DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 427 902 



RC 021 798 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 
ISBN 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Swisher, Karen Gayton, Ed./ Tippeconnic, John W. , III, Ed. 
Next Steps: Research and Practice To Advance Indian 
Education. 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools, 
Charleston, WV. 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

ISBN-1-880785-21-8 

1999-00-00 

32 5p.; Individual chapters have been separately analyzed; 
see RC 021 799-811. 

RR93002012 

ERIC/CRESS, P.O. Box 1348, Charleston, WV 25325 ($24.00). 
Books (010) -- Collected Works - General (020) -- ERIC 

Publications (071) 

MF01/PC13 Plus Postage. 

Alaska Natives; *American Indian Education; American 
Indians; College Students; Colleges; *Culturally Relevant 
Education; Curriculum Development; Educational History; 
Educational Legislation; *Educational Research; Elementary 
Secondary Education; Higher Education; Teacher Education; 
Theory Practice Relationship; *Tribally Controlled Education 



ABSTRACT 



Written entirely by Native authors, this book addresses some 
critical issues in the education of American Indian and Alaska Native 
students. Intended for college classrooms, it aims to fill a void in the 
literature and textbooks used in multicultural and teacher education 
programs. The book has four sections: the past and present foundations of 
Indian education; curriculum issues, thoughts, and practice; the college and 
university experience; and next steps (research to support improved 
practice) . Chapters are: (1) "The Unnatural History of American Indian 

Education" (K. Tsianina Lomawaima) ; (2) "Tribal Control of American Indian 

Education: Observations Since the 1960s with Implications for the Future" 
(John W. Tippeconnic III) ; (3) "Education and the Law: Implications for 

American Indian/Alaska Native Students" (Linda Sue Warner) ; (4) "Culturally 

Appropriate Curriculum: A Research- Based Rationale" (Tara jean Yazzie) ; (5) 

"Teaching through Traditions: Incorporating Languages and Culture into 
Curricula" (Linda Skinner) ; (6) "The Native American Learner and Bicultural 

Science Education" (Gregory A. Cajete) ; (7) "Student Assessment in Indian 

Education or What Is a Roach?" (Sandra J. Fox) ; (8) "Effective Counseling 

with American Indian Students" (Deborah Wetsit) ; (9) "The Role of Social Work 

in Advancing the Practice of Indigenous Education: Obstacles and Promises in 
Empowerment-Oriented Social Work Practice" (Michael J. Yellow Bird, Venida 
Chenault) ; (10) "American Indians and Alaska Natives in Higher Education: 

Promoting Access and Achievement" (D. Michael Pavel); (11) "Tribal Colleges: 
1968-1998" (Wayne J. Stein) ; (12) "The Vanishing Native Reappears in the 

College Curriculum" (Clara Sue Kidwell) ; and (13) "Research To Support 
Improved Practice in Indian Education" (Karen Gayton Swisher, John W. 
Tippeconnic III) . Contains references in each chapter and an index. (SV) 




021 798 



RESEARCH AND PRACTICE TO 
ADVANCE INDIAN EDUCATION 

EDITED BY 

KAREN CAYTON SWISHER AND 
JOHN W. TIPPECONNIC III 

U S- DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
ot Educational H*s«*ren and impiovamani 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
✓ CENTER (ERIC) 

Or This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

□ Mi.tor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality 



• Points of view or opinions stated m this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position o t policy 



i Ant C 



2 






Next Steps 

Research and Practice to 
Advance Indian Education 



edited by 

Karen Gayton Swisher 
and 

John W. Tippeconnic III 




Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools 
Charleston, West Virginia 




P-m-hl 




Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools 



Appalachia Educational Laboratory 
P.O. Box 1348, Charleston, YVV 25325 
www. a el . org/eric / 

0 1999 by the Appalachia Educational Laboratory. Inc. 
All rights reserved (except for use by the U.S. government). 



Printed by Chapman Printing Co., Huntington. YVV 
Cover illustration bv John MacDonald. YVilliamstown, MA 

Cover design by Richard Mendel. Chapel Hill, NC 



Library of Congress Cataloging -in-Publication Data 

Next steps r research and practice to advance Indian education/ 
edited by Karen Gayton Swisher and John \V. Tippeconnic III. 



p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references (p. ) and index. 

ISBN 1-880785-21-8 (alk. paper) 

1. Indians ot North America— Education (Higher) 2. Indian college 
students— North America. 3. Indian teachers— Training of— North 
America 4. Education and State-North America. 1. Swisher, Karen 
Gayton, 1943- . II. Tippeconnic, John. 

E97.55.N48 1999 



371. 829 *97— dc2 1 98-50364 

pi t* 

A A" 



ISBN 1-880785-21-8 



«>lhe paper used in this publication meets the minimum requirements of 
tht Amet it an National Standard for Information Sciences— Permanence ot 
Paper for Printed Library Materials, ANSI Z39.48-J984 



This publication was prepared with funding from the U.S. Department of 
Education, Olfice of Educational Research and Improvement, National 
Library of Education, under contract no. RR93002012. The opinions ex- 
pressed herein do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of the 
Appalachia Educational Laboratory, or the Department of Education. 

‘Hie ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools is operated 
by the Appalachia Educational Laboratory (AKL). Inc. AKL is an Equal 
Opportunity/Affirmative Action Employer. 



r 

I I 



IV 




Pitt>Acr 



Contents 

Preface 

Karen Gaytan Swisher (Standing Rock Sioux) and 

John W. Tippeconnic HI (Comanche) vii 

Contributors xi 

Part I. The Past and Present Foundations of 
Indian Education 

1. The Unnatural History of American Indian Education 

A* Tsianina Lomawaima (Muskogee/Creek) 1 

2. Tribal Control of American Indian Education: Observations 
Since the 1960s with Implications for the Future 

John IV. Tippeconnic FI I ( Comanche) 33 

3. Education and the Law: Implications for American Indian/ 
Alaska Native Students 

Linda Sue Warner (Comanche) 53 

Part II. Curriculum Issues, Thoughts, and Practice 

4. Culturally Appropriate Curriculum: A Research- Based 
Rationale 

Tarajean Yazzie (Navajo) 83 

5. Teaching Through Traditions: Incorporating Languages 
and Culture into Curricula 

Undo Skinner (Choctaw) 107 

6. The Native American Learner and Bicultura! Science 
Education 

Gregory A. Cajete (Santa Clara Pueblo) 135 

7. Student Assessment in Indian Education wVVhat Is A Roach? 

Sandra J. Fox (Ogla/a Lakota) 161 

8. Effective Counseling with American Indian Students 

Deborah Wetsit (Assiniboine) 179 

9. The Role of Social Work in Advancing the Practice of 
Indigenous Education: Obstacles and Promises in 
Empowerment-Oriented Social Work Practice 
Michael J. J e/lou * Bird (Sahnish/llidatsa) 

I 'enida (henau/t (Prairie Band Potawatomi) 301 

v 




PRFFACE 



Part III. The College and University Experience 

10. American Indians and Alaska Natives in Higher 
Education: Promoting Access and Achievement 



D. Michael Pavel (Skokomish) 239 

11. Tribal Colleges: 1968-1998 

Wayne J. Stein (Turtle Mountain Chippewa) 259 

12. The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the College Curriculum 

Clara Sue Kid well (Choctaw Sr Chippewa) 27! 

Part IV. The Next Steps 



13. Research to Support Improved Practice in Indian Education 
Karen Cay ton Swis.' n r (Standing Rock Sioux) 

John W. Tippeconnic III (Comanche) 



295 



PfJFFACf 



Preface 



In this nation’s 300 years of formal education of Indigenous 
people, the last four decades have been most significant to American 
Indian and Alaska Native communities. These years mark the pro- 
gression of self-determination in the education of children and youth 
in Indigenous communities. The “right’ to self-determination was 
“granted” by federal policy and legislation in 1975; however, the 
momentum began building during the civil rights protests of the 
1960s. Since then, significant progress has been made in every facet 
of education. 

The first tribally chartered/controlled colleges are 25-30 years 
old, and there are now 31 of them. Approximately 60 percent of the 
schools supported by the bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) are now 
locally controlled through grants or contracts. Indian Education Act 
and Johnson O’Malley (JOM) programs have resulted in more pa- 
rental involvement and more culturally relevant activities in public 
schools. Indigenous people are excelling in the fine arts, literature, 
motion pictures, sports, science, medicine, and education. We proudly 
claim the first Indigenous astronaut, John Bennett Herrington, who 
is Chickasaw. Role modeling is working, and a majority of our young 
people are getting the message that they can excel if they want to. As 
we close out another decade and another century, the state of Indig- 
enous education is in better shape than ever before in history. 

While we celebrate the renaissance of Indigenous thought and 
actions, we recognize many issues still need to be addressed and 
resolved. The promise of resolution lies in the hands of those who 
care most about the issues— Indigenous people. There is promise in 
the growing number of tribally controlled elementary and secondary 
schools and early childhood programs, which provide Indigenous 
knowledge bases for younger students. There is promise in the pro- 
liferation of tribal colleges, which provide higher education to citi- 
zens who otherwise would not have access. There is promise in the 
number of Indigenous people who have chosen the professorate in 
mainstream colleges and universities as a career path. There is 
promise in the number of teacher preparation programs (estab- 



vii 



P'.'H AC .l 



lishcd and developing), which address the need for Indigenous teach- 
ers— a need recognized in nearly every major study in the field of 
Indian education in the last 20 years. 1 There is promise in the 
renewal of Native studies programs that emphasize history, law, 
literature, or some other discipline. Effective practice based on re- 
search is demonstrated in the school improvement efforts of reser- 
vation grant, contract, and BIA-operated schools in the 34 states in 
which they are located. 

Donna Deyhle and Karen Swisher thoroughly reviewed the re- 
search in American Indian and Alaska Native education and con- 
clude that, until recently, research has not made a difference in the 
education ot Native students. Recent research has emphasized cul- 
tural strengths and cultural integrity as a constructivist base for 
effective practice, versus the deficit model under which schools op- 
erated for too many years. This research has enabled local knowl- 
edge (language, culture, history, and philosophy) to take a more 
prominent place in the role of schooling. We now know more about 
learning styles and how individuals approach the teaching and learn- 
ing situation. We know that caring teachers have great impact on 
students’ decisions about staying in school or leaving. We know a 
great deal, but much still needs to be investigated. 2 

Next Steps is a tribute to the intellectual strengths and talents of 
American Indian and Alaska Native people. It is an attempt by 
Native authors to address some critical issues in education. It is 
written for college or university classrooms to fill a void in the 



literature and textbooks used in multicultural and teacher education 
programs. Given the complexity of the field of Indian education, this 
book is not comprehensive. Some important areas are not addressed 
here: early childhood education, special education, use of technol- 
ogy, gender issues, leadership, preparation of teachers, and adult 
education. Also not addressed are two critical concerns preservice 
teachers should know more about: (1) education history and con- 
temporary issues of Alaska Natives and (2) the education of Indig- 
enous children in urban areas. In spite of the voids, this book is 
unique. To our knowledge, it is the first text about Indian education, 



among the many that exist, that is written entirely by Native authors. 

In Part I, three authors discuss historical, contemporary, and 
legal aspects of Native education. K. Tsianina Lomawaima critically 



It 



viii 




PoUfcLE 



examines colonial education, arguing that it produced unnatural 
ideas regarding civilization, Christianization, subordination of Na- 
tive communities, and presumed intellectual deficiencies. The con- 
temporary aspects of Indian education are discussed by John VV. 
Tippeconnic 111 through a review of the literature surrounding local 
control of Indian education. Finally Linda Sue Warner presents an 
overview of federal education case law as it relates to all students, 
including implications for American Indian and Alaska Native stu- 
dents. 

Part II focuses on curricula. Seven authors present their thoughts 
about curriculum foundations, theories, and practices, and how these 
relate to culture. Tara jean Yazzie examines the theoretical and prac- 
tical research regarding the need for inclusion or integration of 
culture in curricula for Native learners. Linda Skinner fleshes out 
this topic with a discussion of exemplary programs, successful strat- 
egies. and suggestions for more effective practices. Gregory A. Cajete 
takes a more specific approach, asking readers to consider bicultural 
foundations in the development and delivery of science curricula for 
Native learners. Assessment of learning is a continuing concern for 
educators who believe that standardized achievement tests do not 
accurately reflect the magnitude of learning experienced by Native 
learners. Sandra J. Fox discusses new methods of assessing student 
learning that provide a fairer and more complete picture of what 
Native learners know and can do. The importance of historical un- 
derstanding and a culturally specific knowledge base in counseling is 
adeptly defined and discussed by Deborah Wetsit. She points to the 
need for cross-cultural strategies not generally practiced by non- 
Native counselors. Finally Michael Yellow Bird and Venida Chcnault, 
both social work educators, link social work to advancing practice in 
the education of Native learners. Their chapter reminds educators 
that students live their daily lives in several critical settings outside 
the school walls. 

In Part III, three authors consider the college and university 
experience. D. Michael Pavel presents data on two important areas 
of postsecondary education, access and achievement. Access data 
are examined through precollege attributes, achievement data are 
examined using national data on enrollment and degrees conferred, 
and actions are presented that promote both access and achieve- 



meat. In a chapter about the development of tribal colleges, Wayne 
J. Stein reviews this successful alternative to mainstream education 
initiated 30 years ago. Predating the tribal college movement was 
another effort grounded in principles of sovereignty and cultural and 
linguistic integrity: Native studies programs. In the last chapter of 
this part, Clara Sue Kidwell discusses the development and evolution 
of Native American or American Indian Studies programs. 

Part IV concerns the next steps that must be taken to maintain the 
momentum of the past 40 years. Karen Guyton Swisher and John W. 
Tippeconnic III outline some actions that Native and non-Native 
educators must consider as they work to improve the education of 
Native students. 

Progress has been made, but much more work remains. ’Phis 
book is an attempt to engage authors and readers in thinking about 
the next steps for advancing research and practice in Indian educa- 



tion. 



Notes 



1. We use the colloquial term Indian education , recognizing that it does 
not appropriately name the field of education involved with the education of 
American Indian and Alaska Native peoples in this country. I lowever, it is the 
official term used in legislation related to American Indian and Alaska Native 
education and self-determination. We prefer the terms Indigenous. Native, or 
American Indian and Alaska Native. 

2. See Donna Devhle and Karen Swisher, “Research in American Indian 
and Alaska Native Education: Prom Assimilation to Self-Determination.” In 
Review of Research in Education. Yol. 22. edited by Michael W, Apple. 
Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association (1997). 



1.i 



x 



Preface 



Contributors 



Gregory A. Cajete, Ph. D. (Santa Clara Pueblo) is an educator, 
artist, and educational consultant. He is Tewa from Santa Clara 
Pueblo, New Mexico. He has taught extensively at the Institute of 
American Indian Arts in Santa Fe and has lectured nationally and 
internationally. Currently he is an assistant professor in the College 
of Education at the University of New Mexico, 

Venida Chenault (Prairie Band Potawatomi) is a faculty member 
at Haskell Indian Nations University and a doctoral student in Social 
Welfare at the University of Kansas. Her interests include the impact 
of tribal casinos on the social fabric of Indigenous communities and 
structural empowerment of First Nations Peoples. 

Sandra Fox, Ed.D. (Oglala Lakota) has worked for the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs as a teacher, education specialist (area and central 
office levels), and team leader. She also provided assistance to schools 
through Indian Education Act Resource Centers in Bismarck, ND, 
and Washington. DC. Her main focus areas have been improving the 
teaching of language arts, including culture in instruction, and school 
reform. 



Clara Sue Kidwell, Ph.D. (Choctaw & Chippewa) directs the 
Native American Studies program at the University of Oklahoma. 
Previously she taught at Haskell Indian Junior College. University of 
Minnesota, University of California at Berkeley, and Dartmouth 
College. Her teaching areas include Native American history, phi- 
losophy, and medicine, with special interest in Native systems of 
knowledge. 



K. Tsianina Lomawaima, Ph.D. (Muskogee/Creek) is a faculty 
member of the University of Arizona American Indian Studies pro- 
gram. She teaches courses on various historical and contemporary 
issues related to American Indian education and societies. She is the 
author of the award-winning book They Called It Prairie Light: The 
Story ofChUocco Indian School 



XI 



D. Michael Pavel, Ph.D. (Skokomish), is an assistant professor in 
the College of Education at Washington State University. His teach- 
ing and research interests include tribal colleges. Indian education, 
and higher education access and achievement. He is also involved in 
the lifelong process of being trained as a traditional bearer of the 
sacred and traditional way of life among the Skokomish. 

Linda Skinner (Choctaw) is a mother and schoolteacher in Okla- 
homa. With 27 years of experience as an educator, she has been a 
classroom teacher, curriculum specialist, and teacher educator in 
the United States and Canada. The recipient of many awards, her 
background in instructional design, innovative methods, and multi- 
media approaches for teaching is rooted in parent and community 
involvement. 

Wayne J. Stein, Ed.D. (Turtle Mountain Chippewa) is an associ- 
ate professor and director of Native American Studies at Montana 
State University. He works closely with Montana tribal communi- 
ties, governments, and colleges. He teaches graduate and under- 
graduate courses and formerly served as president of Standing Rock 
College and as Vice-President for Academic Affairs at Ft. Bcrthold 
Community College. 

Karen Gavton Swisher, Ph.D. (Standing Rock Sioux) is Dean of 
Instruction at Haskell Indian Nations University. In addition to 
serving as chair of the Teacher Education Department at Haskell, 
Swisher has been a faculty member at the University of Utah and 
Arizona State University, where she served as Director of the Center 
for Indian Education. She has also been an elementary school 
teacher and principal. 



John W. Tippcconnic III, Ph.D. (Comanche) is a professor of 
education at The Pennsylvania State University, where he directs the 
American Indian Leadership program. He has also solved as direc- 
tor of the Office of Indian Education, U.S, Department of Education 
and director of the Office of Indian Education Programs, Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of Interior. 



1 \ 



xn 



Linda Sue Warner, Ph.I). (Comanche) is CKO of the Indian 
Community School in Milwaukee, \VI. She taught Kducational Lead- 
ership and Policy Analysis at the University of Missouri-Columbia, 
the Pennsylvania State University, and the University of Kansas. 

Deborah Wetsit, Pd.l). (Assiniboine) holds a doctorate in coun- 
seling (emphasis in cross-cultural counseling); is a former faculty 
member at the University of Montana; and is the former dean of 
instruction at Haskell Indian Nations University. She is the distance 
learning coordinator for the Montana Corsortium which is made up 
of three tribal colleges and a small private college in Billings, MT. 
She also works extensively with In-Care Network, Inc., a therapeutic 
foster care program for American Indian children and their families. 

Tarajean Yazzie (Navajo) is a doctoral student at the Harvard 
Graduate School of Kdueation. Her research interests are learning 
and teaching in schools serving American Indian students, particu- 
larly teachers' roles in defining, developing, and implementing a 
culturally appropriate curriculum for Native children. She also serves 
as eochair of the Harvard Educational Review Board (1998-99). 



Michael Yellow Bird (Sahnish/Hidalsa) is an assistant professor 
in the School of Social Welfare at the University of Kansas. His 
current work examines the effects of colonialism on Indigenous 
peoples in the United States and strategies for decolonization. He is 
coediting a hook on social work practice with First Nations Peoples. 





Part I 

Tin-: Past and Prhshnt 
Foundations of Indian Education 



i \ 





The Unnatural History of 
American Indian Education 

K. Tsianinw Lomawaima' 



A critical examination of the colonial education of American 
Indians unearths the roots of many stereotypical beliefs about 
the culture and capability of Native Americans. The phrase 
colonial education refers to the reculturing and reeducation of Ameri- 
can Indians by the secular and religious institutions of colonizing 
nations— Spain, Great Britain, France, and the United States of 
America. Deep-seated ideas and practices that were accepted as 
naturalhy past colonizers continue to undergird contemporary ste- 
reotypes about American Indians. 

In truth, there was nothing natural or true about the tenets of 
colonial education: (!) that Native Americans were savages and had 
to be civilized; (2) that civilization required Christian conversion; (B) 
that civilization required subordination of Native communities, fre- 
quently achieved through resettlement efforts; and (4) that Native 
people had mental, moral, physical, or cultural deficiencies that 
made certain pedagogical methods necessary for their education. 
Those tenets were not based on natural truths but were culturally 
constructed and served specific agendas of the colonizing nations, 
hence the title for this chapter. Although these ideas have become 




naturalized, or taken for granted over time, they should be ques- 
tioned and analyzed. 

The American Heritage Dictionary of the English Language de- 
fines natural history as “the study of natural objects and organisms, 
their origins, evolution, interrelationships, and description." Natu- 
ral objects and organisms are those that arc “produced by nature, 
not artificial or man-made." The study of American Indians has 
often been subsumed under the topic of “natural history." Our peoples 
and cultures have been presented in static dioramas in natural his- 
tory museums as though we were nonlntman subjects, undeserving 
of inclusion within museums devoted to “American" (i.e.. non-Na- 
tive) history, culture, and civilization. The racist implications of the 
“unnatural history" of Indians extend beyond our exclusion from 
human history. We should also think carefully about uses of the 
word natural iXvM. imply normal \ true, or connnonsense. As human 
beings, we take for granted much of what we think, experience, and 
remember. Over time, certain ideas and perceptions of the world are 
taken as natural— in other words, not as artificial or man-made but 
as unexceptional components of the natural order of things. Over the 
years, certain invented and stereotypic ideas about American Indi- 
ans have been accepted, by both Indians and non- Indians, as self- 
evident, natural truths. Many untrue ideas have been aggressively 
promulgated by European and American authorities. 

The invention and dissemination of distortions or inaccuracies 
occurred because they proved useful in advancing various goals of 
colonizing nations. For example, for centuries, non-Indian histori- 
ans and observers of American Indian life underestimated the dev- 
astating impact of infectious disease on American Indian popula- 
tions.’ European Americans viewed the New World as a sparsely 
populated virgin wilderness, thinly settled by roaming nomadic 
groups. This suited the notion that it was European American mani- 
fest destiny to “settle" this continent: If few Native people lived here, 
colonial intrusion could be described as settlement rather than con- 
quest. Acknowledging that much of North America was well popu- 
lated by Indian communities with advanced agricultural sciences 
and sophisticated technologies would have made European Ameri- 
can notions of settlement much more difficult to justify. ‘ Hence, 
images of “the virgin wilderness" and “roaming nomads" became 
accepted over time as natural truths. 



A 



Tnr U-.r He. 



» Av-t - 



I*. i 



Ei 



The four tenets of colonial education mentioned earlier represent 
other untruths that have dominated educational institutions in North 
America since long before the United States government was estab- 
lished. This chapter discusses in particular detail the third and fourth 
tenets: the resettlement of Native people and the development 
of “special'' pedagogies for Native people. That I focus on these 
concepts and leave other things out of this natural history calls for 
some explanation. 

The term American Indian education has been used to refer to 
two distinctly different, segregated, and often opposing worlds: (1) 
the education of American Indian children by their parents, ex- 
tended families, and communities, and (2) the education of Ameri- 
can Indian children, teenagers, adults, and communities by colonial 
authorities, particularly Kuropean American institutions. This chap- 
ter focuses on the second world, the education of Indian people by 
the colonial powers of Spain. Great Britain, France, and the United 
States. 1 do not survey the educational theories, practices, and insti- 
tutions American Indian communities and parents have developed 
over the centuries to educate their own children. My reasons are 
practical, ideological, and historical. 

On the practical side, it is impossible to survey adequately both 
worlds of Indian education— the education of Indians by Indians 
and the education of Indians by others— in one chapter. Native 
America is remarkably diverse, encompassing hundreds of commu- 
nities with distinct languages, cultures, philosophies, and educa- 
tional systems that defy easy generalizations. Ideologically, I resist 
generalizations about American Indians because so many stereo- 
types rest on the mistaken assumption that all Indians are alike. 
Whether lazy or noble, drunken or stoic, poverty-stricken or living in 
harmony with nature, we are all lumped together in an artificial 
category that is anything but natural. 

Historically, the goals of the colonial education of American Indi- 
ans have been to transform Indian people and societies and to eradi- 
cate Indian self-government, self-determination, and self-education. 
In the late twentieth century, long after the U.S. independence from 
Great Britain, Indian education often still means the education of 
Indians by non-Indians. Many current attitudes, programs, prac- 
tices, and beliefs continue the legacy of Indian education by others', 
these are contemporary expressions of colonial education. 



1 







K. K-v.-na U.maaa.v-. 



While this chapter focuses on how non-Indians have imposed 
education on Indians, it is important to recognize that, in varying 
degrees. Indian self-education has survived under tremendous du- 
ress. Recently windows of opportunity have been opened more widely 
in the United States, making it possible for Indian communities to 
reassert and regain powers of self-governance, self-determination, 
and self-education, the three fundamental components of tribal sov- 
ereignty. The other chapters in this book attest to this truth.’ 

In the earliest interactions, Europeans constructed a model of 
appropriate education for Indians. This model included ideas and 
practices or. in other words, theory and methods. Educators, then as 
now, were concerned with these questions: What is the purpose of 
education? Who has authority to teach? Who are the students? 
Where should this education take place? What teaching methods are 
most suitable? What should the curriculum cover? What are stu- 
dents being prepared for? In addressing these questions, colonizing 
nations developed educational theory and methods particular to the 
colonial education of Indigenous populations, and to imported popu- 
lations such as Africans brought to the Americas as slaves. 

In surveying the educational theory and methods developed for 
American Indian communities by Spain. Great Britain, France, and 
the United States, I identified four common tenets of Indian educa- 
tion shared by the colonizing nations. I propose that these tenets 
have assumed a status as natural requirements, what must be 
achieved in order to educate Native Americans. 

Until recently, official colonial education policy conflated the first 
two tenets. Civilization and Christian conversion were assumed for 
centuries to be the same thing. ■ Full status in one category required 
full status in the other. The separation of church and state, a founda- 
tion of our public school system, was not initiated in federal Indian 
hoarding schools until the l9B()s.'’ 

Accordingly, I consider the first two tenets, civili/.ation and 
conversion , side by side. I then elaborate on the third and fourth 
tenets— new model communities and appropriate pedagogical 
methods— in considerable detail because these factors are gener- 
ally less well understood. Finally, I suggest ways the legacies of 
colonial education have been carried into today’s classrooms and 
communities. 



A 




Tenets 1 and 2: American Indians Need to be Civilized; 
Civilization Requires Christian Conversion. 

Samuel Chapman Armstrong wrote. “Only the light of Christian 
truth and example, steadily shining, can lift men up." Kuropean 
notions of "savagery" and "civilization” were imported to the New 
World; they structured the very first Kuropean interactions with, 
and perceptions of. Native America. Deep-seated Kuropean fears of 
the unknown, the "wild," the forest, and “barbarians" who lived in 
the wilderness can be traced back to Greek philosophy. Those fears 
permeated Kurope in the centuries before Columbus stumbled onto 
America; we see their influence in the Spanish expulsion of Moors 
and .lews, in the British conquest of Ireland, and elsewhere." 

Of course, a fourteenth-century Spanish Catholic priest carrying 
out the orders of the Inquisition believed he was carrying out the 
orders of God. The natural order of things demanded that heresy, 
whether Judaism or Islam, be eradicated. It is unlikely that such a 
priest ever considered the possibility that the supremacy of Chris- 
tianity might he an artificial or man-made idea. He accepted it as a 
natural truth. In this unquestioning way. the natural dominion of 
the Christian God was carried to the Americas. 

As recently as the 1940s. the historian Sister Mary Stanislaus Van 
Well wrote that Catholic missionaries in the Southwest had to con- 
trol every aspect of Indian education because “nothing contrary to 
Christian religious teaching and morality can he tolerated by the 
Church. Hence the Church has the right to supervise all phases of the 
education of those who belong to her fold." Similarly, when the 
French returned to Quebec after their brief displacement (1629- 
1632) by the Knglish, l ; ather Paul I.eJeune led the Jesuit Order in 
what one historian has termed "an a'J-out offensive" against Native 
religions. LoJouno's Jesuits naively expected they would achieve 
their proselytizing mission within one generation; they were to be 
disappointed. The French were secure, nonetheless, in their convic- 
tion that “by the process of evangelization and assimilation, the 
Amerindian would become humanise as well w^francisr," meaning 
they would become human as they became French.* Other coloniz- 
ing nations shared the assumption that Christianity and Kuropean 
cultural traditions wore the cornerstones of a "civilized" and "hu- 
man" life. 



7 





Tenet 3: Civilization Requires Subordination of Native 
Communities, Which May Be Achieved by Resettlement 
of Native People. 

Everywhere in the colonial world, the tenets of civility and conver- 
sion were explicitly linked to power/' One tried-and-true method 
used by all colonial nations to assert power has been the relocation 
and resettlement of Indigenous communities. Spanish rcduccioncs 
and cnco/nicndoy, French reductions', British praying towns; and 
American boarding schools, reservations, colonies, and homesteads 
are all examples of the colonial compulsion to radically restructure 
and control American Indian communities. In 1603, the secular 
political leader in Acadia was instructed in his duty: 

To seek to lead the (Native 1 nations thereof to the profession of 
the Christian faith, to civility of manners, an ordered life . . . 
and finally their recognition of and submission to the authority 
and domination of the Crown of France. 10 



Submission to authority and domination of colonial power were at 
the crux of the colonial encounter between American Indians and 
European Americans. Control is the key word here; the creation of 
these new communities was all about imposing military, political, 
economic, and social power. Spain, Great Britain, France, and the 
United States were each intent on the conquest of a continent, and 
the extension of power over Native nations was couched in the 
rhetoric of civilization versus savagery. 



According to the colonizers, civilized communities were clustered 
around an urban center. The scale varied from hamlet to city, but 
social groups were congregated, bounded, and tied to the soil indi- 
rectly through service to a landlord (as in the case of feudalism) or 
directly through patented ownership (as in the case of slavery) 
Sarat/c communities, on the other hand, were said to comprise 
nomadic roamers rather than landowners, possibly undeserving of 
the term community at all. This rhetorical context made it necessary 
to stereotype all American Indians as nomadic wanderers, thinly 
scattered across (but not really owners of) the landscape, despite 
abundant evidence to the contrary. When faced with the reality of 
settled Indian village life, colonizers frequently— although not uni- 
versally-turned to practices of resettlement to impose political, 
civil, and religious jurisdiction. 



8 



Thl Unn a|, :'^’i H-‘U)i/y i>r Amu's, an Ei ■ . >u 



One early exception to resettlement occurred on the northern 
frontiers of New Spain" in the Pueblo communities of modern-day 
Arizona and New Mexico. In this early era of European colonization, 
from the arrival of Juan de Onate’s expedition to New Mexico in 
1598 to the Pueblo Revolt of 1680, resettlement of sedentary Native 
communities was not a primary goal, but the assertion ot colonial 
control was essential. The substantial Pueblo villages were not relo- 
cated, but Spanish institutions of religious and political control were 
superimposed. Catholic churches were built on the foundations of 
Pueblo ceremonial buildings, called kii 'ns, and Spanish political 
offices were delegated to Pueblo men. 1 * After nearly a century of 
often brutal Spanish rule, in 1680, the Pueblos and other Native 
people of the area united to push the Spanish back to Id Paso, Texas. 
Twelve years later, the Spanish reasserted their jurisdiction but 
worked out a less punitive accommodation with Pueblo groups, by 
comparison in the late 1700s, the Spanish launched their conquest of 
Alta California (which included territories within southern and cen- 
tral modern-day California) and implemented a more aggressive 
resettlement and education program. 

The encorniendo— a feudal arrangement allowing little freedom to 
. subjugated Indian residents— was the prevalent institution for reset- 
tling and reorganizing Native people in Old Mexico. In Alta Califor- 
nia, however, the mission — flanked by the military force of the presidio 
(a garrison of soldiers) and the civic model of the pueblo or farm 
community— became the preeminent colonizing institution. Van Well, 
Catholic historian of the church's educational role in the American 
Southwest, described the mission as “a community or village into 
which the missionaries gathered their concerts j emphasis added | 
or prospective converts . . . trained [them] in the rudiments of 
civilized living . . . taught Christian doctrine ... at times even 
introduced [the Indiansl to elements of reading (and | writing." Rob- 
ert Jackson and native Californian scholar Edward Castillo label the 
missions' goals as acculturation and the production of a disciplined 
I ndian labor force to serve the Spanish. These goals were achieved by 
gathering Native people under the control of Spanish priests, hacked 
by the military power of the presidios. The Spanish had first allowed 
Native Californian families to live in traditional dwellings within the 
missions but eventually replaced these structures with “permanent 
adolu* housing units . . . j that | afforded a greater degree of control 



9 




over the converts, which was enhanced by the building of walls to 
surround the villages.” 11 As a result. Native Californians were housed 
in overcrowded, unsanitary barracks that separated men from women, 
parents from children, and "wild” from “mission” Indians. Mission 
architecture reinforced colonial control. 

Spanish and French church doctrine dictated reducing “wild" 
Indians from states of unfettered and chaotic freedom to settled, 
organized, and civilized lives. Tins explains the terminology applied 
to resettled communities: rcduccioncs in New Spain and reductions 
in New France, deductions had first been established under French 
colonial direction in Central and South America. They wore adopted 
in New France as well as a way to implement one cornerstone of 
EeJeune's plan to civilize the Natives in present-day Canada. His 
plan had four parts: (1) learn the Native language, 11 (2) establish 
educational seminaries for children, (3) build hospitals, and (J) 
encourage Native people to live sedentary lives. The .Jesuits founded 
the settlement of Sillerv in 1637, but warfare and disease erased it 
within two decades. The Jesuits learned from the Sillerv experiment 
that too-dosc proximity to European settlements was not healthy 
(because of the transmission of epidemic diseases), so in 1667, they 
established the segregated community of Prairie de la Magdelaine 
(also known as Kentake). 

Reductions were important symbols of the educational ideology 
of the French, but in reality, they were never as numerous or as 
successful as the colonial powers might have wished. 'Hu* reductions 
were, howe\er. effective foci for French power and authority: resi- 
dents were closely supervised, egress was restricted, every weekday 
was regimented into periods of prayer, and every Sunday witnessed 
a constant round of se rv ices, processions, and instructions. 

In New England. English Protestant groups such as the religiously 
and culturally aggressive Puritans and separatist Pilgrims did not 
expend as much effort on missionary endeavors as the Catholic 
nations, but a few individuals devoted themselves to the conversion 
of local Native communities. John Eliot. Massachusetts Hay Colony 
minister known as “Apostle to the !udians,” was dedicated to reset- 
tling Native eotncrt.s into praying toicns. where they were isolated 
from Native religious beliefs and practices. To he eligible for reli- 
gious instruction, the towns had to subject themselves to thegosem- 
menl of Massachusetts, placing them under the authority of English 



HJ 



Tm UNNAti'V'-i i < I AMi’fi- A f i Im ' k '‘t'i El i*» A! * *j 



military officers, liliot's proselytizing targeted Native communities 
already weakened by epidemic diseases and nearby dominating co- 
lonial settlements. Kliot was not alone. On Martha's Vineyard, Tho- 
mas Mayhew, Jr. and Thomas Mayhew, Sr. were remarkably suc- 
cessful in accomplishing what William Simmons characterizes as 
“deep and rapid voluntary* change to colonial ideology." There was 
no thought given, however, to integrating Knglish and Native con- 
gregations; the praying towns were conceived as “similar to those of 
the Knglish, subordinate to them, and geographically separate." 1, 
Simmons concludes that “a shift in authority in favor of the Knglish" 
was a necessary prerequisite to conversion itself. 1 " 

The praying towns were ultimately doomed. At their high point in 
1674. some 16 towns housed approximately 1,100 people (perhaps 10 
percent of the local Native population at the time), but the general 
hysteria and anti-Indian sentiments during King Philip’s War (1675- 
1676) conspired against their perpetuation. During the war, Chris- 
tian Indians in Boston were ordered into concentration camps on 
Deer Island "for their own protection.*' and they never successfully 
rebuilt their Christian community. Allegiance of Christian Indians 
was instrumental to the Knglish victory, but after the war, Knglish 
authorities ignored that loyalty. Only four of the praying towns were 
rebuilt, and all had disappeared by the early 1700s. Ironically, Kliot's 
plan, and the strategy of resettlement to create new religious and 
political allegiances, was fairly successful. Kven after their shabby 
treatment by the Knglish during and after King Philip's War. almost 
half of the converts remained faithful to Christianity. 1 ' 

The seeming paradox of Kuropean Americans unable, or unwill- 
ing, to recognize civilization when they encountered it in the nucle- 
ated village life of New Kngland Algouquians, Iroquoians in New 
France, or Southwestern Pueblos is no paradox at all if we push aside 
the curtain of rhetoric and focus on the issue of power. Iroquois 
longhouses. New Kngland villages. Alta California communities, and 
Pueblo towns were self-governing entities whose existences were 
perceived as threatening to Kuropean American politics. To achieve 
civilized living, colonizers believed Native people had to be removed 
from Native community life and integrated into new communities 
under Kuropean American control. Sometimes, this created seeming 
contradictions within the civilization rhetoric. In 1806. for example, 
the Society of f riends of Pennsylvania and New .Jersey reported 



1 1 t . 




positively on their progress in civilizing the Seneca. The Friends 
enthusiastically reported that Indians had begun to site individual 
houses along river courses rather than following their former habit 
of "crowding together in villages." 1 * 

The reason Indian villages were considered bad while American 
villages were deemed good had to do with power over social life. 
Indians in tribal villages were perceived as shackled by the commu- 
nal tribal bond, while those in disaggregated homesteads were seen 
as free individuals within the liberal American nation. The impetus 
to detribalize Indian individuals and integrate them into the lower 
economic strata of the U.S. economy— as self-supporting rural farm- 
ing families or, in the case of individuals, as domestic sonants, 
manual laborers, agricultural workers, or low-skilled tradesmen— 
was fueled by the desire to alienate tribal people from large commu- 
nal land bases. 

By the l8()()s the movement to relocate and resettle Indian people 
had established reservations across the West, small rancherias in 
California, “model homes" and “homesteads" on boarding school 
grounds and reservation allotments, and model “colonies" in U.S. 
Indian Territory and Canada. 1 ,t ' At Hampton Institute in the t880s.-‘' 
anthropologist Alice Fletcher instigated the “model family” or “model 
home" project, designed to link the domestic transformations 
achieved in boarding schools to Indian family life back home on 
reservations. Model homes were built at Hampton for several young 
Indian couples, mostly from the Omaha reservation. Inspired by 
Fletcher, the Womens National Indian Association (WNIA), a na- 
tional reform group of non-Nalivc women, established a Home Build- 
ing and Loan Committee to assist boarding school graduates to 
achieve “Anieriean-style housing.” From 1884 to 1888, WNIA helped 
build 30 to 40 homes, some at Hampton, some on the Omaha 
reserve, and some in Alaskan villages. ' 1 

In several experiments across the West, the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs (BIA) established demonstration communities, or colonies of 
young “progressive" Indians, usually recruited from among recent 
boarding school graduates. In the colonies— such as Seger Colony in 
Oklahoma or the “Progressive Colony" established by 1918 near 
Sacaton. Arizona (southeast of present-dav Phoenix), on the Pima 
reservation— young adults carried out what they had practiced in the 
schools, where thev had made model furniture and model clothes 





T‘tt UNMAU VAt H-jVi&t Aui !,'i, AN lN> El v J«' A% :f. 



and learned to care for baby doll “families." In the 1930s, using funds 
from the federal Subsistence Homesteads program, a small model 
community was built on the grounds of Cliiloeeo Indian Agricultural 
School in Oklahoma. The plan was to build “just small, inexpensive 
homes" that graduates could buy on a 30-year plan, although the 
land would remain in government ownership. During the New Deal 
era, the BIA also established “rehabilitation communities" connected 
to adult education programs. Red Shirt Tabic on the Pine Ridge 
reservation and Grass Mountain on the Rosebud reservation were 
well-known rehabilitation communities." 

In 1830, a full century earlier, Canada had embarked on a similar 
experiment. Chippewas were “settled" at Coldwater and bake Simcoe 
Narrows. A road was built between the two settlements, land was 
cleared for farming, and administrators hoped “White farmers and 
skilled workers" could be found to build homes for the Indians, who 
would work as farmers and carters. Chippewas and their White 
neighbors were equally unimpressed by the idea, and the experiment 
failed; Coldwater had been abandoned by 1837." 

“Model’' communities created in Canada and the United States 
were primarily models of social surveillance and control. At several 
Canadian communities, the Tsimshian “model Victorian village" at 
Metlakatla (present-day Alaska), and in the Progressive Colony near 
Saeaton, Arizona, daily activities were rigidly scheduled, and the 
inhabitants were subject to cabin-to-cabin inspections." Pedagogi- 
cal methods of discipline, surveillance, time scheduling, and control 
were also implemented in missions, schools, and reservations. These 
methods were designed to produce economically independent work- 
ers so thoroughly saturated in the ideology of Indian inferiority they 
would willingly accept places in society that the larger society de- 
fined as appropriate to their needs and abilities. 



Tenet 4: Civilization Requires Special Pedagogical 
Practices to Overcome Presumed Deficiencies in Indian 
Children and Adults. 



The .Jesuits in New France had been directed to introduce manual 
labor into Indian education as early as 1665. Fatly southwestern 
tJ.S. and California missions were described by Van Well as huge, 
self-supporting agricultural and industrial schools. The Franciscan 



13 




fathers in the California missions classified their converts not by 
intelligence, character, or spirituality hut by their ability to work/'’ 
Work, manual labor, vocational training— all refer to the essential 
perceived need to train Native Americans in bard labor. 

Spanish missions served as early models for the American reli- 
gious and federal boarding schools of the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries. American boarding schools, in turn, were the models 
adopted in Canada after the 1879 Darin Report , commissioned by 
the Canadian government. Basic training in agricultural and domes- 
tic arts was thought to be fundamental to the civilizing process, and 
most educational systems required more student labor in tick's, 
laundries, and shops than intellectual application in the classroom. 
Students were immersed in a life of labor, but their training was 
carefully designed not to create laborers who would compete eco- 
nomically against the privileged classes. Canadian education policy 
in 1910 stipulated that residential school curricula should “fit the 
Indian for civilized life in his own environment (emphasis added I.” 
which meant stressing simplicity and practicality. First Nations people 
in Saskatchewan responded the next year by requesting that the 
Superintendent of Indian Affairs provide for schools that gave “more 
emphasis to classwork, and less to farming.” 

Boarding and residential schools elevated manual labor and hard 
work to a pedestal as effective civilizing practices; cleanliness and 
orderliness were equally privileged pedagogical instruments of cul- 
tural transformation, 'file discipline of orderliness imposed the ut- 
most uniformity of appearance on Native students. Uniforms, mis- 
sion- or government-issued clothing, and regulation haircuts were 
essential markers of the “remaking” process in action. In addition to 
transforming the outward appearance of students and their work 
habits, emotionally charged pedagogical instruments such as liturgi- 
cal music, popular songs and lullabies, ceremonies, dramas, and 
pageants were utilized to help reshape emotional expression, emo- 
tional life, and affective connections to culture and society. 

In l. r >29 Franciscans established the St. John bateran school to 
educate Mestizo children in Mexico City. Students wore distinctive 
uniforms, helped with the necessary labor, were subjected to a disci- 
pline of silence, and were under constant supervision, even through 
the night as they slept in their dormitories. Similarly, the “patio 
schools” for Mexican girls enforced strict uniformity of dress. A 



r i ' 



14 



Unv-i I’t^i H is I?/ '■*• El */■ *\ x ^ < 



contemporary observer noted there did “not exist a difference among 
them, even as regards a ribbon." ' - 

'Phis emphasis on uniformity and regimented discipline lasted 
four and one-half centuries as educational institutions strove to 
reshape Native individuals and societies. All American mission and 
federal boarding schools, from their inception until World War II, 
utilized the disciplines of military regimentation and uniformity to 
train students in subservience and conformity. Students at Chilocco 
Indian Agricultural School, one of the large off- reservation boarding 
schools, rose at dawn to march in close order drill; clad in govern- 
ment-issue GI uniforms, they carried unloaded Knfield rifles and 
executed precise drill patterns in response to the orders of student 
officers. Girls at Chilocco were punished if they refused the Gl shoes, 
which thev derisively called “bullhides," and attempted to wear shoes 
sent from home— shoes with “uonregulation laces or a patch of gray 
“color.’ vs 

Vet other parts of the process of colonial education focused on 
transforming emotional expression and connections to Native cer- 
emonial and social life. Kducators through the ages have recognized 
the strength and endurance of emotional bonds to cultural phenom- 
ena formed early in life and reinforced through ritual, pageantry, 
theater, song, music, and dance. Sixteenth-century Franciscan schools 
in Mexico introduced Catholic social activities, fiestas, religious dra- 
mas, and music to provide “an emotional overtone to many of the 
drab and more repetitious drill methods." The priests recognized 
that the festive pageants and tableaux of Catholicism psychologically 
engaged potential converts “through active sensation and emotional 
association with the new order.”’** 

Catholic missionaries in New Franco relied on lurid pictures of 
heaven and hell as well as the highly developed material culture of 
Catholic piety: rosaries, medals, statues, colored beads offered as 
prizes lor correct rote memorization, colored sticks used to tally sins, 
and the crosses, bells, and candles of the church. One fervent pros- 
elvti/er at Onondaga “made up for the lack of a church hell by 
running through the village before service calling out Fire! Fire! 
F.ver burning hellfirc! Given the high rates of Native mortality due 
to infectious epidemic crowd diseases such as measles, smallpox, 
and influenza (sometimes introduced by the missionaries them- 
selves), it is not surprising that death and the afterlife preoccupied 



15 



V 



Native peoples as well as the priests. One can only imagine the 
response of Native communities to the threat "Fire! Fire! Ever burn- 
ing hell fire!"* 0 

One Canadian missionary thought the Natives tended to be “sad" 
by nature so he set spiritual songs to “various joyful tunes" to lift 
their spirits. Similarly, the fathers in Alta California often described 
“a melancholy attitude among many converts.” The Natives' general 
depression in the face of forced labor, gender segregation, and high 
death rates (particularly among infants, women, and children) should 
not seem surprising to us, but it was remarked upon by European 
contemporaries. Ludovik Choris, illustrator on the Russian expedi- 
tion to California ( 1815-1818) led by Otto von Kotzebue, wrote of the 
Costanoan and Coast Miwok neophytes he sketched at the San Fran- 
cisco mission, “I have never seen one smile; I have never seen one 
look one in the eye."" 

Father Jean Pierron labored in the mission fields among the 
Mohawk in New France. Pierron illustrated cards with the Christian 
mysteries and invented a game called “Point to Point," which illus- 
trated human life from “the point of birth to the point of Eternity." 
Pierron endorsed the use of brightly colored, garish, even lurid 
visual aids such as “tear-inspiring images of the torments of hell and 
purgatory" because, in his words, “one must begin by touching their 
hearts, before he can convince their minds." More recently, alumni 
of the Blue Quills Residential School in Alberta. Canada, recalled 
that the pictorial catechism used in the 1980s vividly depicted two 
roads. One road led up to heaven and was traveled only by Whites; 
the lower road to hell was populated entirely by Indians . lJ 

Hearts could be touched/however, without necessarily persuad- 
ing minds to change. Sometimes Indian students interpreted or 
transformed festive occasions on their own terms. Jacqueline Grosko 
proposes that in Saskatchewan and British Columbia, the “brass 
bands, sports teams and school spirit" of the Catholic schools "laid 
the foundation for such present-day [Native 1 1 cultural institutions" 
as the powwow and War Dance Festival. “ 

In the praying towns of New England, potential converts to Puri- 
tan Christianity had to he accepted into a congregation according to 
established standards set by, but not necessarily practiced by, En- 
glish congregations. Puritans eschewed emotionally expressive reli- 
gious behavior: they viewed prophets of more “enthusiastic" Chris- 



t . f ■ 



16 



tian denominations as instruments of the devil. Native inhabitants 
of praying towns such as Natick, Massachusetts, however, were 
compelled to demonstrate all the symptoms of emotional break- 
down to be judged authentic converts. Even by contemporary En- 
glish descriptions, New England natives were “well known not to be 
much subject to tears," but John Eliot wrote that the continuous 
cycle of weeping and confessions at Natick gave him “greater hope of 
great hcartbreakings." One could argue that Eliot s “great 
hcartbreakings" were the overt physical signs of the inner psycho- 
logical transformations achieved through brainwashing, cultural at- 
tack, and epidemic mortality. Natick’s citizens went through more 
than a half-dozen tear-filled, public confessional traumas before the 
congregation was approved. 1 ' 1 

In the federal boarding schools of the nineteenth and twentieth 
centuries, federal staff stcreotypically expected Indian students to 
display a certain stoicism, and educators bent their efforts toward 
instilling “appropriate" forms of emotional expression. The stoicism- 
in public at least— should perhaps come as no surprise. Children 
found themselves in difficult, otten hostile circumstances, whcio 
their own language, religion, culture, behavior, and individualism 
were under constant, systematic attack. In that kind of setting, who 
would admit to uncertainty or weakness before the enemy? Personal 
narratives and autobiographical accounts of boarding school life arc 
full of references, however, to tears shed in private, often in bed at 
night. * Even if the cause was “only" homesickness, emotions were 
better kept to oneself. 

Federal educators turned to stereotypes of Indian emotional and 
physical “deficiencies” to explain student behavior and to justify 
federal reshaping of Indian emotional life and expression. In a 1900 
newspaper interview, federal Superintendent ot Indian Schools 
Estelle Reel said this about Indian children under her charge: 

[The Indian child's] face is without that complete development 
of nerve and muscle which gives character to expressive fea- 
tures; his face seems stolid because it is without free expres- 
sion, and at the same time his mind remains measurably stolid 
because of the very absence of mechanism for its own expres- 



sion. 




sidering in this analysis of what is natural and what is culturally 
constructed. It is undeniably true that linguistic and social rules 
governing language use, and the interplay between spoken language 
and silence, differ among Native languages and between Native 
languages and English. However, wo should consider the role that 
colonial education may have played in creating a social realitv that 
has fed the stereotype of silence and stoicism. As mentioned earlier. 
Mestizo students at the St. John Lateran school in the 1530s wore 
distinctive uniforms, helped with work to sustain the school, and 
were kept under surveillance night and day. They were also subject 
to a discipline of silence. Girls at the associated patio schools were 
taught good (Spanish) manners and domestic skills (such as sewing 
and needlework to decorate the church), clothed in uniform dresses, 
kept occupied at all times, and uplifted through “.svAvftrand prayer."’' 
Imposed silence is as much a part of nearly five centuries of 
colonial education as uniforms, manual labor, and relocation. Si- 
lence has been an integral part of the discipline, regimentation, and 
internal transformation demanded of Indian children by colonial 
educators. It we hope to understand contemporary classrooms and 
contemporary Indian learners, we must examine Native cultures 
and knowledge bases, including rules governing language use and 
silence use. We must also examine the historic legacies of colonial 
education that may have created or contributed to ideas of Indian 
“silence.” This is only one example of a more complex consideration 
of colonial education and its legacy of assumptions, which today are 
accepted, without question, as natural. 



Conclusion 

What are some of the natural truths specific to colonial educa- 
tion? This chapter examined lour tenets common to colonial educa- 
tion over the centuries: 

1. Native Americans were savages who had to he civi- 
lized. This meant providing instruction in all aspects of a European 
American lifestyle. The markers of a civilized life included learning a 
new language (Spanish, French, or English) and adopting domestic 
customs (such as dress, hairstyle, and family structure) and eco- 
nomic technologies (such as architecture, foods, agricultural meth- 
ods, trades, eratts. and so on) of The colonial nation. 






T--i Hv < l Avt n lr<: :an £n^ a not. 1 



2. Civilization required Christianization. I he specific de 
nominations have varied from nation to nation and by region, but 
Catholics, Baptists, Moravians, Mennonites, Quakers, and Mormons 
were prominent in the vast proselytizing mission. 

3. Native communities should be politically and legally 
subordinate to the nation siate, even if it means relocating 
them. Examples include the seventeenth- and eighteenth-century 
resettlement of Native peoples in New England into Puritan praying 
towns; the colonial resettlement of Native nations of New France 
into reductions and of New Spain into missions or rcduccioncs\ the 
eighteenth- and nineteenth-century resettlement of Native Ameri- 
cans onto reservations and rancherias; the resettlement of Nati\e 
children into mission, manual labor, residential, and boaiding 
schools; and the relocation of Indian workers and families into cities 
in the 1950s and 1960s. All of these new settings for Native people 
have been under the direct political control and legal jurisdiction of 
the colonizing nations. 

4. Specific pedagogical methods were needed to over- 
come deficits in mental, moral, and physical characteris- 
tics. These methods typically included a military model of mass 
regimentation, authoritarian discipline, strict gender segregation, 
an emphasis on manual labor, avoidance of higher academic or 
professional training, rote memorization, and drill in desired physi- 
cal and emotional habits. 

Because these tenets are so deeply rooted in European philosophy 
and practice, so widely shared by colonial nations, and so enduring 
over time, they have been accepted uncritically by generations as 
-natural facts." m The first two tenets concerning civilization and 
Christianization may sound obsolete— or, at least, politically incor- 
rect. The modern reader may wonder why it is necessary to bother 
with these dusty old ideas in a volume dedicated to contemporary 
research and practice in Indian education. Rephrasing these ideas in 
more contemporary terms makes clear that such ideas arc still with 
us: Instead of saving “Indians must he civilized," we might say 
“Native Americans have been victims ot backwardness, isolation, 
and discrimination, and must be brought into the American main- 
stream." As American society becomes more secular, the dismissal ol 
Native spirituality continues. Instead of saying “Indians must he- 



lp 




K. Ts.A.VNA Li MAV. A-V*' 



come Christians/’ substitute “Native Americans must be welcomed 
and integrated into an American way of life that makes decisions 
based on science, not superstition.” 

The third tenet needs no rephrasing at all to sound current: Native 
communities should be politically and legally subordinate to the 
larger nation state. In evaluating the currency of this tenet, listen to 
the antitreaty activists who believe treaties are not constitutional 
documents but mere historic relics conferring undeserved rights on 
a select few. They do not support tribal sovereignty, self-govern- 
ment, self-determination, or self-education. Listen also to the pro- 
ponents of “English only” initiatives, who believe the survival of 
Indigenous languages (along with Spanish) poses a threat to the 
moral and cultural fabric of the United States. Listen to the Supreme 
Court, a body deeply threatened by the survival of Native religious 
beliefs and practices, as evidenced in recent decisions denying reli- 
gious freedom protections / 10 It seems clear that much of America 
still believes American Indians must he subordinate peoples and 
polities. 1 ” 

Lastly, the tenet calling for a special pedagogy for Indian learners 
has its contemporary guises as well. Do people believe that American 
Indian children (or the children of other ethnic groups) require 
special pedagogical methods to learn because those childi en possess 
peculiar traits or insufficiencies? Listen to recommendations of re- 
formers responding to the pedagogical challenges posed by so-called 
disadvantaged populations: they require vocational education or 
manual training, they're visual or right-brain learners, they’re not 
verbal, they’re culturally deprived, they don't think abstractly, and 
the list goes on.” 

The enduring tenacity of these four tenets prompted the analysis 
in this chapter; we should not underestimate the power these propo- 
sitions still wield in shaping popular thought and influencing public 
policy about Native Americans.’- There is a historic connection— a 
family tree— that leads from the first and second tenets to the third 
and fourth. The legacy of these notions is still with us today. 

I o recognize and resist the same old ideas in new forms, we need 
to describe the ideas, articulate their connections, and make clear 
how they have been implemented in different times and places. We 
need to map the similarities between old ideas and new so we can 
judge for ourselves whether the new are really now, or whether old 



2U 



T»a Unnaji^ai Hv\a. o» A>.*:'< v as* Indian Aisf'\ 



ideas are still being accepted as natural facts. The colonial education 
of American Indians continues today. The four tenets discussed here 
still permeate textbooks and readers in many public, private, and 
parochial schools. 

While some classrooms are deeply implicated in the continuation 
of colonial education, in other places, many Native children now 
have access to community schools that integrate Native culture, 
language, and curriculum . 43 Pedagogical practices, curricula, and 
teachers have changed significantly in recent decades, but the insidi- 
ous legacy of colonial education has not been vanquished yet. It 
stretches far beyond classrooms and schools. Stereotypes, false- 
hoods, and plain ignorance permeate television programming; mov- 
ies; romance paperbacks and their provocative covers; sports teams 
and their mascots; advertising copy, images, and trademarks; coun- 
try-and- western songs; and toys and dolls — all the flotsam and jet- 
sam of American popular culture. 

The stereotypes of Native America may seem inescapable, but 
they are not inevitable. As long as stereotypical ideas are accepted as 
natural facts, they will never be scrutinized, analyzed, or revised. 
They will continue to be dominating influences in the training of 
young minds. Native and non-Native alike. Native and non-Native 
educators have an opportunity and responsibility to scrutinize, ana- 
lyze, and revise the natural truths and the pedagogical theory and 
practice they implement every day. Searching for the legacies of 
colonial education is one place to begin. 



Notes 



1. K.Tsianina Lomawaima (Creek) is a faculty member of the University 
of Arizona American Indian Studies Program. She would like to thank her 
colleagues at the University of Arizona, Teresa McCarty, .lay Stauss, and David 
Wilkins; Tom Biolsi of Portland Stale; and the anonymous reviewers of this 
volume for their careful and critical readings of this essay. She also is indebted 
to Teresa McCarty for assistance with references to contemporary research on 
language, literacy, and curriculum. 



2. Scholars currently agree Native American populations suffered mor- 
tality rates of 90-9S percent due to epidemic diseases introduced by Kumpean, 
African, and Asian populations. Scholars do not agree on pre-1492 Native 
population numbers: estimates range from 9()(),()0() to 1H million. For de- 
tailed debates over population counts and the impact of 'diseases, see Dohyns, 
Their A 'timber then me Thinned', McNeill, P/a<jucs and Peoples Snipp. 



21 




K 1 



American Indiana Thornton, American Indian Holocaust', and Verano and 
Ubelaker, Disease and Demography. For associated ecological changes, see 
Cronon. Changes in the Land. 

3. Weatherford, Indian (Hi ’crs details examples of how Native American 
technologies and concepts in agriculture, cuisine, government, architecture, 
etc. have impacted the world. See Blackburn and Anderson. Before the 
l \ 'i/dcrncssfor Native Californian strategies of land use and resource manage- 
ment that entailed extensive human manipulation ot environments. See 
Nabhan. I:ndu ring Seeds for advanced cultural technologies in the American 
Southwest. 



4. The reassert ion of sovereignty in self-education has been facilitated by 
congressional legislation: the Econondc Opportunity Act ot 1964 (Public l .aw 
88-452). which established the Office of Kconomic Opportunity lOKOj and 
led to Head Start, Upward Bound.. lob Corps, Volunteers in Service to America 
1 VISTA | . and Indian Community Action Programs such as the Rough Rock 
Demonstration School. Navajo Nation (1966): Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act ai 1965 ( KSKA j ( Public Law 89-10); Title !. which amended the 
KSKA to include Bureau of Indian Affairs ( HI A) schools; Indian Education Act 
of 1972 (Public Law 92-318. Title IV); 19"5 Indian Self-Determination and 
Education Assistance Act (Public Law 93-638): creation of the American 
Indian Policy Review Commission in 1975 (Public’ Law 93-580): and 1990 
Xatirc American Languages Act (Public Law 101-47“, Title I). The 
reassert ion of sovereignty has also been lacilitated by presidential e\ceuti\e 
orders such as President. Memorandum, “Government-to-Government Rela- 



tions with Tribal Governments.” Fora rt 



•view of research on Indian education 



in the twentieth century, see Lomawaima, “Kducating Native Americans. 



5. Much of American education hasbeen built on a foundation of religious 
worldview, particularly nineteenth-century Protestantism. SetKTemin, tra- 
ditions of American Education for a description of the moral force of Protes- 
tantism at the turn of the twentieth century. ( The author is indebted to an 
anonymous reviewer for this citation. ) Of course, many contemporary Chris- 
tians believe Christianity and civilization are still inextricably linked. Some 
sectors continue to assert that deeply rooted Kuropean American cultural 
values, such as the patriarchal family, are essential to Christianity and to 
sustaining the ‘ family values” of a civilized nation. 

For more on missionary education ol Native American children, see 
Barr, “Pottawatomie Baptist Manual Labor Training School”; Neely, “Quaker 
F.ra of Cherokee Indian Kducation”: and Soulhwick. “Kducating the Mind." 



6. In the late 1920s and early 1930s federal schools went through a reform 
process initiated by a detailed report on the Office of Indian Affairs known as 
the Meriam Report, after Lewis Meriam. leader of the research team. Report 
published by the Institute for Government Research (see bihliographv). which 
later became the Brookings Institution. 

John Collier. Commissioner of Indian Affairs from 1933 to 1945. insti- 
tuted a radical change in federal Indian education policy. He supported the 
l ight of Native people to practice their own religions and instructed federal 
emploNces no longer to harass or prosecute Indians for their religious beliefs 
and practices. See Philip. John ( oilier s ( 'rusatfc for Indian Deform. 



• i i 



7? 



Thf Unnaiukai Hisiojn of Amihican Indian EouC auon 



7 . Armstrong, Indian Question, 10. For excellent surveys ot this philo- 
sophical and ideological genealogy, see Berkhofer, White Mans Indian ; 
Dickason. Myth of the Savage; Jennings. Invasion uj America-. Pearce. 
Sat w/ism and Civilization', and Takaki, A Different Mirror. 

For more specific details on western Kuropean notions of the wilderness 
and the savagery it harbored, see Bartra. Wild Men in the Looking (da. s.s and 
Bern hei mer , l \ T ild Men in the Middle Ages. 

8 . Van Well, Educational Aspects of the Missions, 1: Dickason. Mi/thoJ 
the Savage. 25 L 274. 

9 . New France included the lands controlled by France in North America 
before 1768. It commonly refers to France's holdings in southcentral Canada 
and parts of what is now the northeastern United States, east and south ot the 

Great Lakes. 

10 . .laenen, “Kducation for Franeization," 46 . 

11. New Spain, from 1521-1821, included territory now in the southwest- 
ern United States, Florida, Texas, Mexico. Central America north of Panama, 
the West Indies, and the Philippines. 

12. See Sando, Pueblo Motions. 

12. Van Well, Educational Aspects of the Missions. 22; Jackson and 
Castillo. Indians. Franciscans, and Spanish Coloni/.ation , 82. See also 
Findlay. “Klusive Institution" and Castillo, Satan* American Perspectives. 

14. The purpose of learning the Native language was to facilitate the 
conversion and assimilation process; everyone involved in the civilization 
project believed in the ultimate transition to the French language. As Samuel 
Champlain commented, "With the French language they ( Native peoples { may 
also acquire a French heart and spirit." quoted in .laenen. "Kducation for 
Franci/.ation," 46. 

15. Jennings. Invasion of America. 252; Simmons, Comeision itom 
Indian to Puritan." 215, 214- 

16. In May 1677 the Massachusetts General Court restricted all Indians 
within the colonv’s jurisdiction to four plantations: Natick. Punknpang. 
Hassaniincsit, and Wamesit. In 1681 the four were reduced to three; Indians 
found outside these "reservations" were sent to "the I louse ot C di rections or 
Prison." quoted in Kawashima. Puritan Justice and the Indian. 29. 

See S/asz, Indian Education in the American C 'atonies \' or more details 
on F.nglish and federal colonial Indian education in New Kngland. For infor- 
mation about the mission efforts of John Flint, the Mayhews, and others, see 
Kawashima, Puritan Justice and the Indian. Simmons, ‘ Conversion from 
Indian to Puritan"; Konda,“'We Are Well as We Are ;and Salisbury, Manitou 
and Providence. 

p See Bowden. American Indians and Christian Missions tor back- 
ground on the praying towns. 

18. Society of Friends of Pennsylvania and New Jersey. A Sketch. 10. 

19. Some colonies were established more for public relations than foi 
transforming Indians. In the early 1900s the wcll-publici/cd File Hills Coloin 



23 . 



L ’W. a.v/- 



in southern Saskatchewan was a showpiece for Canadian and international 
visitors; other Indians “were neither allowed to tour through or visit individu- 
ally," quoted in Carter. “Demonstrating Success," d. 

20. Hampton Institute was founded in Virginia after the Civil War by 
General Samuel Chapman Armstrong, son of New Kngland missionaries to 
I lawaii. The normal school was designed to educate freed African Americans 
as teachers lor Black children in the South; Hampton was founded on a 
premise of racial hierarchy. Its students were inculcated with an ideology of 
White superiority and the “proper" place of the Black race as laborers in the 
Southern economy. Hampton also educated Indian children fora period in the 
late IBOOS. For more on Hampton, see Hultgren and Molin, To Load ami to 
Am rand Lindsey, Indians at Hampton institute. 

21. Matties. Helen Hunt Jackson* id l. 

22. The author is grateful to Thomas Biolsi for bringing these communi- 
ties to her attention. Fo»*more information, see Biolsi. Oraani/.inq the f.akota 
anti Lomawaima. “Sha ks. Huts, Coops and Wickiups." 

23. Wilson, "No Blanket to Be Worn in School’," 70. 

24- Metlakatla, in British Columbia, was created in 1862 and strictly 
controlled by missionary William Duncan. In 1891 the U.S. Congress estah- 
lished the community of Metlakatla in southeastern Alaska forTsimshian who 
had migrated from British Columbia, cited in Prucha. (I rent Father* 1129. 

25. .Jackson and C astillo, indians. Franeiseans. and S/>anish C 'oloniza- 
tion . Id. 

26. Barman, Hebert, and McCaskill, Indian Fdueution in Canada , 8-9. 

27. Barth. “Franciscan Education," 82. 102. 

28. The first federal off-reservation boarding school was established in 
1879 in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, under the command of Army officer Richard 
Henry Pratt. Chilocco, Haskell Institute in Lawrence, Kansas, and Genoa 
Indian School in Nebraska were established in 1884. Bv the turn of the 
century, some 25 .schools had been constructed. A few, such as Chcmawa in 
Salem, Oregon, and Sherman Institute in Riverside, California, remain open 
today as high schools. I laskell, now known as 1 laskcll Indian Nations Univer- 
sity, is the only federally run college for American Indians. For histories of 
hoarding schools and analyses of the impacts on Indian lives and communi- 
ties. see Adams. Fdueatian far Fvtinetion; Child. Hoarding Sehooi Seasons: 
Child and Lomawaima, Boarding School Kducation"; Coleman. .-{mi’riean 
Indian C liildren at Sehooi: Haig-Brown, Resistanee and Renewal: Hultgren 
and Molin, To i \ead and to Serve: liver, One House. One Voice. One Heart: 
Lindsey, indians at Hampton Institute: Lomawaima. “Domesticity in the 
Federal Indian Schools”; Lomawaima. They Coiled It Prairie Lipid: 
Lomawaima, “Educating Native Americans"; Lomawaima. "Estelle Reel"; 
Lomawaima. "Shacks. I hits. Coops and Wickiups"; and Mclietli, Ftlmiefden 
tity. 

29. Bat ih, 1‘t.iiicisean Lduculiou, 192-194. See also Kggan, “Instruction 
and Affect." 



do. Grunt. Moon of Wintertime* d4. 50. 



24 



r.rAT ah All Ar;i r 



Tui Un:i^i.«a« Av-tCMi Indian Eu-j=.-^ : < «■: 



31. [bid., 62; Jackson and Castillo, Indians. Franciscans, and Spanish 
Colonization . 52, 68-69. 

32. Grant, Moon of Wintertime. 51; Jaenen, "Education tor 
Francization," 48. See also Persson, “Changing Experience.” 

33. Gresko, "Creating Little Dominions," 88-89. 

34. Salisbury, “Red Puritans," 16. 

35. See La Fleselie, Middle Fire, Johnston, Indian School Pays', and 
Lomawaima. They Called It Prairie Lig hi. 

36. Lomawaima, "Estelle Reel," 14. 

37. Barth, * Franciscan Education," 82. 102. For discussions of how Native 
communities used silence and how communicative rules of Native language 
differ from English, see Philips. “Participant Structures"; Dumont, “Learning 
English”; and Basso, Western Apache Language and Culture . 

38. Wilkins. American Indian Sovereignty, 1. Wilkins analyzes the ac- 
ceptance of culturally based assumptions in the context of critical legal theory. 
He characterizes natural facts as “reification,’ or a “fallacy of misplaced 
concreteness." 

39. Sec the decisions in Lyng v. Northwest Indian Cemetery Protective 
Association , 485 U.S. 439 (1988) and Employment Division, Dept, of Human 
Resources v. Smith , 494 U.S. 872 (1990), which deny First Amendment 
religious freedom protection to American Indian religions. 

40. See Williams and Neubrech, Indian Treaties for the antitreaty view; 
see Whaley and Bresette. I \ \ allege Warriors f or an analysis of the treaty rights 
controversy in Wisconsin. (The* author is grateful to Dave Wilkins for bringing 
this reference to her attention). See also Baron, English-Only Question ; 
Crawford, Hold Your Tongue Daniels. Not Only English', Gallegos, English - 
Our Official Language?, and Piatt. Only English? 

41. See Lomawaima, “Educating Native Americans.” 

42. A number of important histories of colonial education ot I ndians and 
federal Indian policy do not analyze events occurring after the 1930s or 1940s. 
Collectively, the literature suggests we are in a postcolonial period, but this 
chapter aims to question that assumption. Books that stop at or near the 1930s 
include Adams, Education for Extinction', Child, Hoarding School Seasons'. 
Coleman. American Indian Children at School', I loxie, A Final Promise and 
Lomawaima, They Called It Prairie Light. Exceptions include DeJong, Prom- 
ises of the Past and Szasz. Education and the American Indian. 

43. See Dupuis and Walker, “Circle of Learning at Kickapoo"; Fiordo, 
“(beat Learning Enterprise"; Hornberger, Indigenous Literacies in the 
Americas-, Lipka and Stairs, “Negotiating the Culture of Indigenous Schools"; 
McCarty, “School as Community"; Palmer, “Language and Culture Ap- 
proach”; Rosier and Holm, Rock' Point Experience'. Watahomigie and 
McCarty. “Language in Literacy": McCarty and Zepeda. “Indigenous Lan- 
guage Education and Literacy"; and Stokes. “Curriculum for Native American 
Students." 




K- TSIANINA LOMAWAIMA 



Bibliography 



Adams, David Wallace. Education for Extinction: American Indians and the 
Boarding School Experience, 1875-1928 Lawrence: University Press of 
Kansas, 1995. 

. “Fundamental Considerations: The Deep Meaning of Native American 

Schooling, 1880-1900.” Harvard Educational Review 58(1): 1-28 (1988). 

Armstrong, Samuel Chapman. The Indian Question. Hampton, VA: Normal 
School Steam Press, 1883- Microfiche. 

Barman, Jean, Yvonne Hebert, and Don McCaskill, eds. Indian Education in 
Canada. Vol. 1, The Legacy. Vancouver: University of British Columbia, 
1986. 

Baron, Dennis E. The English-Only Question: An Official Language for Ameri- 
. cans? New Haven: Yale University Press, 1990. 

Barr, Thomas P. “The Pottawatomie Baptist Manual I^bor Training School." 
Kansas Historical Quarterly 43(4): 377-431 (1977). 

Barth, Pius .Joseph. “Franciscan Education and the Social Order in Spanish 
North America, 1502-1821." Ph.D. diss., University of Chicago, 1945. 

Bartra, Roger. Wild Men in the Looking Glass: The Mythic Origins of Euro- 
pean Otherness. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press, 1994. 

Basso, Keith. Western Apache Language and Culture: Essays in Linguistic 
A nthropology. Tucson : University of Arizona Press, 1990. 

Berkhofer, Robert F. The White Man's Indian: Images of the American Indian 
from Columbus to the Present. New York: Knopf, 1978. 

Bernheimer, Richard. Wild Men in the Middle Ages. Cambridge. MA: Harvard 
University Press, 1952. 

Biolsi, Thomas. Organizing the Lakota: The Political Economy of the Hew 
Deal on the Pine Ridge and Rosebud Reservations. Tucson: Universitv of 
Arizona Press, 1992. 

Blackburn, I'homas, and Kat Anderson, eds. Before the Wilderness. Environ- 
mental Management by Native Californians. Menlo Park.CA: Ballena Press. 
1993. 



Bowden. Henry W. Ameriean Indians and Christian Missions: Studies in 
Cultural Conflict. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 1981. 

Buflalohead, W. Roger, and Paulette Fairbanks Molin. ‘“A Nucleus of Civiliza- 
tion*: American Indian Families at Hampton Institute in the I .ate Nine- 
teenth Century." Journal of American Indian Education 59-94 ( 1996). 



Carter, Sarah. "Demonstrating Success: The File Hills Farm Colony." Paper 
presented at the annual meeting of the American Society for Klhnohistnrv, 
November 1989. 



Castillo. Edward, ed. Xa five Ameriean Perspectives on the Hispanic C 'oloni/a- 
iionofAlta ( 'alifornia. New York: Garland Press. 1991. 




I 



f j . . 



26 



Tut UnmatuR-M Hi$!OR, a Ar.MWc.-AN Indian Education 



/ 



Child, Brenda ,J. Boarding School Seasons: American Indian Families , 1900- 
1940. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1999. 

Child, Brenda, and K. Tsianina Lomawaima, eds. “Boarding School Education.” 
Special issue. Journal of American Indian Education 35(3) (1996). 

Coleman, Michael C. American Indian Children at School 1850-1930. Jack- 
son: University Press of Mississippi, 1993- 

Crawford, James. I laid Your Tongue: Bilingualism and the Politics of English 
Only. Reading, MA: Addison-Wesley, 1992. 

Cremin, Utwrence A. traditions of American Education. New York: BasicBooks, 
1977. 

Cronon. William. Changes in the Land: Indians . C 'olonists. and the Ecology of 
New England. New York: Hill and Wang. 1983. 

Daniels, ’Harvey A., ed. Not Only English: Affirming Americas Multilingual 
Heritage. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 1990. 

DeJong, David H. Promises of the Past: A History of Indian Education in the 
United States. Golden, CO: North American Press, 1993. 

Diekason, Olive Patricia. The Myth of the Savage: And the Beginnings of 
French Colonialism in the Americas. Edmonton: University ot Alberta 
Press, 1984. 

Dobvns, Henry F. Their Number Become Thinned: Native American Popula- 
tion Dynamics in Eastern North America. Knoxville: University of Tennes- 
see, 1983. 



Dumont, Robert, Jr. “learning English and 1 low to Be Silent: Studies in Sioux 
and Cherokee Classrooms.” In Functions of Language in the Classroom , 
edited bv Courtney B. Cazden, Vera P. John, and Dell Hymes. New York: 
Teachers College Press, 1972. 



Dupuis, Victor L, and Margery W. Walker. “'Hie Circle of l .earning at Kickapoo." 
Journal of American Indian Education 28(1): 27-33 (1988). 

Kggan, Dorothy. "Instruction and Affect in Hopi Cultural Continuity." In Edu- 
cation and Cultural Process: Toward an Anthropology of Education , ed- 
ited by George 1). Spindler. New York: I lolt, Rinehart & Winston. 1974. 

Findlay, John. “An Elusive Institution: The Birth of Indian Reservations in 
Gold Rush California.” In State and Reservation, edited by George Pierre 
Castile and Robert L. lice. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1992. 



Eiordo. Richard. “The Great Learning Enterprise ol the Four Worlds Develop- 
ment Project.” Journal of American Indian Education 27(3): 24-34 ( 1988). 

Gallegos. Bee. ed. English Our Official Language? New York: II. W. Wilson. 
1994. 

Grant. John Webster. Moon of Wintertime: Missionaries and the Indians of 
(\mada in Encounter Since 1534. Toronto: University of Toronto Press, 



1984. 

Gresko, Jacqueline. “Creating Little Dominions within the Dominion: Early 
Catholic Indian Schools in Saskatchewan and British Columbia. In Bar- 
man, Hebert, and McCaskill, 1986. 



27 -Hi 



K. T t- 



1 laig-Brown, Celia. Resistance and Renewal: Survii Ing the Indian Residential 
School Vancouver: Tillaeum Library, 1988. 

Hornberger, Nancy, ed. Indigenous Literacies in the Americas; Language 
Planning from the Bottom Up. Berlin: Mouton dc Gruyter, 1997. 

Hoxie, Frederick. A Final Promise: The Campaign to Assimilate the Indians . 
1880- 1920. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1984. 

Huff, Delores. To Live Heroically: Institutional Racism and American Indian 
Education. Albany: State University of New York Press, 199?. 

Ihiltgren, Man* I xn., and Paulette Molin. To Lead and to Serve: American 
Indian Education at Hampton Institute . 1878-1923. Charlottesville: Vir- 
ginia Foundation for the Humanities and Public Policy in cooperation with 
Hampton University, 1989. 

I Iyer, Sally. One House, One I r oicc. One Heart: Xu five American Education at 
Santa Fe Indian School Santa Fe: Museum of New Mexico Press, 1990. 

Institute for Government Research. The Problem of Indian Administration: 
Report of a Snivel/ Made at the Request of Honorable Hubert Work . 
Secretary of the Interior, and Submitted to Him, February 21, I92S. Balti- 
more: Johns Hopkins Press, 1928. Reprint, New York: .Johnson Reprint, 
1971. 



Jackson, Robert II., and Hdward Castillo. Indians, Fn/nciscans. and Spanish 
Colonization: The Impact of the Mission System on California Indians. 
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 1995. 

Jaenen. Cornelius. “Kdueation for Franci/.ation: The Case of New France in the 
Seventeenth Century." In Barman, Hebert, and McCaskill, 198b. 

Jennings, hands. The Invasion of America: Indians, Colonialism, and the 
Cant of Conquest. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 1975, 

Johnston, Basil. Indian School I hu/s. Norman: Universitv of Oklahoma Press. 
1988. 



Kawnshima, Yasuhide. Puritan Justice and the Indian: White Man's Lair in 
Massachusetts. /6BO-I76J. Middleton, (T: Wesleyan University Press, 1986. 

La Flesche, Francis. The Middle Five: Indian Schoolboys of the Omaha 'Tribe. 
1900. Reprint. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1978. 

Lindsey, Donal F. Indians at I lum/Uon institute. tS~~-/92J. Urbana: Univer- 
sity of Illinois Press. 1995. 

Lipka, Jerry, and Arlene Stairs, eds. “Negotiating the Culture of Indigenous 
Schools." Special issue. Peabody Journal of Education 69(2) ( 1994). 

Littlefield, Alice, ‘'learning to Libor: Native American Kdueation in the United 
Slates, 1880-1930.” In The Political EcoiunnyofXorthAtnerican Indians. 
edited by John 11. Moore. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 1993. 

Lomawaima. K. Tsianina. “Domesticity in the federal Indian Schools: The 
Power of Authority over Mind and Bod \ T AnuTican Ethnologist 1-14 
(1993). 

. “Kd ti eating Native Americans." !n Handbook of Research on 

Multicultural Education , edited bv James A. Banks. New York: Macmillan, 
199.5. 



28 




. ** Kstelle Reel, Superintendent of Indian Schools, 1898-1910: Politics, 

Curriculum, and I mid." Journal of American Indian Education 85(8): 5-81 
(1996). 

. "Shacks, Huts, Coops and Wickiups: The Domestication of the American 

Indian Home.” Paper presented at the University of Arizona, 28 January 
1998. 

. They Called It Prairie Light: The Story of Chilocco Indian School 

Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 1994- 

Mathes, Valerie Sherer. Helen Hunt Jackson and Her Indian Reform Legacy. 
Austin: University of Texas Press, 1990. 

McBeth, Sally .!. Ethnic Identity and the Hoarding School Experience of 1 1 ivt- 
Central Oklahoma American Indians. Washington, DC: University Press of 
America, 1983. 

McCarty, Teresa L “School as Community: The Rough Rock Demonstration. 
Han ’ard Edm •ational Ret ic *« ' 59( ■ 4 ) : 4 84-503 (1989). 



McCarty, Teresa 
and Literacy.' 



L., and Ofelia Zepeda, eds. “Indigenous language Kducation 
Special issue. Bilingual Research Journal 19(1) (1995). 



McNeill, William 1 lardy. Plagues and Peoples. Garden City, NY : Anchor Press. 



1976. Reprint. New York: Anchor Books, 1989. 



Nabhan. Gary. Enduring Seeds. New York: North Point Press, 1989. 

National Archives. Records of the Bureau of Indian Affairs. RG 75. “Held 
Matron Reports at Sacaton.” Entry 121, Box Pima. 

Neelv, Sharlotte. 'The Quaker Era of Cherokee Indian Education, 1880-1892.' 

/ 1 ppalachian Journal 2( 4 ) : 3 14-322 ( 1 975) . 

Palmer, Gus. “The Umguage and Culture Approach in the Coeur d Alene Lm- 
guage Preservation Project." Human Organization 47: 307-321 (1988). 

Pearce, Roy Harvey. Sacagism and Civilization: A Study of the Indian and the 
American Mind. 1953. Revised edition, Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 1988. 



Pcrsson, Diane. “The Changing Experience of Indian Residential Schooling: 
Blue Quills, 1931-1970.” In Barman, Hebert, and McCaskill, 1986. 

Philp, Kenneth. John C 'oilier s ( 'rusade for Indian Reform. P)2()-P)5J. Tucson: 
University of Arizona Press, 1977. 



Philips, Susan U. “Participant Structures and Communicative Competence: 
Warm Springs Children in the Community and Classroom. In Functions of 
Language in the ( lassroom , edited by Courtney B. Cazden, Vera P. John, 
and Deli 1 lymes. New York: Teachers College Press, 1972. 

Piatt, Bill. Only English ? Lam and Language Policy in the I'nited States. 
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 1990, 



President, Memorandum. “Government -to-Government Relations with Tribal 
Governments." Weekly ('ampliation of Presidential Documents 30 (29 
April 1994): 893-939. 

Prueha, Francis Paul. The ( treat Father. Vols. I and 2. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. 1984. 



29 



Ronda, James. “We Are Well as We Are': An Indian Critique of Seventeenth 
Century Christian Missions." Wiffiarn and Mary Quarterly 34(1): 66-82 
(1977).* 



Rosier, Paul, and Wayne Holm. The Rack Point Experience: .1 l. onyitudina / 
Study of a Xavajo School Proyram (Sand naaki hee Na'nitin). Bilingual 
Education Series, no. 8. Washington, DC: Center for Applied Linguistics, 
1980. 



Salisbury*, Neal. Manitou and Providence: Indians, Europeans, and the Mak- 
ing of Xeic England, 1500-1043. New York: Oxford University Press, 1982. 

. “Red Puritans: The Education and Christianization of ‘Praying Indians' 

in 17th Century Massachusetts." Paper presented at the annual meeting of 
the American I listorical Association, joint session with History of Education 
Society, New Orleans, 30 December 1972. 



Sando. Joseph S. Pueblo Nations: Eight Centuries of Pueblo Indian History. 
Santa Ee; Clear Light, 1991. 

Simmons, William. “Conversion from Indian to Puritan." The Xew England 
Quarterly 52 ( 1 979 ) : 197-218. 

Snipp, C. Matthew. American Indians: The Eirst of 'This Land. New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation, 1989. 

Society of F riends of Pennsylvania and New Jersey. A Sketch . . . for Promoting 
the hnproi vmcnt and Gradual C Vi ■ ili/.ation of the Indian Xatii vs ( The /S05 
Text). 1812. Reprint, Lmdon: W, Phillips; Glen Rock, NJ: Microfilming 
Corp. of America, 1978. Microfiche. 

South wick, Sally. “Educating the Mind. Enlightening the Soul: Mission Schools 
as a Means of Transforming the Navajos. 1898-1928." Journal of Arizona 
History'Mixy. 47-66 (1996). 

Stokes, Sandra M. “Curriculum for Native American Students: Using Native 
American Values.” Reading Teacher 60(7): 576-584 0997). 

S/.asz, Margaret C. Education and the American Indian: The Road to Self- 
Determination Since 1428. 2d ed. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico 
Press, 1977. 



. Indian Education in the American Colonies. /oa~-r~83. Albuquerque: 

University of New Mexico Press, 1988. 

Takaki, Ronald. .-1 Different Mirror: .1 History of Multicultural America. 
Boston: Little, Brown & Co.. 1993. 



Thornton, Russell. American Indian Holocaust and Survival: A Population 
History Since 1442. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1987. 

Nan Well. Sister Maty Stanislaus, the Educational Aspects of the Missions in 
the Southwest. Milwaukee: Marquette University Press, 1942. 

Ycraiio, John, and Douglas U belabor. Disease and Demography in the Ameri- 
cas. Washington DC: Smithsonian Institution Press. 1992. 



Watahomigie, Lucille, and Teresa McCarty. “Language in Literacy in American 
Indian and Alaska Native Communities." In Sociocultural ( 'on texts of Lan- 
guage and Literacy, edited by Bertha Pete/ . Mahwali. NJ: I -twrence Erlhaum 
Associates. 1998. 



A / 



30 



Tk U'JN-'U'wai H-sw* .n As';?/;. *‘-r: In; y< Ee 



Weatherford, .Jack. Indian Givers: How the Indians of the Americas Trans- 
formed the World. New York: Crown Publishers. 1988. 

Whaley. Rick, and Walter Bresette. Walleye Warriors: An Effective Alliance 
against Racism and/or the Earth. Philadelphia: New Society Publishers, 
1994. 



Wilkins. David 1C American Indian Sorereiynty and the US. Supreme Court: 
The Masking f /Justice. Austin: University of Texas Press. 1997. 

Williams, C. 1 Ierb.and Walt Neubrech. Indian Treaties: American Xiyhtmare. 
Seattle: Outdoor Empire Publishing, 1976. 

Wilson. .1. Donald. "'No Blanket to Be Worn in School*: The Education of 
Indians in Nineteenth Century Canada.*' In Barman, Hebert, and McCaskill, 
1986. 



31 1 , 



Chapter 2 




Tribal Control of 
American Indian Education 

Observations Since the 1960s with 
Implications for the Future 



John W. Tipi'Kconnk* III 1 



I n the midst of educational reform and improvement across the 
United States, a movement toward self-determination is taking 
place among American Indians and Alaska Natives.* 1 his move- 
ment toward Indian control of Indian education actually started in 
the 1960s, secured legislation in the 1970s, survived the 1980s. 
picked up momentum in the 1990s, and promises to gain even 
greater significance beyond 2000. A system of education controlled 
by Indian tribes is developing. U includes every level of education— 
from early childhood to graduate school. Increasingly, American 
Indian students will have choices and alternatives to traditional 
public and Bureau oi Indian Affairs (BIA) schools and to mainstream 
colleges and universities. In tribal educational settings, American 
Indian languages and cultures will form the foundation on which all 
knowledge is built. Mainstream schools interested in exploring al- 
ternative ways of teaching and learning will have new opportunities 
to establish mutually beneficial connections with triballv controlled 
schools that emphasize Indigenous knowledge and “Native ways of 
knowing." 




This chapter discusses the history and nature of Indian control of 
Indian education since the 1960s and its implications for the future. 

Numerous studies and reports have concluded that tribal/local 
control of formal education in schools is absolutely necessary if 
education tor American Indians is to improve significantly. Local 
control of public education is a right and responsibility of the states, 
implied by the U.S. Constitution’s lack of mention of any federal role. 
Local or tribal control is also a basic principle inherent in the sover- 
eignty status of American Indian tribes. The current federal policy of 
tribal self-determination, supported by legislation, provides the ad- 
ministrative mechanism for tribes to assume greater control over 
their own affairs, including education. 

Tribal control is also essential for another reason. Historically, 
the United States has used education to change and assimilate Ameri- 
can Indians, or put another way, to eliminate the Indians by the 
systematic destruction of tribal languages and cultures in schools. 
This cultural genocide of tribal people is a tragedy and an irony in a 
country that supposedly values diversity. Assimilation has not worked, 
but its impact is reflected in education statistics and in the poor 
quality oi schooling received by many American Indian students 
today. Formal education has placed too many Indian students at risk 
of failing in both Native and mainstream American societies. Tribal 
control is necessary not only to achieve tribal and individual self- 
sufficiency but to reclaim and strengthen the use of Native languages 
and cultures in schools and communities, thus ensuring a strong 
future for all Indian people. 



Brief History' 

Indian control ol education is not new. The Cherokee and Choctaw 
tribes operated successful school systems in which they taught in 
their Native languages and Knglish during the nineteenth century. 
The quality of education in the Cherokee and Choctaw schools, 
including written Knglish, was superior to that of the White people 
around them. The federal government, favoring an assimilation ap- 
proach to education, did away with these successful tribal schools. ‘ 
todays Indian control movement is based on these early tribal 
education success stories. It is viewed as a wav to address the adverse 



3/1 



C V- ■ ■ » Avi- h?VM< E t 

affects the assimilation policy had on Indian education, including 
limited student success, lack of tribal control, and limited parental 
involvement. 

Contemporary Indian control is rooted in efforts to involve par- 
ents and other tribal members in the education of their children. The 
Meriam Report called for a new attitude and approach to educating 
Indian students: "The most fundamental need in Indian education is 
a change in the point of view." '* It also called for the use of Indian 
language and culture in Indian education. Further, the Meriam Re- 
port recommended the following: 

The whole task of community participation, so important for 
the Indian, has to be consciously worked at; for example, the 
Indians should be serving on school committees in the day 
school as a means of enlisting their general interest in all that 
involves the child’s education and development, and also as a 
gradual preparation for service on boards of education.* 1 

The Great Society programs of the 1960s focused on local commu- 
nity development and action in education. 'Hie change in federal 
Indian policy from cultural termination to tribal self-determination 
called for more Indian involvement and Indian control in education. 
In 1968 President Johnson demanded the establishment of Indian 
school boards at federal Indian schools. By May 1969, 1 74 of the 
BI/Vs 222 schools had advisory boards. The number of Indians on 
public school boards also increased during the late 1960s. 

The Kennedy Report recommended "that Indian parental and 
community involvement be increased . . . that state and local com- 
munities facilitate and encourage Indian community and parental 
involvement in the development and operation of public education 
programs for Indian students . . . that there be a national policy 
committing ... to maximum participation and control by Indians in 
establishing Indian education programs." Further, the Kennedy Re- 
port recommended support for successful schools under Indian con- 
trol. such as Rough Rock Demonstration School and community 
colleges like Navajo Community College (now known as Dine Col- 
lege ). H 

In 1966 Rough Rock Demonstration School was established on 
the Navajo Reservation. It marked the first time an elected school 
board, comprising all Indians, had complete control of a school. An 



36 




W. T;t>?>uONNt, Ill 

early Rough Rock Demonstration School publication offers a glimpse 
of the board’s philosophy and expectations of Indian control: 

Rough Rock Demonstration School will show whether or not so 
called uneducated and unsophisticated Indians can assume 
leadership and control over the total education of their com- 
munity. In the past the “father knows best” attitude was most 
frequently practiced and the level of local community involve- 
ment was minimal. 



The philosophy underlying and permeating the Rough Rock 
Demonstration School is that the Navajo people have the right 
and ability to direct and provide leadership in the education of 
their community. Rough Rock is funded by the Bureau of In- 
dian Affairs and the Office of Economic Opportunity but it 
BELONGS to the Navajo people. The true “bosses” of the school 
are not the BIA, OEO, or even the school officials but rather the 
Navajo people and Rough Rock Community itself. This is the 
challenge and the opportunity awaiting this school at this com- 
munity." 

Parents and other community members at Rough Rock were 
welcomed to participate in all school activities. The curriculum and 
teaching methods integrated the Navajo culture and language. The 
American Indian Policy Review Commission found that 



Indian community controlled schools are the most significant 
education system for Indians today. They are restoring the sclf- 
image and interest in learning among Indian young people. 
They are lowering the drop-out rate and restoring responsibil- 
ity and discipline among our young people. They are graduat- 
ing young people who have solid basic skills and a good feeling 
about themselves and their heritage." 



In 1968 Navajo Community College became the first institution of 
higher education controlled by an Indian tribe. Navajo Community 
College’s philosophy and academic program were based on the “Na- 
vajo way” with institutional governance by an all-Navajo board of 
regents. In 1971 Congress passed the Narajo Community Collcyc 
Act , which provided federal financial support to the college. 

The 1972 Indian Education Act appropriated funds to public 



A. • 



36 



I'HRAi lJ An*1 W'C AN InD.AN Ei .. A'ii'N 



schools to meet the culturally related academic needs of Indian 
students. Parent involvement was encouraged through mandated 
parent committees. The Act also directed discretionary funds to 
Indian institutions, organizations, tribes, and individuals for educa- 
tional services that ranged from early childhood to graduate school. 

In 1975 the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance 
Act (Public Law 93-638) authorized the federal government to enter 
into “638" contracts with Indian tribes and tribal organizations for 
tribal operation of BIA and Indian Health Service programs. The 
Johnson O’Malley program was amended to allow for more Indian 
control of contracts to public schools. In 1978 the Tribady Con- 
trolled Community College Assistance Act provided financial sup- 
port to tribal colleges. u 

The Education Amendments of 1978 (Public Law 95-561) de- 
clared, “it shall be the policy of the BIA in earn ing out the functions 
of the Bureau, to facilitate Indian control of Indian affairs in all 
matters relating to education.” Among other things, Public Law 95- 
561 recognized the lack of Indian involvement and participation in 
education and stressed local involvement and control. In 1988 Con- 
gress passed the Tribady Controlled School Act (Public Law 100- 
297), which allowed for the direct granting (as opposed to contract- 
ing) of funds to school boards to operate schools. Public Law 100- 
297 also authorized the BIA to fund tribal departments of education, 
none of which have ever been funded. 14 

This congressional legislation did not happen because of the good- 
will of Congress or presidential administrations. Rather, it was be- 
cause of the political wisdom and persistence of Indian educators, 
Indian institutions, Indian organizations, tribes, and other driving 
forces behind legislative and executive branch actions. The Coalition 
of Indian Controlled School Boards (CICSB), National Indian Edu- 
cation Association (NIKA), National Congress of American Indians 
(NCA1). American Indian Higher Education Consortium (AIHHC), 
National Indian School Boards Association (N1SBA), Native Ameri- 
can Rights Eund (NARK), Navajo Area School Boards Association 
(NASBA). and the Association of Community Tribal Schools (ACTS) 
arc just some of the organizations that played key roles with the 
White House and Congress in advancing Indian education. 

In the 1990s the policy of self-determination coincided with e f- 
forts to downsize and redesign the ledcral government. The results 



37 




W T ; : 



V. Ill 



were an increased push for tribal control and flexibility of B1A re- 
sources through tribal self-governance and a revision of the budget 
process to include funding to tribes through Tribal Priority Alloca- 
tions. 1 ’ However, a concern associated with this push for tribal 
control of resources is the limited existing funds, with little new 
money to enhance tribal control. 

It is clear that tribal control and Indian control of education are 
being realized within the federal system, especially by those pro- 
grams and schools supported by the BIA. During the 1994-95 school 
year, for the first time in history, there were more tribally controlled 
schools (93) than BIA-operated schools (92) at the elementary and 
secondary levels. Today more than 114 tribally controlled schools 
educate more than 50,000 students. The numbers will continue to 
increase as long as funds and opportunities are available to support 
tribal control of education. 

Tribal colleges are probably the most successful examples of Indian 
control of education. Today more than 25,000 students attend 31 tribal 



colleges in the United States and Canada, This success is demonstrated 
by the colleges’ designation in 1994 as land-grant institutions (Public 
Uuv 103-382) and by the W. K. Kellogg Foundation’s Native American 
Higher Kducation Initiative to strengthen and improve tribal colleges 
and other higher education institutions. 

Public education has fell the presence of Indian involvement rather 
than tribal control. It is safe to assume parents, tribal community 
members, and tribes are more involved in public school education 
today. However, we cannot say that tribal control exists at the public 
school level because states have authority for public education. 



Observations about Tribal Control of Education 

Several observations can he made about tribal control of educa- 
tion, based on a review of the literature. These observations fall into 
five thematic groups: the meaning and significance of tribal control; 
players, roles, and responsibilities; successes and potential; chal- 
lenges; and research findings and needs. 

The Meaning and Significance of Tribal Control. 

A 1997 statement issued by the National Congress of Ameri- 
can Indians and the National Indian Kducation Association 



38 





asserts that t he education of \meriean Indians 

takes place in complex and often contusing environments given 
the roles and expectations of parents, local schools, communi- 
ties, tribes, states, and the federal government. This complex- 
ity of the inter-governmental arena in which Indian learners 
are provided schooling requires a focused federal Indian edu- 
cation policy which recognizes the authority of tribal govern- 
ments. the federal-tribal government relationship and the his- 
tory of federal involvement in the education of American Indi- 
ans in federal, tribal, and slate schools. The political/legal 
status of tribal governments includes as one aspect of sover- 
eignty a primacy authority in the education of tribal mem- 
bers."* 



Outside of Indian count ry. few people realize that Indian tribes do 
not tali under the jurisdiction of states but arc recognized as sover- 
eign bodies by the federal government. As such, tribal governments 
have the legal right to make decisions about how to educate tribal 
members. 



Indian control of education is different from tribal con- 
trol. The terms Indian parent inrolccmcnt , community control, 
local control, and tribal control are often used interchangeably to 
denote aspects of Indian control of education. Hut these terms do not 
necessarily mean the same thing. The most significant difference is 
between tribal control and local or community control, with tribal 
control meaning that the actual tribal government is in control and 
local or community control usually meaning that school boards 
comprise community members. Parent involvement does not mean 
tribal control. Tribally controlled schools can mean tribal control if 
schools arc sanctioned or chartered by tribal governments. 

Loretta DcLong, in defining Indian control, makes a distinction 
between organizational and infrastructure levels. An organizational 
level of Indian control is exhibited in schools that arc controlled and 
primarily staffed by tribal members. Indian control at the infrastruc- 
ture level is exhibited when the school curriculum reflects the cul- 
ture, language, teachings, and values of the tribe. She contends the 
focus has been on the organizational level rather than the infrastruc- 
ture level.' 



39 S i 




John W. TiPPEC.ONNIC III 



Tribal control is essential to self-determination. Tribal 
control is in keeping with the government-to-government relation- 
ship and the policy of tribal self-determination. Tribal control is a 
basic principle inherent in the sovereignty status of American Indian 
tribes. Its premise is that the education of American Indians will be 
most effective when controlled directly by tribal governments. Tribal 
control is essential to achieve self-sufficiency and to strengthen the 
use of Native languages and cultures in schools. lK 

True tribal control is a recent development. The establish- 
ment of Rough Rock Demonstration School in 1966 was the first 
time since the Cherokee and Choctaw schools, 120 years earlier, that 
an Indian community had been allowed to have some control over 
educating its children. Today’s tribal schools are “young and experi- 
mentar and growing.'" Although the developing tribally controlled 
system includes early childhood education through graduate study, 
gaining the involvement of the communities will take a sustained 
effort over time. Roger Bordeaux explains, “Once communities as- 
sume control of the educational process they must deal with the 
vestiges of an education system that tried to stamp out all remnants 
of Indian culture and values." There is a long history of exclusion of 
Indian parents and tribes in schools that promoted assimilation. 20 



This is an active time in the tribal control movement. 

Although tribal control is a national movement, this does not mean 
there is a single national tribal system or that national education 
standards apply to all schools. Rather, the movement is at the tribal 
level, with increasing numbers of tribes gaining greater control of 
the schools serving their members. With more than 560 tribes, 
different approaches to tribal control are to be expected. Tribally 
controlled education systems have developed especially well in In- 
dian communities with tribal colleges. For example, in collaboration 
with the teacher education program at Sinte Gleska University, the 
Rosebud Tribal Department of Education is developing an education 
code that will influence the schooling of its tribal members for years 
to come.’ 1 

Across the United States, K-12, higher education, and other t rib- 
ally controlled education programs have developed networks and 
organizations to enhance collaboration. They often partner with 
professional organizations such as NIKA, NCAI, AIHKC, and ACTS 



40 



Tr-HAi Coniwoi Of American Indian Educaiqn 



to improve Indian education and advance local and tribal control. 
Despite all this activity, the movement toward tribal control of In- 
dian education is not well known outside Indian country, which 
could pose a problem in gaining funding. Funding is needed, in 
accordance with Public Law 100-297* to develop further and main- 
tain tribal departments of education. The general public needs to 
become more knowledgeable and supportive of this el fort to im- 
prove educational outcomes for American Indians and Alaska Na- 
tives." 2 



Players, Roles, and Responsibilities 



Most students attend public schools, which are controlled 
by the states. The majority (approximately 90 percent) of Ameri- 
can Indian students at the K-12 level attend public schools. States 
differ in their overall relationships with tribes. Issues that influence 
tribal-state relations include sovereignty of tribes, economic devel- 
opment, environmental protection, public safety, taxes, child wel- 
fare, gaming, and education. Noneducation issues often overshadow 
Indian education issues and make education less of a priority for 
legislators. 23 

History tells us states have not always been responsive to the 
needs of Indian students in public schools, nor have they typically 
included parents and tribes in decision making about public educa- 
tion. Growing numbers realize that tribal-state relations must im- 
prove if a high-quality educational experience is to be offered to 
American Indians in public schools. Various groups have called for 
increased partnerships; better communication; the education of state 
representatives about sovereignty, tribal governments, and Indian 



perspectives; and the education of tribal members about state gov- 
ernments and their effect on tribes. In the meantime, some tribes- 
like the Rosebud Sioux— have taken the initiative in developing their 
own education codes to govern education on their reservations, 
regardless of school type. 24 



The federal government has major financial responsibil- 
ity for the education of American Indians* Tribal sovereignty 
and treaties form the legal basis for the governnient-to-government 



relationship, trust, federal legislation, executive decisions, court de- 
cisions, and the policy of tribal self-determination. Tribal sover- 



41 



-\W. T.‘m * 



eignty needs to be understood better by the general public and 
government entities.-*' ■ 

Long-term difficulties schools and tribes have experienced in 
working with the federal bureaucracy have included threats to termi- 
nate the recognition of particular tribal nations; resistance from the 
president. BIA, and other federal employees; and difficulty in ar- 
ranging contracts with the federal government. In 1988 some of 
these difficulties were alleviated by Public Law 100-297, which au- 
thorized grants to schools. Today, most Indian-controlled schools 
operate under grants from the BIA.-**’ 

More often than not, Indian education is not a priority at 
state, federal, tribal, and local school system levels. The 
education of American Indians appears to be forgotten and consid- 
ered insignificant at times. At the national level, awareness and 
concern about Indian education seems to fluctuate according to 
political, economic, and social issues of the day. Congressional ap- 
propriation committees continue to give Indian education little pri- 
ority and actually impede the growth of tribal control by including 
budget language that limits the growth of tribal schools. Often, tribal 
governments pay little attention to education issues, focusing in- 
stead on economic, natural resource, and political issues.-' 



Successes and Potential 

There is increasing evidence that when tribes control education, 
American Indian students do better. For example, the American 
Indian Policy Review Commission reported that drop-out rates were 
down at Indian-controlled schools. A study by Bordeaux indicates 
high school completion rates increased from 20-30 percent in 1970 
to 65-80 percent in 1996. However, earlier in the decade. Melody L. 
McCoy contended that "inroads have been made, but tribal control is 
still indirect, uncoordinated, or too limited. Legislation is needed 
that eonlirms and supports direct tribal control over all education 
systems that serve tribal children." Bordeaux predicts that over the 
next five years, Indian-controlled schools will show “major improve- 
ments in academic achievement, tribal language preservation, suc- 
cess in postsecondary education, and relevant employment. "- H 



42 




TViRAi Com»*'i < 



Challenges 

Many challenges lie ahead for those tribes already in control of 
their schools and for those tribes currently seeking control. The 
challenges described here relate to obtaining adequate funding, im- 
proving academic performance, increasing the presence of Native 
cultures and languages, increasing parental and tribal involvement, 
upgrading school facilities, developing Indian leadership and staff- 
ing, and obtaining accreditation. 

Obtaining adequate funding. Funding continues to be a chal- 
lenge. Adequate funding has been a major concern since the 1928 
Meriam Report: 

(Indian education] will cost more money than the present 
program. The real choice before the government is between 
doing a mediocre job thereby piling up for the future serious 
problems in poverty, disease, and crime, and spending more 
for an acceptable social and educational program. . . . Cheap- 
ness in education is expensive.-" 

Today there continues to be a lack of adequate funding for tribal 
schools, and the funding that is available is inconsistent and lacks 
stability. Funding is also inadequate for tribal colleges and for “train- 
ing centers, for teachers and administrators, and for research and 
development of new educational techniques and procedures." 

The Department of Interior appropriation committees in Con- 
gress play the most important role in funding BlA-supported educa- 
tion and schools. A major challenge is to educate and convince 
Congress about the importance of tribal control ol education and its 
potential for improving the overall development of American Indian 
communities. Most recently, the appropriation committees placed a 
moratorium on the number of BlA-supported schools and restricted 
school grade expansions. Congress may also limit the number of 
tribal grant schools because the administrative expenses allocated to 
tribal schools would increase. 11 

Claming has directly helped education, often at tribally controlled 
institutions. Most tribes with gaming profits invest funds in educa- 
tion. often improving or building new school facilities and providing 
higher education scholarships. 




John W. TippcconniC II) 



Improving the academic performance of American In- 
dian students. Many American Indian students do well on aca- 
demic achievement tests, but most score below national norms. 
Research by Donna Deyhle and Karen Swisher shows American 
Indians and White students in the United States have similar capa- 
bilities for learning, but many Indians struggle with ongoing “atti- 
tudes and beliefs of inferiority. 

In some cases, measurement problems make it difficult to tell how 
well American Indian students are actually performing. Bordeaux 
reports some criticisms of standardized, nationally normed tests and 
discusses possible benefits of alternative performance-based assess- 
ment tools. Tribal schools, aware of the student-testing situation, 
are exploring alternative means of assessment. 1 ' 



Increasing the infusion of Indian cultures and languages 
into the curriculum. One major benefit of Indian involvement in 
and tribal control of education is the increasing presence of Ameri- 
can Indian languages and cultures in education, including the prac- 
tice of bilingual-bieultural education. The importance of language 
and culture in meeting the needs of American Indian students is 
recognized in now mathematics, science, and technology guidelines 
developed for schools and communities.-” 

An example of groundbreaking work in the area of culturally 
responsive schools is Gregory Cajete's book Look to the Mountains, 
which presents an Indigenous education framework including a cur- 
riculum mandala for science. Another example is the work of the 
Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative, which is making significant contri- 
butions by developing and integrating Alaska Native knowledge and 
ways of knowing into state standards and classrooms across the 
state. r> 

Despite these exemplary efforts, the overall effort to integrate 
American Indian culture and language into school curricula is piece- 
meal and has realized marginal degrees of success. Tribal schools 
generally have more potential and are more successful in cultural 
integration than public schools, where control of school philosophy 
and curriculum is located in the state departments of education and 
local school hoards. 



Increasing parental and tribal involvement. Contempo- 
rary parental and Indian involvement in formal schooling is rela- 






TutBAi Conwoi c it Ami pu an Indian Eiujcauon 



lively new; tribal control of education is even newer. Meaningful 
involvement and control began in the 1960s but really took hold 
when it was mandated by the Indian Education Act of 1972 through 
program advisory parent committees. Still, the relatively low level of 
parent involvement continues to be an issue today, requiring educa- 
tors to seek new ways to involve parents beyond serving on commit- 
tees and participating in special school activities. Parents need to be 
involved in their children’s education on a daily basis and to promote 
use of their tribal !anguages. :,f> 

Achieving high levels of parent involvement is not easy to do. 
Neither is the task of obtaining local and tribal control. Many barri- 
ers impede progress, drain resources, and divert attention away 
from improving teaching and learning. There has been an ongoing 
need for technical assistance since the 1970s. Gaining Indian control 
happens more readily in federally controlled Bi A schools than public 
schools because of federal responsibility in Indian education, the 
national policy of tribal self-determination, and existing federal leg- 
islation. Indian control is more difficult to achieve in public schools 
because of states’ authority over education. r 

Parental involvement and tribal control connect communities to 
schools. This is true at both the college and K-12 levels. When 
community involvement is high, the school becomes a focal point 
and is involved in the reconstitution of community life. iK 

Upgrading school facilities. School facilities serving Indian 
communities at the K-12 level are often obsolete, ill designed, or 
even condemned. There is a strong need for facilities construction at 
tribal colleges. Studies from the 1970s identified a shortage of school 
construction funds as the most immediate financial problem in In- 
dian education for schools eligible for Public Law 815 ( Federally 
Impacted Areas Aid Act) funds. The situation has not improved. 
New school construction, renovations, and repair of existing facili- 
ties are major problems in BlA-supported schools. There exists a 
backlog of at least $700 million in needed renovations and repairs 
alone.*" 



Developing Indian leadership and staffing. There is a need 
to prepare more Indian people for leadership roles including staff, 
teacher, administrator, and school board roles. The same need exists 
for faculty development programs at tribal colleges. Indian involve- 



45 




i 



J- >-N W. T HI 

ment and control can be achieved only when leadership is provided 
by Indian people, tribes, educators, organizations, and institutions . 11 

Obtaining accreditation. Institutional accreditation and the 
certification of staff are concerns because of the creative, innovative, 
and unusual approaches to education that are grounded in tribal 
languages and cultures. Mainstream accrediting institutions may 
not recognize these approaches. Tribally controlled institutions, on 
the other hand, value staff that know Native languages and cultures, 
and can recognize this knowledge in accreditation and certification 
efforts . 4 - 1 



Research Findings and Needs 

There is greater knowledge about what works in Indian education 
than existed in previous eras. Deyhle and Swisher conclude that 
research has made a difference in Indian education. They report we 
know more about cultural differences, student learning styles, why 
students leave school before graduation, the difference caring teach- 
ers can make, the role a strong grounding in culture and language 
can play in enhancing achievement, and the impact on schooling of 
local knowledge combined with Native language. Finding additional 
knowledge about what works in tribal schools is very likely, given 
their educational philosophies and tribal approaches to education. 

American Indians are becoming more involved in and gaining 
control of research— including educational research. ' 1 Most tribes 
and tribal schools have policies and procedures that control re- 
search, ensure Indian involvement, and ensure that research find- 
ings are put to good use." Tribes and schools are increasingly en- 
gaged in conducting their own research, and the number of Ameri- 
can Indian research scholars has increased. The Journal of Ameri- 
can Indian Education. Tribal College Journal of American Indian 
Higher Education, and American Indian Culture t ,nd Research 
Jnurnahwv publications that disseminate Indian education research. 

There is a need to study virtually every aspect of tribal control 
including the policy of tribal self-determination. Research must de- 
termine not only how well students are doing academically but also 
explore how Native languages, cultures, and ways of knowing influ- 
ence the teaching-learning process in local and tribally controlled 



46 




education settings. Tribal schools need to be compared with public 
schools to ensure parity and equity in resources and budgets. 



Conclusions 

The Indian control movement in education gained momentum in 
the 1990 s; indications are that tribal control will become even more 
established and prominent during the twenty-first century. Indian 
control of Indian education has been difficult to achieve, slow to 
develop, fragmented in its approach, and besieged with numerous 
obstacles and problems. At times, survival has been the main con- 
cern. Yet, the movement has persisted, gathered strength, become 
more focused, and is increasingly successful. Support and leadership 
from tribes, institutions, organizations, governments, and individu- 
als have proven essential to the tribal control movement. 

The developing tribal system of education will not only benefit 
students attending tribal schools, it has the potential to help Indian 
students who attend public schools and mainstream colleges and 
universities— especially in integrating Indian cultures and languages 
to enhance student learning. The development of relevant high- 
quality standards and assessment tools will benefit all Indian educa- 
tion. Ultimately, tribal control of education will help current and 
future Indian leadership achieve greater tribal self-sufficiency and 
help ensure cultural and language survival and growth in the future. 



Notes 

1. John W. Tippeconuic HI (Comanche) teaches Kducalion Policy Studies 
and directs the American Indian Leadership Program at The Pennsylvania 
State University. 

2. Throughout this chapter, the term American Indian is inclusive of 
Kskimos, Aleuts, and other Alaska Natives. At times, “Indian’ or “Native’’ 
might he used to refer to American Indians and Alaska Natives. The BIA does 
not currently operate am schools in Alaska; the las! was turned over to the 
stale in 198(». The Johnson O’Malley (JOM) program provides the only IMA 
funds for elementary and secondary students in Alaska. 

;L The intent here is to discuss briefly the history of Indian control of 
education. Detailed descriptive histories of Indian education can he found in 
the American Indian Policy Review Commission, Report on Indian iiduca - 
tion\ Senate Special Subcommittee, Indian iiducation ; National Advisory 
Council, Indian lulucation (commonly known as the Kennedy Report); and 

4/ 




John W. Tippi roNNiC III 



Szasz, Education and the American Indian. A history of tribally controlled 
colleges is found in Stein, Tribally Controlled Colleges. 

4. See McKinley, Bayne, and Nimnicht, Who Should Control Indian 
Education? Senate Special Subcommittee, Indian Education. 

5. Institute for Government Research, Problem of' Indian Administra- 
tion, 346 (hereafter cited as Meriatn Report). 

6. Ibid., 414- 

7. See Fuchs and Havinghurst, To Live on This Earth. 

8. Senate Special Subcommittee, Indian Education, 119, 135, 106. 

9. Rough Rock Demonstration School, 2. 

10. See Johnson, Navaho Education at Rough Rock', McKinley, Bayne, 
and Nimnicht, Who Should Control Indian Education?', and Szasz, Education 
and the A merit \ an Indian. 

11. American Indian Policy Review Commission, Report on Indian Edu- 
cation, 265. 

12. See Szasz, Education and the American Indian and Stein. Tnba/ly 
( 'or trolled C "alleges. 

13. See Fi nest L. Boyer, Tribal Colleges. 

14. Bordeaux, Our Children, 1. 

15. For more information on tribal colleges, seeTippeconnie. “Kditorial." 

16. National Congress of American Indians, Comprehensive Federal 
Indian Education , 2. 

17. DeLong, “Indian Controlled Schools," 13-14. 

18. See McCoy, Role of Tribal Governments. 

19. See Huff, To Live Heroically. 

20. Bordeaux, Our Children, 3. See also McKinley, Bayne, and Nimnicht, 
Wilt) Should Control Indian Education? and Senate Special Subcommittee. 
Indian Education. 



21. See McCoy, Role of Tribal Governments. 

22. See White House Conference 011 Indian Hducation, Einal Report. 

23. See Reed and Zelio, States and Tribes. 



24. See Senate Special Subcommittee, Indian Education', Fducalion 
Commission of the Stales, Indian Education ; Indian Nations At Risk Task 
Force, Indian Nations At Risk (hereafter cited as Indian Nations At Risk); 
Reed and Zelio, States and Tribes', and McCoy, Role of Tribal Governments. 



25. 

Indians 



See Indian Nations At Risk ~ Tippeconnie, “Hducation of American 
and Pavel, Swisher, and Ward, "Special Focus.” 



26. See American Indian Policy Review Commission, Report on Indian 
Education ; Szasz. Education and the American Indian; Bordeaux. Our Chil- 
dren; and Dupris, American Indian C "onununity Controlled Education. 



27. See Tippeconnie, "Hducation of American Indians" and Tippeconnie, 
Kditorial.” 



K/« 



48 



fat&Ai Conikoi Of American Indian Education 



28. McCoy, Role of Tribal Governments, 10; Bordeaux, Our Children, 4. 

29- Meriam Report, 347-348. 

30. Dupris, American Indian Community Controlled Education , 22. See 
also Bordeaux, Our Children', American Indian Policy Review Commission, 
Report on Indian Education ; Ernest L. Boyer, Tribal Colleges, ; and Paul 
Boyer, Native American Colleges . 

31. See Tippeconnic, “Editorial." 

32. See Tippeconnic and Swisher, “American Indian Education and 
Deyhle and Swisher, “Research in American Indian and Alaska Native Educa- 
tion." 

33. See Bordeaux, Assessment for American Indian and Alaska Native 
Learners. 

34. See Johnson, Navaho Education ; American Indian Policy Review 
Commission. Report on Indian Education ; and American Indian Science & 
Engineering Society. Educating . 

35. See Alaska Native Knowledge Network, http://www.ankn.uaf.edu/ 
NPK.html (25 November 1998). 

36. See Indian Nations At Risk . 

37. See Huff, To Live Heroically and American Indian Policy Review 
Commission, Report on Indian Education. 

38. See Paul Boyer, Native American Colleges, Dupris, .4 merican Indian 
Community Controlled Education: and American Indian Policy Review Com- 
mission, Report on Indian Education . 

39. I\L. 815, the Federally Impacted Areas Aid Act, was passed in 1950 
to assist school districts in the education of students who lived on federal 
lands, including reservations. The act is not solely for Indians but tor any 
student who lives on federal land, including children who live on military 
bases. Th». re are two impacted aid laws, 815 and 874- P.E. 815 provides funds 
for school construction in federally impacted areas. Initially these funds were 
not applied to Indian students, but the law was amended in 1953 to include 
Indians. 

40. Tippeconnic, “Editorial," 4- See also Bordeaux, Our Children: Ernest 
L. Boyer, Tribal Colleges, Paul Boyer. Native American Colleges: and 
Rosenfelt, “Toward a More Coherent Policy." 

41. See American Indian Policy Review Commission. Report on Indian 
Education ; Huff, To Live Heroically: Ernest I.. Boyer, Tribal Colleges, and 
Paul Boyer, Native American Colleges. 

42. See Ernest I.. Boyer, 7'ribal Colleges. 

43. See Deyhle and Swisher. “Research in American Indian and Alaska 
Native Education"; Swisher, “Why Indian People"; Tippeconnic and Swisher, 
“American Indian Education”; and Robbins and Tippeconnic, Research in 
American Indian Education. 

44. See Tippeconnic and Swisher. “American Indian Education." 



REST COPY AVAILABU 



49 i, , 



ill 



J .s*N W. I it » i .. 



Bibliography 

Alaska Native Knowledge Network. (1998, November 3) Native Pathways to 
Education. Available at http://www.ankn.uaf.edu/NPE.html (25 Novem- 
ber 1998). 

American Indian Policy Review Commission. Report on Indian Education. 
Washington, LX': U.S. Government Printing Office, 1976. 

American Indian Science & Engineering Society. Educating American Indian/ 
Alaska Math v Elementary and Secondary Students: Guidelines for Math - 
enu/tics. Science and Technology Proyrams. Boulder, CO: American Indian 
Science & Engineering Society, 1995. ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. KD 385 404. 

Association of Community 'Tribal Schools. Our Children. Our Schools. Our 
Tribes: Thirty Years of Local Control of Indian Education i 960 - /ago. 
Sisseton, St): Association of Community Tribal Schools, 1996. ERIC Docu- 
ment Reproduction Service No. HD 395 740. 

Bordeaux, Roger. Assessment for American Indian and Alaska Native Learn- 
ers. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small 
Schools, 1995. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 385 424- 

Boyer, Ernest L. Foreword to Tribal Colleges: Shaping the Put are of Native 
America, by Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. 
Princeton, N.I: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. 
1989. 

Boyer, Paul. Native American Colleges: Progress and Prospects. San Fran- 
cisco: .lossey-Bass. 1997. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 409 
037. 

Cajete, Gregory. Look to the Mountain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education. 
Durango, CO: Kivaki Press, 1994. 

Del xmg, I /)retta.*' Indian Controlled Schools: The Cnreali/.ed Potential." Tribal 
( 'allege Journal 9(4): 13-14 (1998). 

Deyhle. Donna, and Karen Swisher. “Research in American Indian and Alaska 
Native Education: From Assimilation to Self-Determination." In Review of 
Research in Education . vol. 22, edited by Michael W. Apple. Washington, 
DC: American Educational Research Association, 1997. 

Dupris, Joseph C. American Indian Community Controlled Education: "De- 
termination for today . Direction for Tomorrow." bis Cruces, NM: ERIC 
Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools, 1980. ERIC' Docu- 
ment Reproduction Service No. ED 187 502. 

Education Commission of the Slates. Indian Education: Pinal Project Report. 
Denver. CO: Education Commission of the States, 1980. 

Fuchs, Estelle, and Robert J. Havinghursl. To Live on this Earth: American 
Indian Education. Garden City. NY: Doubleday, 1972. Reprint with new 
introduction. Albuquerque: University of Now Mexico Press, 1983. 



(NJ 



50 





T./ G v- . - A y? v .v . i v fo ». 

Huff. poeores J. To Uvc Heroically: Institutional Racism and American 
Indian Education. Albany: State University of New York Press. 1997. 

Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. Indian Xations At Risk: An Educational 
Strategy far Action: Final Report of the Indian Xations At Risk Task Force. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Kducalion. 1991. KRIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. HD 343 753. 

Institute for Government Research. The Problem of Indian Administration: 
Report of a Surrey Made at the Request of Honorable Hubert Work. 
Secretary of the Interior, and Submitted to Him. February 21. 1928. Balti- 
more: Johns Hopkins Press, 1928. Reprint, New York: Johnson Reprint, 
1971. 

Johnson Broderick 11. Xaraba Education at Rough Rock. Rough Rock. A'/: 
Rough Rock Demonstration School, 1968. 

McCoy, Melodv L The Role of Tribal Governments in Education Policy: A 
Concept Paper. Boulder, CO: Native American Rights Fund, 1991. 

McKinley. Francis. Stephen Bayne, and Glen Nimnicht. Who Should Control 
Indian Education? A History . Three Case Studies, Recommendations. Her- 
kelev, CA: Far West laboratory for Kducational Research and Development. 
1970. KRIC Document Reproduction Service No. HD 042 538. 

National Advisory Council on Indian Kducation. Indian Education: A Federal 
Entitlement: /9th Annual Report to the l \S. C angressfor Fiscal ) ear 1992. 
Washington, DC: National Advisory Council on Indian Kducation. 1993. 
KRIC Document Reproduction Service No. F.D 361 157. 

National Congress of American Indians and National Indian Kducation Asso- 
ciation. Comprehensive Federal Indian Education: Policy Statement: A 
Proposal from Indian Country to the White House. Washington. DC: Na- 
tional Congress of American Indians and National Indian Kducation Asso- 
ciation. 1997. KRIC Document Reproduction Service No. KD 408 137. 

Pavel. Michael, Karen Swisher, and Marlene Ward. “Special Focus: American 
Indian and Alaska Native Demographic and Kducational Trends." In Status 
Report on Minorities in Higher Education: 1994 Thirteenth Annual Status 
Report, edited by Deborah J. Carter and Reginald Wilson. Washington, DC: 
American Council on Kducation, 1995. KRIC Document Reproduction Ser- 
vice No. KD 407 891. 

Reed, .lames B., and Judy A. Zelio, eds. States and Tribes: Building Xeie 
Traditions. Denver. CO: National Conference of State legislatures. 1997. 
KRIC Document Reproduction Sen ice No. KD 396 8^6. 

Robbins. Rebecca, and .John Tippeconnic III. Research in American Indian 
Education. Tempo. A/.: Center for Indian Kducation, 1985. 

Rough Rock Demonstration School. Chink*. A/.: Rough Rock Demonstration 
School, n.d. 

Senate Special Subcommittee on Indian Kducation. Indian Education: A Xa- 
Hanoi Tragedy. .4 Xational Challenge. 91st Congress. 1st sons.. 1969. S. 
Rept. 91-501. 

Stein. Wayne J. 1'rihully ( 'on trolled ( 'alleges: Making Good Medicine. New 
York: Peter l -mg. 1992. 

&) 



John W. TippiconniC 111 



Swisher, Karen Gayton. “Why Indian People Should Be the Ones to Write about 
Indian Education.” American Indian Quarterly 20(1): 83-90 (1996). 

Szasz, Margaret C. Education and the American Indian: The Road to Self- 
Determination Since 1028. 2d ed. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico 
Press, 1977. 

Tippeconnic, John W., III. “Editorial ... On BIA Education.” Journal of 
American Indian Education 35(0* 1-5 (1995)- 

. “The Education of American Indians: Policy, Practice, and Future Direc- 
tion.” In American Indians: Social Justice and Public Policy , edited by 
Donald E. Green and Thomas V. Tonnesen. Milwaukee: University of Wis- 
consin System, 1991. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 351 158. 

Tippeconnic, John W., and Karen Swisher. “American Indian Education.” In 
Encyclopedia of Educational Research, 6th ed., edited by Marvin C. Alkin. 
New York: Macmillan, 1992. 

White House Conference on Indian Education. Final Report of the White 
House Conference on Indian Education. Washington, DC: White House 
Conference on Indian Education, 1992. ERIC Document Reproduction Ser- 
vice No. ED 353 124. 



fi 



4 i 



52 




Chapter 3 




Education and the Law 

Implications for American Indian/ 
Alaska Native Students 

Linda Sri-: Warner 1 



T he right to an education is not a federal right: no references to 
education are found in the U.S. Constitution. As a result, 
education is considered a state responsibility. The federal gov- 
ernment assumes responsibility for education of American Indian/ 
Alaska Native* 1 students through the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 
and through education legislation that targets federally recognized 
tribes. 

This chapter provides an overview of federal education case law 
and legislation. Case law references are U.S. Supreme Court deci- 
sions, except as noted. The chapter further discusses the doctrine of 
in loco /Hi rent is and its potential applicability tor Indian tribes. The 
overview summarizes general case law applicable to all students. 
Interpretations with specific implications for American Indian stu- 
dents are included where relevant. Currently, there is no Supreme 
Court education case law applicable specifically to American Indian 
students. 

In April 1998 the Central Section Coordinator for the Committee 
for Native American Rights sent a memorandum to all schools in 



i 




California with American Indian mascots, nicknames, or logos . 1 The 
memorandum advised the schools that a lawsuit against the Los 
Angeles School District had been upheld in federal district court. 
Referring to this landmark decision, the committee invited all Cali- 
fornia schools with American Indian mascots or nicknames to “re- 
consider" their stances. Although the decision is limited to the juris- 
diction of the federal district court where it was delivered, other 
district courts may eventually cite this ruling as precedence. At this 
writing, the plaintiffs had not decided whether to appeal the case. 
Only U.S. Supreme Court decisions become “the law of the land." 
and the mascot issue is not slated for Supreme Court review at this 
time. 

i ” ’ ' - * " ■ ” 

i School Law and the U.S. Legal System 

I 

| JUDICIAL SYSTEM 

! There are 50 state court systems, a court system for the District of 
Columbia, and a federal court system. Each court within a system is 
i identified by its jurisdiction. Jurisdiction often refers to the geographic 
| area over which a particular court has authority. Jurisdiction refers to the 
power of a court to adjudicate a dispute. To have the power to order a 
defendant to do anything (or refrain from doing anything), a court must 
j have personal jurisdiction over the defendant. 

; Jurisdiction alludes to the extent of power a court has over certain 
■ subject matter or a particular kind of dispute. These are some of the more 
, common classifications of subject matter jurisdiction: 

* Limited or special jurisdiction. A criminal court of limited jurisdiction 
cannot take a noncrimihal case 

* General jurisdiction. A state court of general jurisdiction can handle 
j any case that raises state questions (state constitution, state statutes. 

1 or state common law). 

j • Exclusive jurisdiction. An example of exclusive jurisdiction is juve- 
j nile court. 

* Concurrent jurisdiction. An example of concurrent jurisdiction is 

I family court and county court, which have jurisdiction to enforce a 
! child custody order. 

j • Original jurisdiction, trial court, or court of first instance. The first 
| court to hear and decide a case. This court may overlap with other 
j designations of jurisdiction 

| • Appellate jurisdiction. This court can hear appeals from lower tribu- 
i nals. An appeal is a review of what a lower court or agency has done 
j to determine if there was any error Sometimes, a party can appeal to 



64 



1 I* 



, A* 



•/A. a 



N- 



This example accentuates an Indian education issue: the breadth 
of education case law at the Supreme Court level is minimal. Vet the 
existing education case law is applicable to Indian students in pub- 
lic and tribal schools. ‘Hus chapter reviews briefly the Supreme 
Court cases that serve as the primary basis for education policy and 
regulation. Also reviewed is education legislation that targets Ameri- 
can Indian populations. 

School law, as many specialized fields in law, requires a general 
understanding of the legal system in this country (see box below), 
'lids general understanding can be applied to schools serving Ameri- 
can Indian populations. It is important to note that schools sene 



the appellate court as a matter of right: in other Kinds of cases, the 
appellate court has discretion as to whether it will hear the appeal. 

STATE COURTS i 

Depending on the state. there may be one or more levels of trial courts j 
that hear disputes, determine case tacts, and make initial determinations j 
or rulings. These are courts of ouginai jurisdiction. State courts may also 
review cases initially decided by an administrative agency. State courts 
have variously configured appellate courts based on the state's constitu- 
tion. Case law specific to states is not reviewed in this work because of its j 
limited applicability to ail Indian students. 1 

t 

FEDERAL COURT SYSTEM j 

The federal court system, like those of the stales, consists of two basic j 
kinds: courts of original jurisdiction (trial courts) and appellate courts. The j 
basic federal trial courts are U.S. district courts. There are about 100 
districts, including at least one for every state, the District of Columbia. 
Guam, the Virgin Islands, and Puerto Rico. Specialized courts include the 
U.S. Tax Court, U.S. Claims Court and U.S. Court ot International Trade. 

Appeals courts have two levels: middle appeals and final appeals. 
Primary courts at the middle level are U.S. courts of appeals: eleven j 
comprising groups of states and territories, with a twelfth for the District of 
Columbia. Their primary function is to review the decisions of federal 
courts of original jurisdiction. 

The federal court of final appeals is the U.S. Supreme Court; it 
provides the final review of decisions of all federal courts and federal 
agencies. The Supreme Court may also review state court decisions that j 
raise questions involving the U.S. Constitution or a federal statute. The j 
Supreme Court does not hear every case presented to it \ 



bb l - j 



primarily a state function, and each state organizes and supervises 
education as its constitution and statues allow. The Tenth Amend- 
ment to the U.S. Constitution provides the basis for state control: 
“The powers not delegated to the United States by the Constitution, 
nor prohibited by it to the States, are reserved to the States respec- 
tively, or to the people. 

Case law is not the only source of law. Constitutions, statutes, 
ordinances, and regulations are also sources for education law. The 
legislative branch of government is responsible for passing laws. 
Citizens are moie likely to be aware of case law than legislation 
because of the media attention to court opinions at all levels. The 
function of the courts is to resolve or adjudicate disputes by inter- 
preting and applying applicable constitutions, statutes, ordinances, 
and regulations. Suppose a dispute comes before a court and no 
statutes, ordinances, regulations, or constitutional provisions gov- 
ern the facts of the dispute. The judge will rely on prior opinions in 
which the court has established rules for this type of dispute. If no 
such opinions exist, the judge may be forced to create new rules. 
Such judicially created rules are referred to collectively as common 
law. Judges create common law in their written opinions. 



Trust Responsibility 

When case law involves American Indian individuals or tribes, it 
is important to understand the federal government's trust responsi- 
bility to tribal entities. Case law involving the BIA is handled by the 
Department of Interior’s Solicitor's Office. If the matter goes to 
court, the Department of .Justice may represent the BIA. Both Inte- 
rior and Justice have responsibilities to other government agencies. 
Conflict of interest specific to Indian tribes is not unusual within the 
government. The Supreme Court has made it clear that, in such 
circumstances, tribes cannot be favored/' t ribes cannot be relieved 
of the res judicata" effect merely because the government has repre- 
sented both the tribes and those competing with them/ While the 
trust responsibility for education has been debated and/or ignored 
by executive priority over the years, the courts have supported edu- 
cation for American Indians. The courts have asserted in some opin- 
ions that while no legal obligation can be found in treaties, the 
federal government s historical moral obligation for edueation lakes 

Co 



56 



j<s.»,v> mw Amu-k at, Ira- .. m/A( A‘.k.\ Naim SiufjfNis 



E P„-.a!- % a;,: . ■„. Lav,, jytyi A 

precedence. 8 

Jurisdiction in Indian country is determined by a complex mix- 
ture of factors including the existence or nonexistence of applicable 
specific federal jurisdictional or regulatory statutes governing the 
issue. For example, in a 1985 case, the Supreme Court held that a 
non-Indian party could sue in federal court under federal Indian law 
to contest a tribal court's authority to exercise jurisdiction over a 
civil dispute.' 1 ' However, non-Indian individuals seeking to invoke 
federal court jurisdiction must First exhaust all tribal court remedies 
before proceeding. This decision helped establish the relationship of 
tribal and federal courts for cases involving non-Indians. 

Despite the history of Indian/non-Indian affairs, the number of 
court cases that specifically address Indian education is nearly non- 
existent. However, this may correlate to the relatively small number 
of federal laws that specifically address education issues. School 
officials need a basic understanding of school law to make informed 
decisions. Case law and legislation form the basic framework for 
decision making in schools. 



Case Law 

Case law in education falls into the following general areas: disci- 
pline, curriculum, free speech, tort law, equity, special education, 
finance, and compulsory attendance. Case law at any level is bound 
by the jurisdiction of the court; comparable jurisdictions may have 
conflicting rulings in case law. This section highlights education case 
law at the U.S. Supreme Court level. These rulings apply to a!! 
schools, but some carry additional implications for American Indi- 
ans. 

Discipline. The 1977 Supreme Court ease Inyrahum v. Wright 
considered whether corporal punishment constituted "cruel and un- 
usual punishment” as prohibited by the Kighth Amendment to the 
Constitution. In its decision (five to four), the Court ruled paddling 
does not require Kighth Amendment protections. The court ruled 
that paddling neither violated any substantive rights nor caused any 
student to suffer any grievous loss. Requiring notice and a hearing 
for every corporal punishment case would, according to the Court, 
“significantly burden the use of corporal punishment as a disciplin- 
ary measure." Most states have laws prohibiting corporal punish- 




ment, and even in states without such laws, school officials often 
discipline students without the use of corporal punishment. Federal 
and tribal schools typically prohibit the use of corporal punishment. 

'fhe due process clause of the Fourteenth Amendment was found 
to apply to students in (loss r. Lope xT a 1975 Supreme Court case. 
Nine public school students in Columbus, Ohio, had been suspended 
from school for up to 10 days for various misconducts connected 
with student unrest. None had been given the benefit of a hearing. 
The Court reasoned that students have two protections under the 
constitution: property interest in a free education and liberty inter- 
est in a freedom from injury to the students' reputation. The Court 
found that students should receive at least 

* oral or written notice of the charges, and if the student denies 
the charges, then 

* a summary of the evidence against the student, and 

* an informal opportunity to present his or her side of the story. 

B1A schools and tribally controlled schools have policies and proce- 
dures sanctioned by local boards that include due process activities 
forstudents alleged to have broken school rules. 

Curriculum. Curriculum questions presented to the Supreme 
Court provide a range of decisions, some touching on other issues 
such as academic freedom and freedom of speech or press. A 1963 
case. School District of Abington Township v. SchemppS focused 
on religious freedom. Students had been required to read at least 10 
verses from the Bible, and school authorities required students to 
recite the Lord's Prayer. The question for the Court centered on the 
violation of religious freedom as protected by the First and Four- 
teenth Amendments. M The court ruled the required activities vio- 
lated First Amendment clauses protecting the free exercise of reli- 
gion and prohibiting government establishment of religion. Further, 
the ability of a parent to excuse a child from these ceremonies by 
written note was irrelevant since it did not prevent the school's 
actions from violating the establishment clause. No case law has 
tested the use of tribal religious activities in federal or tribal schools. 

In l mu r. Xicho/s nou-Knglish-speaking Chinese students in 
San Francisco brought a class-action suit seeking relief against un- 



58 



E; 



f l AJJ! • ',-f t_A.\ . i' 




»! v At.uvi »\fi lt.;-A'i/A s A‘ r a N '- 1 \i \ 



equal educational opportunities. California state law provided that 
English should he the basic language of all schools, yet many native 
Chinese students were unable to understand English. The Supreme 
Court, relying solely on Section 601 of the ( 'inil Rights Act 1964, ,r ‘ 
found that such discrimination did exist in programs receiving fed- 
eral financial assistance. The Court indicated that a student “brings 
to the starting line of his educational career different advantages and 
disadvantages caused in part by social, economic, and cultural back- 
ground, created and continued completely apart from any contribu- 
tion to the school system.” By requiring English (e.g., state-imposed 
standards), “there is no equality of treatment merely by providing 
students with the same facilities, textbooks, teachers, and curricu- 
lum; for students who do not understand English are effectively 
foreclosed from any meaningful education.” 

The implications of these two cases for American Indian students 
compel school officials to consider entanglement questions (church 
and state) and second-language instruction for speakers of Native 
languages. Given the history of assimilation policies and practices in 
federal and public schools, particularly in view of the 1990 Native 
American Languages Act , and tribal officials are sensitive to the 
need to incorporate "Native ways of knowing” throughout the cur- 
riculum. 

Free speech. Constitutional freedoms for students are fairly 
new to the Supreme Court. The landmark case on speech is Tinker e. 
Pcs Moines Independent Community School Districts' In Tinker , 
the primary issue was protected speech. Students in Dos Moines, 
Iowa, had worn black arm bands to protest the Vietnam War. In the 
decision, the Court reasoned that wearing an arm hand as a political 
protest is a symbolic act of speech and constitutes a form of “pure 
speech.” The speech or expression was "pure” because it was not 
accompanied by disruptive conduct. In fact, testimony indicated 
most other students were apathetic. The court made clear that sym- 
bolic speech would not be protected in a ease where discipline could 
not be maintained, distracting from the educational processes. Memo- 
rable language from this decision includes the following: "It can 
hardly be argued that either students or teachers shed their constitu- 
tional rights to freedom of speech or expression at the selioolhouse 
gate.” 



59 < d. 





For schools with American Indian populations, the most relevant 
language in the 'Tinker case concerns “undifferentiated fear or ap- 
prehension of disturbance” and the probability that school adminis- 
trators will make decisions based on the potential discipline prob- 
lems. In his decision. Justice Abe Fortas referred to a 1996 circuit 
court decision: “As Judge Gcwin, speaking for the Fifth Circuit, said, 
school officials cannot suppress ‘expressions of feelings with which 
they do not wish to contend. ” r 

The wearing of insignia or slogans now is usually covered by 
school dress codes. For school administrators and board members, 
the prohibition of pins (e.g., “Free Leonard Peltier” buttons) re- 
quires comparable attention. Does the wearing of an insignia consti- 
tute a disturbance to the educational program? If so, what is the 
likely extent of such disturbance? The Supreme Court has not re- 
viewed cases involving student dress or appearance. 



Tort law. Tort 11 * claims require establishing negligence of (1) 
duty of care, (2) breach of that duty through a negligent act or 
omission, (3) an injury, and (4) a proximate cause between the 
breach of the duty and injury. Each qualifier must be present. Negli- 
gence is the failure to use the degree of care a person of ordinary 
prudence and reason would exercise under the same or similar 
circumstances. Reasonable care, in the context of professional negli- 
gence. requires exercising the degree of skill and care ordinarily 
employed by members of the same profession under similar condi- 
tions and in like surrounding circumstances. Thus, an elementary 
teacher is expected to have knowledge and skills in early childhood 
development. A college professor, however, is not likely to need 
knowledge about the development of preschool children in order to 
perform his or her professional duties: he or she would be judged by 
standards applicable to a professional teacher of adults. The courts 
also use as a qualifier the expertise a professional portrays to a 
community. For example, if a college teacher professed to have 
specific qualifications in preschool education, the courts would con- 
sider those qualifications. As a result, the question of whether the 
duty has been breached turns on the professional's departure from 
the standard of care rather than on the event. 

Cases alleging tort responsibility have increased in recent years. 
One of the immediate defenses bv school officials in a tort case is the 



60 




E fine aik >n anl' ik Law: tUr'er aim »ns i< t; A‘,*f pie an Indian/ A; ask a Naiivf $»\iofNis 



common law doctrine of in loco parentis. In loco parentis translates 
literally as in place of the parents. A school official would argue that 
any decision regarding a student is based on the premise that school 
officials often act in place of parents. More recently, courts have 
been asked to address liability issues of schools and school employ- 
ees for failing to prevent a suicide or failing to provide notice to 
parents of a student's suicidal tendencies. Recent circuit court cases 
involving this doctrine concern litigation by parents of a student who 
has committed suicide. In one instance, the court stated “there is a 
duty which arises between a teacher or a school district and a stu- 
dent. This duty has previously been recognized bv this Court as 
simply a duty to exercise reasonable care in supervising students 
while they attend school. In another case, the mother of a 13-year- 
old student who had committed suicide brought a 1983 civil rights 
suit and wrongful death action based on the failure of school admin- 
istrators to prevent the student’s suicide. 2 " The jury awarded the 
mother $165,000 in damages. Those two cases are regional, yet they 
provide educators with an understanding of recent decision-making 
trends. 

In the 1975 Supreme Court case Wood v. Strickland.'' school 
officials used a defense based on common-law tradition and public 
policy: “School officials are entitled to a qualified good-faith immu- 
nity from such liability for damages.” In this case, the students had 
been expelled from school for violating a school regulation prohibit- 
ing the use or possession of intoxicating beverages at school or 
school activities. The students claimed their suspensions violated 
the due process requirements of the Constitution. The Court’s opin- 
ion discusses the balance of qualified and absolute immunity for 
school officials in detail. The significant discussion of the interfer- 
ence with school administration ends with this comment: “The sys- 
tem of public education that has evolved in this Nation relies neces- 
sarily upon the discretion and judgement of school administrators 
and school board members,” Historically, the Supreme Court has 
been reluctant to intervene in the administration of schools, result- 
ing in a small number of education cases adjudicated in the high 
court. 

Implications for schools serving American Indian students are 
clear. Negligence will not he tolerated, nor is it defensible. Prior eras, 
wherein imimmitv was the first line of defense, are obsolete. The 



61 t* • 




L<N'[ ; ft $i,t W- • 



courts will protect school officials acting in a “reasonable” manner. 
The doctrine of in loco pa re mis appears to be most useful in a 
boarding school; however, its weight in a Supreme Court case is yet 
to be determined. In considering liability, courts also consider the 
age and maturity of the child and the foreseeability of the incident. 



Equity. Equity issues typically pertain to people complaining 
they have been denied a benefit or suffered a burden unfairly. The 
legal foundation is the equal protection clause of the Fourteenth 
Amendment of the Constitution. The Supreme Court has placed the 
burden of proving differential treatment on the plaintiffs. Plaintiffs 
must establish that government policies (in this instance, school 
policies) were driven by discrimination. Once the plaintiffs establish 
differential treatment, it must next be determined (1) whether the 
plaintiff or government must bear the burden of proving the ad- 
equacy of the justification for differential treatment and (2) whether 
the differential treatment is in fact justified. A law or policy is pre- 
sumed unconstitutional unless the government can show that differ- 
ential treatment is necessary to achieve some compelling state inter- 
est. The test for equal protection cases is strict scrutiny." 

Without question, the landmark case involving equity is Brown t\ 
Board of Education of Topekir* and its subsequent rehearings. 
Brown o\erturned the Supreme Court's P/cssi/ i\ Fcryt/so/r 7 deci- 
sion by ruling that “in the field of public education the doctrine of 
‘separate but equal' has no place. Separate educational facilities are 
inherently unequal.” Brown relied heavily on the First, Fifth, and 
Fourteenth Amendments to the Constitution. This decision has pro- 
foundly affected public education and other areas of public policy 
whore the Supreme Court has attempted to adjudicate equal oppor- 
tunity. 

Equal opportunity includes gender as well as racial issues. The 
most significant gender cases in education have involved access. The 
importance of education to our democratic society and the relation- 
ship of education to our most basic public responsibility were the 
grounds on which the Court concluded that the opportunity of an 
education, where the state has undertaken to provide it, is a right 
that must be made available to all on equal terms. 



/ < 4 62 



El'*'- M'.N M<|s 'I'! La-.V. A1« -hS 1 • ,lj A*.'» Afjllv Na’i.! S‘i ; t Oi'S 



Special education. In 1988 Supreme Court Justice William 
Brennan delivered an opinion in Honiy v . Doe.*' 'Hie judgment 
directed California to provide services directly to a disabled child 
because a local agency had failed to do so. This ease involved the 
“stav put” provision of the 1975 Education of All Handicapped Chil- 
dren Act (Public Law 94-142). The provision prohibited states or 
local school authorities from unilaterally excluding disabled chil- 
dren from the classroom due to dangerous or disruptive conduct 
related to their disabilities during a review of their placement. An 
earlier case involving the Education of All Handicapped Children 
/lr/ was Hendrick Hudson District Board of Education v. Rowley r 
Rowley determined that a state must have a policy that assures all 
handicapped children the right to a “free appropriate public educa- 
tion'’ to be eligible for federal funds. The parents had filed suit asking 
that an interpreter be provided for their child. The school had al- 
ready provided hearing aids. After lower courts upheld the parents' 
argument, the Supreme Court ruled the court of appeals and district 
court had misconstrued the requirements imposed by Congress upon 
states receiving federal funds. 

Two federal district court cases were central to the movement 
protecting the rights of disabled children: Pennsylvania Association 
for Retarded Children (R.A.R.C.) v. Commonwealth of Pennsylva- 
nia and Mills v. Board of Education of District of Columbia /*’ 
These cases were based on equal protection and due process theo- 
ries. The P.A.R.C. case ended with an agreement that provided “ac- 
cess to a free public program." Mills provided similar rights to an 
even broader category. Cases involving handicapped or disabled 
students are among the most widely litigated cases in education law. 

Finance. State school finance systems have been challenged in 
recent years. Karly attempts to use the W.S. Constitution to resolve 
inequities in funding for public schools were largely unsuccessful. 
These early attempts focused on the equal protection clause ol the 
Constitution: “No state shall deny to any person within its jurisdic- 
tion the equal protection of the laws." Lawsuits claiming that a 
particular state's school funding formula violated its own state con- 
stitutional provision have been more successful. These cases have 
been based on the strategy that education funding is not fiscally 
neutral. 'Phis strategy was successful in Serrano r. Priest A" wherein 



63 / fJ 





U,r>A $t,-t W APNt j? 

the California Supreme Court found that the state funding system 
violated the equal protection clauses of both the U.S. Constitution 
and the California State Constitution. The Serrano case was the 
impetus for moving this issue to the national agenda. 

In San Antonio Independent School District r. Rodriguez y u the 
U.S. Supreme Court effectively precluded the use of the federal equal 
protection clause as a vehicle for school finance reform. In a five to 
four decision, the Court ruled that the Constitution does not prohibit 
the government from providing different services in different dis- 
tricts. The key to this ruling is that the Constitution protects the 
rights of individuals but not school districts. Since Rodriguez , school 
finance reform litigation can be found in nearly half of the state court 
systems. Systems of allocating state resources for education have 
been affected either by the threat or reality of school finance litiga- 
tion. v -' 

Compulsory attendance. In matters concerning school atten- 
dance, two Supreme Court cases are notable. The 1925 Fierce r. 
Society of the Sisters of the Holy Names of, Jesus and Mary" ruling 
had strong implications for separation of church and state. In this 
case, a private school in Oregon had sought relief from a 1922 state 
law requiring parents to send their children “to a public school for 
the period of time a public school shall be held during the current 
year" in the district where the child resided. The law pertained to all 
children between the ages of 8 and 16. Based on a precedent estab- 
lished in Meyer r. Nebraska, " the Supreme Court noted "the Act of 
1922 unreasonably interferes with the liberty of parents and guard- 
ians to direct the upbringing and education of children under their 
control." The Court added that "rights guaranteed by the Constitu- 
tion may not he abridged by legislation which has no reasonable 
relation to some purpose within the competency of the state." This 
compulsory education case had no major impact on American Indi- 
ans because they were not considered citizens of the United States in 
1925. In fact, based on voting rights, not all the states considered 
American Indians citizens until 1946. 

Another landmark decision in compulsory education came in 
1972. In Wisconsin r. Voder, 1 ' the Supreme Court ruled that Amish 
children could not he compelled to attend school to the age of 16 as 
state law required. Testimony pointed to a basic tenet of Amish faith: 



/ t > 



64 




u v- jo'; Avr 



\/A,a ■'A Na'..i Stm u/s 



religion pervades all life, and salvation requires living in a church 
community apart from worldly influence. The Amish objected to 
public secondary schools because the schools emphasized intellec- 
tual and scientific accomplishments, competitiveness, worldly suc- 
cess, and social life. The conflict between worldly and nonworldlv 
values, they argued, would psychologically harm their children. At 
issue was the violation of the right to free exercise of religion as a 
result of the compulsory' school attendance law. The Supreme Court 
reasoned that “a way of life that is odd or even erratic but interferes 
with no rights or interests of others is not to he condemned because 
it is different.*’ Much of the language in the Yoder case has implica- 
tions for American Indians. By replacing the noun Amish with Ameri- 
can Indian , the reasoning and subsequent judgment in favor ol the 
Amish invites a number of moral and ethical questions regarding the 
schooling of American Indians, 

As indicated throughout, the Supreme Court’s docket rarely in- 
cludes cases with substantial impact for education. For example. 
Supreme Court decisions deal with dress or appearance, yet there 
are state and federal district court decisions on these topics. This 
reflects the Court’s continued efforts to leave the administration of 
schools to those officials charged with education and its general 
reluctance to get involved in any except the most fundamental con- 
stitutional questions. The Supreme Court's Tinker decision (which 
protected students* freedom of speech), as in others, included the 
following statement: “We express no opinion as to the form of relief 
which should be granted.*' This statement is consistent with the 
Court's pattern of hearing only the most significant education law 
cases. Typically, certiorari u> (or Supreme Court review) of education 
law eases is a small portion of the Court's docket. There are currently 
no decisions from the Supreme Court specifically referencing the 
education of Indian children. 



Legislation 

Norman T. Oppelt divides the history of Indian education into two 
broad periods: the missionary period (1568-1870) and the federal 
period (1870-1968). r It is during this second period that the major- 
ity of the legislation involving Indian students was passed, f ederal 
legislation impacts tlu* education of American Indian students on 



66 h . 





Linda Suf Wa»nl» 



several levels. The following pages summarize 19 federal laws that 
provide the legislative foundation of American Indian education: 

• Snyder Act (1921) 

• Johnson O'Malley Act ( 1934), as amended 

• Impact Aid 

• Elementary and Secondary Education Act (1965), as amended 

• Head Start Program Act { 19 65 ) > as a mended 

• Indian Elementary and Secondary School Assistance A ct ( 1 9 68 ) 

• Indian Education Act (1972) 

• Title IX of the Education Amendments ( 1972) 

• Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act 
(1975), as amended 

• Education of All Handicapped Children Act ( 1975) and Indi- 
viduals with Disabilities Education Acts, as amended 

• Education A mendments (1978) 

• Tribally Controlled Community College Assistance Act { 1978), 
as amended 

• Indian Child l Velfare Act ( 1 978) 

• A ug ust us /'! Hau > kins- Robert I \ Stafford Elementary and Sec- 
ondary School Improi \ ement A mendments (1988) 

• Carl I). Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Educa- 
tion Act (1990) 

• Native American Languages Act ( 1990) 

• Goals 2000: Educate A merica Act 

• Title I X of the Improi Pig A meric * a s Schools A ct ( 1 9 94 ) 

Snyder Act A* This act granted legislative authorization for the 
Indian Office. This office was established to provide social, health, 
and educational sen-ices to Indians, specifically those tribes for 
whom the United States had no specific treaty obligations. The 
language for the establishment of this office is as follows: 

The Bureau of Indian Affairs, under the supervision of the 
Secretary of the Interior, shall direct, supervise, and expend 



66 




such moneys as Congress may from time to time appropriate, 
for the benefit, care, and assistance of the Indians throughout 
the United States for general support and civilization, includ- 
ing education. 



In the 1920s Commissioner of Indian Affairs Francis F. Leupp 
continued the federal policy of assimilation for American Indians. 
By encouraging enrollment of Indian students in public schools, this 
policy accomplished two things. First, the overwhelming number of 
non-Indian "peers” pressured these children to discard their own 
traditions. Second, it reduced the costs of Indian education for the 
BIA. To carry out this policy. Congress allocated up to $300,000 
annually between 1923 and 1929- 



Johnson O’Malley Act A" The Johnson O'Malley Act (JOM), 
passed in 1934 and reauthorized in 1991, authorizes the Secretary of 
the Interior to contract with a state or territory to provide to Ameri- 
can Indians various services, including education. Thus, it is a fund- 



ing mechanism for providing schooling to American Indians. The 
JOM has attempted to increase enrollment in public schools and 
reduce the efforts of BIA education. In states with large populations 
of American Indian students, JOM quickly became an added source 
of federal funds to school districts. Originally, JOM funds were not 
limited to Indian-specific needs, and many schools deposited the 
money into their general operating budgets. The actual authority for 
spending money remained with the fiscal agents at the local school; 
therefore, a consequence of the original legislation, whether in- 
tended or unintended, was minimal individual parent input. How- 
ever, the current regulations require local Indian parent committee 



involvement. 



Impact Aid."* Impact Aid laws passed in 1950 and reauthorized 
in 1978 and 1991 have been the center of considerable debate over 
the years. The passage of Impact Aid legislation in 1950 compen- 
sated schools for the education of children living on tax-free federal 
lands. Impact Aid monies are grounded in the government-to-gov- 
ernment relationship of the United States and federally recognized 
tribes. This funding Hows to public school districts impacted signifi- 
cantly by the absence of a tax base as the result ot district boundaries 
including nontaxable (specifically trust) land. Indian parents have 



L S. W<v/;i t: 



input into the application processes for Impact Aid and may indi- 
vidually or collectively use the formal complaint system in dealing 
with public school districts; however, in many areas, public schools 
have the ultimate decision-making authority over the usage of these 
funds. Amendments in 1978 attempted to add Indian-specific provi- 
sions to the monies, holding local schools more accountable to In- 
dian tribes and parents of Indian children. A report by a special 
Senate subcommittee in 1969 documented misuse of ,JOM and Im- 
pact Aid monies. 'This report and others led to passage of the Indian 
Education Act of 1972. ” 

Elementary and Secondary Education Act.'- To encour- 
age parental input into curriculum used with Indian students. Con- 
gress added a rider to 1965 legislation designed primarily for public 
school education. The Elementary and Secondary Education Act 
targets public schools to make curricular reform applicable to Indian 
populations. Because education is a state function, public schools 
had no obligation to offer programs specifically for Indian children, 
even in densely populated school districts. This legislation sought to 
encourage more tribal and parental involvement. It began to fund 
“special supplementary programs for the education and culturally 
related needs of Indian students.” 



Head Start Program Act." This act includes children on 
federally recognized Indian reservations. It provides formula-driven 
federal funding for health, education, nutrition, and other social 
services. Head Start programs are among the most successfully ad- 
ministered educational programs in Indian country. 

Indian Elementary and Secondary School Assistance 
Act." This act authorizes tribes to bid for special funding (discre- 
tionary aid) for education programs such as demonstration schools 
or pilot projects for the improvement of educational opportunities. 
The act seeks to involve Indian parents more meaningfully in the 
development of educational priorities for their children. The pro- 
grams supported by this act are conditionally based on consultation 
with Indian parents and approved by Indian parent committees. 



Indian Education Act. 1 ' This act was, in part, a result of the 
Senate Special Subcommittee on Indian Education s final report, 
Indian Education: A National t ‘rayed// A National ( ] Iial/enyc . best 



oh 



68 




El U- A'lf'N >*'M‘ 1 1 ‘l L iMI'l 



,t.. ' Ar.*r v.r an Inp'.vj/Ai as* a Na’.-.i Sm:{ i '•■■is 



known as the Kennedy Report. 1 * The act has four major compo- 
nents. Part A provides formula funding for public schools with In- 
dian children; including a 10 percent set-aside for Indian-controlled 
schools. Part B provides direct grants to Indian tribes, organizations, 
colleges, universities, state departments of education, and other 
nonprofit institutions. Grants are to be used for demonstration sites, 
planning and evaluation, and projects designed for American Indi- 
ans and Alaska Natives. Part C provides monies for adult education, 
and Part D established the Office of Indian Education in the U.S. 
Office of Education, a deputy commissioner of Indian education, 
and the National Advisory Council on Indian Education. 

Title IX of the Education Amendments (1972). ' The first 
amendment to t itle V (now known as Title IX) was a special appro- 
priation to Part B for Indian professional development at the gradu- 
ate level. Other changes included the addition ot gitted and talented 
programs, Indian preference for employees, eligibility of BI A schools 
for formula grants (originally limited to public schools), and autho- 
rization for the BIA director to recommend policy on all programs 
for Indians funded by the U.S. Department of Education. 

Two other federal statutes, Title IX of the Education Amendments 
of 1972 and Section 1983 of the ( 'mil Rights Act of 1964, 1K provide all 
students with potentially powerful tools for protection and redress 
from sexual harassment and abuse by school employees. The most 
notable court ruling on the application of Title IX is the Supreme 
Court s 1992 decision in Franklin r. Gwinnett County Public 
Schools.'" This is a landmark case because the court entitled a 
female high school student who had been subjected to sexual abuse 
by a teacher to receive monetary compensation for damages under 
Title IX. Under Section 1983, the violation of a student’s rights 
evokes protection and substantive due process under the Fourteenth 
Amendment. To demonstrate liability the plaintiff must show that 
the school knew of a pattern of conduct on the part of the school 
official. This is often a difficult standard to meet. Instances of sexual 
harassment have been reported more in recent years, and some state 
courts have waived statutory time limits on filing claims involving 
minors. Administrators and school boards serving populations of 
American Indian students would, no doubt, experience the hnancial 
responsibility from such a civil action. 




I'f.’t 'A St t .WAT'tjt 1 ; 



Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance 
Act. " The Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance 
Act (reauthorized in 1991) authorizes tribes to contract with the 
federal government to administer schools for Indian children. Sec- 
tion 2(b)(3) emphasizes that parental and community control of the 
educational process is crucially important to Indian people. Part A, 
Education of Indians in Public Schools, addresses parental input in 
Section 5(a): 



Whenever a school district affected by a contract has a local 
school hoard not composed of a majority of Indians, that par- 
ents of the Indian children enrolled in the sehool/s affected 
shall elect a local committee from among their number. Such 
committee shall participate fully in the development, and shall 
have the authority to approve/disprove programs to be con- 
ducted under such contract/s. 



The language of this act underscores Congress's intent to “pro- 
mote maximum Indian participation in the government and educa- 
tion of Indian people. " %1 While the focus is not education, the act 
marks the beginning of an era when Congress began emphasizing 
and reestablishing tribal sovereignty. Tribal sovereignty is a prereq- 
uisite for the establishment of policies and programs that reflect the 
wishes of local communities (e.g., parents in the educational pro- 
grams designed for their children). 

Education of All IDnulicapped Children Act-’ and the In- 
dividuals with Disabilities Education Act (I DKA).‘* These 
two acts address all students but have special significance for Ameri- 
can Indians. IDEA assures parents of students with handicaps the 
right to participate in the assessment and program planning pro- 
cesses for their children. For the first time, all parents are partners 
with professionals in the decision-making process. Education re- 
searchers Eleanor Lynch and Robert Stein have found that language 
is a major inhibitor to this shared decision making. Many lan- 
guage-minority students are from homes where English, the lan- 
guage of Individual Education Programs (1EP), is not spoken. Prob- 
lems with facilitating full participation by Indian parents in decision 
making about their childrens educational programs have been com- 
pounded by the lack of Indian personnel in special education and the 



rf 70 



£;\l' A?i- ! .\ /•t'iii Jut L/'.V. If.lr’ll- Alu -JjS l< jN' Af/i !*<! ’I A>j/ Ai A*.r A N»!l;t S^'LlOl* 1 ' 



cultural bias of assessment tools. Appropriate student assessment 
and placement into programs are ongoing concerns of Indian educa- 
tors. Despite recent changes, a disproportionate number ot Indian 
students continue to be identified tor special education classes, for 
years, support has been widespread for the notion that minority- 
language students are likely to he* slow learners, due either to low 
mental ability or disadvantages imposed by their language handicap. 
This act is another example of legislation not originally targeted to 
the needs of Indian children that has nevertheless had significant 
impact. 

Congress enacted IDKA, in part, in response to two well-publi- 
cized federal court cases: Mills r. Hoot'd of Education of District of 
Columbia''' and Pennsylvania Association/)!' Retarded Children v. 
Commonwealth of Pennsylvania:' 1 ' While these were regional cases, 
the decisions had broad implications for students in other areas. In 
both cases, the courts found that children with disabilities had been 
denied access to public schools because of their disabilities. IDKA 
defines the types of disabilities covered and limits coverage to educa- 
tionally disabled children. IDKA is the funded mandate in a series of 
three laws Congress enacted to protect disabled students. Section 
504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1073 and the Americans with Dis- 
abilities Act (AD A) of 1990 are antidiscrimination laws that overlap 
. to protect the rights of persons with disabilities. Kadi successive law 
was more encompassing. All individuals covered under IDKA are 
also covered by Section 504 and ADA. However, all individuals who 
qualify for Section 504 and ADA coverage may not qualify for special 
education under IDKA. IDKA differs from previous legislation be- 
cause it requires parents of a disabled child to work with school 
officials to shape an educational experience specific to the child. 

education Amendments (1978). r Congress passed several 
Kducntion Amendments in 1978. One of the riders was directed at 
schools operated by the HI A. In response to the increased awareness 
in Indian country of the needs of Indian students and the limited 
ability of the BIA to respond to local concerns, this rider authorizes 
parental involvement by redefining the role of the local school hoard. 
Local hoards of BIA schools have more specific authority over gen- 
eral decision making at the schools, including a voice in the hiring of 
school officials, specifically administrative positions. 



1 \ 



Linda Suf. Warniw 



In practice, the authority relinquished to parental school boards 
is determined by the local school administrator and/or local school 
superintendent (education program administrator). For some 
schools, decision making is more participatory than others since 
Fiscal accountability still resides with the administrators. While the 
intent of the rider was to provide local boards with a larger role in the 
control of local schools, it is not guaranteed. The amendment nar- 
rowed the focus of the BIA, establishing an official policy of facilitat- 
ing “Indian control of Indian affairs in all matters relating to educa- 
tion." 

Tribally Controlled Community College Assistance Act.™ 

The Tribally Controlled Community College Assistance Act of 1978 
authorizes Congress to provide funding for higher education institu- 
tions controlled by tribal governments. Currently, there are 24 tribal- 
government -controlled colleges and 7 other tribal colleges with other 
sorts of governing arrangements. 

Indian Child Welfare Act (1CWA). W 1 'his act was designed 
to protect the integrity of tribes and the heritage of Indian children 
by inhibiting the practice of removing these children from their 
families and tribes to be raised as non-Indians.*' 0 Under the act. state 
courts have no jurisdiction over adoption or custody of Indian chil- 
dren domiciling or residing within the reservation of their tribe, 
unless some federal law (such as Public Law 83-280, which gave 
several states criminal and civil court jurisdiction over Indians) 
confers such jurisdiction. The act has been held to preempt a state 
rule that would have shifted the domicile of an abandoned Indian 
child from that of the parent on the reservation to his would-be 
adoptive parents off the reservation/’ 1 As a result of ICWA, state 
courts have no jurisdiction over children who are wards of a tribal 
court, regardless of domicile or residence. .Jurisdiction of these cases 
lies exclusively with the tribe. State courts have some jurisdiction 
over adoption and custody of Indian children not domiciling or 
residing on their tribes reservation, but this jurisdiction is subject to 
important qualifications. For example, in any proceeding for foster 
care placement or termination of parental rights, the state court, “in 
the absence of good cause to the contrary" and in the absence of 
objection by either parent, must transfer the proceedings to tribal 
court upon the petition of either parent, the child's Indian custodian, 
or the tribe. The tribe tnav decline such a transfer."* 



72 



Education and iiif Law: Implications tot? Amt pic an Indian/ Alaska Native Students 



While not specifically addressing education, the law reinforces 
other legislation. Indian parental rights are, for the most part, subju- 
gated to the wishes of the tribe in matters of welfare for a child, 
including education. 1 * The primary consideration is the opportunity 
for the child to remain cognizant of the culture (and language) to 
protect the identity of the group and ultimately, the individual. The 
Indian Child Welfare Act came under attack in the 1998 Congress. 
The Adoption Promotion and Stability Act 4 contained language 
that would seriously weaken the ICWA. The Senate also introduced 
similar legislation. The passage of such legislation would reduce 
recent efforts to allow more control by tribes in decisions affecting 
tribal children. 



Augustus F. Hawkins- Robert T. Stafford Elementary 
and Secondary School Improvement Amendments The 

Augustus F. Hawkins- Robert T. Stafford Elementary and Second- 
ary School Improvement Amendments (1988) address the specific 
educational needs of Indian communities. It strengthens parental 
involvement in Indian schools by authorizing resources. Prior to 
these amendments, an Indian school board could contract through 
the tribe to operate a school; however, layers of fiscal management 
still diverted money from local school operations. This act autho- 
rizes the BIA to provide outright grants to tribally controlled schools. 
Local school boards have more autonomy to make curricular and 
operational decisions. 



Carl D. Perkins Vocational and Applied Technology Edu- 
cation ActF' This act provides vocational education opportunities 
for Indians through competitive, discretionary project grants. Dis- 
cretionary funding is often targeted by Congress when budget cuts 
are required. 



Native American Languages Act. tr On October 30, 1990, 
President Bush signed the Native American Languages Act, which 
Congress had passed to protect the “status of the cultures and lan- 
guages of Native Americans [as] unique." It states the United States 
“has the responsibility to act together with Native Americans to 
ensure the survival of these unique cultures and languages." 08 Con- 
gress makes it a policy of the United States to “preserve, protect, and 
promote the rights and freedom of Native Americans to use, prac- 
tice, and develop Native American Language." 0 '' Finally, the act 



73 







emphasizes that "the right of Native Americans to express them- 
selves through the use of Native American language shall not he 
restricted in any public proceeding, including publicly supported 
educational program (s).’’"° 

The implications for Indian educators are obvious. From a gen- 
eral administrative perspective, the act advances the policy of Indian 
self-determination, particularly as it pertains to the tribal governing 
authority. Second, it is a stark reversal of the assimilation practices 
that discouraged teaching Native languages. 



Goals 2000: Educate America Act.' 1 This act provides funds 
for schools as they work to meet the National Education Goals. Set- 
aside funds are authorized for B1A and tribal schools. This legisla- 
tion connects the U.S. Department of Education, specifically the 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI), to activi- 
ties in Indian education. Tribal and federal schools have adopted 
goals that meet or exceed the National Education Goals. 



Title IX of the Improving America 's Schools Act ( 1994). - 
Title IX includes numerous Indian-specific programs, most signifi- 
cantly the Formal Grant Program to Local Educational Agencies in 
Part A. The formula grant program provides supplemental funds to 
local educational agencies to reform current school programs serv- 
ing Indian children, thereby better meeting their special needs and 
ensuring they can meet state and national education standards. 
There are a number of special projects under Title IX as well. These 
include grant programs for the development of demonstration 
projects to improve achievement of Indian children; professional 
development of Indian educators; fellowships for Indian students; 
gifted and talented programs; adult education; and grants to tribes 
for education, administrative planning, and development. While 
these special projects are provided by legislation, they arc not always 
included in congressional appropriations. 

This summary of legislation is not all-inclusive of legislation that 
impacts American Indians, nor does it include all legislation that 
impacts education. It is, however, representative of key legislation 
and subsequent educational policy affecting American Indian el- 
ementary and secondary students. In the absence of Supreme Court 
decisions on the rights of American Indian students in schools, 
legislation forms a significant base for decision making. 



7A 



Emk'ahon ano me Law: Imi’iicaiu^ns ior Amhjk'an Ini «an/Ai a:*a Naiivj Shu inis 



Conclusions: Indian Education and the Law 

Recent data on Indian students in this country show 398,484 
American Indian and Alaska Native students attend school (K-12). 
About 87 percent attend public schools. Indian tribes and tribal 
organizations operate schools that serve about 16,500 students, and 
in 1997 the BIA-operated schools serving 27,000 Native students. 
Additionally, another 10,352 reportedly attend private schools.'* 
Based on these statistics, the vast majority of American Indian stu- 
dents attend state-supported schools. As a result, case law impacting 
discipline, curriculum, free speech, tort law, equity, special educa- 
tion, finance, and compulsory attendance (as reviewed above) has 
the most direct effect on these students. 

Case law rarely addresses education and even less frequently 
concerns Indian students at the local level. Legislation affecting 
Indian students often is incorporated in legislation written for all 
students, with amendments for American Indians. The section on 
legislation reviewed laws intended for all students that include* 1 
provisions for Indian students. Further, this section reviewed legis- 
lation that targeted American Indian education programs. 
J. E. Silverman' 1 asserts that tribal control over education has re- 
ceived more federal deference than the interests of other parents in 
this country, yet the actual practice of including parents (or tribes) in 
decision making is remarkably rare. Indian parents have only re- 
cently been provided opportunities to be involved in decisions af- 
fecting their children. Even today in hoarding schools, parents typi- 
cally acquiesce to the doctrine of in loco parentis. -' Federal schools 
tend to route grievances through the federal system, and students 
(and parents) have been reluctant to use the federal court system. 

In recent years, many states have passed legislation that allows 
for the formation of charter schools. Charter school designation has 
significant financial implications for Indian schools. Roughly a dozen 
states have legislation providing for charter schools, and there ap- 
pears to be some backlash in states where Indian schools also have 
charter status. Suits addressing these issues are currently in federal 
and state lower courts. 

Educators need to have a general understanding of education case 
law. The language of Supreme Court decisions is useful in evaluating 
the parameters of specific situations encountered during the course 



75 




Linda Sul Wahniu 



of a school day, because these cases are used as precedents for all 
subsequent court opinions. Students in schools governed by tribal 
contract or grant have the same rights and responsibilities as stu- 
dents in state-supported schools. 

While there are no Indian education decisions from the Supreme 
Court, the education cases decided by the Court apply to all students 
regardless of the type of school board governance. Federal legisla- 
tion, subsequent amendments, and all regulations and policies con- 
tribute to the current environment of Indian education law. The 



scope of both case law and legislation, while narrow, provides educa- 
tors with a philosophical foundation for decision making. For tribal 
schools, the philosophy and goals often include Native culture and 
language. 



The National Indian Education Association's recent Indian Edu- 



cation Impact Week -0 featured Representative Dale E. Kildee, a 
Michigan Democrat and cochair of the House Native American Cau- 



cus. Representative Kildee, a recognized advocate of Indian rights, 
cited a section of the U.S. Constitution referencing the sovereign 
status of Indian people. He noted that each congressman is required 
to take an oath to uphold the Constitution. 

Tribal sovereignty' is often under legislative attack. Advocacy for 
Indian children can be found in national organizations, like the 
National Indian Education Association, which seek to influence leg- 
islation but rarely use the federal court system. The Native American 
Rights Fund, a highly visible advocate for Indians in the court sys- 
tem, offers a series of monographs and training on education law 
designed for tribal education offices.” 

Case law and legislation affecting American Indian students will 
continue to increase as more American Indian parents and educa- 
tors become actively involved in policy and practice at the local level. 
Further, the advocacy of these parents and educators at the federal 
level continues to impact legislation. 



Notes 

1. Linda Sue Warner (Comanche) teaches Education Leadership and 
Policy Analysis at the University of Missouri-Columhia. 

2. From this point, the term American Indian is inclusive of Eskimos, 
Aleuts, and other Alaska Natives. 



k ; , 76 



ElXK'AHON ANl» IHr l_AvV. ImI’UCAHONS K.W AmI«»< AN IN0iAN/AiA$XA NaHvI Sl-'MOIS 



3. Joe R.Talaugon to all California schools with American Indian mascot 
names and logos. Memorandum, 7 April 1998. 

4. U.S. Constitution, amend. 10. 

5- A 'eeada u. United States, 463 US 110. 127 (1983). 

6. Du ha i me s Law Dictionary (http://wwlia.org/diction.htm) defines 
res judicata “as a matter that has already been conclusively decided by a court 

7. Arixona r. California , 460 US 605, 626-28 (1983). 

8. /Northwest Hands off Shoshone Indians v. I hated States, 324 US 335 
(1945). 

9. Nations Fanners Union Insurance Company r. ('row Tribe , 471 US 
845(1985). 



10. Ingraham v. Wright , 430 US 651 (1977). 



It. (loss c. Lopez, 419 US 565 ( 1975). 

\'l. School District of Ahington Township v . Schempp , 374 US 203 ( 1963). 

13. The First Amendment of the U.S. Constitution states, “Congress shall 
make no law respecting an establishment of religion, or prohibiting the free 
exercise thereof; or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press; or the 
right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the Government for 
a redress of grievances.” 



Section 1 of the Fourteenth Amendment states, “All persons horn or 
naturalized in the United States, and subject to the jurisdiction thereof, are 
citizens of the United States and of the State wherein they reside. No State shall 
make or enforce any law which shall abridge the privileges or immunities of 
citizens of the United States; nor shall any State deprive any person of life, 
liberty, or property, without due process of law; nor deny to any person within 
its jurisdiction the equal protection of the laws.” 



14. Lai/ r. Nichols, 414 US 563 (1974). 



15. C Veil Rights Act (1964), 42 USX'. 20()C)d (amended 1986). 

16. linker e. Dcs Moines Independent Community School District, 393 
US 503 (1969). 



17. Tinker , at 511. quoting Burnside r. Byars, supra, at 749. 

18. Mcrria/n- 1 1 'chstcr's ( 'ollegiatc Dictionary ( 10th ed.) slates, “A tort is 
a wrongful act other than a breach of contract for which relief may be obtained 
in the form of damages or an injunction.” 

19. Brooks v. Logan, 127 ID 484, 903 l’2d 73 (ID 1995). 

20. I tyke r. Folk County School Board, 129 F,3d 560 ( 1 1th Cir 1997). 

21. Woodv. Strickland, 420 US 308 ( 1975). 



22. .SV/vi , /.vt7v///>///is used when the criterion of classification and differ- 
ential treatment is race or ethnicity. The government must justify its policy In- 
showing that this test is necessary to the accomplishment of a compelling state 
purpose. Kxcept regarding certain affirmative action policies, the government 
(school) rarely meets this requirement. Substantial relation is the second 
level of this test. When it is admitted or demonstrated government has 
classified on the basis of gender, this test places the burden of justification on 



7 7 , . 



the government. Gender-based classifications are upheld only if the govern- 
ment can demonstrate the classifications are substantially related to the 
achievement of an important government purpose. The third lecel of the test 
is rational basis. Classifications based on- characteristics other than race, 
ethnicity, or gender require the rational basis test. This test places the burden 
on the plaintiff to show that differential treatment is wholly unrelated to any 
legitimate state goal. 

23. Brown v. Board of Education of Topeka* 347 US 483 (1954). 

24. Bless// r. Ferguson, 163 US 537 (1896). 

25. 'file equal protection clause does not prohibit policies that discrimi- 
nate or segregate purely as an unintended by-product. All intentional dis- 
criminatory action is de jure and therefore unconstitutional, but unintended 
discrimination is de facto. De facto discrimination is not unconstitutional. For 
school officials, answering the following question would determine if they arc 
in violation ofthe Fourteenth Amendment: Suppose the adverse effects of this 
policy fell on Whites instead of American Indians. Would the decision/policy 
be different? If the answer is yes, the policy/decision was made with discrimi- 
natory intent. This is the rerersing of //roups test. 

26. l/onig. California Superintendent of Bublie Instruction i\ Doc. 484 
US 305 (1988). 

27. Hendrick Hudson District Board of Education v. Rowley, 458 US 176 
(1982). 

28. 334 F. Supp. 1257 (K.D. FA 1971), 343 F. Supp. 279 (K.D. FA 1972). 

29. 348 F. Supp. 866 (D. DC 1972). 

30. Serrano r. Briest. 487 P2d 1241 (1971). 



31. San Antonio Independent School District r. Rodrigue/., 411 US 1 
(1973). 

32. VanSlyke, Tan, and Orland, School Finance Litigation, 9. 

33. Bierce v. Society of the Sisters of the Holy Names of Jesus and Mary, 
268 US 510 (1925). 

34. Meyer r. Nebraska, 262 US 390 (1923). 

35. Wisconsin r. Voder, 406 US 205 ( 1972). 



36 . Duhaime s Lau • Dictionary ( lit t p: // wwl ia .org / diction . h t m ) dell nes a 
writ of certiorari as “a form of judicial review whereby a court is asked lo 
consider a legal decision of an administrative tribunal, judicial office, or 
organization (e.g., government) and decide if the decision has been regular 
and completeor if there has been an error of law. For example, a certiorari may 
be used to wipe out a decision of an administrative tribunal made in violation 
of the rules of natural justice, such as a failure to give the person affected bv the 
decision an opportunity to be heard." 



37. See Oppelt, Trihally ( 'on trolled Indian ( 'allege. 

38. Snyder Act (1921 ). Public Law 67-85. 

39. 48 Stal. 596. 25 U.S.C. 452-457. 

40. Federally Impacted Aid Areas Act ( 1950). Public Law 81-874 and 



S f I 7ft 



El'UCAifON and inf Law: Impuca^ons ?c-t? Amw. an In- -an/ Ai as* a N»v<vf Sennas 



Public Law 81-815, as amended. Funds provide assistance for operation and 
construction of schools. 

41. Education Amendments (1972). Public I .aw 92-318, as amended. 

42. Elementary and Secondary Education Act ( 1965)- Public I*iw 89-10, 
as amended. 

43. Head Start Proyram Act { 1965), 42 V.S.C. 105- 

44. Indian Elementary and Secondary School Assistance Act (1972). 
Title IV of Public Law 92-318. 

45. Indian Education Act. T itle IV of Education Amendments (1972). 
Public I .aw 92-318. as amended. 

46. Senate Special Subcommittee, Indian Education. 

47. 20 U.S.C.A. 901 090, as amended; 20 U.S.C.A. 1681-88. 

48. C hit Rights Act (1964), 42 H.S.CA. § 1983. 

49- Eranklin v. Gwinnett County Public Schools, 503 US 60 (1992). 

"9. Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act. Public 
Law 93-638, 1975; Title III, Public Law 100-472, 1988; Title IV, Public Law 
103-413, 1994. 

51. See II. R. Report No. 1600, 93rd Congress, 1st Sess 1 (1974). 

52. Education of All Handicapped t 'hildren Act ( 1975). Public Law 94- 

142. 

53 'Pile original Individuals with Disabilities Education Act ( Public I .aw 
101-476) was reauthorized in 1997 as Public Law 105-17. 

54. Lynch and Stein, ‘ Parent Participation by Kthnicitv," 105-11. 

55. Mills v. Hoard of Education of District oft 'olumbia. 348 F. Supp. 866 
(1). DC 1972). 

56. Pcnnsy/i ‘ania Associationfor Retarded t 'hildren r. Commonwealth 
of Pennsylvania , 343 F. Supp. 279 (K.l). PA 1972). 

57. Public Law 95-561, as amended. 

58. Public Law 98-192, as amended. 

59. Indian Child Welfare Act{ 1978). 25 L \S.C 1903. 

60. Compare with Wakefield v. Little Liyht . 276 MI) 333, 347 A2d 288 
(1975). 

61. Matter of Adoption of Halloway, 732 P2d. 962 (Utah 1986). 

62. 25 C.S.C.A. §19ll(b). States are required to give tribal adoption and 
custody orders full faith and credit. 

63. See Thompson, “Protecting Abused Children." 

64. Adoption Promotion and Stability Avl. ILK. 3268. Also see Indian 
Child Welfare Act Amendments ( 1977). ILR. 1082 and Senate Bill 569. 

65. Auyustus E. Hawkins- Robert T. Stafford Elementary and Secondary 
Sclu ml Improvement Amendment s{ 1988), Public Law 100-297, as amended. 

66. Public Law 101-392. 



79 



r . * 



Linda Sup Waunip 



67. Title I of Public Law 101-477, Tn bally Controlled Community College 
Reauthori/.ation Act (l 990 ) . 

68. Ibid., 1153. 

69. Ibid., 1155. 

70. Ibid., 1155-56. 

7 - Goals 2000: Relocate America Act, 20 USX'. 5843. 

72. 20 U.S.C. 6301 et seq., Public I*»w 103-382. 

73. See U.S. Department of the Interior, Fingertip Facts. 

74. Silverman, “Miner’s Canary," 1019-46. 

75. Briscoe, “Legal Background,” 24-31. 

76. National Indian Kducation Association, “A 7AM Co-hosts” 17. 

77. Seethe Native American Rights Pund Website: http://www.narf.org/ 
ed uca t ion/ed neat i onlaw.h t in 



Bibliography 



Briscoe, L. S. “The Legal Background of in loco parentis as Applied to the 
Kducation of Indian Children.” Emergent Leadership 4(2): 24-31 (1980). 

Lynch, Kleanor W., and Robert C. Stein. “Parent Participation by Kthnicity: A 
Comparison of Hispanic, Black and Anglo Families. ” Exceptional Children 
54(2): 105-11(1987). 



National Indian Kducation Association (NIKA). “NIKA Co-hosts First Indian 
Kducation Impact Week.” NIFA Newsletter , Spring/Sunnner 1998, 17. 

Oppelt, Norman T. The Trihally Controlled Indian College: The Beginnings of 
Self-Determination in American Indian Education. Tsaile, AZ: Navajo Com- 
munity College Press, 1990. 



Senate Special Subcommittee on Indian Kducation. Indian Education: A Na- 
tional Tragedy, A National ('Italic.. ge. 9 1st Congress, 1st sess., 1969. S. 
Kept. 91-501. 



Silverman, .J. K. “The Miner’s Canary: Tribal Control of American Indian 
Kducation and the First Amendment.” Fordham Urban Law Journal 19 
(1992): 1019-46. 



Thompson, K. “Protecting Abused Children: A Judge’s Perspective on Public 
I -aw Deprived Child Proceedings and the Impact of the Indian Child Welfare 
Acts. "American Indian Law Review 15(1): 1-1 14 (1990). 



U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of indian Kducation Programs. Finger- 
tip Facts. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of the Interior, 1997. 

VanSlvke, Dore, Alexandra Tan, and Martin Orland. School Finance Litiga- 
tion: A Review of Key ( 'uses. Washington, DC: The Finance Project, 1994. 



Warner, Linda Sue. “The Legal Framework for Parental Involvement in Indian 
Kducation.” Paper presented at the aim ini meeting of the American Kduca- 
tional Research Association, New Orleans. April 1994. KRIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. KD 369 641. 



m 




Chapter 4 




Culturally Appropriate Curriculum 

A Research-Based Rationale 

TaK.-VI KAN YaZZIK 1 



T o clarify our purposes and strengthen our approaches to school- 
ing Native youth, education researchers and practitioners have 
long advocated adopting a culturally appropriate curriculum. 
Such an approach uses materials that link traditional or cultural 
knowledge originating in Native hnmp life and community to the 
curriculum of the school/' Deeply embedded cultural values drive 
curriculum development and implementation and help determine 
which subject matter and skills will receive the most classroom 
attention. This chapter examines theoretical and practical research 
studies that support and inform the development of culturally ap- 
propriate curricula for American Indian children in K-12 classrooms. 



Education and Culture 

Donald Oliver and Kathleen Ocrshman observe, “Knowing is said 
to be the result of learning which comes about as a type of transfer of 
information from the outside world of nature to the individual self." 
They suggest that, in Western Kuropean thought, this learning and 
teaching relationship is a “knower-known" dualism. Oliver and 




TAWAJf AN Ya//1[ 



Gershman consider this view of education problematic because it 
implies a separation between what is known and the person who 
holds the knowledge about it. This implied separation negates the 
nature and “most basic understanding of our being .” 3 According to 
Oliver and Gershman, every individual’s culture functions as a per- 
ceptual lens, shaping a unique worldview. Culture cannot be sepa- 
rated from everyday experiences through processes; it influences 
social, political, and intellectual activities .' 1 

Jerome Bruner adds that “education is a major embodiment of a 
culture’s way of life, not just preparation for it.” In other words, if 
Indigenous agriculture, jazz music, Broadway theater productions, 
tribal courts, and medical research are all embodiments of culture, 
so is schooling. He captures beautifully what is hidden in the struggle 
to rationalize a culturally relevant curriculum as he links learning 
and thinking to how cultural knowledge is lived out. According to 
Bruner, “[It] is culture that provides the tools for organizing and 
understanding our worlds in communicable ways .” 5 

While these scholars have linked culture and education theoreti- 
cally, Oscar A. Kawagley has written about the deep influence and 
connectedness of cultural knowledge with the kind of learning in 
which Yupiaq people (southwestern Alaska) traditionally engage. 
Culture and knowing are inextricably connected in all aspects of 
daily life. Thus education is embedded in who Yupiaq people are and 
how they behave and communicate. Ultimately these relationships 
have a bearing on the survival of the people/' 



What Is a Curriculum? 

There are many approaches to defining a curriculum, but Wilma 
Longstrect and Harold Shane suggest that a curriculum can encom- 
pass a variety of activities: selecting who should be educated; setting 
desirable goals for education; choosing appropriate content; and 
deciding how content should be gathered, organized, developed, 
taught, and evaluated. But, who are the people engaged in these 
tasks? The answer for many schools is a team of teachers working 
with an outside consultant, often isolated from the rest of the school. 
Afterwards, however, teachers are expected to implement the cur- 
riculum/ 



<i \ 



84 



Cuuu&auy Appbcwiaie Gjimic.uium: A Remarch-Baseu Rahonau 



The picture becomes more complicated as we search for a clearer 
understanding of what the creators of a curriculum understand it to 
he. Part of the task is to acknowledge the interrelationships among 
learning, teaching, and curriculum. Another part is developing bet- 
ter methods for transmitting that knowledge in preservice or in- 
service teacher education. 

An investigation of theories guiding development of a culturally 
appropriate curriculum will help us understand more about the 
multiple links connecting curricula with learning and teaching. By 
examining these theories, we begin to uncover, the underlying phi- 
losophies and ideologies embedded in the educational goals set by 
curriculum planners for Native communities. 

This chapter is organized into five sections: historical roots, theo- 
retical frameworks, curriculum development curriculum practice 
and implementation, and implications for educational research and 
practice. 



Historical Roots 

Through the first half of this century, the ideology of assimilation 
guided curriculum development for American Indian education. 
American Indian students endured a series of forced introductions 
to a new “civilized" culture.” For decades, they tried to make sense of 
what they learned in history, math, and reading lessons (including 
the values and morals embedded in text) while living in a separate 
society. Carol Locust describes the costs of this policy: 

Discrimination against persons because of their beliefs is the 
most insidious kind of injustice. Ridicule of one's spiritual 
beliefs or cultural teachings wounds the spirit, leaving anger 
and hurt that may he masked by a proud silence. American 
Indians experience this discrimination in abundance for the 
sake of their traditional beliefs, especially when such beliefs 
conflict with those of the dominant culture’s educational sys- 
tems.'' 

Efforts to provide an education that is more respectful of Ameri- 
can Indian culture have run hot and cold in the United States. The 
first discussion that legitimized cultural considerations in Bureau of 
Indian Affairs ( HI A) school curricula began with the release of the 

85 




T At; A Jt A\ Y A/Y f 



Meriam Report in 1928. The very first paragraph of the report's 
section on education included this statement: 



The most fundamental need in Indian education is a change in 
point of view. Whatever may have been the official governmen- 
tal attitude, education for the Indian in the past had proceeded 
largely on the theory’ that it is necessary to remove the Indian 
child as far as possible from his home environment; whereas 
the modern point of view in education and social work lays 
stress on upbringing in the natural setting of home and family 
life. The Indian educational enterprise is peculiarly in need of 
the kind of approach that recognizes this principle; that is, less 
concerned with a conventional school system and more with 
the understanding of human beings. ,n 



In this report, the researchers discussed how the U.S. government 
had appropriated education policy and practice to transform Ameri- 
can Indian people and societies. This historical document represents 
the first official recognition of the essential roles Native families and 
cultures play in the learning process. The more than 70 years that 
have passed since the Meriam Report have brought increased under- 
standing about cultural considerations in curriculum, although not 
without occasional setbacks. As we approach a new century, educa- 
tors of Native students continue to work toward improving educa- 
tional delivery and practice. Our histories help us to see the distance 
we have come, while we look to current education research for help 
in making informed decisions about the future of education. 

Given this reality, what does research tell us about curricula? 
What theories underpin cultural considerations in the education of 
American Indian learners today? For more recent views on how to 
make a curriculum more effective, I will review theories and re- 
search studies that show various ways culture affects student aca- 
demic performance. Specifically, I will review the works of Frederick 
Krickson, Susan Philips, and Henry T. Trueba. These studies dis- 
close some of the ways to view the connections among culture, 
curricula, and instructional practice in American Indian education." 




86 




CmiuiMiv Ai'puo* , w>\ii CL'W"V_i'u‘M. A Rt -\in ><-Ba-.{ i • Rak >nai t 



Theoretical Frameworks 

Modes of linguistic interactions. Erickson argues there is a 
difference between how majority and minority students interact 
linguistically and cognitively. His position is not that one type of 
linguistic interaction is superior over another, rather students may 
reach similar understandings via different cognitive and linguistic 
modes of investigation. He suggests learning is complicated by dif- 
ferent modes of interaction, which, if negative, can lead to distrust. 
Trust— a major component in behavioral interactions— can grow when 
teachers understand linguistic aspects of their students’ cultural 
backgrounds. Erickson thinks it is important for teachers to find 
ways to obtain and build trust instead of emphasizing cultural differ- 
ences. He suggests that a culturally responsive curriculum (includ- 
ing pedagogy) can transform routine educational practice. ’Phis view 
is supported by several studies conducted in Native communities 
and education settings by other researchers. This growing body of 
research suggests that better learning occurs when teachers trans- 
form their educational practices and the curriculum reflects the 
home culture from which children conic.’*' 

Supportive learning environments. Researchers Trueba and 
Philips also stress the importance of culture as a contributing factor 
to student performance and positive engagement in the classroom. 
Culturally appropriate relationships ground children in supportive 
environments, which help them contend with non-Native cultural 
values embedded in the school curriculum. Trueba advises educa- 
tors not to lose sight of the fact that many minorities succeed in 
school without losing their cultural identities or assimilating; there- 
fore, teachers should seriously question theories that encourage 
assimilation or even partial acculturation. Trueba stresses that 

Conditions for effective learning are created when the rule of 
culture is recognized and used in the activity settings during 
the actual learning process. Ultimately, cultural congruence is 
not only part of the appropriate conditions . . . for learning 
effectively. At the heart of academic success, and regardless ot 
the child’s ethnicity or historical background, an effective learn- 
ing environment must he constructed in which the child, espe- 
cially the minority child, is assisted through meaningful and 



8/ 



culturally appropriate relationships in the internalization of 
the mainstream cultural values embedded in our school sys- 
tem. 1 ' 



Trueba recognizes that many mainstream values are embedded in 
the school system, some of which are valued by Native educators, 
parents, and communities. Educators *v«nt Native children to suc- 
ceed academically. To accomplish this, Trueba argues children need 
to be more aware of the values embedded in the acts of learning and 
teaching in American schooling. Trueba is speaking of a bicultural 
approach that provides a setting that clearly fosters mainstream 
values yet offers equal recognition of the contributions home cul- 
tures bring to the learning situation. Trueba's work informs how 
others might acknowledge the structure of schools. He does not 
suggest an assimilation of values; on the contrary, he says the home 
culture is needed in the classroom to facilitate academic achieve- 
ment. Minority children need to be able to internalize both 'heir own 
culture and that of the school. 



Communication and interaction styles. Philips's research 
in the Warm Springs Indian Community focused on culture and its 
relationship to classroom communication and interaction styles. 
She compared the interaction of Warm Springs children with Anglo 
middle-class modes of interaction. The children were reluctant to 
interact with their teachers and engage with academic content. She 
views this reluctance as a hindrance in the learning process. Without 
critical engagement with the curriculum and between teacher and 
learner, acquisition of knowledge is interrupted and learning is 
stunted. Philips's research in 1972 and 1983 found that Warm Springs 
students had been eneulturated in their community, which influ- 
enced their communication style in the classroom.” 

Other researchers have emphasized important differences be- 
tween students and teachers in nonverbal behavior. These studies 
show that communication differences may bias teachers' interpreta- 
tions of their students' classroom communication and behavior and 
lower teachers' expectations of student academic performance. 1 ■ 
The educational research literature includes numerous anecdotal 
reports, position essays, discussions, and debates about how the 
culture of the dominant society may be incongruent with, conflict 
with, or impede the schooling of American Indian students. The 



teacher may infer that the child who is listening with averted 
eyes may be bored, confused, or angry. 1 *' 

Erickson pinpoints what research suggests is the source of cultural 
conflict in American Indian education. There exists a salient differ- 
ence in how American Indian students, parents, and communities 
conduct social and learning interactions in home and in school. 
These different modes of interacting are not usually described in 
information available to teachers and school personnel who interact 
academically with Native students. Informed by such research knowl- 
edge, teachers might stand a better chance of creating ways to en- 
gage students in learning content material. Better informed teachers 
and curriculum developers might also find better assessment activi- 
ties and measures to monitor student learning of content material. 
Native parents and communities could be very helpful if included in 
the curriculum and assessment development process.* 1 

Bruce A. Birchard studied the perspectives of community mem- 
bers, parents, students, and teachers with regard to Native language, 
history, and values taught in school. Many of the participants in the 
study felt some aspects of the tribal heritage and culture should be 
taught in school; however, most agreed the purpose of a full educa- 
tion is to prepare Indian youth for employment and successful lives 
in American society. From Birchard’s study, we learn that a curricu- 
lum for Native children needs to address the expectations of both the 
Native community and larger society. For example, it is helpful for 
students to learn in situations where they are not isolated from the 
larger society, i.e., the curriculum must meet state requirements. 
Meeting these requirements does not necessarily exclude creative or 
culturally appropriate curriculum and instruction.-* 1 

James E. Biglin and Jack Wilson, in their study of Navajo and 
Hopi parental attitudes toward Indian education, found the same 
attitudes reported in the Birchard study. Barents in this study em- 
phasized “inclusion of the Navajo/Hopi language [as] most impor- 
tant in the curriculum. “ Similarly, C. L. Steele conducted a study 
with parents to identify and organize teachable Mohawk cultural 
content.” 

A 199 1 study to develop an inquiry-based curriculum found that 
Navajo parents agreed their children “need the skills and knowledge 
for full adult participation in the off- reservation economy." Although 



90 



Cuuurauv Ar propri a: f Cursk'uium: A RrsFA&at-BASfD Rajionam 



the parents disagreed about the best means to achieve this, they were 
in agreement, regardless of approach, that the school curriculum 
should reflect Navajo values. Most teachers held the belief that 
Navajo children “won’t respond to questioning!” However, one 
teacher encouraged the students to participate actively by asking 
questions that incorporated social knowledge from their backgrounds. 
The researchers attributed this increase in verbal participation to 
the familiarity and relevance of the content to students’ lives. Navajo 
students clearly felt comfortable with a classroom dialogue that 
captured and honored their multiple cultural experiences. 21 

Not only do these studies demonstrate the importance of culture 
and language in schools serving American Indian students, they 
indicate that American Indian parental input can assist schools in 
refining curricula to become more culturally relevant and responsive 
to students. Relevance of curriculum content seems important to 
tribal groups, particularly since it is likely to impact academic suc- 
cess. Trueba explains why culturally relevant materials and interac- 
tions enhance learning for minority students in unfamiliar class- 
room situations: 



The transition from assisted to independent performance must 
be anticipated by the parent, teacher, or more knowledgeable 
peer, and the assisted performance prior to transition requires 
(1) effective communication between child and adult/peer, (2) 
shared cultural values and assumptions, and (3) common goals 
for activities. . . . Gradually the child understands an activity 
and meaning and consequences of the activity. Through cultur- 
ally and linguistically appropriate interaction, the child then 
develops a suitable cognitive structure that is continuously 
revised with new experiences and feedback. 21 



Based on her work with Yavapai curriculum development, Teresa 
McCarty suggests culturally relevant curriculum development places 
importance on community input and delivery of cultural topics. Her 
work further supports the need for parental involvement in this 
process. McCarty's applied research goal with Yavapai and Navajo 
school programs was to revitalize culture by tapping into language 
learning. 2 '’ 

Other studies have shown the role Native language plays in con- 
cept development. Duane Schindler and David Davison believe “more 



?! Ur- 




attention needs to be paid to the structure [and] thought processes of 
the native language when that language is not English/' It is the 
“cognitive structures of the native language with which [American 
Indian students] attempt to construct English language analyses/' 
even in cases when particular students may not retain their Native 
language. For example, Schindler and Davison find that “school 
mathematics is typically presented using the English language and 
an English language method of processing/’ Schindler and Davison 
suggest that, to address problems in translation, the Crow language 
bilingual education programs could minimize problems through an 
“emphasis on teaching Crow speaking children the interrelation- 
ships of the mathematics terms and concepts in English and Crow/'* 1 ’ 
Judith Hakes and colleagues conducted a curriculum project to 
improve the education of Aeoma i.od Laguna Pueblo children. The 
educational programs in place were not culture based, and an as- 
sessment at the beginning of the project found that educational 
experiences were inadequate. Students indicated the existing cur- 
riculum lacked cultural relevance. Factors that contributed to the 
new project’s success were teacher training, cultural relevance, and 
community involvement. When piloted, the new culturally relevant 
curriculum reportedly fostered academic improvements.*' 

Educators may be unaware of the complex processes by which 
American Indian students adapt to school environments. While re- 
search indicates parental interest for inclusion of culture in the 
school curriculum, how and whether to teach tribal cultural knowl- 
edge in schools remains controversial. These are philosophical ques- 
tions that educational communities, students, parents, teachers, and 
administrators will have to consider, particularly since a majority of 
the BI A schools have applied to become charter or community-based 
schools .* 8 

Despite growing evidence and beliefs that a curriculum should 
reflect the culture it senes or, at least, the learning needs of stu- 
dents, Jerry Lipka warns about the difficulties of developing a cul- 
turally appropriate curriculum, especially when attempting to use 
the community as a resource. Lipka’s six-year case study reveals that 
Bavuq (a factitious name) community educational concerns are not 
always focused on the traditional aspects of culture, nor should they 
be. Lipka's work suggests curriculum development interests should 



i (/;■ 




CjiUwauv Owrio. v: A R[ ap>-»i-Ba<K' Rm nau 



not bo limited to traditional Native culture but should include the 
local climate and politics in which Native youth live. For example, 
educators might ask how the economic climate of the time affects the 
lifestyles and livelihood of the people. A successful curriculum devel- 
oped for the Bayuq reflects community issues related to the Alaska 
Native Chii/us Settlement Act {NHCSn\). Lipka stresses that a cultur- 
ally relevant curriculum emerging from school and community rela- 
tions is "more complicated and subtle than simply adding curricu- 
lum that is culturally relevant.""' 

Sandra Stokes's work with the Menominee determined. “Although 
Menominee values would be an integral component of the new 
curriculum, there was a widespread agreement that the children on 
the Menominee reservation needed to become cognizant of the val- 
ues other than their own as well as how the Menominee values fit 
into the concept of values in general.’’ 1 " 

Lipka cautions curriculum developers to consider the following 
challenges: 

• establishing trust in situations where tension between school 
and community is common; 

• overcoming assumptions that the school or university knows 
what is best for the students and community it senes; 

• dealing with controversies arising from development of cultur- 
ally relevant materials, discussion, and knowledge that may be 
tied to traditional rituals: 

• encouraging the community to use the school or university as a 
resource, not the other way around; 

• involving students in timely community efforts such as debates 
on land rights or Native sovereignty issues, all of which can 
supplement and even enhance state-required course content. 

Lipka s study further demonstrates how even gathering informa- 
tion about culture can conflict with Native life and social rules. For 
example, Lipka quotes a Yup'ik student researcher, “We talked about 
how the elders should be approached, knowing full well that it is 
sometimes difficult to conduct interviews since direct questioning of 
elders is often perceived as inappropriate behavior." Kdueators need 
this type of information when working in communities where sinti- 



V3 j (J-* 




Ya ,7.v 

lar principles of communication are fundamentally a part of inter- 
viewing community members about cultural knowledge." 

Despite a wide array of curricula related to American Indian 
cultures, most existing literature presents information about how to 
learn about Indians rather than how to implement a culturally 
appropriate curriculum. Researchers have established the need for 
culturally relevant curricular materials: however, they have done so 
while a majority of the materials have been widely distributed with- 
out appropriate cautions. For example, what may work well for 
Native Hawaiians may not work for Navajo. The findings of Lynn 
Vogt and colleagues remind educators serving Indian students of the 
vast differences among Native groups and cultures. These differ- 
ences represent an important reason why teachers must take care 
not to generalize research findings to the Native communities in 
which they work. w 

Research focusing on links between culture and curricula indicate 
that individual tribal cultures are apart from the culture of the larger 
American society, and distinct in their own right. If gaining in-depth 
and comprehensive knowledge is the goal of education, then learn- 
ing about tribal cultures only as they relate to the history and priori- 
ties of White American culture underrepresents the parallel but 
separate knowledge systems of Indian peoples and the many unac- 
knowledged contributions tribal cultures have made and continue to 
make to the whole society. 

Clearly, developing a culturally appropriate curriculum is com- 
plex and difficult, and continues to be influenced by our inherited 
values and ideologies. 



Curriculum Practice and Implementation 

To serve Native students better, teachers of American Indian 
children must make a conscious effort to match materials and in- 
structional strategies to the values and ideologies of their students. 
Stokes suggests that teachers who actively and critically engage in 
curriculum development may be particularly effective in carrying 
out appropriate instructional and assessment procedures. Instead of 
having a curriculum imposed on them, teachers can claim ownership 
by considering how educational reform can happen from inside the 
classroom.'' 



9a 



1 



Ci'UU’/auy Awmowmu OufiQlClHuM! A Rf?[ arch- Base p Rationau ___ 



As John W. Tippeconnic III asserts, “Without question, the most 
important relationship within the American educational system de- 
velops between teacher and student." Researchers have described 
methods and programs that prepare teachers to teach Indian chil- 
dren and ways in which teachers demonstrate effectiveness in the 
classroom. Affective qualities, rather than skills or academic prepa- 
ration, seem to characterize effective teachers in the research litera- 
ture. Studies indicate that teachers who sene Native students effec- 
tively are informal, are caring and warm, give up authority, and have 
and show respect for the students/ - ’ 

Qualities that make for effective instruction in Native schools are 
generally identified but marginally understood. The next step is to 
create consciousness and deeper understanding of the underlying 
philosophies of institutions where teachers learn about effective 
practice. Many teachers are trained in colleges and universities lo- 
cated at a distance from reservations and urban communities where 
Native culture exists. As students of culture, teachers engage in 
course work in the humanities, anthropology, religion, social sci- 
ences, math, science, and education, which taken together constitute 
a curriculum. This knowledge frames how teachers will view Ameri- 
can Indian students' learning and lives. Because of this, the discus- 
sion on appropriate curriculum development should examine the 
ideologies teachers have internalized during their own schooling 
and will take with them to schools serving American Indian children. 
Doing this well requires a careful investigation of teacher education 
programs of study, teacher observation and reflection on their own 
practice as cultural workers, and a reassessment of teacher educa- 
tion curricula .upon which future teachers will base their instruc- 
tional approaches. 1 '’ 



Implications for Educational Research and Practice 

Given the historical foundations of American Indian education 
and ultimately the purpose of schooling American Indian children, 
the importance of a culturally appropriate (or responsive) curricu- 
lum cannot be denied. Educational researchers have established 
strong evidence to support inclusion of Native knowledge and lifewavs 
in the K-12 classroom (with the help of Native parents and commu- 
nities) to create a quality educational experience for Native students. 



1 i \L 



T ADA A \ V A 4 \ 7 ii 



We know that the curriculum guiding teacher practice makes a 
difference in the academic lives of students. Language, tradition, 
and histories ot a people shape how and what we learn and who we 
are to become as intellectual, political, and social beings. Donald 
Oliver and Kathleen Gershman point to an unconscious connection 
between what is known and the holder of that knowledge, the knower. 
It is this relationship that becomes essential in the act of teaching. 
The known, the curriculum, should not be separated from the knower. 
the teacher. 11 ’ 

Research in schools serving Native communities has consistently- 
demonstrated the importance of culture in the learning process. 
Equally important is a sense of ownership — a kind of belonging, a 
familiarity with what is being taught. For Native people, oral tradi- 
tions are important, language is important, social relationships are 
important. As time takes Native society away from the immediate 
and detrimental effects of the boarding school era, there is still a 
need to keep a conscious watch over the progression of education as 
well as how educators view curricula, practice, and the students who 



are affected by them. 

More research is needed on the effects of culturally appropriate 
curriculum on achievement, as measured by authentic or alternative 
measures. Rough Rock Demonstration and Kickapoo Nation schools 
have showcased how culture and language produce a positive rela- 
tionship with higher academic performance. 1 ' More schools need to 
demonstrate this correlation. In addition to linking culturally appro- 
priate curricula to assessment, further study is needed about how 
teachers define and implement a culturally appropriate curriculum. 



American Indian students attend various types of schools: public, 
BIA-funded (boarding and day, grant, and contact), charter, private 
otf- reservation, rural, and urban. American Indian students in these 
environments are bombarded with a multitude of potentially delim- 
iting factors including, but not limited to. language, majority social- 
ization practices, and values. It is difficult to say to what degree each 
factor impacts a student’s ability to adapt to the curriculum and 
learning environment. Ogbu suggests some individuals come to ac- 



cept a role in the larger society not defined by their own culture (this 
being the precise reason successful students are inclined to adapt). 
Donna Deyhlcs and Dennis Melnerney and Karen Swisher s re- 



1 r j v 96 




Cuuuwmi^ Aomw’mak Cu»«*cuium: A Pt <1 *qk h-Base d Pahonai e 



search emphasizes that individual perceptions of and motivation to 
complete school extend beyond influences of cultural background. 
Theoretical and applied research focusing on curricula and Native 
education over the past 25 years v evea!s that culture influences 
teaching and learning. We can assume there is a direct relationship 
among culture, curriculum, and learning in American Indian school- 
ing experiences. But to what degree? We do not know. :w 

Educational research appears to lack primary research that tar- 
gets contemporary issues in American Indian education such as the 
educational experiences of urban Indian cultures/** Cultural consid- 
erations in American Indian education go far beyond culturally ap- 
propriate curricula; they reach into the hearts of Indian youth, who 
have to sift through what is taught to find themselves, their roles, 
and eventually the purpose of education. 

Gaps in the research reveal questions and debates to be further 
considered: Should we use Native languages to teach concepts and 
values of the dominant American culture? Should we teach students 
how to learn in ways valued by American society for the sole purpose 
of improving academic gains as measured by standardized tests? 
Finally if we, as Native people, are truly going to determine for 
ourselves the goals of education, we need to continue engaging in 
careful consideration of how Native children become successful and 
active members of individual tribal societies as well as the larger 
society. There is an inherent view of how Native youth perceive 
themselves and their roles in two societies; educators cannot lose 
sight of it. Does this mean, as Ogbu suggests, that as involuntary 
minorities, American Indian students accept the American system 
and assimilate? Or can American Indian students succeed academi- 
cally, as Truoba suggests, without losing their sense of identity and 
the culture in which it is deeply rooted? These questions need fur- 
ther thought and discussion in the schools, in the community, and 
within and among societies. Improved educational opportunities 
can he and are realized by Indian people conducting and building 
educational programs and curricula for their own people. John 
Chilcott writes, “The solution to accommodation must lie within the 
ethnic population itself rather than the school." Indian educators 
and researchers are addressing some of the concerns and questions 
that Native communities and people want answered."' 



t?; i (jo 



Tapajean Ya//ie 



The link between curricula and culture is conceptualized differ- 
ently by diverse populations. Each community, school, and tribe 
needs to establish its own definition and direction for how culture 
will play a role in the education of its youth. Our own communities 
can make a difference in the selection of research topics and the 
influence educational research will have on instruction, curricula, 
and educational programs. With community-directed purpose, re- 
search can presumably have a positive impact for Native students. 

The extant research evidence demonstrates that American Indian 
students are not culturally disadvantaged or deficient but are subject 
to factors beyond their control that impact learning. A powerful 
factor affecting performance is the schools' lack of attention to meet- 
ing the needs of Native students. Because of the likelihood that 



Native societies will continue to change in response to technology 
and greater exposure to European American values and beliefs, 
educators are reminded that use of published works needs to be 
continuously investigated, challenged, and rethought. It is impos- 
sible that American Indian students are not affected by the instant 
and ever-ready exchange of information. We can assume that media 
and exposure to other cultures are strong influences on how cur- 
ricula are developed and how Native children come to incorporate 
new information into what they already know . 11 

Evelyn Jacob and Cathie Jordan remind educators that although 
researchers have identified cultural discrepancies between the school 
performance of European American students and many ethnic mi- 
nority students, dialogue has been limited about processes of engag- 
ing in appropriate reform. * J There is already a wealth of knowledge 
with regard to cultural considerations for teaching, learning, and 
curriculum development. The question now is where do we go from 
here? What can research and current practice in schools tell us about 
the current situation in which American Indian students find them- 
selves? This question can only be answered by carefully examining 
past research and practice that emphasize culture in curricula, and 
looking critically at how knowledge is defined by varying societies 
and education agents. A culturally appropriate curriculum is the 
building block to achieving a challenging, relevant, thought provok- 
ing, and most importantly responsive education for Native children 
in American schools. 



98 




c. 



A. 



« C . . 



A Ri j.. L 



Notes 



1. Tarajean Yazzie ( Navajo) is n doctoral student in the Harvard Graduate 
School of Kd neat ion I .earning and Teaching Program. She would like to thank 
Karen tun ton Swisher and .John Tippcconnic 111 tor their editorial support 
and patience. She would also like to thank the anonymous reviewers who 
provided careful reviews and thoughtful suggestions. 

2. Sec “Constructing, Failure and Maintaining Cultural Identity. 24- 27; 
Mcliierney and Swisher. "Kxploring Navajo Motivation. 28-51; McQuiston 
and B rod! "Structural and Cultural Conflict. "48-58: Philips. The Invisible 
Culture ; and Spang. “Fight Problems in Indian Hducation.*’ 1-4* 

3. Oliver and Gershman, "Knowing as Participant.” 69. 

4. The term culture, in the education research reviewed tor this chapter, 
is used looselv to encompass a wide array ot behav iors associated with any 
particular group of individuals. Lungstreel. in Aspects of Ethnicity, provides 
a thorough explanation ot behaviors that demonstrate belonging to a particu- 
lar group of people. She carctully discusses aspects ol ethnicity as verbal 
communication, nonverbal communication, orientation modes, social value 
patterns, and intellectual modes. In this chapter, culture refers to any or all of 
these "aspects of ethnicity.” When appropriate, specific behaviors will he 
highlighted. Native language, for example, is the locus ot many cultural 
education programs. 

5- Bruner. The Culture oj Education. 3. 

6. See Kawagiey, .1 Yupiaq Worldview. 

7. See l.ongstreet and Shane. Curriculum for a Xcir Millennium 
(Needham Heights: Allyn & Bacon. 1993). 

8. See Adams. “Fundamental Considerations, 1-28; llamley, “Cultural 
Genocide in the Classroom": Lomawaima. “Fducating Native Americans”; 
Komawaima, “The Unnatural History of American Indian Hducation"; and 
Soto. I.anyuaye, Culture and Tower 

9. l.oeust. “Wounding the Spirit.” 315. 

10. Institute for Government Research, i'he Emblem of Indian Adminis- 
tration, 340- 

11. See Hricksmi. “Transformation and School Success,” 335-50: Philips. 
“Participant Structures and Communicative Competence 4 ': Philips, Invisible 
('u/turc\ and Henry T. Trueba. “Culturally Based Kxplanntions ol Minority 
Students* Academic Achievement.” 270-87. 

12. See Krickson, “Transformation and School Success”; Philips, “ Partici- 
pant Structures 44 ; Philips, Invisible t'idfurt , \ Grcenbauni and Urccnbaum, 
“(’ultural Differences, Nonverbal Regulation, ami Classroom Interaction. 10- 
33: Van Ness. “Social Control and Social Organization": and Cleary and 
Peacock. ( \ dice ted 1 1 isdom. 

13. Trueba. “Culturalh Based F.xplanalions." 282. 

14. See Philips. “Participant Structures. ” 

wj » n 



T'VMjI AN Ya/Ji[ 



15. See Greenbaum. "Nonverbal Differences in Communication Style/' 
101-15; Greenbaum and Greenbaum, "Cultural Differences '; Nlohatt and 
Erickson, "Cultural Differences in Teaching Styles"; Philips, "Participant 
Structures”; and Philips, fn visible Culture. 

16. See Deyhle, "Constructing Failure”; Jacob and Jordan, "Moving to 
Dialogue,” 259-61; McQuiston and Brod, "Structural and Cultural Conflict”; 
Danielle Sanders, "Cultural Conflicts," 81-89; Spang. "Eight Problems”; 
Swisher and Deyhle, "The Styles of Learning Are Different," I- 14; and Wright, 
Hirlinger, and England, The Politics of Second Generation Discrimination in 
American Indian Education. 

17. Butterfield, "The Development and Use of Culturally Appropriate 
Curriculum,” 50. See also Gipp and Fox, “Promoting Cultural Relevance," 58- 
64; Kawagley, Yupiaq Worldview, Skinner, "Teaching through Traditions"; 
Worrest, "Curriculum Development at Pretty Eagle School”; Youpa, Hpaloose, 
and Tharp, "Family and Community Involvement"; and Stokes, "Curriculum 
for Native American Students," 576-84. 

18. McQuiston and Broil, "Structural and Cultural Conflict,” 29; Ogbu, 
"Variability in Minority School Performance," 330. Ogbu categorizes minori- 
ties in the United States into two groups, voluntary or involuntary. Voluntary 
minorities generally enter their minority status as immigrants, whereas 
involuntary minorities, such as African Americans and American Indians, 
enter their status under circumstances forced upon them. 

19. Erickson, ‘Transformation and School Success," 337. 

20. See Mohatt and Erickson, “Cultural Differences”; Plank, “What Si- 
lence Means,” 3-19; Swisher and Deyhle, “Styles of Learning”; Philips, “Par- 
ticipant Structures”; Philips, Invisible Culture; and Vogt, Jordan, and Tharp, 
“Explaining School Failure, Producing School Success," 276-86. 

21. See Birchard, Attitudes Toward Indian Culture . 

22. Biglin and Wilson, “Parental Attitudes Toward Indian Education,” 2. 
See also Steele, "Mohawk Cultural Perspectives." 

23. McCarty and others. "Classroom Inquiry and Navajo Learning 
Styles,” 42. 

24. Trueba, “Culturally Based Explanations,' 1 281. 

25. See McCarty, “Language Use by Yavapai-Apache Students,” 1-9. 

26. Schindler and Davison. "Language. Culture, and the Mathematics 
Concepts of American Indian Learners," 32-33. 

27. See I lakes and others, ( 'urriculum Improvement for Pueblo Indian 
Students. 

28. See Tippeeonnic, "Editorial . . . On BIA Education.” 1-5. 

29. Lipka, “A Cautionary Talc of Curriculum Development.” 216. Lipka's 
Bayuq community is a fictitious composite village in the Bristol Bay region of 
Alaska. For research on culturally appropriate curricula, see Gipp and Fox, 
"Promoting Cultural Relevance”; Worrest, “Curriculum Development"; 
Butterfield. “Development and Use"; and Tippeeonnic. "Training Teachers of 
American Indian Students,” 6-15. 



1 1 j 




Cw!'!$>A|i. Af UiCV.. A RiM A(.., h-8aM{. R.V'CNMI 



30. Stokes. ‘Curriculum for Native American Students," 579. 

31. Lipka. "Cautionary Tale,’* 224- 

32. See Vogt, Jordan, and Tharp. “Explaining School Failure." 

33 . For information on curriculum development and implementation, 
see Cotton and Savard, Xative American Education', Gipp and i*ox, “Promot- 
ing Cultural Relevance ; J. S. Kleinteld, “Intellectual Strengths in Culturally 
Different Groups," 341-59; More. “Native Indian Learning Styles," 15-28; 
Swisher and Deyhle. “Styles of Learning"; and Stokes, “Curriculum for Native 
American Students." 

34 . Tippeconnic, 'Training Teachers." 6 . For studies on effective teacher 
characteristics, see Deyhle. “Constructing Failure"; Kleinfeld, Effective 
'Teachers of Indian and Eskimo High School Students, ; Kleinfeld , McDiarmid , 
Grubis, and Parrett. “Doing Research on Effective Cross-Cultural Teaching," 
86-108; Philips, “Participant Structures"; Scollon and Scollon, A 'curative. 
I.iteracif. and Face in Interethnic Communication ; Van Ness. “Social Con- 
trol": and Lipka. “Cautionary Tale." 

35 . See Freire, Teachers as Cultural Workers. 

36. See Oliver and Gershman, “Knowing as Participant." 

37 . Dupuis and Walker, “The Circle of Learning at Kickapoo." 27-33 and 
McCarty, "School as Community," 484-503. 

38. See Ogbu. “Variability"; Deyhle, “Measuring Success and Failure in 
the Classroom," 67-85; and Mclnerney and Swisher, “Exploring Navajo Mo- 
tivation." 

39 . See Deyhle and Swisher, “Research in American Indian Education." 

40. Chilcott, “Yaqui World View and the School. 22 . See also Ogbu, 
“Variability”; Robbins and Tippeconnic. Research in American Indian Edu- 
cation ; Stokes, “Curriculum for Native American Students"; and Swisher, 
“Why Indian People Should He the Ones to Write about Indian Education, 1- 
8 . 

41. See Greenbaum and Greenbaum. “Cultural Differences": Locust, 
“Wounding the Spirit": Philips. “Participant Structures"; Philips, Invisible 
Culture: Spang. “Eight Problems": Deyhle, “Constructing Failure"; 
Mclnerney and Swisher. “Exploring Navajo Motivation ; and Wright, 
Ilirlinger. and England. Politics of Second Generation Discrimination. 

42 . See Jacob ami Jordan. “Moving to Dialogue." 



101 



J I 




Bibliography 



Adams. David Wallace. “Fundamental Considerations: The Deep Meaning of 
Native American Schooling. 1<880- 1900." Harvard Educational Review 
58(1): 1-28(1988). 

Biglin. James K.. and Jack Wilson. "Parental Attitudes Toward Indian Kduca- 
tion.’’ .Journal of A mar icon Indian lid motion l 1(3): 1-6 ( 19"2). 

Birchard, Bruce A. Attitudes 1 "award Indian Culture and Its Incorporation in 
the School ( 'urricuf urn . Students. Parents. Teachers, and Community (.cod- 
ers: Perceptions of Indian education. Series !Y. No. 10. Final Report. 
National Study of American Indian Kducation. Washington. DC: Bureau of 
Research, ()1 flee of Kducation. 19~0. KRIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. Kl) 047 879. 

Bruner.. Jerome S. The Culture of Educiit ion. Cambridge. MA: Harvard I’niver- 
sity Press, 1996. 

Butterfield, Robin A. "The Dciclopmcnl and I’se of Culturalb Appropriate 
Curriculum lor American Indian Students." Peabody Journal of Education 
61(1): 49-66 (1983). 

Chilcott. John ll.“Yaqui World Yicwand the School: Conflict and Accommoda- 
tion." Journal of American Indian Education 24( 1 ): 21-32 ( 1985). 

Clean*. Linda Miller, and Thomas D. Peacock. CoKtvted Wisdom: American 
Indian Education. Needham Heights: Alhn N- Bacon, 1998. 

Cotton, Kathleen, and W. (I. Snvard. .Xut ire American Education: Topic Sum- 
mary Report. Portland. OR: Northwest Regional Kducational laboratory. 
1981. KRIC Document Reproduction Sen ice No. KD 214 "00. 

Deyhle, Donna. “Constructing Failure and Maintaining Cultural Identity: Na- 
vaj< ) and l ' te Sch< >ol I .cavers. " Journal of American Indian Education 31(2): 
24-27(1992). 



. "Measuring Success and Failure in the Classroom: Teacher Communica- 
tion about Tests and the Cnderstanding of Young Nava jo Students." Peabody 
Journal of Education 61(1): 6" -85 ( 1983 ). 

Deyhle, Donna, and Karen Swisher. "Research in American Indian Kducation 
and Alaska Native Kducation: From Assimilation to Self- Determination." In 
Review of Research in Education. \ol. 22, edited by Michael W. Apple. 
Washington. DC: American Kducational Research Association. 199**. 

Dupuis. Victor L. and Margery W. Walker. " The Circle of learning at Kickapoo." 
Journal (f American Indian Education 28( 1 ): 2 **-33 ( 1988). 



Krickson. Frederick. 



"Transformation and School Success: The Politics and 



Culture ol Kducational Achievement." , I nthropoloyy and Education Ouar 
terly 18(4): 335-56 ( 198"). 



ITeire. Paulo. Teachers as ('ultural It briers: 
leach. Boulder. CO: Weslvieu Press. 1988. 



Letters to Th**sc Who Parc 



^ * 



U)? r. r*fvr f\f\ m/ A\/ A it AD! £ 



C 



A* 1 '<• 5 '** * i C 



A R‘ 



Gipp. Gerald K., am! Samira .1. Ko\. "Promoting Cultural Rt*h*\aiur in Ameri- 
can Indian Education." Education Diyesi^ 7(3): 58-64 (1991). 

Greenbamn, Paul H. "Nonverbal Differences in Comnuinication Style between 
American Indian and Anglo Elementary Classrooms." American Education 
Research Journal 101-15 (1985). 

Greenbamn, Paul H.. and Susan D. Greenbamn. "Cultural Differences, Nonver- 
bal Regulation, and Classroom Interaction: Sociolinguistic Interference in 
American Indian Education.” Peabody Journal of Education 6t(t): 16-33 
0983). 

Hakes. Judith A., and others. Curriculum Improvement for Pueblo Indian 
Students: .4 Pilot Study. Albuquerque: Ail Indian Pueblo Council. 1980. 
KRIC Document Reproduction Sen ice No. KD 190 283. 

Ilamlev, Jeffrey K. "Cultural Genocide in the Classroom: A History of the 
Pederal Hoarding School Movement in American Indian Kducation, 1875- 
1030." I'.d.D. diss., I larvard Graduate School nt Kducation. 1994. 

Institute for Government Research. The Problem of Indian Administration: 
Report of a Surrey Made at the Request of Honorable Hubert Work. 
Secretary of the Interior, and Submitted to Him. February 21. PIPS. Balti- 
more: Johns Hopkins Press. 1938. Reprint, New York: Johnson Reprint, 
DPI. 



Jacob. Kvclyn, and Cathie Jordan. "Moving to Dialogue.” Anthropoloyy and 
Education Quarterly 18(4): 359-61 (1987). 

kawagley. Oscar A. .4 Yupiaq Worldvieir: .4 Pathway to Ecoloyy and Spirit. 
Prospect Heights, II.: Waveland Press, 1995. 

Kleinfeld, Judith. Effective Teachers of Indian and Eskimo Ifiyh School Stu- 
dents. Fairbanks: Center for Northern Kducalional Research: Cniversily of 
Alaska, Institute of Social, Kconomic and Government Research. 1973. 
KRIC Document Reproduction Service No. KD 008 346. 



Kleinfeld. Judith, (». Williamson McDiarmid, Steve Gruhis, and William Parrett. 
"Doing Research on Effective Cross-Cultural Teaching; A readier Tale.” 
Peabody Journal of Education 61(1): 86*108 (1983). 



kleinfeld, J. S. "Intellectual Strengths in Culturally Different Groups: An Es- 
kimo Illustration." Review of Educational Research 43(3): 341-59 (I9~3). 

I.ipka. Jerry M. "A Cautionary Tale of Curriculum Development in Yup'ik 
Eskimo Communities .”. [nthrojndoyy and Educatum Quartcrly'HMW): 210- 
31 (1989). 



. "Toward a CulUirallv Based Pedagogy: A Case Study of One Yup'ik 
Eskimo 'leacher.” Anthropoloyy and Education Quarterly 32(3): 203-23 
(1991). 



l.ueuM. (‘ami. "Wounding the Spirit: Discrimination and Traditional American 
Indian BeliefSyslems." Ihirvtinl EifiiC(iti<niiil Ih'vicivSSYM'. 315-30 ( 1988). 

Komauaimn. k. Tsianina. “Educating Native Americans.” In Ihmdhook of 
Research on Mu/ticuiturai Education, edited by James A. Banks and Cheny 
A. McGee. New ’f ork: Macmillian. 1995. 

."The Cnnatural I listory of American Indian Education." In Xevt Steps: 



lo.1 .. 






Tarajfan Ya/71F 



Research and Practice to Advance Indian Education, edited by Karen 
Gayton Swisher and John Tippeconnic III. Charleston, VVV: ERIC Clearing- 
house on Rural Education and Small Schools, 1999. 

Longstreet, Wilma S. Aspects of Ethnicity: Understanding Differences in Plu- 
ralistic Classrooms . New York: Teachers College Press, 1978. 

Longstreet, Wilma S., and Harold G. Shane. Curriculum for a New Millen- 
nium. Needham Heights: Allyn & Bacon, 1993- 

McCarty, Teresa L. “Language Use by Yavapai-Apache Students with Recom- 
mendations for Curriculum Design.” Journal of American Indian Educa- 
tion 20(1): 1-9(1980). 

. “School as Community: The Rough Rock Demonstration.’’ Harvard 

Educational Review 59(4 ): 484-503 (1989). 

McCarty, Teresa L., and others. “Classroom Inquiry and Navajo learning 
Styles: A Call for Reassessment.” Anthropology and Education Quarterly 
22(0:42-59(1991). 



Mclnerney, Dennis M.. and Karen Gayton Swisher. “Exploring Navajo Motiva- 
tion in School Settings.” Journal of American Indian Education 34(3): 28- 
51(1995). 



McQuiston, John M. t and Rodney L. Brod. "Structural and Cultural Conflict in 
American Indian Education." Journal of Thought 19(3): 48-58 (1984). 



Mohatt, Gerald V., and Frederick Erickson. “Cultural Differences in Teaching 
Styles in an Odawa School: A Sociolinguistic Approach.” In Culture and the 
Bilingual Classroom, edited by Henry T. Trueba, Grace Rung Guthrie, and 
Kathryn Hu-Pei Au. Rowley, MA: Newbury House, 1981. 



More, Arthur J. “Native Indian Iiearning Styles: A Review for Researchers and 
Teachers.” Journal of American Indian Education, special issue (August 
1989): 15-28. 



Noley, Grayson. “Native and Non-Native Teachers and Administrators for 
Elementary and Secondary' Schools Serving Native Students.” In Indian 
Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s , edited by G. Michael Charleston. 
Washington, DC: Hemispheric Publishing, 1991. 

Ogbu, John U. “Variability in Minority School Performance: A Problem in 
Search of an Explanation.” Anthropology and Education Quarterly 18(4): 
312-34 (1987). 



Oliver. Donald W., and Kathleen K. Gershman. “Knowing as Participant.” 
Journal of Curriculum Theorizing 10(2): 59-100 (1992). 



Philips, Susan Urmstrom. The Invisible Culture: Communication m Class 
room and Community on the Warm Springs Reservation . New York 
lxmgman, 1983. 



“Participant Structures and Communicative Competence: Warm Springs 

Children in Community and Classroom.” In Functions of Language in the 
Classroom , edited by Courtney B. Ca/.den, Vera P. John, and Dell Hymes. 
New York: Teachers College Press. 1972. 



Plank, Gary A. “What Silence Means for Educators of American Indian Chil- 
dren.” Journal of American Indian Education 34( 1 ): 3-19 (1994). 



104 



CuitURAuv ApFi<OPRiAir Curbicuium: A R?sr ARon-BAr.fr> Rai;onau 



Robbins, Rebecca, and John Tippeconnie III. Research in American Indian 
Education, Tempe, A2: Center for Indian Education, 1985. 

Sanders, Danielle. “Cultural Conflicts: An Important Factor in Academic Fail- 
ures of American Indian Students/’ Journal oj' Multicultural Counseling 
and Development 18(15): 81-89 (1987). 

Schindler, Duane E., and David M. Davison. “language, Culture, and the 
Mathematics Concepts of American Indian Learners." Journal of American 
Indian Education 24(3): 27-34 (1985). 

Scollon, Ronald, and Suzanne B. K. Scollon. Narrative, Literacy . and Face in 
Interethnic Communication, Norwood, NJ: Abies Pub. Corp., 1981. 

Skinner, Linda. “Teaching through Traditions: Incorporating languages and 
Culture into Curricula.” In Next Steps: Research and Practice to Advance 
Indian Education , edited by Karen Gavlon Swisher and John Tippeconnic 
III. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small 
Schools, 1999. 

Soto. Lourdes Diaz. Language . Culture and Power: Bilingual Families and the 
Struggle for Quality Education. Albany: State University of New York Press, 
1996. 



Spang, Alonzo. “Eight Problems in Indian Education.” Journal of American 
Indian Education 10(1): 1-4 (1970). 

Steele, C. L. “Mohawk Cultural Perspectives: A Curriculum Database for Mohawk 
Cross-Cultural Curriculum.” Ph.l). diss.. State University of New York at 
Albany, 1986. 

Stokes, Sandra M. “Curriculum for Native American Students: Using Native 
American Values.” The Reading Teacher 50(7): 576-84 (1997). 

Swisher, Karen Gayton. “Why Indian People Should Be the Ones to Write about 
Indian Education.” American Indian Quarterly 20(1): 1-8 (1996). 

Swisher, Karen, and Donna Deyhle. "The Shies of Learning Are Different, but 
the Teaching Is Just the Same: Suggestions for Teachers of American Indian 
Youth.” Journal of American Indian Education . special issue (August 1989): 
1-14. 

i’ippeconnic, .John W., III. “Editorial . . . On BIA Education.” Journal of 
American Indian Education 35( 1 ): 1-5 ( 1995). 

. “Training Teachers of American Indian Students Peabody Journal of 

Education 6l( 1): 6- 15 (198.3). 



Trueba, Henry T. “Culturally Based Explanations of Minority Students’ Aca- 
demic Achievement/’ Anthropology and Education Quarterly 19(3): 270- 
87(1988). 



Van Ness, 1 1. "Social Control and Social Organization in an Alaskan Athahnsknn 
Classroom: A Microethnography of ‘Getting Ready' for Reading." In Culture 
and the Bilingual Classroom , edited hv Henry T. Trueba, Grace Pung 
Guthrie, and Kathryn Hu-lVi An. Rowley. MA: Newbury House, 1981. 

Vogt, Lynn A., Cathie. Jordan, and Roland G. Tharp. “Explaining School Failure, 
Producing School Success: Two Cases/’ Anthropology and Education Quar- 
terly \H{4)\ 276-86(1987). 



+ ... 

105 I Ml 



Worrest, Henry N. "Curriculum Development at Pretty Kagle School: Some 
Success and Some Problems.'' Paper presented at the Joint Meeting of the 
Annual Rural and Small Schools Conference and Kansas Community Kdu- 
eation Association in Manhattan, KS, November 15-16, 1982. 

Wright, David K., Michael W. Hirlinger, and Robert K. Kngland. The Politic* of 
Second Generation Discrimination hi American Indian Education: Inci- 
dence, Explanation, and Mith/ating Strategies. Westport, CT: Bergin & 
Garvey, 1998. 

Youpa, Daniel G., Georgia Kpaloose, and Roland G. Tharp. “Family and Com- 
munity Involvement in the /uni Public Schools." Paper presented at the 
meeting of the American Fdueational Research Association, San Diego, 
April 13-17. 1998. 




inA 




Charier 5 




Teaching through Traditions 

Incorporating Languages and 
Culture into Curricula 



Linda Skinner 1 



T here are many challenges related to the perpetuation of Ameri- 
can Indian languages and cultures, including the general lack 
of awareness within mainstream society about the presence of 
contemporary Indian peoples. Also, about two-thirds of the original 
Native languages have become extinct, along with the cultural knowl- 
edge they conveyed. Indian educators wishing to develop culturally 
relevant curriculum will find in this chapter descriptions of exem- 
plary’ programs and successful strategies, suggestions for more ef- 
fective practices, and recommendations for overall improvement of 
American Indian education. 

Let me begin by sharing an account of mv own deep immersion in 
these issues as both an insider and outsider. 



On© Teacher's Experience; A True Story 

Our elders have maintained a tradition of transmitting knowl- 
edge, values, and history through oral tradition. We learn from the 
experiences of others. There is something beyond the story itself that 




llND* SwNNfP 



takes hold of each listener’s heart and remains in memory. As our 
elders have modeled their love for this method of learning and 
teaching, I want to give the following account of a lesson in language 
and culture that was for me both transforming and unforgettable. I 
have shared this story verbally with thousands of educators to im- 
press the importance of developing understanding of Native lan- 
guages, Native cultures, and Native children. 

It was my first teaching job. I was fresh out of school, having 
studied at a major university in Oklahoma, preparing for what I 
wanted most to do in life: teach Indian children. It had been difficult 
to find any classes to help me do that, even in the state that had once 
been designated Indian Territory and still has more CDIB Indians 
(those having a Certificate of Degree of Indian Blood) than any 
other. The classes had very little content about culturally different 
children, let alone Indian children. But I had done my best. I took 
sociology classes, read a lot, and traveled extensively (from Greenland 
to Europe to Mexico). Formal teacher education study between 1966 
and 1971 included one chapter on cultural diversity in one history of 
education textbook. That was not enough. 

I was interviewed by a Zia Pueblo Day School community commit- 
tee and a Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) official for a teaching 
position at Zia Pueblo Day School. One of their many questions was 
“How will you communicate with our children? They speak the 
Keresan language and you speak English. Of the 10 kindergarten 
children, most speak only Keresan.” I thought a moment and an- 
swered: “1 would like to learn your language, but I would also, in the 
beginning, communicate with the students in ways other than lan- 
guage.” Little did I know how difficult it would be, even with the best 
of intentions. I quickly learned that the barriers of language and 
culture are big ones. Thankfully, I also learned that barriers can lead 
to the building of bridges. My interviewers informed me kindly that 
the people had important reasons for keeping the language to them- 
selves. 

1 tried creative approaches during the first week of school. I 
depended almost completely on Mary, the Keres-speaking teacher 
aide, for communicating concepts. We played one game for the 
multiple purposes of getting comfortable with one another, having 
fun together, and learning both the Keresan and English names of 
animals. A student would imitate the sounds or movements of an 



108 





Tf ACHING U (ROUGH TRADIUONS: InCORPORAHNG LaN( .UAU s A Nil CnKuM iNlO CuRRlOILA 



animal and the others would guess. It was great fun. Things were 
going very well until Mary had to leave the room. We kept playing. 
The kids had already imitated many of the animals around the 
pueblo: dogs, horses, sheep, and pigs. It was Cindy’s turn. She went, 
“Meeoww.” Immediately Alfonso jumped up and said, “Moose!” I 
quickly thought back to my teacher education days. I had learned 
about the“ teachable moment,” and here it was! I would teach Alfonso 
what a moose was. I proceeded to do just that. I put my arms way up 
over my head and spread my fingers wide for the antlers. I bellowed 
loud noises and said, “Moooose!” Their big eyes and puzzled expres- 
sions told me something was awry. 

During recess (which was announced soon after this incident), l 
told Man' what had happened, adding that their faces told me some- 
thing was not right. The look in her eyes told me she had seen similar 
things all too often. Her head sort of dropped in her hands as, still 
smiling, she uttered, “Oh, Linda, in our language, moose means cat." 

We gathered the children together, and with constant bilingual 
translations via Mary, we sat and talked about the need to communi- 
cate. I explained that we came from different places and spoke 
different languages. Wc said we would help one another. I told them 
about Oklahoma, niv family, and the Choctaws. They showed me a 
prickly pear cactus fruit and talked about hot chilies and pottery. I 
felt better. Serious as the predicament was, we all laughed and were 
genuinely amused. We all learned that day. Our classroom circle 
conversation was the first of many meetings on the topic of cultural 
relevance and authenticity in the classroom. 

While driving the more than 37 miles home that night. I thought 
about what had happened and what I should do. 1 figured this sort of 
thing happens over and over again for the /via people, and they 
deserve better for their children. I was Indian and committed to 
doing my best. I had chosen to he there, and yet had not succeeded 
that day. What had happened and what was happening to the chil- 
dren whose teachers did not oven care about their Indian heritage? I 
thought about resigning so a better teacher could take over but 
realized that probably would not happen. I resolved to stay, do the 
best job I could, and pay more attention. The kids were great. They 
had already said they would help me, and they did. Now I was ready! 




1 09 - 




dren. They loved horses, birds, butterflies, and fishing. Rhonda 
talked about “wild piggies.” They knew a lot about many things like 
hunting, planting, seasons, dances, and pottery. They spent lots of 
time with their families and had close relationships with grandpar- 
ents, aunties, and uncles. I developed my own instructional materi- 
als, even though the BIA had spent much money on commercially 
developed programs. Those prepared materials were a lot like “Dick 
and Jane,” meant for middle-class European American kids. They 
were not very successful or even interesting to these curious, active 
Native minds. 

The next Monday morning, I finally felt ready and much more 
secure. I set up a pretty little fishing pond with beautiful blue card- 
board for water so the construction paper fish could “swim” in it. 
When you fished with the pole, the magnet on the end of the string 
would catch the fish. There were many colors because this was a 
bilingual color-learning game. I was proud; the kids would love it. 
Early that morning, Alfonso and Morris were the first students in the 
room. They ran over to see what was new in the corner. They kept 
pointing and talking to each other in Keres. I encouraged them to 
fish for colors, showing them how. They still seemed hesitant. They 
pointed to the cardboard (water) and said in a rather dissatisfied 
tone, “Not blue, brown/* How many times had I crossed the bridge 
over the Rio Grande and seen the water— but not “seen” the water? It 
was brown, not blue. 

This experience taught me that not only would the students be my 
best teachers but that the quality of their education would depend on 
community involvement. I began to learn, by experience and gentle 
Pueblo guidance, how to involve parents and community in mean- 
ingful ways, and how valuable and essential this involvement would 
prove to be. My young teachers lit the way for me to learn and 
understand. 

A book called Teacher also helped me that year. The author, 
Sylvia Ashton-Warner, gave valuable insights from her experiences 
in recognizing and meeting the need for cultural relevance with her 
Maori students in New Zealand. I believe every' educator and parent 
should read this book. 



Over the past 27 years, I have shared experiences with many 
friends in education all over North America. This culture shock, 
resulting from the language-gap experience, is not unique. It hap- 



i in 



Tf ACHING THROUGH TRADITIONS'. INCORPORATING LANGUAGLS AND CULTURE INTO CuRRlOn A 



pens over and over again to Native children and their teachers. We 
all know now, beyond a shadow of a doubt, that the federal 
government’s assimilation and indoctrination policy has not worked. 
It is time to meld our collective learning experiences and rise to the 
great challenge of creating effective classrooms that reflect respect 
for our children and create a stronger and more just future for all 
children. 



Let History Speak 

Cultural and linguistic genocide (ethnocide) has been directed 
toward Native people for many years. Of all the oppressive govern- 
ment policies, perhaps the most devastating have involved educa- 
tion. Education of Native children came under government control 
through a series of treaties from 1778 to 1871, and it became obvious 
to policy makers that education was a powerful tool for subjugating 
and controlling the destinies of Native peoples. The general philoso- 
phy was to “civilize” Indians. They were taken from their parents and 
moved to boarding schools, where they were forced to forego tradi- 
tional cultural practices and embrace European American culture. 
For instance, at the Carlisle Indian School from 1867 to 1904, En- 
glish was mandatory, long hair forbidden, and traditional Native 
clothing unaccepted. Captain Richard Henry Pratt captured the pre- 
vailing attitude in his memoirs: *T believe in immersing the Indians 
in our civilization and holding them there until they are thoroughly 
soaked.”-' 

Many of those hoarding school students are still alive, and the 
effects of their degradation and miseducation are carried to their 
children and grandchildren. Some have called this negation of self 
“the hoarding school mentality" and presume it is responsible for the 
high rates of alcoholism, suicide, alienation, insecurity, and general 
unhappiness present in some Indian communities today. 

In addition to isolation from family and suppression of cultural 
practices, great efforts were undertaken to eliminate Native lan- 
guages and teach English. Federal policies specifically forbade the 
use of any Indian language for instructional purposes: “Education 
should seek the disintegration of the tribes. Only English should he 
allowed to be spoken and only English speaking teachers should be 
employed in schools.” ‘ Those language policies were to he enforced 



i \ i 



Linda Skinni r 



under threat of loss of government funding. Ironically, and in spite 
of government efforts to eradicate Native languages, there was evi- 
dence even then of effective educational practices that utilized Na- 
tive languages to promote overall educational attainment. 

In the 1840s the Choctaw and Cherokee had elaborate, successful 
schools, educating students in both Native languages and English. 
Not only was the Cherokee population 90 percent literate in its own 
language, but the English literacy level of Oklahoma Cherokces was 
higher than the non-Native populations in either Texas or Arkansas. 
There were more than 200 schools or academies, and numerous 
graduates went on to Eastern colleges. All of this was accomplished 
with complete tribal autonomy. 

Then the federal government took over the schools, and Native 
education rapidly declined. By 1969 a U.S. Senate hearing on Indian 
education revealed that the median number of school years com- 
pleted by the adult Cherokee was only 5.5, drop-out rates in public 
schools were as high as 75 percent, and the level of Cherokee educa- 
tion was well below the Oklahoma average and below the average for 



rural residents and non-Whites in the state. 

In many government-controlled reservation schools, missionar- 
ies served as teachers. Though they also favored ending tribal tradi- 
tions, as educators, they felt students would ultimately learn En- 
glish better if they were allowed to learn in their Native language 
the first three or four years. Current research agrees with the mis- 
sionaries; language-minority students who receive at least three to 
four years of formal schooling in their Native language generally 
achieve more in all subject areas, including the second language. 
Certainly the self-image is more intact. 4 



Addressing The Need to Reinvigorate Native Languages 

Dating back at least to the 1870s, schools have made every' effort 
to assimilate, acculturate, and indoctrinate Native students to speak 
the same, dress the same, wear their hair the «:;nu\ and even to think 
and believe the same as European Americans. 

The 1870 Annual Report of the Hoard of Indian Commissioners 
summarizes the general attitude embodied in these educational prac- 
tices, stating that education was seen as “the quickest way to civilize 
Indians and that education could only he given to children removed 



1 19 



Teaching hirough Tgadiuons: Incorporaung Languages and CunuRr into Curr.cuia 



from the examples of their parents and the influence of the camps 
and kept in boarding schools.” * 

According to Bea Medicine, the historic prohibitions against Na- 
tive language use have had great repercussions on the communica- 
tion skills of American Indians and Alaska Natives since language is 
the core expressive element in culture, music, song, dance, art, and 
religion. She also points out that the persistence of Native languages, 
despite the extended period of repression, attests to the great vigor 
of Native people and their cultures. This persistence also indicates 
the value placed on Native languages by parents and grandparents, 
who have continued in many communities to teach them to their 
children. These communities understand that language is critical to 
maintaining cultural continuity and Native identity.'’ 

Michael Brunn’s recent study in ethnohistory documents that 
speaking a heritage language is essential to identifying with tradi- 
tional culture and maintaining and carrying a culture forward. He 
reports that “children’s identities are re-formed through the process 
of language socialization within sociocultural contexts. Their identi- 
ties are ultimately constructed through interactions within her/his 
affective domain.” He verifies through firsthand accounts (life sto- 
ries) of tribal members that “language was the key element that 
would carry their cultures forward and maintain their traditions. To 
them the loss of language meant the loss of their cultures and it gave 
them much concern. . . . They came to firmly believe that their 
heritage languages were central to their identities as culture bearers 
and [v ere] an important part of what gave them their sense of 
belonging; of being ” 7 

To ensure that schools in the United States are ready for Native 
children, it is necessary for educators to realize and value the rela- 
tionship between language and culture. Eli Taylor, a First Nations 
Elder of the Sioux Valley Reserve in Manitoba, provides a strong 
rationale for the revitalization of Native languages: 

Our Native language embodies a value system about how wo 
ought to live and relate to each other. ... It gives a name to 
relations among kin, to roles and responsibilities among family 
members, to ties with the broader clan group. . . . There are no 
English words for these relationships because your social and 
family life is different from ours. Now if you destroy this lan- 



113 1 V (1 




Linda Skinnir 



guage, you not only break down these relationships, but you 
also destroy other aspects of our Indian way of life and culture, 
especially those that describe man's connection with nature, 
the Great Spirit and the order of things. Without our language, 
we will cease to exist as a separate people.” 

Federal policies in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries suc- 
ceeded in assimilating many American Indians through the educa- 
tion of their children. When the first of these policies became law, 
there were 604 Indian languages, which were, for the most part, 
healthy and alive. 9 Today, only 206 Indian languages remain. 10 W. 
L. Leap reported in 1981 that the remaining languages survive with 
different levels of fluency, depending on the relationship between 
the number of speakers and age range. Of the surviving Native 
languages, it is estimated that approximately 50 are on the death list. 
If we value diversity, and if wc value languages and their connection 
to cultures, we must act now. There is no more time to mull over the 
question. 

James Bauman of the Center for Applied Linguistics in Washing- 
ton, D.C., proposes that there are five distinct stages of language 
preservation: flourishing, enduring, declining, obsolescent, and ex- 
tinct. 

Flourishing language. An example of flourishing language is 
Navajo, with well over 100,000 speakers, more than any other Ameri- 
can Indian language north of Mexico. It is also the largest tribe and 
has the largest reservation. Most Navajo children on the reservation 
learn only Navajo until they begin school. Louisiana Coushatta is 
also a flourishing language, with a population of only 1,000 people. 
The most important indicators of a flourishing language can he 
summarized as follows: 



1. It has speakers of all ages, some of them monolingual. 

2. Population increases also lead to an increase in the number of 
speakers. 



3. It is used in all communicative situations. 

4. The language adapts to the changing culture of the community. 



5. Speakers become increasingly more literate in their Native lan- 
guage. 11 



1 ! . 114 



Ji .’...H!*,-- , '|||A >'i .t, TuV.J.hU- if;* S4«t *i.'.\5'‘ J-. . [■'•! f •■■*•: •» V •«!<; dt : I * -IVt M / C'J { ' : * V *J1 »* 

Knduring language. An example of an enduring language is 
Ilualapai. The Hualapai and related Havasupai have fewer than 
2,000 people, of whom 95 percent, including most children, speak 
Hualapai. The language is not expanding. An enduring language is 
characterized in this way: 

1. It has speakers of all ages; most or all are bilingual. 

2. The population of speakers tends to remain constant over time. 

3. Knglish tends to be used exclusively in some situations. 

4. The language adapts to the changing culture of the community. 

5. There is little or no Native language literacy in the community. 

Declining language. Shoshoni is a declining language. The 
Shoshoni Nation has approximately 7,000 members, but their lan- 
guage is now spoken bv no more than 75 percent of the Shoshoni 
people, with an ominous concentration of abilities in older people. 
These are the characteristics of a declining language: 

1. There are proportionately more older speakers than younger. 

2. Younger speakers are not altogether fluent in the language. 

3. The number of speakers decreases over time, even though the 
population may be increasing. 

4. The entire population is bilingual and Knglish is preferred in 
many situations. 

5. The language begins to conform to and resemble Knglish. 

6. The population is essentially illiterate in the language. 11 

Obsolescent language. Pit River exemplifies an obsolescent 
language. More than half the Native languages still spoken north of 
Mexico are obsolescent. Perhaps 50 tribes have tewer than 10 speak- 
ers, all of them elderly. The language can he heard only when the 
elders get together. The characteristics of an obsolescent language 
are these: 



1. An age gradient of speakers terminates in the adult population. 

2. The language is not taught to children in the home. 

3. The number of speakers declines very rapidly. 







L'NOA SKiNNttt 



4. The entire population is bilingual, and English is preferred in 
essentially all situations. 

5. The language is inflexible. It no longer adapts to new situations. 

6. There is no literacy in the Native language. 11 

Extinct language. An example of an extinct language is 
Chumash. Approximately 32 years ago, the last speaker died, al- 
though the language had not been used for many years before. 

Indian nations experiencing the various stages of language de- 
cline require different approaches to the preservation or restoration 
of linguistic (hence cultural) health. In the late 1980s, the first order 
of business for all groups, as perceived by Native American leaders 
and educators from across the nation, was to reverse the century-old 
federal policy of disintegrating tribes by exterminating their lan- 
guages. These leaders approached sympathetic lawmakers, who even- 
tually passed the Native American Languages Act (NAI^A) of 1990. 
This law explicitly establishes as policy the government’s responsi- 
bility to assist Native American tribes to preserve, protect, and pro- 
mote the rights of Native Americans to use, practice, and develop 
Native American languages. 

While testifying in behalf of this act. Senator Daniel Inouyc ex- 
plained the impact of loss of language on a group: 

Traditional languages are an integral part of Native American 
cultures, heritages, and identities. History, religion, literature, 
and traditional values are all transmitted through language. 
When a language is lost, the ability to express concepts in a 
certain way is also lost. For example, names for objects or 
events in nature reflect the way people understand those phe- 
nomena. When they no longer know the name of something in 
their own language, they no longer have the same relationship 
with it, and part of their culture dies along with this communi- 
cation loss. 1 '' 



When President Bush signed this hill into Public Law 101-477, he 
not only changed the old policy but added further responsibility to 
empower states and local education agencies, tribal governments, 



and communities to determine their own linguistic destinies (see 



box). 



1 - < HA 




Teaching imnough Tradiuons: Incokporaung Languages and Cuiiure into Curricuia 



Native American Languages Act 
Public Law 101-477 §2903. Declaration of Policy. 

It is the policy of the United States to 

1) preserve, protect, and promote the rights and freedom of Native 
Americans to use, practice, and develop Native American languages; 

2) allow exceptions to teacher certification requirements for Federal 
programs, and programs funded in whole or in part by the Federal 
Government, for instruction in Native American languages when such 
teacher certification requirements hinder the employment of qualified 
teachers who teach in Native American languages, and to encourage 
State and territorial governments to make similar exceptions; 

3) encourage and support the use of Native American languages as a 
medium of instruction in order to encourage and support Native Ameri- 
can language survival, educational opportunity. 

A) increased student success and performance, 

B) increased student awareness and knowledge of their culture and 
history, and 

C) increased student and community pride; 

4) encourage State and local education programs to work with Native 
American parents, educators. Indian tribes, and other Native American 
governing bodies in the implementation of programs to put this policy 
into effect; 

5) recognize the right of Indian tribes and other Native American 
governing bodies to use the Native American languages as a medium 
of instruction in all schools funded by the Secretary of the Interior; 

6) fully recognize the inherent right of Indian tribes and other Native 
American governing bodies, States, territories, and possessions of the 
United States to lake action on, and give official status to, their Native 
American languages for the purpose of conducting their own business; 

7) support the granting of comparable proficiency achieved through 
course work in a Native American language the same academic credit 
as comparable proficiency achieved through course work in a foreign 
language, with recognition of such Native American language profi- 
ciency by institutions of higher education as fulfilling foreign language 
entrance or degree requirements; 

8) encourage all institutions of elementary, secondary and higher edu- 
cation, where appropriate, to include Native American languages in the 
curriculum in the same manner as foreign languages and to grant 
proficiency in Native American languages the same full academic credit 
as proficiency in foreign languages. 



7 



•» 4 






Passage of this bill was an important turning point in the federal 
government's treatment of First Americans. However, a change in 
policy cannot magically undo past wrongs and present-day effects. It 
also does not automatically change current practices that continue 
to miseducate Native children in public schools. Nor does it change 
misperceptions by non-Native students about Native people, their 
languages, and their cultures. Irene Silentman, who works in lan- 
guage planning, says 



To become more than a federal-level “gesture/' NALA requires 
active support by tribes and Indian communities. With com- 
prehensive support for many tribal - level education and lan- 
guage policies still lacking, it is unclear how national-level laws 
like the NAI*A will have an impact. 1,1 



Dr. Dick I.ittlebear, in his work to preserve Native languages, 
writes 



The topic of language death has been “dialogued" to death. 
Those who are serious about preserving their languages must 
act now. They have to start tape-recording and video-taping 
their elders, to begin developing curriculum for language de- 
velopment and content area instruction, and begin compre- 
hensive, college-credit training programs. Whatever action is 
taken, it must emanate from the Native American cultures 
whose language is to be preserved. ... It is up to Native 
Americans to preserve their languages and cultures. To help 
reinforce what the schools are trying to do. Native Americans 
should just talk their languages everywhere, with everyone all 
the time. 1 



Addressing Lack of Knowledge about American Indians 

As we enter the twenty-first century, many barriers stand itt the 
way of equity for Indian students. The failure of national policy and 
the prevalence of stereotypical attitudes about American Indians 
continue to undermine effective, equitable education. More than 20 
years ago. the American Indian Policy Review Commission reached 
this conclusion: 



J -'i 



118 




ft n.’j - ?m'.. .>• T!-. '- : 1?.- • '.f- • L-Vj-. ‘A, t s C .: •! C’ v." . ■» 

One of the greatest obstacles faced by the Indian today in his 
drive for self-determination and a place in this nation is the 
American public s ignorance of the historical relationship of 
the United States with Indian tribes and the lack of general 
awareness [of] the status of the American Indian in our society 
today. 1 * 

American Indians and Alaska Natives have a unique governmenl- 
to-government relationship between individual sovereign Native 
nations and the U.S. government. There is no other minority or 
ethnic group with this status. Kducation is an entitlement granted 
through treaties for American Indians and Alaska Natives, not a 
handout. Understanding this unique relationship is the first step in 
grasping tin* complex nature of Native education today. Kducation. 
often thought of as a privilege, is actually a right, based on federal 
trust responsibility. Several laws, already on the books, mandate 
multilingual and multicultural Native education, but they have not 
been implemented. 

One persistent problem Native leaders and educators must over- 
come is their in risibility to non-Natives in the larger society. .John 
Tippeeonuic III explains that because American Indians comprise 
less than one percent of the U.S. population. 

They are truly a minority among minorities. 'This fact has po- 
litical. economic, and social consequences when money is allo- 
cated or programs developed; or when data is collected for*' 
minority groups. Often American Indians are forgotten be- 
cause of their small numbers or grouped under ’other" when 
data is collected and analyzed. At times it appears that Ameri- 
can Indians are just low in priority when compared to other 
ethnic or special interest groups. 1,1 

American Indians and Alaska Natives are often considered van- 
ishing races, museum relics. In the National Museum of Natural 
History, a division of the Smithsonian Institution, a teacher was 
asked by one of her schoolchildren, “Where are the Indians now?" 
She was overheard to have replied. “Oli. I don’t think there are 
Indians anymore." ,l 

Conditions of ethnocentrism and ignorance of Native cultures 
pervade American school svstemv compounded by the lack of Na- 



11V Kxll 







tive educators, which together create specific educational problems. 
Native values are traditionally handed down by ciders. Blit these 
eminent persons, who hold the knowledge that can keep our cultures 
and languages intact, are missing from classrooms. While schools 
have ways to certify Spanish, French, and German teachers ( foreign 
languages), they do not provide alternative certification for Native 
languages. These languages are national treasures, and the survival 
of our people depends upon their preservation. 

This neglect of Native values robs Native students of their cultural 
pride and personal identities, impedes their success, and makes 
them feel inferior and insecure. Moreover, Native students tend to 
be confused by curricular content and design that are not culturally 
relevant, authentic, or tribal specific, and that harbor cultural bias 
and stereotypes. Not only do most textbooks and history classes 
teach Eurocentric versions of American history/ 1 but there is a lack 
of effective action on a national level to change the way teachers are 
educated to respond to the culturally different child. Many class- 
room-based language development activities uncouple language and 
culture, depriving students of the opportunity to use language and 
culture in real communication/*’ Schools have failed also to create 
opportunities for American Indian and Alaska Native students to 
access leadership positions within student bodies and communities. 

Natives themselves share some of the blame. Native governments 
and communities have failed to accept responsibility for determin- 
ing the future of their people in all areas, including education, and 
continue to perceive themselves as victims. 

In a recent report on Native American colleges, Paul Boyer states, 
“So while we describe the educational needs of Indians in this report, 
we believe Indian education should come to mean not just the educa- 
tion of Indians, but also education about Indians.' - ' Marjane Ambler, 
editor of the Tribal College Journal, reports this problem eloquently 
and writes about the impact of America’s ignorance on the lives of 
Indians: 



I have yet to meet anyone who was taught about treaties or 
tribal sovereignty in a high school civics class when they learned 
about federal, state, and local governments. When conflicts 
arise it is not a time for education. As states and tribes battle 
over taxation, water rights, or gaming compacts, citizens tend 




] :< i 120 



Teaching through Traditions: Incorporating Lanuuao; $ and Cut mm -mo Cumacuia 



to be polarized, not informed by the debate. We therefore 
conclude our study with the hope that Native Americans will be 
given a stronger place in the curriculum of America's schools. 
The goal should be more than increased ‘sensitivity’ or aware- 
ness of ‘diversity. 

Boyer’s report proposes that all students leave high school having 
learned three “pieces of essential knowledge": understanding the 
richness of Native American heritage, that Indians are contempo- 
rary people, and that Indians hold a unique place in the nation’s 
body of law. 1 * 



Developing Curricula and Practices Relevant to Each 
Community 

As described earlier, tribal languages and cultures represent great 
diversity, and Native languages exist in varying stages of linguistic 
vitality. This situation calls for flexible, locally appropriate ap- 
proaches, which vary from community to community. Yet, we all 
want the best educational experiences for our most precious trea- 
sures, our children. 

It is also more evident than ever before that our Native population 
has a brilliant pool of educators, parents, ciders, tribal leaders, 
students, and families, who today eloquently express their hearts 
and minds. This is no accident. Through adversity, we have had to 
develop strength and endurance. Our recent history has been filled 
with conflict, suffering, losses, and factionalism. Yet, our hearts 
remain full of the ancient values of respect, generosity, and love for 
our children, elders, and all of life’s circle. Our minds keep the 
remembrance of oral tradition, the histories of our ancestors, the 
images of our grandparents, and even the memories of their memo- 
ries. We are spiritually connected to our past, our present, and our 
future. 

Those of us who serve as educators have had the opportunity for 
many years to deal with education reform on the local grassroots 
level, as well as state and national levels. We have learned needs 
assessment, curriculum design and development, implementation, 
and evaluation, all within the context of community and tribal eul- 



121 




L $■ 



tures. It is time to come full circle and put forth the best we have to 
give for our future, our children. 

Traditionally education among Native people helped children find 
meaning in life. The curriculum was balanced, attending to cognitive 
learning (factual information necessary for survival) and relating it 
to affective and emotional learning through oral tradition and knowl- 
edge guided by tribal elders. Children developed physical strength 
and skills through games and daily activities. They developed social 
skills through group experiences, grounded in the philosophy that 
we arc born into lives of service. We do not exist alone. Community is 
important. All these lessons are connected to spirituality, which is at 
the center of our existence. 

Amidst our cultural and li iguistic diversities, we share guiding 
values that could form the base of a tribal code of education or could 
become curricular content, learned through interdisciplinary activi- 
ties. These shared values include 

• generosity and cooperation 

• independence and freedom 

• respect for ciders and wisdom 

• connectedness and love 

• courage and responsibility 

• indirect communication and noninterference 

• silence, reflection, and spirit 



These values were once taught by communities; they can he again 
today. When communities produce education, values and beliefs are 
expre sed, languages are spoken, songs are sung, and histories are 
heard. The people determine their priorities and develop a loving, 
collective ownership of the curriculum. 

Kvery district must have a curriculum relevant to its community 
that also uses multicultural approaches and methods to value diver- 
sity and teach tolerance, livery district must he responsible for using 
the rich resources it has at hand. 'Phis does not mean holding one or 
two meetings where one .Joe and one .Jane show up and then con- 
clude that parents do not care. Historically, schools have alienated 
American Indian parents. This negative cycle must he broken. The 



1 122 




Teaching through Traditions: Incorporating Languages and Culture into Curricula 



small number of local education agencies (LEAs) that have made 
good progress in establishing positive communication with parents 
must be nationally recognized. They should be awarded the opportu- 
nity to share their secrets of success with all, raising the standards 
and expectations of respectful relationships. 

Textbook companies must realize their obligation to represent all 
people with truth in print. Textbook commissions can assist each 
state in solving the problem of institutionalized racism by refusing to 
buy books that denigrate any group or perpetuate any stereotypes, or 
that include cultural bias or insufficient information about particu- 
lar groups. 

The following recommendations would move our public schools 
toward equality and equity: 



• Even* local school board should have representation of each 
minority in its district, elected by that minority. 

• The proportion of teachers from various racial/ethnic groups 
should match the proportions present in the student popula- 
tion served in each individual LEA. 

• Every LEA must recognize the relationship of language to cul- 
ture and establish programs that use the languages and em- 
phasize their importance. 

• Teachers must be trained and retrained to meet the education 
needs of all minority children. Where qualified teachers are in 
short supply, programs must be implemented to allow for spe- 
cial certification to meet student needs until teachers can be 
trained. Teachers who prove unable or unwilling, over lime, to 
address the education needs of (///students should be removed 
from school faculties. 






Districts that receive federal funding for Native students must 
be forced to include Native parents from local communities on 
committees that establish policies. The ratio of parents on 
these committees should reflect the number of children in the 
district as well as the amount of money the endorsement of 
those children generates. Native communities must he involved 
wherever local education agency (LEA) expenditures include 
federal monies. 




Linda Skinner 



• The federal government must take the initiative and enforce 
current legislation. 

Without such changes, we can expect the continuation of the same 
unhealthy situations that have led many Native communities to 
crisis. 



Successful Models of Culturally Relevant Curriculum 

How can we define the path of learning we want to create for our 
students? An obvious way to begin is by examining positive aspects 
of the past and applying them to the future. For instance, the ancient 
wisdom that all things are interrelated can he exemplified in a 
contemporary interdisciplinary curriculum. Tribal elders can help 
by discussing traditional learning and how science, language, math- 
ematics, the arts, social studies, music, and physical education can 
he taught together, using culture as the common denominator and 
motivational vehicle. The Wa He Lute Indian School at Frank's 
Landing, Washington, is an excellent example. Educators and com- 
munity members developed a seasonal-environmental curriculum 
based on traditional values, oral traditions, and guidance from el- 
ders. Their curricular experiences were based on the Nisqually River, 
Mount Rainier, and the local flora and fauna (huckleberries, salmon 
berries, alder, cedar, and fish). 21 * Project Preserve in Bemidji, Minne- 
sota, has honored the past by compiling a book of memories and 
photographs of elders on the reservation, serves the present with a 
strong volunteer program, and prepares for the future by helping 
young people succeed in college classes. The book and volunteer 
program reflect crucial characteristics of Indian education such as 
Native culture and cultural skills, allowing for collaborative efforts 
and individual talent, using the teacher as a facilitator, deriving 
knowledge from experience rather than textbooks, making partici- 
pation voluntary, and including multigenerational characteristics. 

Most importantly community members need to take active roles. 
Discuss common stereotypes and cultural biases to which your chil- 
dren have been exposed, and examine textbooks for untruthful rep- 
resentations and biased accounts of historical events. Become advo- 
cates for your students by serving on textbook commissions and 



J H \ I 124 




LlNPA S*»NNH? 



with a special relevance to the local Native community. Science, 
mathematics, and language arts studies relate to the environment 
and life experiences of the Hualapai reservation. Discovery and 
experience are integral to the curriculum. 28 

At Isleta Pueblo, a computer program developed by a University 
of New Mexico professor, Ted Jojola (an Isleta Native), assists Head 
Start students in learning the language and folkways of their ancient 
tribe. Opinion differs o”. whether to continue this project. The chil- 
dren are learning but so too are non-Isletans. Some fear sharing 
tribal knowledge with the offspring of people who have tried during 
the last 500 years to destroy Native cultures in one way or another. 

In 1990 Verna Graves, director of education, Red Lake Band of 
Chippewa Indians, stated the tribal government of the Red Lake 
Band was the only tribe in the Western Hemisphere that had pre- 
pared a comprehensive code for education. 2 '’ The band developed 
seven education goals and four general education objectives. The 
tribal council declared the Chippewa language the official language 
of Red Lake. The education goals encompass a broad knowledge of 
Chippewa culture and are integrated into all phases of the curricu- 
lum. 

Graves quoted the Augustus F. Hawkins- Robert T. Stafford El- 
ementary and Secondary School Improvement A mend meats (1988), 
which guarantee that the assistant secretary of the Department of 
Interior 

shall provide for comprehensive multicultural and multilin- 
gual education programs including the production and use of 
instructional materials, culturally appropriate methodologies 
and teaching and learning strategies that will reinforce, pre- 
serve and maintain Indian and Alaska Native languages, cul- 
tures and histories. 10 



Though these policies were written for federally recognized Indian 
nations, Graves anticipated that policies written by Indian people 
would be adopted by other school systems enrolling American In- 
dian students. She eloquently stated a common theme when she 
testified: 



We believe it is necessary and inherently proper for each tribe 
to develop systems of education. For years we have danced to 



4 s i 



I9A 




TfAUtlNO THROUGH T('AUi:u;NS: Inc OM'URAIiNG LAI'jr.l'Ai .1 S ANl» C Ut (nRt INK* G>W<H UlA 



the tune of others as education plans were written for us; we 
will now go forward with our own plans to serve our own people 
governed and prescribed from within to serve the individual 
member and our tribe as a whole. 11 

The language policy of the Red Lake Band Kducation Code is an 
excellent example of tribal autonomy in education. The policy be- 
gins, “The Chippewa language is a gift from the Creator to our people 
and, therefore, shall be treated with respect. The Code includes 
these 15 sections: 

1. reciprocity of language use 

2. protection of language use authority 

3. general application 

4. status of the Chippewa language 

5. parent involvement 

6. eminent persons/eiders 

7. Chippewa language as an integral part of all school curricula 

8. orthography 

9. teacher, administrator, and guidance counselor competencies 
for language instruction (preservice and in-service) 

10. teachers and teacher aides (certification for language instruc- 
tion) 

11. establishment of the Red Lake Language and Culture Commis- 
sion 

12. composition of the Red Lake Language and Culture Commis- 
sion 

13. role and function of the Red Lake Language and Culture Com- 
mission 

M. research and external studies that require tribal approval 
15. funding for language policy implementation 

The Indian Reading Series, published by the Northwest Regional 
Kducational Laboratory, is an example of a curriculum created by 
Indian authors and authenticated by the participating tribes. It was 



'PU \ 



field-tested in more than 93 classrooms. The student hooks show the 
cultural diversity of Indian America and are designed to improve 
reading comprehension, classroom participation, and written and 
oral language skills. The teacher manuals relate cultural background 
information, program objectives and rationale, and teaching activi- 
ties to Native culture, utilizing the language experience approach to 
learning. The activities are designed to help students learn how to 
think, rather than what to think. 

The North Dakota Department of Public Instruction began offer- 
ing three teacher training programs and a four-part Native curricu- 
lum built around the North Dakota Centennial celebration after a 
survey showed that 99 percent of North Dakota teachers did not 
have books about Native Americans in their classrooms. Other find- 
ings of the survey showed 75 percent of the teachers did not fre- 
quently plan activities reflective of cultural diversity, while 91 per- 
cent did not plan activities reflecting Native culture. “ 

A school in Pawnee, Oklahoma, has found a unique solution to a 
political, social, and legal dilemma. Helen Norris’s Indian students 
visited Pawnee homelands in Republic, Nebraska, and toured the 
original earth lodges of their ancestors. In 1985, 42 students and 
their parents traveled to the Field Museum in Chicago to visit the 
largest display of Pawnee artifacts in the United States. In 1988 
students wrote to the Nebraska Historical Society, asking the society 
to release 378 skeletal remains of their ancestors and burial goods 
that had been dug up. Their letters became part of a congressional 
hearing report and were instrumental in the reburial of 146 Pawnee, 
Arikara, and Wichita ancestors who had been put on public display 
in Salina, Kansas. The students also raised money for a Pendleton 
blanket to he placed on one of the bodies for burial. This labor of love 
encompassed cultural and linguistic tradition, writing, speaking, 
listening, researching, and communicating with elders, staff, attor- 
neys, legislators, and one another. H 

United National Indian Tribal Youth (UNITY), an Oklahoma- 
based national organization, is involved in activities that enable 
Native youth to meet together, define problems, identify solutions, 
and develop strategies to address their concerns. The goals and 
strategies are built around spirituality, unity, environment, heritage, 
sovereignty, family, individual, education, health, economy, sobri- 
ety, and service. 



4 t . i 



128 



It a< ming ihmxjgh TPA(iiito;G: Inc \ ai\ ;ka:»ng L*kgj , 1 s and ipto Cmw uia 



The Cheyenne Circle Keepers consists of children in four western 
Oklahoma communities who have pledged to keep their bodies, 
minds, and spirits strong— in holding with ancient tradition. They 
have special interactions with their Native elders, learning the his- 
tory and traditions that keep a people strong. Their gourd dance clan 
is a powerful presence, showing what love for children and elders 
can produce. 

The value of embracing our cultural loots is echoed by Paul Hover: 

If we have learned anything from our relationship with the 
American Indian, it is that people cannot be torn from their 
cultural roots without harm. To the extent that we fail to assist 
Native Americans through their own institutions, to reclaim 
their past and secure their future, we are compounding the 
costly errors of the past. 4 ' 



A Call for a National Native Curriculum Project 

To meet the education needs of Native students, it is essential that 
wc establish a National Native Curriculum Project, funded by the 
U.S. Department of Education, as an entitlement based on treaty 
rights. The need is clear, not only for Native students but for all 
students, to create more accurate learning experiences related to 
American Indians and Alaska Natives. 

This National Native Curriculum Project should have a central 
office, director, and staff of Native curriculum developers with years 
of experience in Native communities and education. Regional offices 
should be established in each of the identified cultural areas to 
develop locally researched Native curricula that accurately reflect 
the lifeways of the people. The results would necessarily he tribal- 
specific, nonstereotypical, authentic, and free of cultural bias. All 
regional centers would feed into the national center (and vice versa). 
The result would he a curriculum of empowerment for students, 
enhanced by the generous contributions of all Native groups for all 
Native children. 'Phis curriculum, accompanied by accurate resource 
materials, would be placed in every school in the United States to 
bring children honor and to ensure that future generations may 
benefit from this decisive action. 



129 w, 



Linda Skinni i? 



In this way, we can change years of misinformation to achieve a 
future that goes beyond the “Thanksgiving and Indians” syndrome. 
The contributions of Native peoples would be discussed, along with 
heroes and holidays, resulting in a higher level of learning. The 
structure of the curriculum itself would be transformed to enable 
students to view concepts, issues, events, and themes from the unique 
and diverse perspectives of Native groups. Then, and only then, will 
students gain the necessary level of critical thinking to make thought- 
ful decisions on issues and proactive personal choices. 

In conclusion, we must join together now to make a good life for 
our children and our children's children seven generations to come. 
Creating caring classroom communities that nurture the human 
spirit, regardless of ethnicity, is the beginning step in building an 
educational environment that does not assault any student's culture. 

Together, we can move from the inaccurate and trivial to the 
meaningful essence of who we all are. We can work together to create 
acceptance and understanding that will naturally cany us to real 
relationships with one another. We can foster authentic interaction 
based on respect and trust, which will lead to the education of 
children who have powerful voices for peaceful relations with others. 
Now there is a curriculum with meaning for all of us. Our children 
can grow up respected and respectful, having the inner resources 
and strength to act with love, wisdom, reason, and responsibility. 
They can build their world with the power of love and acceptance. 

We are responsible for what we teach and how we teach. Rethink- 
ing our approach to a curriculum for diversity will send a message. 
We value one another. We believe we can create unity in all our 
diversity. We believe our children have the critical thinking skills to 
examine our collective histories, not just memorize dates and facts, 
hut to comprehend meaning, practice application, analyze, synthe- 
size. and evaluate critically. We can trust our children. Can they trust 
us? In America at the close of the twentieth century, democratic 
values of tolerance, acceptance, respect, responsibility, and justice 
remain the cornerstones of our way of life. Can we rekindle our 
passion for “liberty and justice for all" and purposefully create a life 
that reflects what we value? 

Be models of liberty. Be models of justice. Kmbrace our diversity, 
for it truly is our greatest strength. 



i « • 



130 




Teaching ihkough Tractions: Incorporating Language* and Cujhri !ni» > Civrh hi a 



Notes 

1. Linda Skinner (Choctaw) teaches in Edmond. Oklahoma. Public 
Schools. 

2. See Pratt, Battlefield and Classroom. 

3. House Executive Document, 93-97. 

4. In Bilingual and ESL Classrooms, Ovando and Collier observe the 
following: "Many studies have shown that cognitive and academic develop- 
ment in Li has a strong, positive effect of L2 development for academic 
purposes. . . . Academic skills, literacy development, concept formation, 
subject knowledge, and learning strategies all transfer from Ll and L2 as the 
vocabulary and communicative patterns are developed in L2 to express that 
academic knowledge. (JimJ Cummins . . . refers to this phenomenon as 
‘common underlying proficiency' or the ‘interdependence' of languages. 
Cummins’ view is supported by research in linquistie universals, which has 
found many properties common across all languages at deep underlying 
structural levels. . . . Only in surface structures do languages appear to be 
radically different. But still deeper than language itself is the underlying 
knowledge base and life experience that students have development in Ll, all 
of which is available to them once they have the ability to express that 
knowledge in L2." 

5. See U.S. Board of Indian Commissioners, 1870 Annual Report. 

6. Medicine, Speaking Indian. 3. 

7. Brunn, Ethnohistories . 12. 

8. See Jamieson, The Aboriginal Language Policy Study. 

9. McGee, Bureau of Ethnology Report, 11. 

10. See Reeves, “The High Cost of Endurance." 

It. Bauman, A Guide to Issues in Indian Language Retention , 7. 

12. Ibid., 9. 

13. Ibid.. 10. 

14. Ibid., II. 

15. See Inouye, Congressional Record, Senate. 

16. Silentman, Revaluing Indigenous Language Resources. 

17. See Littlebear, “A Model." 

18. See American Indian Policy Review Commission, Report on Indian 
Education. 

19. Tippeconnic. American Indians. 256. 

20. Kaupp. personal correspondence, November 1990. 

21. Textbooks perpetuate inaccuracies and myths about Indians. Non- 
Native authors write most textbooks and trade books. Most are filled with 



131 



* 



k > . 



propaganda from mainstream society's perspective including untruths, half- 
truths, obvious omissions, and terminology laden with cultural bias. Virtually 
no mandated local, state, or federal classes in the United States offer an 
accurate history of Natives in America (prehistory, transition, contemporary, 
and implications for the future). 

22. Often, memorization of verbal laheis is confused with the infinite 
creativity of speaking a language. 

23. See Boyer, Xatire American Colleges. 

24- Ibid., 9H. 

25- Ibid. 

26. See Skinner, Teaching Through Traditions . 

27. See Boyer, Xatire American Colleges. 

28. See Watahomigie's testimony, Indian Nations At Risk (INAR) Task 
Force, Indian Sat ions At Risk . 

29. See Graves's testimony. INAR Task f orce. Indian Xations At Risk. 

30. Public Law 100-297, Section 5106. 

31. See (Iravess testimony, INAR Task Force. Indian Xations At Risk. 

32. Ibid. 

33- See Kulas's testimony. INAR Task Force, Indian Xations At Risk. 

34. See Norris's testimony, INAR Task Force, Indian Xations At Risk . 

35. See Boyer. Xatire American Colleges. 




Bibliography 

American Indian Policy Review Commission. Report on Indian Education. 
Washington. DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 1976. 

Ashton-Warner. Sylvia. Teacher. New York: Simon and Schuster, 1963. 

Bauman, dames. .*1 Guide to Issues in Indian Language Retention. Washing- 
ton, DC: Outer for Applied Linguistics, 1980. 

Boyer, Paul. “Higher Kducation and Native American Society." Journal of 
American Indian Higher Education 1(1): 10-11, 14-18 (1989). 

. Xatire American Colleges: Progress and Prospects. Princeton, Nd: 

Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching, 1997. 

Brunn, Michael. “Kthnohistories: learning through the Stories of Life Kxperi- 
ences." Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American Kducational 
Research Association. New Orleans. I A, April 1994. KKIC Document Repro- 
duction Service No. KD 374 94T 

Cummins, dim. Empowering Minority Students. Sacramento. CA: Association 
for Bilingual Kducation. 1989. 



1 * ' 



13 ? 



IlACMlNC* Ih'.’w.k. -M L '<■5 •» *M ! iN'*. L Af »Vl'*‘ - -t s *'Nf> Ct ! OU ,; t 'NIO CoW'l '!i A 



Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. Indian Nation* At Risk: Summary of Issues 
<V* Recommendations from Regional Hearings, July-Octobcr 1990, Wash- 
ington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 1990. ERIC Document Repro- 
duction Service No. ED 341 543. 

. Open Discussion with National Advisory C 'o unset on Indian Education 

and Task Force Members. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 
1990. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 34! 542. 

Inouye, Daniel. §13851 & §13852 Congressional Record, Senate. 23 October 
1990. 

Jamieson. M. E. The Aboriginal l. any uaye To/icy Study: IJ We Can Speak and 
Understand Our I. any uaye. Our Elders Can Tell Cs Who fie Arc. 
Summerstown, Ontario: National Indian Brotherhood, /Assembly of First 
Nations, 1988. 

Leap. W. L "American Indian language Maintenance." In Annual Review of 
Anthropotoyy . vol. 10, edited by B. I. Siegel. Palo Alto: Annual Reviews, 
1981. 

Lilllebear, Richard E. "A Model for Promoting Native America language Pres- 
ervation and 'reaching." In Stabilizing Indigenous Language: A Center for 
Excellence in Education Monograph , edited by Gina Cantoni. Flagstaff: 
Northern Arizona University. 1996. ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 395 736. 



McGee, William John. Bureau of Ethnology Report. Smithsonian Institution. 
Washington, DC: DeVinne Press, 1897. 

Medicine, Bea. "Speaking Indian: Parameters of language Use Among Ameri- 
can Indians." In EOCES. voi. 6. Rosslyn, VA: National Clearinghouse for 
Bilingual Education, 1981. 

Northwest Regional Educational laboratory, and Indian Tribes. Indian Read- 
ing Scries. Inchelium, \VA: Sunrise Educational Publishers, n.d. 

Ovaiulo. Carlos and Virginia P. Collier. Bilingual and ESI. Classrooms: 
Teaching in Multicultural Contexts. New York: McGraw I till, 1998. 

Pratt. Richard Henry. Battlefield and Classroom: Four Decades with the 
American Indian. ISO "-toog. New Haven. CT: Yale University Press, 1964- 



Reeves. Sandra M. “The High Cost of Endurance." Education Week, 2 August 
1989. 



Senate Special Subcommittee on Indian Education. Indian Education: A .Va- 
tina at Tragedy .1 Xationali \ hal/enge . 9 1st Cong.. 1st sess., S. Rept . 9 1 -50 1 , 
1969. (Also known as the Kennedy Report.) 

Silentman. Irene. “Revaluing Indigenous Lmguage Resources 'I'll rough Lan- 
guage Planning." Bilingual Research Journal 19(1): 179-82 (1995). 

Skinner. Linda. Teaching Through Traditions: Incorporating A ’afire Lan- 
guages and ('ultures into Curricula. Washington, IK*: Indian Nations At 
Risk Task Force, U.S. Department of Education. 1992. 

. Wa lk ‘ l.uli ' Indian Si In u >t( 'ultural Em ir< man •ntaf-Si *, asi matt urrii •//- 
luni Outline. Developed with Elders and Communitv. Franks I .adding. WA. 
1980-81. I ; .R1C Document Reproduction Service No. I’D 343 ”6 4. 



^ ^1 A /* 






Linda $k<nni& 



Tippeconnic, John W., III. “American Indians: Education, Demographics, and 
the 1990s." In U.S. Race Relations in the 1980s and 1990s: Challenges and 
Alternatives, edited by Gait E. Thomas. New York: 1 lemisphert* Publishing, 
1990. 

U.S. Board of Indian Commissioners. Annual Report to the Secretary of the 
Interior for the Yeur 18~0. Washington. DC: U.S. Government Printing 
Office. 1870. 

. [eleventh/ Annual Report to the Secretary of the Interior for the Year 

lS"9. Washington. DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 1879. 

. Annual Report to the Secretary of the Interior for the Year 1SS 7 

Washington. DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 1887. 



1 

J 




134 




Chapter 6 




The Native American Learner and 
Bicultural Science Education 



(ikkcokv A. C.vn-.n: 1 



Cultural revitalization and restoration has resulted from 
education from a Xat ire perspective. This has been one of the 
positive aspects of the educational emphasis upon A alive 
language and culture which has remained vibrant despite all 
efforts to change our institutions. 

—Boa Medicine. “Contemporary Cultural Revitalization" 



U nderstanding the nature of the Native American learner must 
guide efforts to improve the education of Native Americans. 
To this end, studies concerning how best to educate Native 
Americans have been conducted since the I9ft()s/ These studies 
have advocated comprehensively exploring the unique and cultur- 
ally conditioned learning characteristics of Native Americans and 
applying such research to improving Native American education. 
Unfortunately, few of these studies have focused on the distinct 
culturally conditioned learning characteristics of Native Americans. 
Instead, most approaches have attempted to adjust Native students 
to the learning norms most valued within mainstream American 
education. Basing their approach on the assumption that Native 
American children suffer from cultural deprivation, educators have 



1a; 




Giucoky A. Cajeu 



attempted to change the learning style of Native Americans through 
educational reconditioning, in this way helping students conform to 
the mainstream education system. The record of Native American 
education— from the earliest missionary' attempts to the boarding 
school era to public schooling in the mid-1980s— shows the preva- 
lence of such attempts. 

Fortunately, with the new emphasis on self-determination and 
the concurrent onset of Native American cultural revitalization* this 
situation has slowly begun to change. However, to strengthen the 
movement toward more culturally relevant and learner-sensitive 
educational approaches, some important factors must be consid- 
ered. 

Native Americans have undergone periodic adaptations of lan- 
guage and culture during the 1900s. The nature and degree of this 
transition varies according to individual, social, and environmental 
circumstances. Many Native American students can be classified as 
being English dominant in their language usage. Many have encoun- 
tered in their homes and communities varying degrees of tradition- 
alism in interpreting the natural world. Some identify strongly with 
both the cultural and linguistic revitalization of their particular tribal 
group. These factors have important ramifications for teaching sci- 
ence to such students. For instance, identifying with tribal roots can 
strongly motivate students to learn about science and its role in 
some aspect of their tribal heritage. 

While some students are rediscovering their tribal identities, oth- 
ers are truly bilingual and bicultural. With these students, the bicul- 
tural approach to science is equally important, but for different 
reasons. Such students generally want to continue to learn and live 
within the context of both cultures. Instruction in bicultural science 
for these students can result in a positive attitude toward science and 
reaffirmation of their tribal identity. Another reason to use a bicul- 
tural approach to science instruction is that it provides a wav to 
bridge differences in worldview concerning natural phenomena. 



Native American Valuing in Transition 

For Native Americans, participation in the U.S. education system 
has always presented the challenge of coming to terms with two 
distinctly different value orientations. The psychological conflict 



136 



I 



The Native American Learner and Bicuiujral Science Education 



that can result often lies at the heart of poor academic achievement 
by a large number of Native Americans. 

Successful learning is tied to the degree of personal relevance the 
student perceives in the educational task. The basis for this premise 
stems from the idea that motivation toward any pursuit is energized 
by the individual’s own constellation of personal and sociocultural 
values/* A Native student’s constellation of values has ancient and 
well-developed roots in the tribal social psyche. It is because of these 
deep-rooted values that unconscious aspects of Native American 
social personalities remain so durable and relatively visible through 
layers of acculturation. Understanding and using this cultural con- 
stellation of values can provide the key to motivating Native Ameri- 
cans to learn science. 

Research from a variety of sources supports the notion that an 
insightful, well-integrated, and consistent cognitive map and 
worldview leads to a healthy concept of self and positive social 
adjustment. The opposite condition is usually apparent when chronic 
inconsistencies and conflicts arise between the internal constella- 
tion of values and those of the external social environment. The 
accelerated rate of change in Native American cultures since World 
War II has increased the inconsistences in worldview and cognitive 
mapping in the social, cultural, and psychological fabric of Native 
American life. As a result, many people experience tremendous in- 
ternal tension. Chronic cultural conflict has given rise to a variety of 
emotional and social problems, the ramifications of which are poorly 
understood. 

Understanding the core cultural values of Native American tribal 
groups, and how such values differ from the implied values inherent 
in American education, is essential to bicultural education. But what 
exactly are these core values, where do they reside, and how are they 
involved in the current transition of Native American valuing? The 
following example from Pueblo Indian philosophy may illustrate the 



origins of a particular set of Native American core values. 

According to Torcy Parley of Laguna Pueblo, in Keresan Pueblo 
Indian philosophy, the mythological being, Thinking Woman plays 
an important role in the process of human valuing. Thinking Woman 



orders the universe by maintaining the balanced interrelationship 



among four worlds of being. The first world involves the collectivity 






of prior human experience (similar to Carl .Jung's collective uncon- 
scious). The second world involves learning and the development of 
the individual. The third world involves the development of think- 
ing, especially at its higher levels. The fourth world synthesizes all 
life within oneself, the individual life cycle. These worlds are so 
intertwined there is perpetual movement of our being in each world 
simultaneously. 1 

In contrast to the notion of some scholars that Native American 
cultures tend not to conceptualize abstractly, one can see that the 
Kcresan philosophical concept of Thinking Woman is highly ab- 
stract. In fact, the example of Thinking Woman as an abstract con- 
cept requiring very creative conceptualization is characteristic of the 
traditional worldviews underlying most Native American philoso- 
phies. In addition, constructs such as Thinking Woman directly 
influence the traditional, spiritual, and intellectual valuing within 
the framework of the traditional culture. F. Strum and Purley ex- 
plain, for instance, that two interrelated valuing processes are in- 
volved in the concept of Thinking Woman and the four worlds of 
being. The first is called Ma-s lira, which refers to immediate percep- 
tions and the valuing therein based on the individual's experience of 
the immediate environment. The second is called Shac-tah-ca, or 
like (his it is, which refers to learning by being shown and the valuing 
that results from such teaching. Thinking Woman can be thought of 
as a process and frame of reference upon which core cultural values 
are formed. The goal of such a valuing process is to achieve a balance 
of those things that are valuable to the life and harmony of the 
Kcresan. 

Thinking Woman represents an ideal philosophical construct from 
which traditional values of the Kcresan are expressed. However, the 
increasing assimilation of U.S. mainstream values by Pueblo Indians 
is greatly changing this traditional framework for valuing. Other 
Native American cultures are experiencing similar transformations. 

One can say in reference to contemporary Pueblo Indian valuing 
that four categories are reflected in the personal value constellation 
of individuals. These include the Pueblo-Indian-lhat-is, the Pueblo- 
tndian-in-transition, the newfound-Puehlo-lndian, and the Pueblo- 
Indian-thal-isn't. The Pueblo-lndian-that-is lives life according to a 
set of values firmly rooted in the traditional Pueblo mind-set. The 

1 *1 « A *> 0 




The Na11V[ AmSRiC AU LlAWJlW AND BlOUW.'HA, S( lfN< I Epuc.ahi'n 



Pueblo-Indian-in-transition lives according to value sets ot both the 
traditional Pueblo culture and mainstream society. The nevvfouiul- 
Pueblo-Indian is usually an individual who has not been raised in a 
Pueblo context and is consciously in search of his or her traditional 
roots. The value set of this group is externally and acutely oriented to 
an idealized standard of traditional Pueblo culture. The Pueblo- 
Indian-who-isnt, for a variety of environmental and personal rea- 
sons, has consciously decided to adopt mainstream cultural values/’ 

In reality, the above categories depend on local circumstances, 
and an individual may alternate among the value orientations dur- 
ing different phases of his or her life. Human cultural valuing is a 
dynamic ever-evolving process, and human cognitive development 
does not fit neatly into categories. However, the example ofThinking 
Woman and Pueblo valuing illustrates the kinds ot value sets charac- 
teristic of ail Native American cultures and individuals existing within 
contemporary American society. 

Pueblo Indians are among the most tenacious of American Indi- 
ans in preserving their traditional culture. Yet, even among the 
Pueblos, the transition of values directly affects attitudes toward 
education. The core cultural values of Native Americans and their 
resultant influences on attitudes and behaviors are relatively sub- 
merged since such values tend to operate at the subconscious level. 
It is this characteristic subconscious influence of core cultural values 
that must he addressed by any educational strategy. 

Because core values invariably affect education outcomes, it is 
important that the teacher, teaching methods, and curricular con- 
tent reflect this dimension of the learner. It follows, then, that an 
effective and natural way for learning to begin is to help students 
become aware of their core values. This can he accomplished when 
the teacher shows the students how the content presented in a 
particular subject area (such as science) is relevant to or otherwise 
enhances an understanding of the students' core cultural values. 

A student's core cultural values can act as psychological vtwryiz- 
ers powering the development of a positive sell -image. In a bieul- 
t u nil approach to education, helping students bring core cultural 
values into their conscious awareness for examination is a transfor- 
mational necessity. This process sets the stage for students to syn- 
thesize creatively and interpret these values in new and psyehologi- 






GRir.cn> < A. C--a u 



cally rewarding contexts. Based on these assumptions, recognizing 
the core cultural value structure of students becomes a powerful 
learning aid if teachers use this insight into their students’ minds 
and lives in creative and constructive wavs. 



Traditional Native American Values and Behaviors 

The following paragraphs draw contrasts between selected and 
widely shared Native American core cultural values and non-Native 
American values and associated behaviors and attitudes. These brief 
descriptions are somewhat idealized. They cannot reflect the wide 
variations within Native American communities that result from 
d He re nt levels of cultural assimilation among individuals nor the 
differences among various Native American cultures across the North 
American continent; yet, these values are common enough that 
readers may have encountered them already. 

Personal differences. Native Americans traditionally have re- 
spected the unique individual differences among people. Common 
Native American expressions of this value include staying out of 
others' affairs and verbalizing personal thoughts or opinions only 
when asked. Returning this courtesy is expected by many Native 
Americans as an expression of mutual respect. 

Quietness. Quietness or silence is a value that serves nianv 
purposes in Indian life. Historically the cultivation of this value 
contributed to survival. In social situations, when they are angry or 
uncomfortable, many Indians remain silent. Non-Indians some- 
times view this trait as indifference, when in reality, it is a very 
deeply embedded form of Indian interpersonal etiquette. 

Patience. In Native American life, the virtue of patience is based 
on the belief that all things unfold in time. Like silence, patience was 
a survival virtue in earlier times. In social situations, patience is 
needed to demonstrate respect for individuals, reach group consen- 
sus, and allow time for “the second thought.” Overt pressure on 
Indian students to make quick decisions or responses without delib- 
eration should he avoided in most educational situations. 

Open work ethic. In traditional Indian life, work is always 
directed to a distinct purpose and is done when it needs to he done. 
The nonmaterialistie orientation of many Indians is one outcome of 



L l 



) I 



MO 



Tuf Native American Learner anp BiruiUiRAj S.'ifN; \ Ep'Icahon 



this value. Only that which is actually needed is accumulated through 
work. In formal education, a rigid schedule of work for work’s sake 
(busy work) needs to be avoided because it tends to move against the 
grain of this traditional value. Schoolwork must be shown to have an 
immediate and authentic purpose. 

Mutualism. As a value, attitude, and behavior, mutualism per- 
meates everything in the traditional Indian social fabric. Mutualism 
promotes a sense of belonging and solidarity with group members 
cooperating to gain group security and consensus. In American 
education, the tendency has been to stress competition and work for 
personal gain over cooperation. The emphasis on grades and per- 
sonal honors are examples. In dealing with Indian students, this 
tendency must be modified by incorporating cooperative activities 
on an equal footing with competitive activities in the learning envi- 
ronment. 



Nonverbal orientation. Traditionally most Indians have tended 
to prefer listening rather than speaking. Talking for talking’s sake is 
rarely practiced. Talk, just as work, must have a purpose. Small talk 
and light conversation are not especially valued except among very 
close acquaintances. In Indian thought, words have a primordial 
power so that when there is a reason for their expression, it is 
generally done carefully. In social interaction, the emphasis is on 
affective rather than verbal communication. When planning and 
presenting lessons, it is best to avoid pressing a class discussion or 
asking a long series of rapid-fire questions. This general characteris- 
tic explains why many Indian students feel more comfortable with 
lectures or demonstrations. Teachers can effectively use the inquiry 
approach, role playing, or simulation to demonstrate they have a full 
understanding of this characteristic. 



Seeing and listening. In earlier times, hearing, observing, and 
memorizing were important skills since practically all aspects ov 
Native American culture were transferred orally or through example. 
Storytelling, oratory, and experiential and observational learning 
were all highly developed in Native American cultures. In an educa- 
tion setting, the use of lectures and demonstrations, modified ease 
studies, storytelling, and experiential activities can all be highly 
effective. A balance among teaching methods that emphasize listen- 



\A\ 





Gnr f.orjv A. On u 



ing and observation, as well as speaking, is an important consider- 
ation. 



Time orientation. In the Indian world, things happen when 
they are ready to happen. Time is relatively flexible and generally not 
structured into compartments as it is in modern society. Because 
structuring time and measuring it into precise units are hallmarks of 
public schools in the United States, disharmony can arise between 
the tradition-oriented Indian learner and the material being pre- 
sented. The solution is to allow for scheduling flexibility within 
practical limits. 



Orientation to present. Traditionally most Indians have ori- 
ented themselves to the present and the immediate tasks at hand. 
This orientation stems from the deep philosophical emphasis on 
being rather than on becoming. Present needs and desires tend to 
take precedence over vague future rewards. Although this orienta- 
tion has changed considerably over the past 40 years, vestiges are 
still apparent in the personalities of many Native Americans. Given 
this characteristic, the learning material should have a sense of 
immediate relevancy for the time and place of each student. 



Practicality. Indians tend to be practical minded. Many Indians 
have less difficulty comprehending educational materials and ap- 
proaches that are concrete or experiential rather than abstract and 
theoretical. Given this characteristic, learning and teaching should 
begin with numerous concrete examples and activities to be followed 
by discussion of the abstraction. 



Holistic orientation. Indian cultures, like most primal cul- 
tures, have a long-standing and well-integrated orientation to the 
whole. This is readily apparent in various aspects of Indian cultures, 
ranging from healing to social organization. Presenting educational 
material from a holistic perspective is an essential and natural strat- 
egy for teaching Indian people. 



Spirituality. Religious thought and action are integrated into 
every aspect of the sociocultural fabric of traditional Native Ameri- 
can life. Spirituality is considered a natural component of every- 
thing. When presenting new concepts, teachers should keep in mind 
that all aspects o{ Indian cultures are touched by it. Discussing 
general aspects of spirituality and religion is an important part of the 



1 r x 
] S AA7 



Tuf NaIivE AmFHu'AN Lf ARNH? ANf) BlCUllUPAl SrilNCt £pnr A1ION 



curriculum, although precautions must be taken to respect the integ- 
rity, sacred value, and inherent privacy of each Indian tribe's reli- 
gious practices. Ideally all discussions of Native American religion 
should be kept as general and nonspecific as possible. Specifics 
should be discussed only in the proper context and with the neces- 
sary permission of the particular tribe involved. 

Caution. The tendency toward caution in unfamiliar personal 
encounters and situations has given rise to the stereotypical por- 
trayal of the stoic Indian. This characteristic is closely related to the 
placidity and quiet behavior of many Indian people. In many cases, 
such caution results from a basic fear regarding how their thoughts 
and behavior will be accepted by others with whom they are unfamil- 
iar or in a new situation with which they have no experience. Educa- 
tors should make every effort to alleviate these fears and show that 
students' subjective orientations arc accepted by the teacher. To the 
extent possible, the class and lesson presentation should be made as 
informal and open as possible. Open friendliness and sincerity are 
key factors in easing these tensions. 

Classroom discipline. Most Indian people value the cultiva- 
tion of self-discipline and rarely resort to direct punishment or 
demeaning personal criticism. Behavior is regulated through group 
and peer pressure. Withdrawing approval, expressing shame, and 
reflecting unacceptable behavior back to the individual are the main 
forms of punishment in the traditional Indian context. In the class- 
room, direct and demeaning personal criticism in front of others is 
considered rude and disrespectful and can lead to “loss of face" and 
complete withdrawal and alienation by the student. Withdrawing 
approval and communicating clearly the consequences of breeching 
standard behavior are key considerations in this situation/' 

Field-sensitive orientation (group orientation, a sensi- 
tivity for a field of social relationships). A significant number 
of Native Americans tend to express field-sensitive behaviors as 
opposed to field-independent behavioral characteristics." 'This has 
direct implications for the learning styles Native Americans exhibit. 
The most important implications include the following: Native Ameri- 
can learners will respond more readily to personalized encourage- 
ment coupled with guidance and demonstration from the teacher; 
Native American learners tend to base much of their motivation foi 



143 



learning on the affective relationship with the teacher; and Native 
American learners tend to respond best to learning formats that are 
group oriented and humanized through the extensive use of narra- 
tion, humor, drama, and affective modeling in the presentation of 
content. 8 



Implementing Biculturai Science Education 

The scientific rationalistic viewpoint has become an integral part 
of the American education structure. This viewpoint has become so 
ingrained in the psyche that most Americans view reality in no other 
way. Because of this conditioning, science education in most schools 
is the subject most insensitive to the diverse sociocultural environ- 
ments from which students come. 

Learning is tied to the job. The following example demon- 
strates the differences and possible points of antagonism among 
European American and Native American approaches to teaching 
and learning science. 

In Native American society, learning how to hunt is a programmed 
sequence of observations and experiences tied to a process: 



1. learning the habits of the animal to be hunted— via mythology, 
listening, and observation; 

2. learning how to track, read appropriate signs, and stalk the 
animal— via observation, intuition, and reasoning; 

3. learning the appropriate respect and ritual that is to be ex- 
tended to the animal— via a “mind-set"; 



4. 



learning how to care properly for the carcass of the animal once 
it has been taken— via an ecological ethic and technology; 



5. 



learning how to utilize fully the various 
taken— via technology. 



parts of the animal 



All of these processes require a variety of teaching techniques that 
range from formal instruction to experiential learning by doing. 
They must take place within a particular contextual framework nec- 
essary for conveying these forms of knowledge.** 

This type of learning is directly tied to the job or activity to he 
completed and involves teaching to accomplish a specific goal. Stu- 




1 r 1 AA 




Th( Nauve American Learner and Bicuiiurai Science Educauon 



dents learn much by careful observation. Within this traditional 
process of teaching and learning, teachers are many, and situations 
are numerous. Learning how to hunt becomes a part of the life cycle 
of the Native American individual and community. In Native Ameri- 
can cultures, education is grounded in the challenge of learning 
practical skills and knowledge in a real-life context. 

Modern European American education, however, imparts to stu- 
dents conceptual frames of reference that prepare them for future 
tasks deemed important in an industrial and technological society. 
Learning material is typically laid out in a distinct linear pattern. 'Hie 
curriculum is mapped out hierarchically, beginning with the objec- 
tives for each grade level and moving to more specific unit and 
individual lesson plans, each with their own objectives and associ- 
ated learning activities. 

This highly structured and programmed approach is useful in that 
it allows for easier teaching of large numbers of students and a 
greater consistency in what is learned. Yet, if one views this ap- 
proach in terms of addressing individual student learning styles, 
many problems become apparent. When looking at Native American 
students with some understanding of cultural influences on learning 
style, the teacher encounters major difficulties with this approach. 

Much of modern education involves to one extent or another 
imposing a preconceived psychological pattern of “right ways to do 
things” and “wrong ways to do things.” In public schools, this pattern 
involves imposing a modern American societal will on all those who 
participate in American public education. However, in imposing 
such a societal will upon what is taught and how it is to be learned, 
many students arc denied use of their own innate repertoire of 
intelligences and cultural styles of learning. Learning by simply 
doing, experiencing, and making connections that coincide with the 
personal and cultural intelligences and learning styles students bring 
with them from home can be significantly diminished through such a 
homogenization of the education process. 



Understanding what constitutes reality' for different cultural groups 
and establishing communication about nature that is meaningful for 
each are basic aims of bicultural science education. The preliminary 
steps toward this end necessarily begin with a careful study of bow 
students perceive familiar natural phenomena. In reference to Na- 



145 i r v r 




Gpcgorv A CAjfif 



tive American attitudes and ideas about these phenomena, one often 
finds a mixture of observations based upon combinations of folk, 
experiential, and school-derived sources. Such observations may 
appear to be contradictory-, and a teacher might wonder how these 
disparate combinations of ideas about nature can be comfortably 
accommodated within a single student's understanding of the world. 
To a non-Native American observer, this mixture of perspectives 
may seem to be a paradox that must be reconciled. 

Studies of cognitive development, however, imply we are all ca- 
pable of having more than one internally consistent mind-set con- 
cerning natural reality. 1 " The conditioning of Western scientific 
schooling may make it seem otherwise. This conditioning of stu- 
dents to think in only one way regarding the explanation of natural 
phenomena is a key concern in enhancing creative scientific thinking 
because such conditioning eventually stifles creative learning . 11 

In addition, one often finds that opportunities to learn about or 
practice the skills necessary for Western science arc not present 
within the student's home. This is common in many Native Ameri- 
can households. However, this docs not necessarily mean that stu- 
dents have not acquired skills in applying cultural knowledge .to their 
natural environment. On the contrary, many Native American stu- 
dents from traditional backgrounds have gained relatively rich expe- 
riences through a variety of cultural and practical encounters with 
the natural environment. Hut the sources of knowledge of nature and 
the explanations of natural phenomena within a traditional Native 
American context are often at odds with what is learned in “school 
science" and proposed by Western scientific philosophy. Herein lies 
a very' real conflict between two distinctly different worldviews: the 
mutualistic/holistic-oriented worldview of Native American cultures 
and the rationalistic/dualistic worldview of Western science that 
divides, analyzes, and objectifies. 

In regard to this conflict, science educators have generally- adopted 
an either/or attitude. That is, most science educators have deter- 
mined that if non-Western explanations of natural phenomena do 
not fit the Western scientific framework, they are not scientific. This 
is not a new attitude. From the earliest days of missionary' education 
to the days of Bureau of Indian Affairs (HI A) boarding school educa- 
tion to the present, the attitude of replacing the “primitive" beliefs of 



1 146 




Tut N ATiVf Aupacan LrAW-jfP ANf • Science Education 



Native Americans with the “correct" beliefs of science has been an 
integral part of the curriculum. Such a difference in perspective has 
caused much conflict in Native American students, families, com- 
munities, and schools. 

What measures can science educators take to decrease the con- 
frontation of a student's cultural worldview with that of Western 
science? First, introduce students to the basic skills of science. Use 
familiar objects or events to build upon students' innate interests 
and curiosity. Students then become involved with science as a 
process of observing, classifying, collecting information, and making 
generalizations with reference to phenomena they know about. Sec- 
ond, or.ee students learn to apply these basic skills, compare ways in 
which science as a thought process is exemplified in students' par- 
ticular cultures and in that of the larger society. Third, analyze 
various symbols as they relate to explanations of natural phenomena 
in both traditional culture and Western science. Teachers should not 
present one perspective in preference to another. 

In every culture, the inherent thought process of science attempts 
to relate derived symbols of phenomena to one another in such a way 
as to develop a pattern of thought concerning those events. And 
while many Native American students may come from environments 
in which they are not exposed to, or have not developed skills re- 
quired for, the established patterns of Western science, they arc 
exposed to the process of making sense of natural phenomena. That 
is, they have some skill in relating important culturally derived 
symbols of phenomena within the framework of what is meaningful 
to them. 1 ' 

The model, or symbolic map, of concepts representing what is 
important in a particular culture's natural reality is important to the 
way members of that culture apply the science process and develop 
their mind-set. In addition, much of the communication concerning 
natural phenomena is highly contextual in Native American cul- 
tures. That is, information concerning natural phenomena is pre- 
sented in the most appropriate context by using symbolic vehicles 
such as art. myth, or ritual. Relationships among natural phenom- 
ena are observed and symbolically coded in a variety of forms based 
on experiential knowledge of the phenomena. In contrast. Western 
science is low context in terms of both communication and process- 



^ j [ ) < > 




Grfgory A. Cajfjf 



ing of information. That is, information concerning natural phe- 
nomena is often highly specific, parts oriented, and presented out- 
side of the contexts within which the phenomena naturally occur or 
are observed. Western science is based upon a set of relationships 
among concepts or theories derived from the observation of natural 
phenomena . 13 



Orientations for Implementation 

Given the differences between the way Native American cultures 
and Western science apply the science process, what are some of the 
other considerations for implementing a bicultural approach to sci- 
ence? hirst, teachers must keep in mind there is both an ideal and a 
reality in the implementation of any approach to education. Both of 
these dimensions directly affect the way a teacher teaches science. If 
a teacher begins with the premise that teaching is a communicative 
art, one can apply the appropriate research concerning the teaching, 
accumulation, and learning of language to explain the complexities 
encountered in the classroom. 

Teaching is essentially the processing and communicating of in- 
formation to students in a form they can readily understand, com- 
bined with facilitating their learning and relative cognitive develop- 
ment. Ideally the teaching methods and information presented will 
be in a form that is relevant and meaningful to the students. Since 
language is the dominant mode of communication in teaching and 
learning, studies of language acquisition are important sources for 
understanding the dynamics of this overall process. Research shows 
that after a language is learned, it is initially used as the basis for 
learning subsequent languages. We actively engage in a gradual, 
subconscious, and creative process to acquire the knowledge and 
ability to use a language and understand its underlying assumptions 
and cultural frames of reference . 11 

People apparently learn a new language in two characteristic 
ways— through unconscious acquisition or through a more conscious 
process. The most natural way to learn a language requires no formal 
teaching. Instead, it involves immersion in the environment in which 
the particular language is spoken. The other method requires the 
formal study of how a particular language is structured. This in- 



] ,s:# '48 




Tut Nahvl American Learner and Btcunuwvi Science Epucaiion 

eludes learning grammatical rules, correctness of form, and other 
technical requirements .’ 5 

If one views science as a special kind of language for communicat- 
ing information about nature, the method of learning a language has 
very important implications for teaching and learning science. Sci- 
ence can be learned the same way young children naturally acquire a 
whole language system by being in an environment in which that 
language is cultivated. This implies children must be exposed to an 
environment that is acquisition-rich in the language of science. Ide- 
ally both the home and school environments should offer many 
opportunities to practice and develop the application of the science 
process. However, this is rarely the case. The task becomes one of 
creating acquisition-rich, science-process environments in schools. 
Elements composing such environments might include various op- 
portunities to encounter the natural environment: field trips; visits 
to appropriate museums and national or state parks; art, social 
science, or culturally related projects dealing with the science pro- 
cess; storytelling or guest speakers; hands-on activities involving 
science as process; and the creative presentation of science as both a 
discipline and a cultural system of thought 

Another useful concept in understanding the acquisition of sci- 
ence language and literacy is the relevant-input hypothesis. 1 " This 
hypothesis suggests that a key to acquiring a second language is a 
source of content that is familiar, easy to understand, interesting, 
and relevant to the environment of the learner. If science can he 



thought of as a kind of literacy, the relevant-input hypothesis sug- 
gests science has a language with content, symbol systems, and 
structure that can he learned very much like other second languages. 
'Hie relevant-input hypothesis also suggests that we acquire new 
language structures through understanding messages that contain 
the new structures rather than being taught them directly. The im- 
plications of this hypothesis for teaching science are many. Students 



can learn new science constructs more effectively if thev are encoun- 



tered first in messages that contain the new constructs. Thai is, one 
can teach about science by teaching about something else and relat- 
ing that something else back to a particular aspect in science. This 
can he done by integrating ideas and structures (or constructs) from 
the arts, humanities, or social sciences into the presentation of sci- 
ence. 1 '' 



149 





Further Considerations 

There are several other essential elements in developing an effec- 
tive approach to bicultural teaching and learning. First, the mis- 
match between students’ home environments and the school envi- 
ronment is often identified as the reason for the maladjustment of 
Native American students to school. Most often the nature of the 
home environment is pointed to as the main problem. This situation 
has had important ramifications for both the emotional and cogni- 
tive growth of the Native American student within the school envi- 
ronment. The second element includes the values, religion, commu- 
nity, and social context from which Native American students derive 
their frames of reference. These factors are essential to understand- 
ing the way in which teaching/learning activities affect students. In 
addition, the styles of nonverbal communication used in classrooms 
and the social context of the school itself play important roles in 
shaping student perceptions of education. 

Tiie cultural mismatch between home and school has been the 
subject of much research in bicultural education, leading to some 
important insights that directly impact Native American education. 
For instance, researchers have found that how a minority group 
perceives itself as being viewed by the dominant culture often influ- 
ences the self-esteem and self-concept of minority students within a 
particular school environment. In other words, for practically all 
Native American students, school represents an emotional chal- 
lenge. Variations among different tribal cultures and relative levels 
of acculturation that Native American students bring with them 
from home couple with individual personality differences to form 
important aspects of their emotional structures. 

Many Native Americans view themselves as minorities, apart 
from mainstream culture, because they are deemed as such by the 
school. The fact they are frequently looked upon as being different 
has had a detrimental effect on their self-images. As they grow older, 
they begin to perceive what is valued and not valued within main- 
stream culture. They realize that much of what makes up their core 
cultural values is not seen as valid or important, and they feel com- 
pelled to either adapt or retreat. 

Native American students’ awareness of this underlying bias in 
favor of Wesle *n values often direetlv affects their attitudes toward 



1 \ 



150 




Tnt N»vmy[ Anil»;c an If ARNf i? Awn B;<r utiutfAL Sonin Et r< ai-qn 



certain school disciplines such as science. In a complex interplay 
among student, home, school, and community, many Native Ameri- 
can students internalize the assumption, based on their experiences 
in school, that the school and the rest of mainstream society expect 
less of them than of non-Indian students. As a result, students expect 
less of themselves and adopt stereotypical images of themselves and 
their cultures. To counteract this scenario, educators must make a 
great effort to encourage and expect excellence from Native Ameri- 
can students. 

Aside from home environment and culture, language is another 
major element within a bicultural education program. When one 
views teaching as a communicative art and language as the most 
basic part of that communication, the way language is used to present 
content becomes an important issue. A Native American student 
whose first language is an Indigenous dialect may come to school 
with a different orientation to sound and symbol relationships and 
may exhibit a unique pattern of thought and style of communication. 
Such differences require a sensitive approach to the presentation of 
each subject, especially modern science since it may be the least 
familiar to Native American students from a traditional home envi- 
ronment. Science as a process of thought is learned not only in 
school but also through interaction in the home and with the sur- 
rounding natural environment. This affects the student's perception 
of modern science. 

In many contemporary Native American cultures, traditional cul- 
ture and language are being revitalized. Within this context, it is not 
too uncommon to find students, as well as their parents, consciously 
involved in relearning or reviving these aspects of their cultural 
heritage. Language revitalization, along with a resurgence of cultural 
identity, will directly affect the perceptions and attitudes of Native 
American students toward science. Kven when a Native American 
student does not come from a traditional Native American back- 
ground, the bicultural approach presents important advantages. 1 *' 

Very much like the learning of a new language, the learning ot 
science can provide valuable perspectives concerning the way an- 
other culture views nature. The comparison of a particular Native 
American view of science with that of Western science can broaden 
students' perspectives of science. It can help all students become 



151 



? ( ‘ 



G^gowyA C«j[U 



more open and less isolated within the confines of a single cultural 
viewpoint. 



Discovering the Student 

Discovering and understanding the student— culturally, socially, 
and individually— is a first step in implementing a bieultural ap- 
proach to education. This recognition of diversity is often given “lip 
service” but is otherwise neglected or poorly represented in the 
development of curricula. When educators fail to consider students' 
feelings about a particular approach, they may inadvertently alien- 
ate students instead of motivating them. Sometimes, well-intended 
educators follow models too literally and overemphasize an ideal 
picture of a cultural group, thereby perpetuating stereotypes not 
based in reality, or reflecting an outmoded view of the evolving 
character of a particular cultural group. 

Such stereotyping is often the result of relying too heavily on 
ethnographic descriptions of a culture, while failing to recognize that 
cultures change and that students within those cultures may have 
very different views of those cultures than are commonly repre- 
sented in the literature. While such descriptions provide an impor- 
tant starting point, they should always be tested against reality. And 
the best way to do this is by facilitating discussion of the kinds of 
characteristics students perceive as being a part of their culture and 
experience. The reality of a culture experienced by a student may be 
a collage of values and perceptions that does not resemble very 
closely the statements in the literature. The student’s reality does not 



negate traditional realities of the culture but exists beside or inter- 
twined with these realities. 

Getting reliable information on the cultural characteristics of 
students is essential loan effective and meaningful implementation 
of the bieultural education approach. Careful observation of student 
compositions, informal discussion with students and parents, and 
involvement with cultural activities within the community are all 
helpful in developing needed perspectives. 

Learning style is a dimension of the interplay of our insider and 
outsider realities: it is conditioned by our individual and cultural 
environments. Learning style has three dimensions: ways of think- 
ing, ways of feeling, and basic inherited tendencies. Of these three 

I t ) • ">) 52 



Tm NAiivt American Learner and Bicuiiural Scun< { Ei:u< ai'n 



dimensions, the affective, or ways of feeling, is the least well under- 
stood, yet, at all stages of learning, it is one of the most influential. 20 
According to Rita Dunn, learning style 

is the way individuals concentrate on, absorb, and retain new 
or difficult information or skills. It is not the materials, meth- 
ods, or strategies that people use to learn; those are the re- 
sources that complement each person s styles. Style comprises 
a combination of environmental, emotional, sociological, physi- 
cal, and psychological elements that permit individuals to re- 
ceive, store, and use knowledge or abilities/ 1 

As stated before, a major reason many Native American students 
feel alienated from mainstream education is the incongruence be- 
tween the approaches to and expectations of learning at home and at 
school. The home learning environment of many Native Americans 
is characterized bv such factors as freedom of movement, learning 
through direct experience, and hands-on and activity-oriented learn- 
ing. These learning models emphasize visual, spatial, and kines- 
thetic orientations. In contrast, in the typical school environment, 
free movement is significantly restricted and indirect intellectual 
learning, which emphasizes verbal, mathematical, and logical orien- 
tations, is the norm. In some cases, the disparity between home and 
school environments is so great that Native American students expe- 
rience a kind of culture shock that significantly affects their attitudes 
toward school/ 2 

Of the many possible behavioral learning styles, none have been 
isolated as distinctly Native American, but some general tendencies 
are recognizable. These include a predominantly nonverbal orienta- 
tion; tendency toward visual, spatial, and kinesthetic modes of learn- 
ing; heavy reliance on visual perception and memory; preference for 
movement and activity while learning; aifd preference for process 
learning that moves from concrete examples to abstractions. 2 * 
These tendencies present major implications for science curricu- 
lum development for Native Americans. Recognizing that a cultural 
difference in affective learning style exists between the home and 
school environment is an important step toward developing more 
creative and effective teaching strategies for Native American learn- 
ers. Floy C\ Popper writes the following; 



'531 



The basic except of having instruction fit the real nature of the 
Indian learner, rather than trying to make the Indian learner fit 
the school, opens the door to recognizing individual differ- 
ences, behavioral learning styles and teaching strategies. 1 ’’ 

The following practices could help teachers get to know their 
students and successfully implement a bicultural orientation to the 
education process: 

• Explore the student’s home and cultural background. This in- 
cludes such areas as social orientation, parents' expectations of 
school, parents’ educational background, and the student’s 
affective orientations toward home and community. 

• Observe students in the school context with special attention to 
interactions with peer groups, affective emotional characteris- 
tics, styles of verbal and nonverbal communication, and pre- 
disposition toward specific teaching or learning styles (such as 
whether they are predominately relational or analytical). 

• Explore students’ expressions of core values, which can pro- 
vide insights into their cultural worldviews. The goal is to 
identify those values that can he focused upon in the develop- 
ment of curricula and that students perceive as relevant to their 
cultural identity. 

The dimensions presented here are preliminary indications of 
possibilities and considerations of the learner within bicultural edu- 
cate 'll. Each area has been addressed only in general terms. A com- 
prehensive exploration of each area would require a major research 
endeavor that could enhance an understanding of bicultural educa- 
tion and broaden the realm of possibilities for creative teaching. 



Postscript 

I began writing this chapter during a period of reflective thought 
and research from 1982 to 1986 while writing my dissertation. Thus, 
this chapter is a snapshot of one author’s early awareness of an 
approach, to making science relevant to Native American learners by 
building upon the bicultural background each student brings to 
school. ’Hi is has since become a prevalent assumption in current 



} f (,,i 154 




THt Naiive American Learner and Btuuural Science Educahon 



research regarding ways to improve science education for Native 
American and other minority students. Today bicultural consider- 
ations related to teaching and learning are termed “culturally syn- 
tonic variables,” defined as “those factors which are in harmony with 
the normative behavior, values and attitudes of a particular ethnic or 
cultural group".”** Culturally syntonic variables include curricula 
materials, preferred instructional and learning modes, language of 
instruction, peer interaction, role models, contexts of learning, and 
interaction with learning materials.-' 1 

Added to the research on culturally responsive classrooms is the 
growing literature on creative approaches to scientific inquiry, the 
multicultural history of science, brain-based methodologies, and 
constructivism in science teaching. All of these current i eas of 
research reaffirm the essential role of cultural relevance in the teach- 



ing of science. 

In recent years, Indian education literature has moved away from 
the notion that Native American learners exhibit a particular type of 
culturally determined learning style. Instead, the emerging research 
shows that Native American students reflect all possible modes of 
learning, but these learning modes arc mediated by their particular 
cultural orientation. Cultural orientation, especially in terms of lan- 
guage, continues to influence the learning and perception of science 
by Native American learners. 

During the dozen years since this chapter was first conceived, the 
loss of language among Native American youth has increased signifi- 
cantly. Today most Native American students speak only English, 
though a minority of students still understand their Native lan- 
guages. Thinking first in their Native language and then translating 
into English is no longer the case among most Native American 
students. The reverse— thinking in English and trying to find a word 
in their Native language that fits— is now the norm. Despite this 
situation, the influence of a cultural constellation of values is still 
extensive. 

I would like to direct the reader's attention to new work by Native 
and non-Native scholars that adds much to the thesis of this chapter. 
For example, recent work by Canadian Native educator Madeline 
Maelvor, Alaska Native scholar Oscar Kawagley, Hispanic American 
professor Roberta Barba, and teacher educators Linda Clean 1 and 



155 



I t . . 




GRfGORY A. Caj{ Tf 



'lorn Peacock have significantly added to the research base and 
curricular applications of science and the bicultural learner. In addi- 
tion, culturally responsive curricula materials are now being pro- 
duced by school districts, tribally contracted schools, tribal colleges, 
community colleges, and universities that serve Native American 
clientele. The popularity among both Native and non-Native educa- 
tors of “Keepers of the Earth,” a series of Native American story- 
based science curriculum guides by Michael Caduto and Joseph 
Bruchac, is but one testament to the timely resurgence of cultural 
relevancy as a factor in teaching and learning science. 



Notes 



1. Gregory A. Cujete (Santa Clara Pueblo) is an assistant professor in the 
College of Education at the University of New Mexico. He has taught at the 
Institute of American Indian Arts in Sante Eeand has lectured nationally and 
internationally. 

2. See Aurbach and Fuchs, The St atm of American Indian Education. 
See Anders and Lloyd, ’The Significance of Prior Knowledge.” 

4. See Strum and Parley, “Pueblo Valuing In Transition.” 

5- Ibid. 

6. See O'Malley, American Indian Education Handbook. 

7. See Ramirez and Castaneda, Cultural Democracy. 

8. See Pepper, Understanding Indian Students. 

9- Sec* Cajete, Look to the Mountain. 

10. See Hyitfeldt, “Traditional Culture.” 

11. See Lore,” Art as Developmental Theory.” 

12. See Cajete, Look to the Mountain and Kawaglew.l ) upiay Worldview. 



13. See Cajete, Science: A Satire American Pcrs/iectivewwd Kawaglev, A 



) upiay f t 'orldi weir. 

14. Ovandoand Collier, Bilingual and ESI. Classrooms, 58-61. 

15. Ibid. 

16. SeeOvando and Collier, Bilingual and ESI. Classrooms. 

17. See Krashen, Second Language Acquisition. 

18. See Lore, “Art as Developmental Theory," 

19. See Kawaglev, A Yupiag Worldview. 

20. See Pepper, Understanding Indian Students. 



J f. V '56 




Tit) Na8>v| AmII "N LtW("Q r.t -if} 8- ‘'It TyiffAl S' ! Q» £ £l : "'I * 

21. Dunn, “Learning Styles," 5. 

22. See Pepper, l 'ndersta tiding Indian Students. 

23. Ibid.. 21. 

24. Ibid., 23. 

25. Valle, "Cross-Cultural Competence," 30. 

26. Barba, Science in the Multicultural ( lassrootn. 14. 



Bibliography 



Abruscato. Joseph, Teaching Children Science. 4th ed. Needham I leights, MA: 
Alien & Bacon. 1696. 

Adams. David Wallace. "Fundamental Considerations: TIu* Deep Meaning of 
Native American Schooling. 1880-1990.” Harvard Educational Review 
68(1): 1-28(1988). 



Anders, Patricia L.,and Carol V. Lloyd. "The Significance of Prior Knowledge in 
the Learning of New Content-Specific Instruction.” In Content Area Read - 
iny and Learning: Instructional Strategies, edited by Diane Lapp, James 
Mood, and Nancy Parnan. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 1989. 

Atwater. Mary M. "Multicultural Science Education: Assumptions and Alterna- 
tive Views.” The Science Teacher 60(3): 32-37 ( 1993). 



Au, Kathryn I lu-Pei. ‘‘Participation Structures in a Reading lesson with I lawai- 
ian Children: Analysis of a Culturally Appropriate Instructional Event.” 
Anthropology and Education Quarterly 1 1(2): 91- 1 15 ( 1980). 

Aurhaeh. 1 lerbert A., and Estelle Fuchs. Ihe Status of American Indian Educa- 
tion. An interim report of the National Study of American Indian Education 
to the Office of Education, U.S. Department of Health, Education and 
Welfare Project No. 8-0147. University. Park: The Pennsylvania State Uni- 
versity, 1970. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. El) 039 055. 

Barba. Roberta II. Science in the Multicultural Classroom. A Guide to Teach- 
ing and Learning. Needham Heights. MA: Alien & Bacon, 1995. 

Battiste, Marie, and .lean Barman, eds. Eirsf Xations Education in Canada: 
The Circle Enfolds. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1995. 



Bruchac. Joseph, and Michael Caduto. Keepers of the Earth. Series of Science 
Curriculum (brides. 



Cajete, Gregory A. Look to ihe Mountain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education. 
Durango: Chevaux Press, 1994. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED 375 993. 

. “See nee: A Native American Perspective: A Culturally- Based Science 

Education Curriculum.” Ph.l). diss., International College, 1986. 

Clarkson, Philip C. liilinyualistn and Mathematu s /.< 'anting. ( ieelong, Victoria. 
Australia: Deakin University Press. 1991. 



16 ? Hhi 




Grfgo^y A. Cajuf 



Clean*, Linda Miller, and Thomas D. Peacock. Collected Wisdom: American 
Indian Education. Needham Heights, MA: Allvn & Bacon, 1998. 

Cobern, William W. “Contextual Constructivism: The Impact of Culture on the 
Learning and Teaching of Science." Paper presented at the annual meeting 
of the National Association for Research in Science Teaching, l^ike Geneva, 
WI, 7-10 April 1991. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 338 488. 

Cole, Michael, and Peg Griffin, eds. Improving Science and Mathematics 
Education for Minorities and Women: Contextual Factors in Education. 
Madison: Wisconsin Center for Education Research, 1987. ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 288 947. 

Cortes, Carlas EL “The Education of Language Minority Students: A Contextual 
Interaction Model." In Beyond Language: Social and Cidtural Factors in 
Schooling Language Minority Children , edited by C. K. U*bya. Ix>s Angeles: 
Evaluation, Dissemination, and Assessment Center at California State Uni- 
versity, 1986. 

Driver, Rosaling, and Valerie Oldham. “A Constructivist Approach to Curricu- 
lum Development in Science." Studies in Science Education 13(1986): 105- 
22 . 



Dunn, Rita. ‘Teaming Styles and Its Relation to Exceptionality at Both Ends of 
the Spectrum.” Exceptional Children 49(6): 496-506 (1983). 

Gaffney. Kerry E. “Multiple Assessment for Multiple learning Styles.” Science 
Scope 15(6): 54-55 (1992). 

Hadfield, Oakley D., J. V. Matin, and S. Wooden. “Mathematics Anxiety and 
Learning Style of the Navajo Middle School Student." School Science and 
Mathematics 92{4): 171-76 (1992). 



Humphreys, Barbara, R. T. Johnson, and I). W. Johnson. “Effects of Coopera- 
tive, Competitive, and Individualistic learning on Students' Achievement in 
Science Class." Journal of Research in Science Teaching 19(5): 351-56 
0982). 



Ilyitfeldt, C. “Traditional Culture, Perceptual Style, and learning: The Class- 
room Behavior of II mong Adults." Adult Education Quarterly 36(2): 65-77 
( 1986 ). 



Kawagley, Oscar. A Yupiag Worldview: A Pathway to Ecology and Spirit. 
Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press, 1995. 

Keig, Patricia V. “Construction of Conceptual Understanding in the Multicultural 
Science Classroom." Paper presented at symposium, “Multicultural Class- 
rooms— A Constructivist Viewpoint," San Diego State University, San Diego, 
CA, 20-21 Mav 1992. 



Kessler. Carolyn, and Mary Ellen Quinn. “Bilingualism and Science Problem- 
Solving Ability." Bilingual Education Paper Series 4( 1 980): 1- 30. 

Kitano. Margie K. “A Multicultural Perspective on Serving the Culturally Di- 
verse Gifted." Journal for the Education of the ( lifted 15( l ): 4-19 ( 1991 ). 



Kovalik, Susan, and Karen Olson. I’ll: The Model-Integrated Thematic In- 
struction. Kent, WA: Books for Educators, 1994. ERIC’ Document Repro- 
duction Service No. EJ) 374 894. 



158 





Tut Nahvi Amfrk an Uaivnfi? ano Bir ui iupai S^.m- i Ei« ahmn 



Krashen, Stephen l). Second Language Acquisition and Second Language 
Learning. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hall, 19$ 1. 

Lire, R. K. “Art as Developmental Theory: The Spiritual Ecology of Learning 
and the Influence of Traditional Native American Education/’ Ph.D. diss., 
University of New Mexico, 1998. 

Maelvor, M. “Redefining Science Education for Aboriginal Students/' In First 
Nations Education in Canada: The Circle l T nfoids, edited by Marie Battiste 
and .lean Barman. Vancouver: University of British Columbia Press, 1995. 

Martinez, D. I., and .). V. Martinez. Aspects of American Hispanic and Ameri- 
can Indian Involvement in Biomedical Research . Bethesda, M D: Society tor 
the Advancement of Chicanos and Native Americans in Science, 1982. 



McCarty, Thomas P. “Integrating learning for Young Children." Educational 
Leadership 44(3): 64-66 (1986). 

Medicine, Beatrice. “Contemporary Cultural Revitalization: Bilingual and Bi- 
eultural Education." Ninth Inter-American Indian Congress. 1985- 



Minlzes, Joel. James Wandersee. and Joseph Novak, eds. Teaching Science for 
t J nderstanding:A Human Const rue th 'ist I me. San Diego: Academic Press, 
1998. 



Ogbu, John U. “Understanding Cultural Diversity and learning." Educational 
Researcher 21(8): 5-14, 1992. 

Okebbukola, Peter Akinsolun. “The Influence of Preferred Learning Styles on 
Cooperative learning in Science/’ Science Education 70(5): 509-17 (1986). 

O’Malley, Edward, ed. American Indian Education Handbook. Sacramento: 
California State Department of Education, American Indian Education Unit, 
1982. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 230 327. 

Ornstein-Galicia, Jacob L., and Joyce Penfield. A Problem-Solving Model for 
Integrating Science and Language in Bilingual/Bicultural Education . Bi- 
lingual Education Paper Series, vol. 5, no. 1. Lis Angeles: Evaluation, Dis- 
semination and Assessment Center at California State University, 1981. 
ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. El) 219 948. 

Ovando, Catlos Julio, and Virginia P. Collier. Bilingual and ESL Classrooms: 
Teaching in Multicultural Contexts. New York: McGrow- 1 Iiil, 1985. 

Pepper, Elov C. Understanding Indian Students: Behavioral Learning Styles. 
Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational laboratory. 1985. 

Pitman, Mary Anne. Culture Acquisition: A Holistic Approach to Human 
l. earning . New York: Praeger, 1989- 

Ramirez, Manuel, 111, and A. Castanada. Cultural Democracy. Bicognitive 
Development, and Education. New York: Academic Press, 1974. 

Rhodes, Robert YV. “Holistic Teaching/ Learning for Native American Stu- 
dents.” Journal of American Indian Education 27(2): 21-29 ( 1988). 

Rodriguez, Imelda, and Unveil J. Bethel. “An Inquiry Approach to Science/ 
Language 'reaching." Journal of Research in Science Teaching 20(2): 291- 
96(1983). 





Ronan. Colin A. Science: Its History ami Development oniony the Worlds 
Cultures. New York: Hamlvn Publishing. 1982. 

Stahl. R. .1. "Using the Information-Constructivist (!C) Perspective to Guide 
Curricular and Instructional Decisions Toward Attaining Desired Student 
Outcomes of Science Education." Paper presented at the annual meeting of 
the National Research in Science Teaching. Boston. March 1992. 

Strum. E„ and To rev Purley. “Pueblo Valuing in Transition. Pueblo Cultural 
Center Xeivslet ter 10(12): { 1985). 

Tippens, Deborah J., and Nancx Fichtman Dana. “Culturally Relevant Alterna- 
tive Assessment." Science Scope 15(6): 50-53 (1992). 

Valle, R. "Cross-Cultural Competence in Minority Communities: A Curriculum 
Implementation Strategy. In Mental Health Research and Practice In 
Minority Communities: Development of ( ultura/ly Sensitive Traininy Pro- 
grams. edited by Manuel R. Miranda and Harry II. !.. Kitano. Rockville. 
MB: National Institute of Mental Health. 1986. ERIC Document Sen ice 
Reproduction No. ED 278 "5". 

Van Otten, George A., and Setsuo Tsutsui. "Geocentrism and Indian Educa- 
tion.” Journal of American Indian education 22(2): 23-2" ( 1983). 

Weatherford. Jack. Indian (livers: Itoic the Indians of America Transformed 
the World. New York: Fawcett Columbine. 1988. 



l - 

J t I 



160 



Chapter 7 




Student Assessment in Indian 
Education or What Is a Roach? 



Sandra .J. Fox 1 



N ew performance-based methods of assessing student learn- 
ing are being developed as part of the education reform move- 
ment. These new methods offer educators the opportunity to 
adopt a system that more fairly and completely assesses what Indian 
students know and can do. Because successful performance on stan- 
dardized tests correlates with socioeconomic status and the provi- 
sion of mainstream experiences, Indian students generally have not 
done well on them. Performance-based assessment can give Indian 
children alternative ways to demonstrate their knowledge and skills. 
According to the National Center for hair and Open 'Testing ( Fair Test), 

Assessment is a process of obtaining information about stu- 
dent learning that can he used to guide a variety of decisions 
and actions. . . . 'The primary purpose of assessment is to 
improve student learning. Teachers assess to learn students' 
strengths and weaknesses, to understand their interests and 
how they learn, to figure out how to help each individual and 
the class as a whole, and to help students think about their own 
learning, as well as to measure what they have learned and how 
well they have learned it.* 



»* » 



! 



Sandi/a J. Fox 



The terms authentic assessment anci performance-based assess- 
me/ it have become increasingly familiar as educators across America 
explore alternative ways to assess student learning. But understand- 
ing the methods and purposes of these new forms of assessment 
challenges both educators and the general public, partly because the 
topic is so politically and morally charged. The old paradigm is 
deeply entrenched. The established process of norm-referenced stan- 
dardized testing to determine student achievement and school effec- 
tiveness has been sacred in America, and it has been deemed politi- 
cally incorrect to question it. Those who disputed the usefulness of 
norm-referenced standardized testing of Indian students were dis- 
counted as trying to avoid accountability or not caring enough for 
Indian children to want them to be as competent as others. 

But the old paradigm is now being questioned by the education 
establishment, making this an ideal time for Indian educators to 
question openly the process of assessment used for Indian children. 
To paraphrase Sitting Bull, “We must put our minds together and see 
what we can make for our children." Indian educators must take 
advantage of this opportunity. They must learn what the general 
education system proposes for assessment and how it can apply to or 
be adapted for Indian students so we might finally have a fair and 
more complete picture of what Indian students can do. 

This venture will not be easy. The Indian population, like the 
general American population, is brainwashed in regard to thinking 
about testing. It would be easy to stay in old paradigms or fall back to 
them. The criticism of new methods of assessment is already start- 
ing. We must stay the course. We must try new methods of assess- 
ment that are being created, including the Learning Record, a sys- 
tem recently adapted by BIA-funded schools, and we must evaluate 
proposed methods to find the best ways to assess the learning of 
Indian students. 

Why Are New Methods of Assessment Being 
Developed? 

The U.S. Department of Kduealion explains that three phenom- 
ena have prodded changes in the assessment process: 

1. concern from the business community that students entering 
the workforce could not produce in real-world workplace situa- 




AV'tV^.nN’- ■*< lr.i»i«v>> Er ,< : a in ,n , >..• Wn.\; h » R •--«< >»° 

tions and could not solve problems necessary to keep our coun- 
try competitive in the world economy 



2. emergence of the constructivist model of learning, which em- 
phasizes how students learn and the importance of their exist- 
ing knowledge base, and predicts greater student motivation to 
learn when learning is based in real-world experiences 



3. pressure on educators to be more accountable for student learn- 
ing as a result of the 1991 report Indian Nations At Risk, which 
promotes “teaching to the tests," even though the tests were 
actually measuring lower order skills (not the ones required by 
the business community) and knowledge out of context (not 
related to the real world). 1 



further pressure came from reports that students in the United 
States were not learning as much as students in other countries, 
emphasizing the need for an assessment system to measure the 
learning of more difficult content. A review found assessment prac- 
tices of other countries more performance based. The U.S. govern- 
ment now urges new, more challenging instructional content in 
America s schools and use of new assessments to measure the learn- 
ing of that content. At this writing, recipients of federal Goals 2000 
or Title I funds have begun implementing new content standards 
and piloting new assessment systems. All states are required to have 
performance-based assessment systems in place by the 2000-2001 
school year. 

Many have long criticized the use of standardized, norm -referenced 
tests for assessment. In 1997 Peter Sacks summarized research re- 
garding standardized testing in America: 



/. Standardized tests generally hat *e questionable ability to pn *- 
diet academic success. Kven though educators and the general 
public have been led to believe that standardized tests provide 
sound measures of students' achievement and schools' success 
and many decisions are made based on results of those tests, 
they are often not reliable indicators of what students know or 
how well students will do in subsequent educational experi- 
ences. Teachers often testify that standardized tests don't accu- 
rately measure their students' achievement or abilities. Perfor- 
mance on tests such as the SAT, for example, is very poorly 



1 i/a# 






correlated with student success in college. Sacks concludes that 
high scores on standardized tests only predict high scores on 
standardized tests. 



2. Standardized test scores tend to be highly correlated with 
socioeconomic class . 'This finding is true across races. Stan- 
dardized test scores correlate well with the income and educa- 
tion of one's parents. 

3. Standardized tests can reward superficial learning . Standard- 
ized tests assess rote learning of facts and formulas. They are 
designed to test information that can be put into multiple choice 
questions for ease of scoring. They cannot test active, critical 
thinking skills. They cannot test whether someone can truly 
solve problems or write an essay. Studies of students who scored 
high on the SAT and a standardized reading exam found that 
those students acquired information through rote learning. Stu- 
dents who valued learning and literacy activities did not do as 
well. Schools that continue to use standardized tests are work- 
ing in opposition to the attempt to teach problem-solving and 
other thinking skills. Standardized tests drive instruction in 
undesirable directions and inhibit meaningful educational re- 
form. 1 



Fair' lest cites two main problems with traditional standardized 
tests: (l) they fail to measure important learning adequately; and (2) 
their use encourages classroom practices that fail to provide high- 
quality education, especially for children from minority groups and 
low-income families. FairTest goes on to state that the multiple- 
choice format is incompatible with how people learn. The norm- 
referencing and bell curve used for standardized testing reinforce 
the view that instruction will not he effective for certain students and 
will encourage low expectations. Standardized tests are culture and 
gender biased. Determining important actions regarding individual 
students on the basis of one test is misuse with serious implications. 

The U.S. Department of Kducation report The Inclusion of Stu- 
dents with Disabilities and Limited English Proficient Students in 
Large-Scale Assessments, published in 1907, provides guidance on 
making accommodations and other considerations in the testing of 
limited-Knglish-proficient ( LKF) children. It acknowledges that pro- 



1 / # i 164 



SU:t.'fN* ASMVsVlNS !fi InI’i-VM E H ' ATI* »f J ( >.V w * 1 ^ 1 1 f?% ;A- p? 



ficiency in the English language is another factor that affects a 
student’s performance when assessed. This issue must he consid- 
ered and addressed. 

Again, why are new methods of assessment being developed? 
Thev are being developed for all of the reasons listed above and will 
provide new direction for education in this country. 

In general. American Indian students have continuously scored 
low on standardized achievement tests. 5 Educators of Indian stu- 
dents have long believed their students could do more than was 
revealed by the standardized achievement tests. Until recently, it 
was not questioned. Many educators of Indian children think the 
tests are definitely culturally biased and can give examples to sup- 
port this belief. Dorothy King, who works with Navajo children, 
documented the following: 

Another item had four pictures: two men in a boat hauling in a 
net, a Navajo woman seated at a loom weaving with another 
woman seated at a nictate grinding corn some distance away, a 
woman in a car returning to a house with a man working on the 
roof, and a girl mowing a lawn while a mailman walks by. The 
item asked one to identify the picture that shows helping each 
other do a job. Most of the students said they had wanted to 
choose all four. In their concept of the world, everyone is 
always helping each other do whatever job there is, working 
together for the good of their family and community regardless 
of whether they are doing diverse tasks or at what distance they 
are doing them. 1 * 



A standardized test is probably a good measure of one’s accultura- 
tion into mainstream society. The fact that successful test perfor- 
mance correlates with socioeconomic status indicates that Indian 
children are at a definite disadvantage. Most Indian children have 
been included in large-scale standardized testing without accommo- 
dations for limited English proficiency, even though many are LKP 
students, whether identified as such or not. 



What Is Performance-Based Assessment? 



.'Issi’ss comes from Latin meaning “to sit beside." This implies a 
teacher sits beside students and watches them do their work or talks 



165 



4 i. 





with them. Assessment is a good thing meant to help students. 

In performance assessment, students construct, rather than se- 
lect. responses. Students may write, give a speech, solve a problem, 
or do a project to show what they know. Teachers observe student 
behavior on those tasks and systematically record information about 
the student’s learning gained from the observation. Teachers are 
able to see patterns in students' learning and thinking. This method 
ol assessment is ongoing, built as a part of the instructional process. 
It also drives the instructional process. Students are well prepared 
for what is expected of them and understand criteria that will be 
used in assessment. Rubrics explain how tasks will be assessed by 
defining exemplary, competent, minimal, or inadequate performance 
(oH'jther delineations such as advanced, proficient, and partially 
proficient, as required by the Department of Hducation). 

Portfolios are collections of student work representing various 
performances. Portfolios are derived from the visual and performing 
arts tradition that showcases artists’ accomplishments. A systematic 
gathering of performances can provide a reliable assessment system. 
Performance-based assessment is not completed in one sitting on 
one day. Many performances are taken into account before determi- 
nations are made about one’s achievement. 'Phis also alleviates prob- 
lems that can arise if a student is absent on the day of testing. 
Assessment and instruction are merged, improving both. 

Performance-based assessment is designed to assess the learning 
of content found in the emerging, more challenging content stan- 
dards that promote critical thinking. Performance assessment is 
often termed authentic assessment because it promotes the demon- 
stration of applied knowledge and the performance of tasks of the 
real world. 

Performance-based assessment allows stud ,mts to he involved in 



assessing their own progress. It also allows parents to be involved in 
assessing the progress of their children and to provide information 
about the child’s application of knowledge at home. Performance- 
based assessments shed light on students’ understanding of a prob- 
lem, involvement with the problem, approach to solving the prob- 
lem, and ability to express themselves. 

The main criticisms of performance-based assessment are the 
possibilities of lack of reliability (e.g., different people might assess 



individual performances differently). 



validity (e.g.. 



particular per- 



1 77166 



S\ ; i u A« j v.m V 1 ; E . 1 '■ ^ I R -■ 

form an ces may not ho good indicators ot spccitic content knowl- 
edge), and lack of access to data used to compare students and 
groups of students (as was provided by norm-referenced tests), 'these 
concerns are being addressed, and some interesting solutions are 
taking shape, as will be described later in this chapter. 

American Indian people have historically used performance-based 
assessment to evaluate the skills and abilities of the young and to 
determine their readiness for taking on various duties in the tribes. 
Performance assessment is alive and well in tribal systems today. 
Contemporan examples include powwow dance competitions, sports 
competitions, art contests, am! some tribal princess contests that 
require contestants to speak the Native language, prepare Native 
foods, and so forth. 

Performance-based assessment examines student performance 
on specific tasks that are important for life. Those tasks can be 
determined at the local level, providing relevance to the assessment 
system. Performance-based assessment can take place in a child's 
Native language, a situation in which a student’s language and cul- 
ture would count as a strength. 

Performance-based assessment may, at last, provide the first fair 
indication of what Indian children know and can do. Schools serving 
Indian students— particularly the schools funded by the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs (B1A)— are delving into performance assessment. A 
svstem known as the Learning Record is being adapted tor Indian 
children in those schools. 

What Is the Learning Record System? 

The Learning Record is a performance-based assessment system 
that provides teachers with a structured method of tracking stu- 
dents' academic development and planning instruction to meet stu- 
dents' needs. It has evolved from the Primary Language Record, first 
developed and used in (I rent Britain. The Record was adapted for use 
in California as the ( 'alifornia Lcimiina Record." 

The Learning Record provides common forms and procedures for 
recording and summarizing information based on selected assess- 
ment indicators that provide multiple viewpoints and common per- 
formance standards of achievement (rubrics), called scales. The 
Learning Record summarizes c\idencc from a varieh o! student 



Sandra J. Fox 



-work and activities to assess student achievement in the contexts of 
^the classroom and the home. It builds on what students from ethni- 
cally and linguistically diverse backgrounds know and can do and 
provides a system to ensure more valid and equitable assessment 
results. 




All schools receiving 'Title I funds must utilize a new form of 
assessment starting in the 2000-2001 school year. BIA schools can 
choose the new 7 performance-based assessment system of the state 
in which they are located or the Learning Record, adapted for use by 
BIA schools. At this writing, staff from 34 schools are being trained 
to pilot this system at their schools. 

The Learning Record system has undergone 10 years of research 
and development throughout California, the last four at the Center 
for Language in Learning, a not-for-profit organization in El Cajon. 
By June 1994 the system had been tested in small-scale studies so it 
could be phased in by schools, including Chapter I program schools, 
as an alternative to or in conjunction with norm-referenced, stan- 
dardized testing. The Center for Language in Learning continues to 
conduct research on implementation of the Learning Record. 

The Learning Record system of assessment is standards refer- 
enced, based on the content to be learned, as specified in the new 
standards and on standards of performance described in scales. (See 
example of reading scales on page 169-) Standards-referenced as- 
sessment requires an analysis of performance in various settings and 
from multiple perspectives and relies on various indicators and 
information from people who are important in the child’s educa- 
tional process. (See page 170 for a diagram of the multiple perspec- 
tives used in the Learning Record process.) Notice that standardized 
tests can be one of the indicators for schools and teachers who still 
feel that such testing is important. Examples of student work and 
other documentation provide evidence that individual students have 
cither met or not met the standards. Use of the Learning Record 
requires extensive staff development. Teachers learn what various 
pieces of documentation indicate about student learning and how 
these data can be summarized to determine students’ achievement 
levels. 



A moderation process is unique to the Learning Record mode! of 
assessment. Moderation readings of student records ensure the qual- 
ity, consistency, equity, and reliability of teacher assessments. A first 



1 

J 





168 



Reading Scale 2, Grades 4-8: Becoming Experienced in Reading 



Pni irAiir.-N Whai Is a Roach? 



«. *0 

C » 

£ g 
Q. S 

Q) v. 
£ 8 . 
“ S 



3J £> C 

~ CO o 

2 w> c 
a> -o 

d 

<U CD cO 

^ i = 

c -^2 — 

CG ^ u 

o £ t: 
— 2 .E 
w -c — 

■S o £ 

3 1? 52 

r*’ > CtS 

J= <5 to 

f— ftJ si ■ - 

-< S? 



if? 

S>l| 

.53 Ql C 

= a. 2 ■ 

w a) 

s= td o ■ 

Les 
„ a 5 

^ 2 > * 
r O) OJ 

UJ 

• cn re 
c cz j= 
•2 ts c 

iM 2 O 



cr • E 
<r> o> > 

» *“ E 2 

■x "5 *o 

s i 8 

o — c 

<n o £ 

■o <n 5 

C Q> > 

S. -g. « 

<d *- *5 

w tz 3 

o? Q> 75 
w 

"5 3 o 



3 CD 

2 o : 



W w o 
t3 fl) 0 
« 03 

<D .2 3 

or o <5 

03 CL 

E Q-n 

E Q.SJ 

i d>. 

O "O .C 

C C C 

tr re re . 

p QJ 

0 e ■ 

a) 3 *- 
jr ^ o 
" r « 
o cn Q) . 

0 3 "O 

CD O C 



o _ 

E c? 



'MCI 

M t3 3 £ 

ffl ffl w G 

«»■§■§ 

Q) ^ CO *0 

1 03 J2 

c c os: o 

f s|J8 

^ 10 c c 

■g a: S § 

® c 

g> S ^ i 

>T3 ° S 
03 C W3 C 
c - -X - 

c o S> 

0 = -O =3 



/ 1/3 r 

cu “D re 

*1= 03 — 

03 CD 53 

- c ■=: 

"O cn 

t- ■ — ■ c 

s's r 

035 

Jr -° £ 
.S 1 <ri re 
ca o 0 = 

T5 o 3 

- &£ 

,2 

Ql J 

cn _ 

m S o- 

SCO 
2 03 -C 



O. 

CD . 

> I— 
^22 
£ Ij UJ 

?<0 

c H U. 

850 
ii°- o. 



03 Co — 

cfl O 
03 o cn 

5« = 

cn c 03 

« 2 o 

&.<= g 

r o "D 
aj r s 

3 O) C 
= « 8 
C 



'cl "2 "s 

o g 5 

Q} w — ; 

> -a .2 
O) r w 

Q re S 



cm3 

3*0 

5 & £ 

f SS 

SOP 
c S 
o 3 = 

O m :g 

0 a A 
r £ !? 

.5*5; ? 

1 S -5 

j= UJ E 
CT> tO J 

|o 5 

;s ! £ 
« >■£» 



2 03 
.2 re 
*•0 w 

<0 *0 
2 03 ■ 
> 03 

° Z 



1 cn 

'TO ro 

o .2 

S CL 



a* s 
€ 1 « 
I -I 
.I- 5 ! 

fo e X 

E S o 

? n 01 

JCtJB 
0 = 3 
T= CT> 
C UJ c 

g >.3 

T3 = C 

in n c 

o 



Hcnemann Educational Boohs 




The Multidimensional CLR 

Multiple Viewpoints 




Teacher 




l 



* 



170 



$*U(>f.NI ASNfSSMfN! IN iNtMAN El)tK AIK ‘N (wWhAI Is A RoAt 



round of moderation readings is held at the schools own site among 
teachers who are keeping Learning Records. Participants read in 
pairs a sampling of the completed records and student work without 
seeing the originating teachers’ judgments. Looking at the evidence, 
they judge a student’s performance according to the performance 
standards scale. The process is repeated at inter-site readings, con- 
ducted by teachers from other schools using Learning Records. Alto- 
gether, this makes three evaluations of student progress: original 
evaluation by the teacher, evaluation by a pair of readers from the 
same school (based on documentation of the teacher’s evaluation), 
and evaluation by a pair of readers from another school at the 
regional inter-site. If there is a difference among judgments by the 
readers, other readers highly experienced in using the Learning 
Record make a final determination. The Center for Language in 
Learning reports annually to each participating school on the consis- 
tency— and therefore trustworthiness— of teacher, site, and inter- 
site judgments. For schools using the Learning Record schoolwide or 
with an identified target population, the center also reports on indi- 
vidual student achievement at each K-12 grade level. 

The Learning Record summarizes information about student learn- 
ing to be used with students of different ethnic backgrounds and 
students with disabilities. It is endorsed by FairTest. The Learning 
Record requires observation and documentation in assessing not 
only what children know but how they learn. The assessment for 
each child requires active involvement of many teachers, parents, 
and the student. The process can he used for all grade levels. It can he 
used to summarize information about reading, language arts, and 
mathematics for Title I requirements and to evaluate student lan- 
guage and mathematics abilities in languages other than Fnglish. 

The Department of Hducation approved the BIA’s state plan to 
use the Learning Record as its new method of assessment because of 
the moderation process and studies that have shown it to be a valid 
and reliable way of assessing student learning. A Learning Record 
(Language Record) system is also being used with a multiethnic 
population in New York City. Beverly Falk and Linda Darling* 
Hammond of the National ('enter for Restructuring Hducation. 
Schools and l eaching list the major principles of the system in New 
York City as ' encouraging meaningful parent involvement, respect- 
ing each family’s linguistic and cultural background, recognizing 



'] <s 



Sandua J . Fox 



that children come to school with prior knowledge and experience, 
looking at children individually and noting their growth rather than 
comparing them with other children, and respecting teacher knowl- 
edge and professionalism/’ 9 

Resulting implications of the Learning Record for Indian students 
can be great. The system includes many of the ingredients Indian 
educators have called for in an educational process suitable for 
Indian students. Indian educators should watch the progress of the 
implementation of the Learning Record with great interest. At present, 
we are gaining insight into the ramifications of its use by reading 
what teachers participating in the Learning Record training have to 
say (see box). 



Comments of Participants in Learning Record Training 

“1 am proud to be a part of this needed change in education." 

“I am very impressed with the new method of assessing our children 
[Native Americans). We’ve bee.: seeking such an assessment." 

“Thank you for giving me a system/means to note my observations 
and progress of the students I teach. It will be put to good use.” 

“This is such a neat way to find out what your kids know — not what 
they don’t know, and it gives you a wonderful insight into your students 
as human beings!” 

"Retrieving information from the student and parents to form a 
database will provide a better understanding of the student." 

“I believe the Learning Record will benefit my teaching abilities and 
increase our parents’ commitment to our school, its teachers, and most 
importantly our students' success." 

“Finally, an assessment tool which will work instead of culturally or 
socially biased tests. Also, putting the sharing of the educational 
experience with parents and students is excellent." 

“It was exciting how it all fit together and we were able to get quite an 
overview of our student!” 

"I have become very excited about the Learning Record and its 
potential for all students. I feel very privileged to be in a position that 
can have such a professional effect on our children’s education.” 

“It seems like common sense to me and simplifies my ideas about 
portfolios." 

“! feel this is a good way of assessing our children, and you have 
planned it out so everyone doesn’t feel pressured by something new.” 

“I believe in ’asking the child’ — this will provide a tool for account- 
ability.” 



172 





SltJOfN! A*>Sf SSMIN1 IN Ittf’tAN ElUJC AllON OH WmAI h A R< >A< \i> 



What Should We Be Questioning Further? 

Despite the fact that performance-based assessment, and the 
Learning Record in particular, appears to offer a real breakthrough 
for Indian education, our work in this area must continue. Indian 
educators are calling into question many aspects of the educational 
process. Some of the questions educators commonly ask about as- 
sessment are discussed in this section. 



Oratory or reading skills? In performance-based assessments, 
one indicator of success might be the number of books read. In the 
Indian world, reading a lot of books is not highly prized. For Indian 
people, more credence is given to the skill of oratory. Is oratory not a 
worthy process? Is it not related to reading? Given that assessment 
drives instruction, is it not wise to give more weight to a skill, such as 
oral language, that tribal members have long recognized as needing 
more emphasis in Indian education? Should this not be taken into 
consideration when framing the assessment of Indian students? 



What about content? The whole matter of content for Indian 
students needs to be examined carefully. While the process of per- 
formance-based assessment bolds great potential, it still could pro- 
mote cultural bias or emphasize learning that is not important to 
Indian people, thereby putting us back where we started. This brings 
us to the main question: What do we want Indian students to learn? 
For example, the BIA has adapted national content standards to 
include aspects of Indian culture. If this cultural information is 
important, the learning of it must he assessed. What should Indian 
students know and he able to do when they leave school? 



How do language and experience factor in? What about the 
fact that assessment of reading is in large part the assessment of 
one's knowledge of and experience with the topic of the material 
being read? It is also the assessment of one’s English vocabulary. 
Yet, one’s reading ability is firmly determined (judged) by an En- 
glish reading assessment. Mow can we say that Indian students 
cannot read as well as other students as indicated bv standardized 
tests and national norms? It brings to mind the story of one of the 
chiefs of the Iroquois Confederacy saying he would send young men 
to the schools of the White settlers as long as they sent some of their 
young men to live with and learn from his tribe. How well would 
non-Indian children do if they had to read something from the 



Sanepa J. F uk 



Indian world for which they had no reference? For example, if an 
Indian story referred to someone wearing a roach , the non-Indian 
student might assume the author meant an insect when, in fact, the 
text referred to a headdress made of deer tail and porcupine hair that 
is worn by male Indian dancers at powwows. The experience one 
brings to the assessment situation is of utmost importance. If Indian 
students are expected to read and understand materials, they must 
be given the cultural experiences that relate to those materials. But is 
that really what we want? Does that require Indian students to learn 
things that are really not important to them? Again, Indian commu- 
nities must decide what their children should know and be able to do 
and then assess student learning within that body of knowledge and 



In many Native languages, a single word may have meaning that 
may take a paragraph to explain in English or that cannot be ex- 
plained at all, or certain linguistic patterns may suggest entirely 
different meanings from those expressed in English. How then do 
Native speakers process English? What implications does that have 
for assessment? We must question, question, question. 



Leaders in the Assessment Process 

We are just on the brink of improving the education of Indian 
children. This is the result of new assessment processes and new 
insights into what should be learned and how it might be learned 
better. Wo need to work very closely with our communities to make 
sure full advantage is taken of this opportunity. Indian educators 
must become very interested in the new assessment process and its 
implications. They must ask questions that may affect the teaching 
and learning of Indian children. 

An Indian educator who has taken a special interest in the assess- 
ment process is Roger Bordeaux: 

Standardized norm-referenced testing is no longer universally 
accepted as the one best measure for determining learner suc- 
cess. Although some American Indian/ Alaska Native students 
have shown academic success in this type of testing, the contin- 
ued exclusive use of norm- referenced assessments could short- 
change many AI/AN learners. One caution, however, for those 
involved in developing alternative assessment measures: The 

1 / { . I 17 A 




Sujuini Asms^mini in Iniuan Epucauon <v?Whai Ir, a Roach? 



effort to improve cultural relevance of curriculum and assess- 
ment must be guided by all stakeholders, including parents and 
other tribal community members. w 

The teaching and learning process for American Indian/Alaska 
Native learners will improve as curricula and assessment become 
more culturally relevant. Culturally relevant performance assess- 
ment can help schools see language and culture as integral parts of a 
total curriculum. According to iilise Trumbull Estrin and Sharon 
Nelson-Barber of the Far West Laboratory, 

Many Native students are thriving in programs that are based 
on culturally responsive curriculum, instruction and assess- 
ment. And— fortuitously— the current climate of reform pro-, 
vides all of us an opportunity to reexamine old assumptions 
and develop new bases of knowledge from which to re-create 
instruction and assessment." 

We must revisit the works of Karen Swisher and colleagues whose 
special interest has been assessing the learning styles of Indian 
students. We must reread the work of Richard Nichols, H who 
concludes the practice of standardized testing has been hurtful to 
American Indians and encourages educators to rely more heavily on 
measures of attitude and skill mastery and to utilize student portfo- 
lios. We must not forget the early questioners Dean Chavers and 
Patricia Locke, who wrote “The Effects of testing on Native Ameri- 
cans” for the National Commission on Testing and Public Policy in 
1989. 

Finally we must not forget that Indian people had a way to assess 
the learning of their children long ago. It was perfomia nee-based 
assessment. 



Epilogue 

The BIA has adopted the Learning Record as its new assessment 
system. BIA-funded schools have the option to utilize the new as- 
sessment systems of the states in which they are located or the 
Learning Record. Teachers from M schools are currently involved in 
extensive professional development activities to build leadership 
capacity among schools choosing to use the Learning Record. 

Other information from the reauthorization of the hulivhhuils 



i *>r 



Sands a J. fox 



with Disabilities Education Act indicates a need for performance- 
based assessment to better meet the needs of students with disabili- 
ties, thus strengthening the requirement for such assessment prac- 
tice. BIA-funded schools, as well as other schools, must provide for 
fair testing of this population. 

The California Learning Record was to be one model for the 
classroom assessment part of a new, three-part California assess- 
ment system. (To learn more about how that assessment system fell 
to defeat before it could be fully implemented, read Crispeels’ “Edu- 
cational Policy Implementation in a Shifting Political Climate: The 
California Experience/') The since-renamed Learning Record As- 
sessment System has been developed to provide a classroom assess- 
ment that can be used to inform teaching and learning as well as to 
serve public accountability purposes. 

A three-year phase-in plan has been designed to help school staffs 
implement the Learning Record in BIA schools. To follow progress, 
contact a School Reform Team Leader, Office of Indian Education 
Programs, Mail Stop 3512. 1849 C Street NYV, Washington, DC 
20240, or visit the Learning Record Web site maintained by the 
Center for Language in Learning: http://www.learningrecord/lrorg. 



Notes 



1. Sandra .1. Fox (Ogala Uikota) has worked for the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs as a teacher, education specialist, and team leader. 

2. FairTcst, Implementing Performance Assessments, 3. 

3. See ITS. Department of Education, Assessment of Student Perfor- 
mance. 



4. Sacks. “Standardized 'resting." 24-31. 

5. See Indian Nations At Risk Task Force, Indian Eat ions At Risk . 

6. King. Standardization vs. Learners , 6. 

7. See Bordeaux. Assessnu mt far American Indian and Alaska Entire 
Learners. 



8. See Barr, California Learning Record. 

0. Falk and Darling-1 lammond. The Primary Language Record at P.S. 



SOL 8 . 

10. Bordeaux. Assessment for . \mcricun Indian and Alaska Entire 
Learners , 2. 

It. Kstrin and Nelson -Barber, Issues in C'ross-i'ultural Assessment, 7. 



SlULHNI AsSISSMfcNI IN INDIAN EOUCAJION OR WhAI Is A ROACH? 



12. For more about the learning styles of I mlian students, see Swisher and 
Deylile, “Styles of Learning and Learning of Styles'* and Swisher, “American 
Indian Learning Styles Survey.” 

13. See Nichols, Continuous Evaluation of Native Education Pray rams. 



Bibliography 



Barr, Mary A. California Learning Record: A Handbook for Teachers, Grades 
6-12. El Cajon, CA: University of California at San Diego Bookstore, 1995. 

Bordeaux, Roger. Assessment for American Indian and Alaska Native Learn- 
ers. ERIC Digest. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education 
and Small Schools, 1995. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 385 
424. 



Chavers, Dean, and Patricia Locke. The E( facts of Testing on Native Americans. 
Paper commissioned by the National Commission on resting and Public 
Policy, April 1989. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 336 445. 

Crispeels, ,L II. “Educational Policy Implementation in a Shifting Political 
Climate: The California Experience. " A mcrican Educational Ri scan h .Jour- 
nal \\ (1997): 453-81. 



Kstrin, Elise Trumbull, and Sharon Nelson-Barber. Issues in Cross-Cultural 
Assessment: American Indian and Alaska Native Students. Knowledge 
Brief No. 12. San Francisco: Far West laboratory. 1995. ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. El) 388 484. 

Fair lest. Implementing Performance Assessments: A Guide to Classroom, 
School and System Reform. Cambridge, MA: National Center for Fair and 
Open Testing, 1996. 

Falk, Beverly, and Linda Darling- Hammond. The Primary Language Record 
at PS. 261: How Assessment Transforms Teaching and Learning. New 
York: National Center for Restructuring Education, Schools, and 'leaching, 
Columbia University, Teachers College, 1993. ERIC Document Reproduc- 
tion Service No. ED 358 964. 



Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. Indian Nations At Risk: An Educational 
Strategy for Action: Final Report of the Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 1991. ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. Id) 343 753. 

King, Dorothy. Standardisation vs. Learners: The Abyss Hetween Assump- 
tions. Chinle, A/., unpublished paper, 1989. 

Nichols, Richard. Continuous Evaluation of Native Education Programs of 
American Indian and Alaska Native Students. Washington. DC': U.S. De- 
partment of Education, Indian Nations At Risk Task Force, 1991. ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service* No. ED 343 760. 

Olson, .John F. The I m 'lusion of Stud*. * nts u ith Pisahilitn v and l . unit* i d English 
Proficient Students in Large-Scale Assessments: A Summary of Recent 






S ANDO A J. Fc.\ 



Progress. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, National Center 
for Education Statistics, 1997. 

Sacks, Peter. “Standardized Testing: Meritocracy's Crooked Yardstick." Change 
29(2): 24-31(1997). 

Swisher, Karen. “American Indian Learning Styles Survey: an Assessment of 
Teacher Knowledge." Journal of Educational Issues of Language Minority 
Students 13 (1994): 59-77. 

Swisher, Karen, and Donna Deyhle. “Styles of Learning and Lear, ingot Styles: 
Educational Conflicts for American Indian/Alaska Native Youth." Journal 
of Multilingual and Multicultural Development 8(4): 345-60 (1987). 

U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improve- 
ment. Assessment of Student Performance. Washington, DC: U.S. Depart- 
ment of Education, 1997. 



1 

1 



f I r 
0-1 



178 




Chapter 8 




Effective Counseling with American 
Indian Students 

Dkkokah Wktsit 1 



A merican Indians and Alaska Natives are the Indigenous people 
of this country; yet they remain among the smallest ethnic 
groups in the United States. Despite interaction with the domi- 
nant Kuropean American culture for more than 500 years, American 
Indians continue to maintain their own cultural! > diifthiw worldviews. 
Broadly defined, counseling has always been a part of American 
Indian cultures, practiced in ways deemed appropriate to respective 
worldviews. Professional counselors responsible for meeting the 
needs of American Indian students must find ways to address a 
variety of contexts effectively. Counseling, as practiced today, is 
heavily influenced by European American cultural values and prac- 
tices. To counsel American Indian students effectively, the profes- 
sion needs to include authentic forms of counseling that are congru- 
ent with American Indian cultures. 



Role of Counseling 

The field of counseling is reportedly growing in both size and 
scope.- In general, counseling is viewed as a means of helping indi- 



1 1 1 1 i 




Deborah Weisit 



viduals, groups, and families solve problems and reach their devel- 
opmental potential as human beings. A number of theories guide 
professional counselors, ranging from individual to family systems 
orientations and from nondirective, person-centered to directive, 
cognitive-behavioral orientations. Counseling has its origins in edu- 
cation and normative developmental work with people, whereas 
psychology and psychiatry are oriented more toward the diagnosis 
and treatment of pathology. 

According to the American School Counselor Association, school 
counseling specifically provides 

Direct services to students, staff and community to facilitate 
self-understanding, interpersonal relationships, problem-solv- 
ing and decision-making skills and responsibility in educa- 
tional, career and avocational development.* 

Further, school counselors focus upon preventive activities to ad- 
dress situations before they cause problems. Counselors conduct 
these activities in a variety of settings: counseling contexts (e.g., 
individual, group, family), classrooms (e.g., instruction, curriculum 
development, teacher consultation), and community (e.g., dissemi- 
nating education literature, organizing community forums). School 
counselors work with students and families through remediation 
activities and intervention. Other observers point out that the school 
counselor, while assisting students with social and personal devel- 
opment, has taken on the role of transmitter and developer of 
multicultural awareness . 4 

Within American Indian cultures, counseling has always played 
an importan; role. For example, traditional Native healers have 
strived to meet the counseling needs of the community and indi- 
vidual. These traditional activities may not be recognized by Euro- 
pean American observers as counseling due to differences in ap- 
proach and process; yet the intent of providing help to individuals, 
families, or groups is the same. Carolyn Attneave points out that, 
even today, the presence and responsibilities of traditional healers 
remain hidden to non-Native counselors. She attributes thus hidden 
existence to the long history of persecution and superstition of Euro- 
pean American society. However, counseling persists within Native 
cultures . 1 



* t . * 



Efftcnvf Counsfung wuh American Indian Siuihnjs 



American Indian Students 

History. The identity of any group of people is rooted in its 
history. Joseph E. Trimble and C. Fleming point out that knowing 
the history of American Indian communities is essential to counsel- 
ing American Indian people effectively. Native people have a history 
that extends long before their contact with Europeans. However, 
with regard to cross-cultural understanding between Indians and 
non-Indians, history began with the first contact between the Euro- 
peans who came to this country and the Native people who have 
always lived here. The relationship between Europeans and Ameri- 
can Indians has been rife with misunderstanding from the begin- 
ning." 

Many European Americans believed it was their destiny and God’s 
plan for them to live here and use the land as they thought best. This 
concept of manifest destiny completely disregarded the Native people 
who already lived on the land. Contact with previously unknown 
European diseases decimated the population of Native people. Mis- 
sionaries sought to convert Native people to Christianity by turning 
them away from and denigrating Native spiritual beliefs. As interac- 
tion between European Americans and Native people increased, the 
federal government implemented a policy of removing Native people, 
particularly children, from their cultures. Often this meant not only 
removing them from their homes but relocating them as far from 
their homes as possible. 

Hoarding schools such as Haskell in Lawrence, Kansas, and Carlisle 
in Pennsylvania taught young Native children about European Ameri- 
can culture. The boarding school system implanted negative mes- 
sages about students' own cultures by forbidding Native languages 
to be spoken, discouraging contact with families, and teaching a 
curriculum based exclusively on European American culture. The 
military model upon which these hoarding schools were based did 
not provide positive, nurturing examples of authority figures nor did 
it employ positive methods of discipline. The school environment 
contrasted harshly with the homes from which children as young as 
five years old had been removed. Native parents were viewed as 
obstructions to the education of their children. The basic premise of 
this education system was to remove the Indian from the person. 



181 



1 1 1 • . 




Df \Aft " '• i’ 



instilling instead the values, practices, and beliefs of European Ameri- 
can culture. Vestiges of this philosophy continue today. 



Current status. Statistically American Indians are an excep- 
tionally young population. The U.S. Bureau of the Census reports the 
American Indian population increased 38 percent between 1980 and 
1990 with a median age of 26, as compared to the overall I’.S. 
median age of 33. American Indian school enrollment was expected 
to increase by 29 percent between 1985 and 1995. Because a signifi- 
cant portion of tins population is, or will be, of childbearing age. 
continued population growth is anticipated. The number of Ameri- 
can Indian students in the formal education system will continue to 
increase, as will the need to address the counseling demands and 
concerns of this population." 



Acculturation. Acculturation is the extent to which an Ameri- 
can Indian (or any person from another culture) identifies with the 
attitudes, behaviors, and values of the dominant culture and vice 
versa. The mere existence of other cultures increases the potential 
for and level of acculturation for all people. For American Indians, 
who have had European American culture imposed upon them, the 
question is not whether they have aeeuliurated but to what degree. It 
is also important to acknowledge that cultures, even traditional 
Native cultures, are never stagnant. This is evidenced by the incor- 
poration of tools or products provided by European American cul- 
ture in even the most sacred American Indian ceremonies. 

Further, the extensive variations among American Indian tribal 
cultures must be recognized. There are 308 federally recognized 
tribes in the Foiled Stales. 'These tribes can differ amongst one 
another as much as the English and Italians or the Spanish and 
Turks differ. Tribes differ in many ways, including languages, be- 
liefs, expectations, gender roles, customs, and ceremonies. Often 
this cultural diversity within American Indian populations is over- 
looked by European Americans, many of whom believe in what T. t\ 
Thomason refers to as the “myth of homogeneity. " s 

In addition to using boarding schools for assimilation, the federal 
government sponsored relocation programs to move tribal citizens 
to urban areas. Although mam participants of the relocation pro- 
grams returned to their reservation communities, a number of Ameri- 
can Indians remained in the cities. Todav a limited reservation land 



182 



Enrciivf CouNSUif«- wuh Aml^ican Indian Simoom's 



base and high unemployment on reservations also pressure tribal 
members to move to urban areas. This urban migration is predicted 
to continue increasing. According to a 1990 census report, 62 per- 
cent of American Indians live away from their tribal land bases: 
therefore, simply living away from the reservation does not mean 
counselors will not encounter American Indians. Counselors must 
take care to ascertain the presence of Native students in mainstream 
schools and not assume erroneously that none attend their school 
just because they are in an urban setting. Nor can it be assumed that 
Native students attending an urban school have lost their cultural 
identities/* 

Teresa Davis LalTomboise and Kathryn Graff Low point out that 
"as Indian youth enter school, they often feel stranded between two 
cultures. Many of them speak an entirely different first language, 
practice an entirely different religion, and hold different cultural 
values than the dominant culture/'"’ Counselors need to recognize 
American Indian students experience different levels of accultura- 
tion and that they are expected to function in a school system based 
upon Kuropcan American culture. Typically the curriculum reflects 
little American Indian history or culture, and that which is included 
is from the Kuropcan American perspective. 



Cross-Cultural Counseling 

Since the early 1970s professional awareness of cultural factors 
and their relevance to the counseling process has increased. “ This 
awareness includes a growing realization that expectations for coun- 
selor and client roles have been influenced almost exclusively by 
Western Kuropcan models and worldviews. While these models have 
proven effective in working with members of Kuropcan American 
society, they have been less effective with other ethnicities. Counse- 
lors need to remember that American Indians and other ethnic 
minorities are socialized to interpret their experiences in the world 
much differently than the majority culture. 

Cultural identity. The vast majority of American Indians has 
little desire to assimilate into Kuropcan American culture. The sense 
of cultural and tribal belonging experienced by American Indians is 
an extremely important aspect of their identity, .lean S. Khinney and 
Mary .lane Kothcram define ethnic identity as "one’s sense of be- 

183 1 [J'j 



longing to an ethnic group and the part of one’s thinking, percep- 
tions, feelings, and behavior that is due to ethnic group member- 
ship.” Some believe this sense of identity begins bv age three or four; 
others believe that even infants can recognize strangers of a different 
ethnic group. School counselors need to recognize the role of ethnic 
identity in the development of self-esteem and self-concept. Studies 
frequently cite the impact of low self-esteem and poor self-concept 
on dysfunctional behaviors with American Indian students. 11 ' 

Frances Aboud reports that only 15 percent of the studies she 
reviewed indicate that American Indian children show a preference 
for their own ethnic group. Native children express a strong prefer- 
ence for European American culture until at least middle childhood. 
This preference comes at the expense of developing positive atti- 
tudes about their own cultural groups. In contrast, Aboud says, 
“White children typically hold negative attitudes toward other groups 
from 4 years of agc.” ,: These findings carry an imp* nant message. 
School counselors must assist teachers, administrators, and stu- 
dents (both Native and non-Nativc) to develop positive self-esteem 
and positive cultural self-concepts in students. In addition, all chil- 
dren must be taught to value other cultures. Because the develop- 
ment of cultural identity and attitudes about other cultural groups 
begins at such an early age, counselors must prepare schools to 
address these issues from the student's first day of enrollment. 
People tend to avoid dissimilar groups, and Aboud suggests children 
react more intensely to dissimilarities because they lack the ability to 
.reconcile different ethnic preferences and reach the conclusion that 
it is all right for people to be different. School counselors aware of 
this situation need to work with teachers and other school personnel 
prior to enrollment and develop strategies to assist children in valu- 
ing ethnic and cultural differences. 

Cultural differences. Many people believe that alt values are 
present in all cultures; however, the priority or emphasis placed on 
each respective value can vary. For example, a sense of family is 
valued by all cultures, cultures differ over the degree to which in- 
volvement with family takes precedence over other values (e.g., 
employment, recreation ). Individuals or groups within a culture 
may also place greater emphasis on one particular value than gener- 



4 i . 



184 



EtfK hvfe Counm nNi> vm!h American Indian Siudenjs 



ally prescribed by the rest of society. It is important to acknowledge 
this to avoid oversimplifying this discussion. 

Values can be described as social guideposts indicating cultural 
norms for appropriate behavior and. revealing what is important, 
what is expected, and what is desired by a particular society. Their 
deep-seated nature renders values so much a part of the background 
they seem almost invisible until confronted with a clashing value. So 
much of what we consider universal is very culture specific . 14 

American Indian students are likely to subscribe to some dis- 



tinctly different values from non-Native counselors, especially those 
students more grounded in their respective Native cultures. Since 
the counseling setting relies on effective communication and the 
counselors ability to “inner-view" the client, the opportunity for 
misunderstanding heightens when values differ. Behaviors of Ameri- 
can Indian students can easily be misinterpreted if the counselor is 
unaware of such differences. For example, Trimble observes, “Many 
young Indians are not socialized to expound on inner thoughts and 



feelings. Thus, reliance on a client's ability to achieve insight would 



be a mistake ." 15 



One of the primary values taught by the formal education system 
is time management. Teachers and administrators expect students 
to arrive at school prior to the beginning of classes, turn in all 
assignments according to a schedule, and think in terms of future 
orientation. Students receive penalties if they are tardy or if they 
think and act only in terms of the present. 'Phis creates a dichotomy 
because Native cultures emphasize a natural order of the world in 
which events happen when they arc supposed to happen. For in- 
stance, Native ceremonies begin when all have arrived who need or 
are expected to be tnere. Contrast this with a mainstream church 
service or school function that begins punctually at the appointed 
hour and minute. Native cultures are rooted in the past, and careful 
attention is paid to the historical nature and ancestral meaning of 
events and relationships. School counselors must assist schools and 
Native students in recognizing this difference and find ways to mini- 
mize the negative impact on students. Johanna Nel suggests empha- 
sizing to Native students the need to show respect for the teacher by 
being punctual. But it is also important for counselors to educate 
teachers and administrators to acknowledge this difference bv exer- 
cising leniency in their policies. 1 '* 



18ft 1 



A second European American value reflected in schools is comple- 
tion of tasks, or goal orientation. Great importance is placed on 
accomplishing tasks or mastering skills to reach specific goals within 
a prescribed time frame. For example, all students are expected to 
demonstrate mastery of certain mathematical skills by third grade. 
While this value has fostered many achievements, it often conflicts 
with Native cultures, which place greater emphasis upon relation- 
ships. School counselors aware of this value difference will be able to 
assist schools and students when it creates conflicts. For example, 
when faced with the choice between completing a homework assign- 
ment or visiting with friends or relatives who stop by, Native culture 
values the relationship with the guests above other tasks. Counselors 
need to work with teachers, parents, and students to resolve these 
types of conflicts, most likely on a case-by-case basis. 

A third value that often creates conflict in schools relates to group 
versus individual accomplishments. European American culture 
places great emphasis on individual accomplishments. Classroom 
environments reinforce this value hy encouraging students to com- 
pete with one another to determine which student is the best, via 
spelling bees, attendance charts, gold stars, letter grades, and so 
forth. Native cultures value group accomplishments more highly, 
working together for the common good. Counselors can assist teach- 
ers in recognizing the potential for and minimizing value conflict. 
Phinney and Rothcrani report studies of success where multiethnic 
teams have worked together to complete class assignments in which 
interdependence is required. A technique recommended in their 
studies is the “jigsaw” method, which requires interdependence 
among students, each of whom must learn part of an assignment and 
teach it to the other group members. r 

Conflict often arises in school settings over a fourth value, family 
orientation. Counselors, in particular, need to attain a clear under- 
standing of the value many Native people place on family. European 
American culture emphasizes the concept of the nuclear family, 
which consists primarily of a mother, father, and children. Parents 
are primary care providers and are held responsible for their children's 
actions, including their accomplishments and mistakes. Laws em- 
bodying the European American culture require children to have 
parental consent until the ages of 16, 18, or 2! depending upon the 
issue and stale of residence. 



1 t 186 



Effecjivf Counseling with American Indian Siudenis 



Within most, if not all, traditional American Indian cultural con- 
texts, the family is far more extended, including grandparents, aunts 
(who may have the same authority as a child’s biological mother), 
uncles (who may have a role similar to a child’s biological father), 
great-aunts (frequently considered grandmothers), great uncles (fre- 
quently considered grandfathers), and cousins (first cousins may 
have the same role as a child’s sibling and thus be considered broth- 
ers and sisters). Native family systems also incorporate biologically 
unrelated family members. For example, one can designate a woman 
as a sister, and that person will be considered a relative by other 
family members. This person may be referred to as “my sister, 
Indian way.’’ These informal adoptees need to be recognized as 
family members. Whereas the specific nature of such relationships 
can be confusing to an inexperienced counselor, it is important to 
realize that it is the perception of a relationship that is significant . 18 

The family is of such importance in Native cultures that u is 
expected to take priority over other values such as recreation, school, 
or even employment, depending upon the situation. If a student is 
needed at home to help a sick family member, that takes priority. If a 
family member is hospitalized, the whole family may stand vigil until 
they are assured the person is in full recovery. Counselors must 
recognize the strength of this value and the implications within the 
school setting in working with American Indian students and fami- 
lies. 



This extended family network has other implications in working 
with American Indian students, adding complexity to identifying a 
student’s primary caretaker. While American Indian families are 
subject to laws that hold biological parents responsible for their 
children, from a Native perspective, such responsibility may be 
shared. The child is the responsibility of the family; thus, a grand- 
parent, aunt, or older sibling may be the primary caretaker. Conse- 
quently counselors must be able to identify which members of the 
family need to be included when working with American Indian 
students. The perceived relationship among the extended family 
members is more important than the biological connection. 



Most literature on counseling American Indians describes these 
differences between Native and Kuropean American cultural values 
plus several others, including sharing versus materialism, being 
versus doing, harmony with nature versus mastery over nature. 



187 



tradition versus technology and progress , humility versus arro- 
gance, and reverence for elders. The ability to recognize these value 
differences and their deep underlying significance is extremely im- 
portant for effective cross-cultural counseling. Without this aware- 
ness and understanding, counselors wilt not recognize the meaning 
of students' behaviors resulting from such values. This lack of under- 
standing can contribute to resistance to counseling processes such 
as self-disclosure. 1 w 

While American Indians share many commonalities in their his- 
tory and general value orientations, it is important to remember 
there are tribal differences. Tribal specific knowledge cannot be 
transported from one tribe to another. For example, firsthand knowl- 
edge about the Navajo culture cannot be transferred to the Dakota of 
South Dakota without significant modification. However, a general 
orientation can provide a foundation from which to build more 
tribally specific knowledge. ,n 

Cross-cultural competencies. Deraid W. Sue and colleagues 
identify three areas of competence that a culturally skilled psycholo- 
gist must possess, which also holds true for related disciplines such 
as school counseling. These areas include (I) awareness of diversity 
in beliefs and attitudes (e.g., need to move from being unaware to 
being aware of personal and other cultural values), (2) knowledge 
(e.g., need to understand the U.S. sociopolitical system and its im- 
pact on other cultural groups), and (3) skills (e.g., ability to interpret 
and respond to a wide range of verbal and nonverbal communica- 
tion). Other observers have built on these observations, pointing out 
the need for counselors to use these competencies in working spe- 
cifically with American Indians. Cultural knowledge can enable dif- 
ferent interpretations of behavioral patterns. For example, Dakota 
people accept the behavior of “pouting, which allows an individual 
to go off alone for a time to reflect on his or her own behavior and the 
behavior of others. If a counselor lacks cultural awareness, knowl- 
edge, and skills, he or she might interfere with a behavior that has a 
function within this tribal context. ’’ 

Effective Counseling Strategies 

Hstablishing trust and rapport. The community's perception 
of the counseling profession is important. Uarhctta Lockhart notes 



4 . 



188 



E»Ff'.:iiy£ Cc-uNagtiUi. ai'h Am{ ftiC^N Indian Si'Jf.iN-s 



American Indian populations hold a historical mistrust of main- 
stream systems. This mistrust can extend to institutions responsible 
for counseling services and the counselors whom they have trained. 
Counseling services for American Indians have been provided pri- 
marily by public schools, Indian Health Services, and the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, with the vast majority of counselors being of Euro- 
pean American descent. LaFromboise and Low remind us that Ameri- 
can Indians tend to look first to their extended family to solve 
problems rather than conventional counseling services, so families 
need to be included in successful interventions." 

Counselors need to recognize and address cultural mistrust at the 
individual, school, and general system levels. Researchers have found 
that mistrust of European Americans is a major obstacle in delivery 
of cross-cultural mental health services and that American Indians 
seldom look to typical mainstream counseling to improve their lives. 
It is evident that using these services depends to a great extent on the 
reputation of past and current counseling programs and the profes- 
sionals themselves. For example, it the previous school counselor 
had been well respected in the community, people would anticipate 
the same types of experiences. If, on the other hand, people have had 
negative experiences, the next counselor would face the difficult 
challenge of establishing trust. M 

Because establishing trust is so essential to the success of counsel- 



ing relationships, counselors need to know how to go about it in 
Native communities. A counselor new to the community is an out- 
sider and can expect a high degree of scrutiny by the community. 
This begins from the moment of first contact with an American 
Indian community. For example, one counselor recently emploved 
in an American Indian community was approached by a woman she 



had not previously met. The counselor was shocked to find out that 
the woman already knew not only that she was a counselor but also 
what kind of vehicle she drove, her marital status, and other per- 
sonal information. American Indian reservation communities are 
quick to share information about anyone who is new to their area, 
and counselors are not immune from this type of scrutiny. While it is 
common for clients to make judgments about their counselors, this 
is especially true in cross-cultural situations. Clients begin sizing up 
counselors at the point of initial contact by keenly observing the way 
in which they are greeted, the counselors manner of dress, the 



1 ftO l / i I 



setting for the session, the manner of introduction (e.g., use of 
formal title or first name), physical appearance, ethnicity, and so 
forth. Lockhart cautions that counselors are watched very closely tor 
inconsistencies and incongruencies . J4 

Clear, effective communication is essential for establishing trust 
and rapport with any client and especially important in cross-cultural 
settings where communication can he so easily misinterpreted. 
Geraldine Youngman and Margaret Sadongei recommend approach- 
ing the initial session very slowly to allow the student to unfold at his 
or her own pace. Counselors are also cautioned that the student 
likely will find self-disclosure inconsistent with tribal traditions. 
Trimble reports that “many young Indians are not socialized to 
expound on inner thoughts and feelings." In many Native cultures, 
the counselor (in traditional cultural terms) is assigned the role of 
expert. The client presents the problem, whereby it is the responsi- 
bility of the healer (e.g., counselor) to diagnose the problem and 
provide a solution. Direct questioning also may not be acceptable 
within the American Indian student's culture. Counselors arc ad- 
vised not to push for self-disclosure but to ask students for help in 
defining the problem in hopes this will foster trust and rapport early 
in the relationship. Without self-disclosure, counselors must learn 
to observe carefully and rely on nonverbal communication clues 
rather than verbal indicators. Thomason recommends the use of 
humor, self-disclosure by the counselor, and warmth to establish 
trust.-* 



In greeting an American Indian student, it is important to ac- 
knowledge the student s tribal affiliation. The sense of tribal identity 
can he very important to a more traditional person. This is especially 
true if more than one tribe is represented in the school population. 
Kqually important is the identification of the student's family sys- 
tem. This can be accomplished by telling the student which family 
members are known by the counselor based on his or her knowledge 
of the community (e.g., “Is Henry Standing Elk your cousin?" "Are 
you related to Molly Begay, who works at the store?") The manner in 
which this is acknowledged depends upon the counselor’s assess- 
ment of the client's level ol acculturation. 

The first contact may need to be formal enough that the student 
knows he or she is being counseled. Thomason recommends counsc- 




5 



( ) i 



ion 



Emcnvfc CouNSutNG v\nt» Avum an Ini man Summis 



lors take a gentle, noninvasive approach to create an atmosphere of 
acceptance in which the American Indian student feels comfortable. 
He also recommends counselors avoid direct questioning.-'’ 

Counseling styles. There is little agreement about which style 
■ of counseling is best for American Indian clients. A study involving 
50 University of Oklahoma students, half of whom identified them- 
selves as American Indian and half as non-Indian, tested an experi- 
mental communication style against a directive style. Kxpcrimcntal 
style communication was characterized bv responses that empha- 
sized approval/ reassurance and self-disclosure while avoiding open- 
ended questions. A directive style of communication was character- 
ized by a high reliance on direct guidance and open question re- 
sponses while de-emphasizing self-disclosure. The researchers found 
that American Indian college students prefer experimental counse- 
lor communication, while a directive style is preferred by non-Indian 
students. However, other research advises against using a nondirec- 
tive (client-centered) counseling approach with American Indians. 
Alonzo Spang suggests an eclectic or directive counseling approach, 
which is most effective when based upon the counselor's knowledge 
of the American Indian culture. LalTomboise and colleagues point 
out that many Native clients expect a different approach from that 
used in traditional therapy. These researchers found that Indian 
adolescents hope the counselor is an expert who can give practical 
advice about their problems.-” 

A number of researchers strongly recommend group counseling 
as a preferred counseling style for American Indians as it is more 
reflective of the cultural worldview of this population. The sense of 
group, rather than the individual, is highly valued in most American 
Indian cultures. This is also very consistent with school counseling 
practices in which group work is used frequently with students. 
Thomason also recommends family counseling whenever possible. - s 

Another factor school counselors need to consider in developing 
effective counseling strategies is the need to be involved in the 
Native community itself. It is important to attend community activi- 
ties, social events, and tribal ceremonies to the greatest degree pos- 
sible. Of course, culturally sensitive school counselors should seek 
out knowledge about the appropriateness of outsider attendance at 
tribal ceremonies beyond the generally public powwow or other 



191 



f • / ' • 



D*r.. ? -ah W; '.S-'. 

social dances. In working with European American counselors who 
live on or near Indian reservations, it is surprising how many coun- 
selors have never attended a powwow or have done so only once or 
twice. To get a true sense of the student's world, it is necessary to 
experience that world as much as possible. In many Native commu- 
nities, tribal members have their own names for particular areas of 
the community, and the only way to find out about these areas is to 
visit them. Often the only way to understand the importance of tribal 
activities is to attend them. While school counselors are encouraged 
to attend Native-oriented activities, they should participate with 
caution. If possible, approach these occasions from the Native cul- 
tural perspective in which unfamiliar situations are observed until 
there is a reason to be invited to participate. 

One school official used the extended family system and the strong 
respect most Native cultures have for their elders quite effectively. 
The school library was displaying photographs of many tribal lead- 
ers from early history to contemporary times. The school official 
would take students to a private area of the library to discuss con- 
cerns with them. In prefacing his remarks, he would remind the 
students of their relatives who were leaders of the community and 
the things they had accomplished. If he needed to instill a sense of 
pride or commitment, he would wait until the students were ready to 
hear such a message and then draw upon their relatives' accomplish- 
ments to remind them of their places in the community and tribe. 
'Hi is tactic requires an extensive knowledge of a tribe’s history and 
extended family systems. 

Overall, the establishment of trust anti rapport is an ongoing 
process that can quickly he destroyed if violated. It is also a process 
that has strong historic roots with American Indian people, creating 
additional challenges in cross-cultural situations. 

Confidentiality. Confidentiality is considered a critical dement 
in establishing trust and rapport in counseling situations. Counse- 
lors who struggle to find more effective strategies for working with 
American Indian students must carefully examine the challenges 
posed by confidentiality. The professional ethical and legal stan- 
dards of confidentiality are the same with this population as with 
other clients. However, the nature of communication patterns and 
extended family systems creates the need lo reflect on this factor in 



192 



Ef fK-HVfc Co^NSHlNG iVUm AN lNl»AN SlUOlMb 



counseling Native students. Within many traditional Native family 
systems, communication patterns are quite indirect, For example, if 
a son is not pleased with his mothers actions, he cannot tell her 
directly, although he can go to another person such as an aunt. The 
aunt can then go to the mother to explain the son's concerns. The 
mother, in turn, can respond to her son through the aunt. While this 
pattern of communication avoids direct conflict and contributes to 
the sense of harmony among relationships, it also can confuse the 
communication process. It is important for school counselors to be 
aware of this communication pattern and be alert for how they may- 
be drawn into it. For example, if a member of a student’s family asks 
the school counselor whether it would be a good idea for Johnny to 
attend a particular function, the family member may he seeking a 
way to express his or her own opinion by saying the counselor said it 
was a good idea. Counselors must recognize the indirect communi- 
cation pattern in place and become adept at interpreting it accu- 
rately. 

School counselors must also exercise care in what they communi- 
cate within extended family systems. Certainly reiterating the rules 
of confidentiality on a regular basis helps everyone involved clarify 
boundaries. While family system theory helps define how relatively 
nuclear families work, school counselors generally work with far 
more family members than in a European American cultural system, 
and as indicated earlier, some of these family members are recog- 
nized as such only within the family system. Counselors must find 
ways to communicate effectively within existing communication pat- 
terns and avoid violating their client's right to confidentiality. 

The possibility of dual roles in small reservation communities is 
also a factor in maintaining the students’ rights to confidentiality. It 
is a chaMenge in any small community where everyone knows every- 
one else. T his will likely create another role for school counselors 
who try to be visible in the Native community and to attend tribal 
activities to establish trust and rapport. Again, it is important for 
counselors to remember they will be scrutinized for what they say 
and do within the community. Additional caution needs to he exer- 
cised to ensure that no information can he attributed back to some- 
thing the counselor has said, which could be construed as violating 
students' confidentiality. “ 



193. M 




Environmental factors: Racism and prejudice. Racism and 
prejudice are realities in the world of American Indians. Counselors 
need to remember this fact when developing effective counseling 
strategies. As indicated by previously cited research, counselors can 
work with the school system and community to help all students 
recognize the value of ethnic diversity. Counselors should develop 
group and class exercises to reinforce students' self-esteem and self- 
worth. Start simply with exercises that create an awareness by stu- 
dents and educators that each person has a culture. One such exer- 
cise is to provide all students, teachers, or administrators with draw- 
ing materials and ask them to draw their culture within a five- to ten- 
minute time frame. The results will promote extensive discussion. 
Value clarification exercises also draw attention to cultural differ- 
ences and the need to res net t diversity without judging others.* 40 
Counselors must acknowledge that racism and prejudice exist 
and must be dealt with by all concerned. Deraid and David Sue point 
out, “Racism is alive, well, and thriving in the United States.” 41 
Awareness is one step but a more active stance would he more 
conducive to American Indian students' well-being. Racism ranges 
from covert, found in institutional forms of racism, to overt biases, 
expressed at the individual level; this needs to be recognized by 
school counselors. A review is needed of school policies as well as 
testing tools used with American Indian students, including stan- 
dardized counseling instruments and ability or IQ testing (e.g., Iowa 
Basic Skills Test, ACT, SAT. and so forth). 

Charles Ridley's work on the impact of racism in counseling iden- 
tifies five assumptions: 

(I) racism is reflected in behavior, (2) racist acts can he per- 
formed by prejudiced and nonprejudiced people | emphasis 
added 1, (B) no one ethnic group is responsible for racism, (4) 
the determination as to a racist act is in the consequences and 
not the causes of the behavior, and (5) power is the toree that is 
necessary for racism to continue. ,J 

School counselors must thoroughly understand racism and preju- 
dice to address them effectively. This is especially true in situations 
where many people are unaware that their behavior in cross-cultural 
situations can frequently result in unintentional racism. 



194 



EOK'ti'.l CooNSEr.V • \V.ln A»/f S h Cl MS 



Summary 

Counseling has always been a part of American Indian culture. 
Only recently has the European American counseling establishment 
recognized the role of culture in counseling. Developing a historical 
understanding of American Indians is important to working with 
American Indian students. It is also important for school counselors 
to recognize the tremendous diversity among and within American 
Indian tribes and the impact of acculturation factors and cultural 
identity issues. The cultural differences between American Indian 
and European American students are very real and require an aware- 
ness of value differences and the implications of a few of the primary 
values described herein. School counselors need to obtain cross- 
cultural competencies to be effective. The establishment of trust and 
rapport, counseling styles, confidentiality, and dealing with the en- 
vironmental factors of racism and prejudice are essential elements 
of a counselor's knowledge base. 



Notes 



1. Deborah Wetsit (Assinibome) holds a doctorate in counseling (empha- 
sis in cross-cultural counseling), is a former faculty member at the University 
of Montana, and is the former dean of instruction at Haskell Indian Nations 
University. She is the distance learning coordinator for the Montana Consor- 
tium and works extensively with In-Care Network, Inc. 



2. See Gladding, Counseling and Peterson and Nisenhoiz, Orientation to 
C 'ounseling. 

3. American School Counselor Association. Sehooi Counselor and Com- 
pre/icnsii t ( 'oanseiing, 1 . 

4. See Gladding, Counseling and Gibson, Mitchell, and Basile. C hansel- 
ing in the Elementary Sehooi . 

5. See Attneave, "American Indians." 



(>. See Trimble and Fleming, "Providing Counseling Services." 

7. See Palsano, We the . . . Fit si A met ic 'a ns and Lee, "School Counseling.’ 



8. Thomason, “Counseling Native American Students." 109. 

9. See Hillahrant and others, "Native American Education." 



to. I HiFromhoisc and Low, "American Indian Children," 119. 

11. See Draguns, “Dilemmas and Choices"; Atkinson, Morten, and Sue, 
( 'ounseling American Minorities and Sue and Sue, ( 'ot/nse/ing the Culturally 
l Efferent. 



195 




12. Phinney and Rotheram, “Children s Ethnic Socialization. “ 13. See also 
Ahoud, “Development of Ethnic Self-Identification": Katz. "Developmental 
and Social Processes”; Youngman and Sadongei, “Counseling the American 
Indian Child": Trimble. “A Cognitive- Behavioral Approach”; and Nel, "Pre- 
venting School Failure: The Native American Child.” 

13- Ahoud, “Development of Ethnic Self-Identification,” 45. 

14. See Samovar and Porter, Communication between Cultures. 

15. Trimble. “Value Differentials” (1976). 204. See also Peterson and 
Nisenholz, Orientation to Counseling. 

16. See Nel. “Preventing School Failure.” 

17. See Phinney and Rotheram, “Children s Ethnic Socialization.” 

18. Tafoya's “Coyote's Eyes” provides an excellent overview of Native 
family systems in comparison to European American family systems. 

19. See /.intz, education Across Cultures r, Bryde, Indian Students and 
Guidance: ; Trimble. “Value Differentials" (1976); LaFromboise, Trimble, and 
Mohatt. "Counseling Interventions”; Trimble and Fleming, “Providing Coun- 
seling”: IxiFromboise and Low, “American Indian Children”; and Herring. 
"Counseling Native American Youth." 

20. See Attneave. “American Indians." 

21. Deraid Wing Sue and others, “Cross-Cultural Counseling Competen- 
cies,” 45-52. See also Herring, "Counseling Native American Youth”: 
I.a Fromboise, Trimble, and Mohatt. “Counseling Intervent ions"; Trimble and 
Fleming. “Prt viding Counseling"; Trimble. “Value Differentials” (19 T 6): 
Dodd, Dynamics of Intercultural Communication ; Atkinson, Morten, and 
Sue. C 'ounscliny American Minorities: Samovar and Porter, C 'onununication 
between t 'ultures: and Attneave. “American Indians." 

22. See Lockhart, "Historic Distrust": LaFromboise and Low, "American 
Indian Children": and Everett. Proctor, and Cartmell. "Providing Psychologi- 
cal Services.” 

23. See UilTomboise. “American Indian Mental Health Policy” and 
Welsit, "Counseling Preferences.” 

24. See Lewis and Ho. “Social Work” and Lockhart, "Historic Distrust.” 

25. Youngman and Sadongei. "Counseling the American Indian Child.” 
2~3-7“: Trimble. "Value Differentials” (19~6). 204. See also Lockhart. "His- 
toric Distrust”; I.aFromboisc. Trimble, and Mohatt, "Counseling Interven- 
tions”: LaFromboise and Low. "American Indian Children"; and Thomason. 
“Counseling Native American Students.” 

26. See Lockhart. “Historic Distrust" and Thomason. “Counseling Native 
American Students.” 

2~\ See Dauphinais. Dauphinais, and Rowe, “Effects of Race"; Spang, 
“Counseling the American Indian": and LaFromboise. Trimble, and Mohatt. 
"Counseling Interventions.” 

2S. See Attneave. “American Indians”; Lewis and Ho, “Social Work”; 
Dufrene and Coleman. “Counseling Native Americans”; and Thomason, 
“Counseling Native American Students.” 

( i / 1 Q<5 



Emcuvf CoUNSlUNG WITH AMtMCAN INDIAN SlUDLNIS 



29. Davis and Ritchie, "Confidentiality.” 

30. See Aboud, “Development of Ethnic Self-Identification” and Katz. 
“Developmental and Social Processes.” 

31. Sue and Sue, Counseling the Culturally Different , 4. 

32. Ridley. “Racism in Counseling." 57-53. 



Bibliography 



Aboud. Frances E. “The Development of Ethnic Self-Identification and Atti- 
tudes.” In Children's Ethnic Socialization: Pluralism and Development, 
edited by dean S. Phinney and Mary .lane Rotheram. Newbury Park. CA: 
Sage Publications, 1987. 

American Counseling Association. American C hanseling Association Code of 
Ethics and Standards of Practice. Alexandria, VA: American Counseling 
Association, 1995. 

American School Counselor Association. The School Counselor and Compre- 
hensive C ] ounseliny : The Position of the American School Counselor Asso- 
ciation, Revised. Alexandria, YA: American School Counselor Association, 
1993. 

. The School Counselor and Crass/Multicultural Counseling: The Posi- 
tion of the American School Counselor Association. Revised. Alexandria, 
VA: American School Counselor Association. 1993. 

Atkinson, Donald R., George Morten, and Deraid Wing Sue, eds. Counseling 
American Minorities: A Cross Cultural Perspective. 3d ed. Dubuque, IA: 
William C. Brown, 1989. 

Attneave. Carolyn L. “American Indians and Alaska Native Families: Emigrants 
in Their Own Homeland.” In Ethnicity and Family Therapy, edited by 
Monica McGoldrick, John K. Pearce, and Joseph Giordano. New York: 
Guilford Press, 1982. 



Bryde, John F. Indian Students and Guidance. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 1971. 

Carey, John C., M. Reinat, and L. Ponte. “School Counselors’ Perception of 
Training Needs in Multicultural Counseling.” Counselor Education and 
Supervision 29(3): 155-69 (1990). 

Dauphinais, Paul, L Dauphinais, and W. Rowe. “Effects of Race and Communi- 
cation Style on Indian Perceptions of Counselor Effectiveness.” Counselor 
Education and Supen •ision 2 1 ( 1 ) : 72-80 ( 198 1 ). 

Davis, Tom, and Martin Ritchie. “Confidentiality and the School Counselor: A 
Challenge for the 1990s.” I he Sc 'hool t 'ounsclor 41(1): 23- 30 (1993). 



Dodd, Curley H. Dynamics of Intereultural Communication. 2d ed. Dubuque, 
IA: William C. Brown, 1987. 



Draguns, Juris G. “Dilemmas and Choices in Cross-Cultural Counseling: The 
Universal Versus the Culturally Distinctive.” In C 'ounseliny Across t 'ultures. 



193 



'Ji 



iffiiL i 




Dl BORAH Wl TSII 



3d ed., edited by Paul Pedersen, Julius (». Draguns, Walter J. Lomier. and 
-Joseph E. Trimble. Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1989- 

Dufrene. Phoebe M.. and Victoria l). Coleman. “Counseling Native Americans: 
Guidelines for Group Process/' The Journal for Specialists in Croup Work 
F(4): 229-34 (1992). 



Everett, Frances, N. Proctor, and B. Cartmell. “Providing Psychological Ser- 
vices to American Indian Children and Families." in Counseling American 
Minorities: A ('ross Cultural Perspective, 3d ed., edited by Donald R. 
Atkinson. George Morten, and Deraid Wing Sue. Dubuque, IA: William C. 
Brown. 1989. 



Gibson, Robert I... Marianne II. Mitchell, and Sherry K. Basiie. Counseling in 
the elementary School: A ( omprehensive Approach. Needham Heights: 
Alien & Bacon. 1993. 

Gladding. Samuel T. Counseling: A Comprehensive Profession. 2d ed. New 
York: Merrill. 1992.. 



I lnvilnnd. Mark G.. R. K. Horswell. J. J. O'Connell, and V. Dynneson. “Native 
American College Students' Preference for Counselor Race and Sex and the 
Likelihood of Their Use of a Counseling Center.” Journal of Counseling 
Psycholag 1983): 

Herring. Roger 1). “Counseling Native American Youth." In Multicultural Is- 
sues in C 'ounseling: \ew Approaches to Diversity. edited by Courtland C. 
I.ee and Bernard I jester Richardson. Alexandria. \’A: American Association 
of Counseling and Development. 1991. 

Ilillabrant. Walter, Mike Romano. David Slang, and Mike Charleston. “Native 
American Educational a Turning Point: Current Demographics and Trends: 
Indian Nations At Risk: Solutions for the 1990s." In Indian SationsAt Risk: 
Listening to the People, edited by Patricia Cahape and Craig B. llowley. 
Charleston. WV: ERICClearingliouseon Rural Education ami Small Schools, 
1992. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 1*3)339 588. 

llodgkinson. Harold, the ( 'urrent ( 'audition o/ Xative Americans. ERIC' Di- 
gest. Charleston. W'V: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small 
Schools, 1992. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 348 202. 

Rat/. Phyllis A. “Developmental and Social Processes in Ethnic Attitudes and 
Sell-Identification." In Children’s lit hnie Socialization: Pluralism and De- 
velopment. edited by Jean S. Phinney and Mary Jane Rotheram. Newbury 
Park. CA: Sage Publications. 1987. 

EiEromboise, Teresa Davis. “American Indian Mental Health Policy. Ameri- 
can Psychologist 43(5): 388-97 (1988). 

La Fromboise. Teresa Davis, and I). Dixon. “American Indian Perceptions of 
Trustworthiness in a (’ounseling Interview.” Journal of ( ‘ounseling Psy- 
chology '±W(‘±)\ 135-39 (1981). 

I .a From Boise. Teresa Davis. Joseph E. Trimble, and Gerald V. Mohatt. “Coun- 
seling Interventions and American Indian Tradition: An Integrative Ap- 
proach." In ( 'ounseling . \tiieriean Minorities: A ( ‘mss( 'ultural Perspective. 
1th ed.. edited b\ I). Atkinson. G. Morten and I). W. Sue. Dubuque. IA: 
William C. Brown Ccmummications, 1993. 




198 



S-iiv 



E ' ■ i ' i - y I C . * i ; ' .• • A ' i * A Vi •{ A *{ 1' .! ■ 



I.aFromboise. Teresa Davis, and Kathryn (iraff Dm - . “American Indian Chil- 
dren and Adolescents." In Children of Colot : Psycholoyical Interventions 
with Minority Youth, edited by .Jewelle Taylor (tibbs. Luke Nahme Huang, 
and associates. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1989. 

Lee. Courtland C. “School Counseling and Cultural Diversity." In Counseliny 
for Pirersi A (luidc for School Counselors and Related Professionals. 
edited by Courtland C. Lee. Needham Heights: Allyn &- bacon. 1995. 

Lewis, Ronald (I.. and Man Keung 1 lo. “Social Work and the American Indian." 
In Counseling American Minorities: .1 Cross Cultural Perspective. 8d cd., 
edited by Donald R. Atkinson. Course Moilen. and Deraid Wing Sue. 
Dubuciue, IA: William C. Brown. 1989. 

.“Social Work with Native Americans. " Social Work 8"9-82 ( 19™5). 

Littrell. John M.. and Mary-Ann Litlrell. “American Indian and Caucasian 
Students' Preferences for Counselors: Effects of Counselor Dress and Sex." 
.Journal oft 'ounscliny Psychology 29( 1 ): 48 5”. 

Lockhart. Barbelta, “Historic Distrust and the Counseling of American Indians 
and Alaska Natives." W hite Cloud Journal of American Indian Alaska 
Satire Mental Health 2(8): 81-84 ( 19SI ). 

Nel. .Johanna. “Preventing School Failure: The Native American Child." In 
Prevent iny School Paiture. \ol. ft™. Washington. DC: lleldref Publications. 
1994. 

Palsano. Kdna L. We the . . . First Americans. Washington. DC: t'.S. Depart- 
ment of Commerce. Economics and Statistics Administration, Bureau of the 
Census. 1998. 

Peterson,.!. Vincent, and Bernard Nisenhol/. ( trim to turn to ( 'ounsi 'liny. Bd cd. 
Needham I (eights: Alhn & Bacon. 1995. 

Phinney. .Jean S.. and Man .lane Rotheram. “Childrens Ethnic Socialization: 
Themes and Implications." In Children 's Mimic Socialization: Pluralism 
and Development. edited by .Jean S. Phinney and Man .Jane Rotheram. 
Newbury Park. CA: Sage Publications. 198“. 

Ridley. Charles R. “Racism in Counseling as an Aversive Behavioral Process." In 
Counscliny Across Cultures . Bd ed., edited In Paul Pedersen. .Julius (i. 
Draguns. Walter.!. Lonner. and .Joseph F. Trimble. Honolulu: Cniversityof 
Hawaii Press, 1989. 

Samovar. Larrv A., and Richard I-.. Porter. ( omnu/nieation Hetween ( 'ultures. 
2d ed. Belmont. CA: Wadsworth. 1995. 

Spang. Alonzo. “Counseling the American Indian." Journal oj American In- 
dian education 5( 1 ): 10- 15 ( I9(>5). 

Sue. Deraid Wing, and Da\ it! Sue. C 'ounsi'Jiny fhei 'ulturally Different: theory 
A Practice. 2d ed. New York: .John Wiley N* Sons. 1990. 

Sue. Herald Wing. Joseph F. Bernier. A. Durran. Lmrenee Feinberg. Paul 
Pedersen, C. .1. Smith, and Fun Yasqmv-Xuttall. "Cross-Cultural Counsel- 
ing Competencies." Thci 'ounscliny Psychol* >yist 19(2): 45-52 ( 1982). 

Talovn, Torn. “Covole’s F\es: Native Cognition Styles." Journal . I meriean 
Indian FJunition. special issue (August 1989): 29-42. 



199 





Df BORAH WtlSII 



Thomason, T. C. “Counseling Native American Students." In Counseling for 
Diversity: A Guide far School 'Counselors and Related Profassimals. edited 
by Courtland C. Lee. Needham Heights: Allyn & Bacon, 1995. 



Trimble, .Joseph E. “A Cognitive- Behavioral Approach to Dnig Abuse Preven- 
tion and Intervention with American Indian Youth/’ In Working with Cul- 
ture: Psychotherapeutic Interventions with Ethnic Minority Children and 
Adolescents, edited by Luis A. Vargas and Joan I). Koss-Chioino. San Fran- 
cisco: Jossey-Bass, 1992. 

. “Value Differentials and Their Importance in Counseling American 

Indians.” In Counseling Across Cultures. 1st ed., edited by Paul B. Pedersen, 
Walter J. 1/mner, and Juris G. Draguns. Honolulu: East-West Center, 
University Press of Hawaii, 1976. 

“Value Differentials and Their Importance in Counseling American 

Indians.” In Counseling A c toss Cultures, rev. and expanded ed., edited by 
Paul Pedersen, Walter J. Umiier, and Juris G. Draguns. Honolulu: East- 
West Center; University Press of Hawaii, 1981. 



Trimble, Joseph E., and C. Fleming. “Providing Counseling Services for Native 
American Indians: Client, Counselor, and Community Characteristics." In 
Counseling Across Cultures. 3d ed., edited by Paul Pedersen, .Julius G. 
Draguns, Walter J. Ix>nner, and Joseph R. Trimble. Honolulu: University of 
Hawaii Press, 1989. 



Wetsit, Deborah. “Counseling Preferences of American Indian Students at the 
University of Montana." Ed.D. diss., University of Montana, 1992. 

Youngman, Geraldine, and Margaret Sadongei. “Counseling the American 
Indian Child.” Elementary School Guidance and Counseling 8(4): 273-77 
(1974). 



Zinlz, Miles V. Education Across Cultures. Dubuque, IA: W. C. Brown Book 
Co., 1963- 




200 



Chapter 9 




The Role of Social Work in Advancing 
the Practice of Indigenous Education 

Obstacles and Promises in 
Empowerment-Oriented Social Work 

Practice 

Miciiakl J. Yellow Bird 

AND 

VkNIDA ClIENAl'LT 1 



E ducation for Indigenous children should empower them to 
become “full participants in their communities, the country, 
and the world. However, a major barrier to empowerment 
for Indigenous peoples is their history of intellectual and cultural 
oppression in European American schools. Social workers who ac- 
cept the challenge of rising above their own profession's past in- 
volvement in this history can heip Indigenous peoples change their 
children’s future. 

Schools have generally approached the education of Indigenous 
children from a deficit model, based upon the belief that First Na- 
tions children have “lacked the innate intelligence to succeed in 
school." 1 Deficit thinking continues today hut is couched in slightly 




different terms. Social workers and educators alike often identify 
Indigenous children as an “at-risk” or “vulnerable" school popula- 
tion because of high drop-out rates and low academic achievement. 
This labeling is individualized to students and rarely takes into 
account the larger political barriers and dynamics that maintain 
oppression. 5 Solving personal problems on an individual level, using 
individual solutions, is important. However, structural approaches 
aimed at reducing institutional racism and oppression are equally 
important. Problems are encompassed by both individual and struc- 
tural frameworks. The professional mission of social work and the 
roles of social workers can advance the practice of Indigenous educa- 
tion. Empowerment-oriented social work practices illustrate bow 
this is possible. The extent to which social workers can help remains 
to be seen. However, to create change, educators interested in ad- 
vancing Indigenous education must develop strong collaborative 
relationships with social workers, whether they are based in schools 
or in other agencies. Educators and social workers with progressive, 
courageous, and collaborative attitudes and an interest in overturn- 
ing oppressive aspects of Indigenous education will make powerful 
contributions. 



Advancing the Practice of Indigenous Education: A 
Social Work Perspective 

'Phe purpose of what we call social work is to help people sur- 
mount personal and environmental harriers that inhibit growth, 
development, and adaptive functioning. The role of social work in 
advancing Indigenous education is. then, (l) to help Indigenous 
children and families resolve persona/ and family circumstances 
that prevent students from achieving the highest levels of learning 
and education and (2) to help students, parents, and communities 
understand and take action to k)\x'XV()\\\c political and institutional 
harriers and oppressive conditions that prevent children and their 
families from achieving the highest levels of learning, education, and 
well-being. • 

Social workers should refer to or provide culturally sensitise ser- 
vices that assist with such issues as communicating; parenting: re- 
solving conflicts: and nurturing spiritual, emotional, physical, and 
intellectual development. Social workers should also use their pro- 

2 1 ;•> 



r jm 



Thf Rolf ci Scxtiai Woi-'k in Advancing mi Pi?ac nu of Iniv Eiha as ion 



fessional skills and knowledge to mobilize action against oppressive 
environmental conditions in the school or community that produce 
racism, substance abuse, and poverty. 



Empowerment Theories, Principles, Processes, and 
Approaches 

Empowerment is used to describe much of what is done in social 
work, but everything that is done is not empowering. Julian Rappaport 
writes, “To be committed to an empowerment agenda, is to be com- 
mitted to identify, facilitate, or create contexts in which heretofore 
silent and isolated people, those who are ‘outsiders' in various set- 
tings, organizations, and communities gain understanding, voice, 
and influence over decisions that affect their lives."'* 

Theories of empowerment help explain how forces of discrimina- 
tion and oppression work in today's society. By understanding these 
forces, people can figure out practical ways to work toward a more 
just society. These theories are important to advancing Indigenous 
education because they 



• help explain social class issues and oppression; 

• identify the barriers that keep people in a state of powerless- 
ness; 

• offer students value frameworks for promoting human empow- 
erment and liberation; 



find practical ways to take down barriers and achieve social 
justice; 

build on people’s strengths, resiliency, and resources." 



The social work literature contains many definitions of empower- 
ment: a process, multilevel construct, service-delivery approach, or 
way to build on strengths of people and communities.” 

Empowerment as a process. Lorraine Gutierrez says, “Em- 
powerment involves the process of increasing personal, interper- 
sonal, or political power so that individuals, families, and communi- 
ties can take action to improve their situations." Gutierrez also re- 
gards several factors as important to empowerment: developing 
critical consciousness (ability to perceive social, economic, and po- 




Mit.liAl! J. YlllOvV & VlNU'A C»«tNAUU 



litical forces that affect people), reducing self-blame, assuming per- 
sonal responsibility for change, and enhancing people’s confidence 
and skill in making change happen.* 1 

Barbara Solomon thinks of empowerment as a process in which 
the social worker engages in a set of activities with clients to reduce 
the powerlessness they experience as members of a stigmatized 
group. The social worker and client first identify the power blocks 
contributing to the problem. The social worker then helps the client 
develop and begin using specific strategies to reduce the effects of 
the client s long-term belief in his or her own incompetence or 
worthlessness and overcome the ongoing political, economic, and 
social barriers that stand in the client’s way. 

Empowerment as a multilevel construct. Karla Mi ley. 
Michael O'Melia, and Brenda DuBois explain: 

On a pcrsonal\Q\c\ empowerment refers to a subjective state of 
mind, feeling competent and experiencing a sense of control; 
on a political level, it refers to the objective reality of opportu- 
nities in societal structures and the reallocation of power 
through a modification of social structures. 10 



Judith A. B. Lee suggests empowerment rests on three interlock- 
ing dimensions: (1) developing a positive and potent sense of self; (2) 
gaining a body of knowledge and detecting and understanding social 
and political realities; and (3) developing the practical ability to 
attain personal and group goals. 

Empowerment as a social work approach. Lee focuses on 
seven key principles of empowerment practice: 



L All oppression is destructive of life and should be challenged by 
social workers and clients. 

2. The social worker should not lose sight of the larger context 
when working with people in situations of oppression. 

3. People empower themselves (social workers should assist). 

4. People who share common ground need each other to attain 
empowerment. 

fi. Social workers should establish an “I and 1" relationship with 
clients. 



6. Social workers should encourage the client to speak his or her 
own words. 



i 




204 




Tme Ron o { Son At Wopk ;n Advancing ?i*e Pwachl* of Indio-inci'S Edik -VioN 



7. Social workers should maintain a social change focus. 11 

Building on strengths. The strengths perspective of social 
work focuses on what people, communities, and cultures have versus 
what they do not have. Almost everything imaginable can be a 
strength: what people know and learn about themselves; knowledge, 
talents, cultural customs, and beliefs; personal qualities; and pride. 
This empowering perspective is founded o?i the following assump- 
tions: 

• Despite life’s problems, all people and environments possess 
strengths that can be used to improve the quality of clients’ 
lives. 

• Client motivation is based on fostering client strengths. 

• Individuals and groups are more likely to continue, autono- 
mous development and growth when it is supported bv their 
own capacities, knowledge, and skills. 

• The social worker does not Fill the role of “expert." Discovering 
strengths requires cooperative collaboration between clients 
and workers. 

• Social workers must avoid the victim mind-set and the tempta- 
tion to "blame the victim"; instead, they should focus on how 
the individual has managed to survive in an oppressive envi- 
ronment. 

• Any environment, no matter how harsh, contains resources. 1 * 1 

These ideas can guide social workers and educators as they inte- 
grate their efforts and collaborate with Indigenous communities to 
overcome oppressive circumstances and advance the practice of 
Indigenous education. 



What Is Social Work? 

It is important for educators to understand the mission, role, and 
professional activities of social work and social workers so they can 
identify areas of possible collaboration. 'Flic social work profession 
uses several definitions to define its scope and mission. The Code of 
Ethics of the National Association of Social Workers (NASW), the 
largest professional social work organization in the United States, 
states this: 



nr\ff 1 ( , 




M« ‘<-vi J. Yniow Bw & \A f Chna. ii 



The primary mission of the social work profession is to en- 
hance human well-being and help meet the basic human needs 
of all people, with particular attention to the needs an 1 em- 
powerment of people who are vulnerable, oppressed, and living 
in poverty. A historic and defining feature of social work is the 
profession’s focus on individual well-being in a social context 
and the well-being of society. Fundamental to social work is 
attention to environmental forces that create, contribute to. 
and address problems in living." 



Rex Skidmore, Milton Thackeray, and William Farley define so- 
cial work as “a profession that helps people to solve personal, group 
(especially family), and community problems and to attain satisfy- 
ing personal, group, and community relationships through . . . case- 
work, group work, community organization, and research . 1 

'This professional mission statement describes multiple roles for 
social workers. They provide services, act as agents of planned change, 
and help individuals who find difficulty relating with other people.' n 



Current Obstacles to Advancing Indigenous Education 

There is a crucial need for empowerment-oriented social work 
practice in Indigenous education. The history of Indigenous educa- 
tion is replete with oppression, racism, discrimination, cultural geno- 
cide, social control, and the imposition of hegemonic European 
American education methods. Understanding the history of a group’s 
oppression raises consciousness and is important to the knowledge 
base of empowerment social work practice. 



Unacknowledged histories of oppression. The greatest ob- 
stacle to advancing Indigenous education may be the lack of ac- 
knowledgment and redress of its oppressive history. The removal of 
Indigenous children from their homes by the social work profession 
is part of this legacy. This painful legacy has generated extensive 
mistrust, alienation, and resistance among Indigenous peoples to- 
ward European American models of assimilationist education. David 
Gil describes oppression as “relations of domination and exploita- 
tion— economic, social, and psychological— between individuals; be- 
tween groups and classes, within and beyond societies; and. globally, 
between entire societies." He stales that oppression results in injus- 



on/. 



Tw Roit OF SoClAi WoPk in AOvANi iN« 7 1h[ PliAf.' Ik' | < '( InCU^NC’ , Ei'-UC AION 



tice, discrimination, dehumanization, and growth-inhibiting condi- 
tions of living. Psychological studies of oppression suggest that re- 
peated exposure to oppressive situations leads people to internalize 
negative self-images. r 

'Fhe most potent and hostile form of oppression brought about by 
educators was the U.S. government policy of forcing Indigenous 
children to attend religious and government-sponsored hoarding 
schools. In boarding schools, Indigenous students were exposed to 
oppressive conditions for extended periods of their childhoods. Edu- 
cators indoctrinated students to prepare them for subordination to 
colonialism and assimilation into majority culture . 18 

Boarding schools resembled forced acculturation camps where 
tribal languages, cultural beliefs, and cultural practices, regarded as 
impediments to European American civilization , were systemati- 
cally eradicated in the education process. Students were subjected to 
harsh physical punishment when they spoke their languages and 
were taught to doubt and devalue the beliefs, identity, and cultures 
of their communities and parents. While many Indigenous peoples 
today hold a positive view of education, some still pass on the stories 
of the oppression and harsh treatment of hoarding schools to their 
children. 1 ’* 



Colonialism and its legacy. Boarding schools did not develop 
in a historical vacuum. They were an extension of the European 
American colonialization process that exerted control over the eco- 
nomic. political, and social lives of First Nations peoples. Robert 
Blauner explains, “Colonialism traditionally refers to the establish- 
ment of domination over a geograph ically-external political unit 
most often inhabited by people of a different race and culture, where 
this domination is political and economic, and the colony exists 
subordinated to and dependent upon the mother country."*" 

Social work practice literature rarely encourages the use of the 
European American colonialism theory to explain the current social, 
political, and economic hardships faced by Indigenous peoples. Yet 
Indigenous social work scholars insist that understanding colonial- 
ism is essential to effective social work practice with First Nations 
peoples .* 1 1 Because of this lack in the education of social workers, 
they rarely understand how colonialism contributed to the creation 
of a host of ills in Indigenous communities: poverty, internalized 



on*; 



1 t 





Mich ac i J Ytiiovv Bn?o & Vcn-da Chcnahu 



violence, high mortality, destroyed families, broken-up village . Ja- 
tions, and subordinated political structures. Yet the point of colo- 
nialism was to weaken the resistance of Indigenous peoples so they 
could be controlled." 

Colonialism did not exist in isolation. It was the product of rac- 
ism. According to Blauner, racism “is a fundamental principle of 
social domination by which a group seen as inferior or different in 
terms of alleged biological characteristics is exploited, controlled, 
and oppressed socially and psychically by a superordinate group.” 
The racism of many Europeans and European Americans made it 
acceptable to force Indigenous children into boarding schools. 1 1 

Linda Miller Clean' and Thomas D. Peacock remind us, “The 
process of colonization, the Christianization and the ‘civilization' of 
the Indigenous peoples in this country today affect both the colo- 
nizer and colonized in more ways than we at first discern. Remnants 
of oppression still affect the daily intercourse of the two peoples.” 
These negative effects of European American colonialism upon the 
well-being of Indigenous peoples are well documented. Today First 
Nations experience shorter life expectancy and greater rates of pov- 
erty, unemployment, violence, alcoholism, chronic disease, suicide, 
and accidents than the general population in the United States.-' 4 

The historical time capsule of boarding school oppression is still 
manifest in Indigenous education today. For example, Indigenous 
children drop out of school at the highest rate of all ethnic groups 
and experience an excess of academic failure and low achievement. 
W. II. Du Bray states that the “inter-generational effect of the board- 
ing school era is still considered one of the major factors in the 
breakdown of Indian family traditions and has had a major impact 
on parenting practices for generations.” When looking for causes of 
the disproportionate number of youth gangs and high rates of vio- 
lence, suicide, and substance abuse among Indigenous communi- 
ties, social workers and educators should challenge themselves to 
determine how colonialism has contributed to these problems/’ 

Social workers as historical participants in the oppres- 
sion of Indigenous peoples. Most social workers do not know 
the history of their profession with respect to Indigenous peoples. 
Thus, most do not know how social workers oppressed and tore 
apart communities by taking Indigenous children and placing them 



ono 





The Roif of Social Work in Advancing hie Practice o r Indigenous Educahon 



in boarding schools. Most do not know that attitudes exhibited by 
their professional predecessors created deep mistrust for social work 
among Indigenous peoples. 

A congressional investigation in the mid-1970s discovered that 
“many state social workers and judges were either ignorant of Indian 
culture or tradition or were prejudiced in their attitudes; many 
children were removed from their homes primarily because the 
family was Indian and poor. In one state, for example, the adoption 
rate of Indian children was eight times that of non-Indian children. 
Entire reservations were being depleted of their you th.” 2 *’ 

The ignorance and prejudice toward Indigenous cultures by social 
workers was present for two reasons. First, social workers, like 
educators, were the products of a European American education 
system that disrespected or ignored Indigenous cultures while pro- 
moting its own history, heroes, language, and culture. Second, the 
education system did not (and still does not) equip students to 
understand how European American colonization oppressed the 
social, political, and economic lives of Indigenous peoples. 

Education rarely incorporates the voices (narrations) of Indig- 
enous peoples who have been traumatized by European American 
racism and colonialism. According to Paulo Freire, a radical Brazil- 
ian scholar who promoted “critical consciousness” among oppressed 
peoples, education uses a “banking approach” when teaching history 
and most other subjects. In this approach, students are passive 
receptacles (listening objects), and the teacher or school (narrating 
subject) deposits selective knowledge that is often detached from the 
reality of the students. This domination of student thinking subverts 
students* abilities to challenge or question what they are told and 
keeps them submerged in a situation where their awareness of and 
responses to Indigenous peoples’ oppression are practically impos- 
sible. Consequently, education suffers from narration sickness when 
it comes to Indigenous peoples. 



To counter this reality, social workers and educators must seek 



out narratives of Indigenous peoples. The narrative is an important 
way to share the depth of personal and group experiences and to 
understand the context of behavior, feelings, and thoughts. Narra- 
tives bring meaning to the engagement between storyteller and lis- 



tener. They empower individuals to voice their perspective and reaf- 



209 




Mil mm i J. Yiiiotv B'm> & Vi N't Chinauh 



firm strengths and resiliency while helping raise the consciousness 
of the listener. For an example of a personal narrative, see the box 
below. 

Social workers were not alone in their ‘’work" of removing Indig- 
enous children from homes; government agents, teachers, and Chris- 
tian missionaries also participated. Together, they took thousands ot 
children and placed them in off- reservation boarding schools and 
non-Indigenous foster homes, where there was little or no concern 



for children's cultural needs. 

Without question, the most prolific baby snatcher was Henry 
Richard Pratt, a European American, Baptist, U.S. Army cavalry 
officer in the late 1800s. Colonel Pratt believed Indigenous peoples 



needed to be cirilizcchu\<\ made into Christians. He believed civiliza- 
tion could best be achieved through a White man's education. This 
belief led him to open one of the first ofl -reservation boarding schools 



A Personal Narrative 

by Micuaki.Yku.ow Bird 



My first experience with social workers happened when I was about 
eight or nine years old. In my community, we all knew the green car with 
the black lettering on the doors belonged to the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
(BIA). We knew that the tall, bald-headed White man who drove the car 
and smiled and waved at us was the BIA social worker. We knew he look 
children from our community and sent them away to boarding schools or 
to White families, especially those children whose parents were poor or 



drank a lot. 



It was a hot summer afternoon when the green ear drove up to my 
house. As usual, our house was bustling with many relatives laughing, 
eating, and carrying on multiple conversations in English and Sahnish. 1 
watched the bald White man get out of his ear, walk up to our house, 
knock on the door, and enter without being asked to do so. Once inside, 
he glanced around at all the activity, smiled, and finally made eye contact 



with my mom. 

’•Well, Mrs. Yellow Bird," he said. "I’ve come for the children. Are they 
ready?" With that remark, all conversations immediately ceased, and 
everyone looked at him. "Yes," said my mother as she got up from the 
kitchen table, where she had been visiting with several of my aunts. 

She slowly walked toward mv cousin standing next to me, gently put 



* \ * 



?in 



Tml Roi? c« r S- >* <'M \A/v )f « , *‘ '* AovANi.* ing ief P.<A.ci'» ( • "*» I o» »i*s Epsi' Ai<oh 



for Indigenous children in the United States at Carlisle, Pennsylva- 
nia, in 1879. 

In his book Education for Extinction: American Indians and the 
Boarding School Experience, 1875-1928, David Adams writes, “Pratt 
liked Indians, but he had little use for Indian cultures." One of his 
beliefs was to “kill the Indian in him and save the man. . . Pratt's 
fantasy was to place the entire population of Indian children across 
the nation, with some 70,000 White families each taking in one 
Indian child." Pratt believed Indigenous cultures* were so inferior 
that Indigenous children would immediately abandon their own 
homes and cultures once they tasted and understood the superior 
ways of European American families. For almost 100 years, from 
Pratt's 1879 opening of the Carlisle boarding school until the passage 
ol the Indian Child Welfare Act (1978), which ended the removal of 
Indigenous children without consent of the tribal community, the 



her arm around his shoulders, and guided him toward my other cousins, 
who had gathered in a small tight circle in the middle of the room. She 
looked at them with intense pain in her face while at the same time trying 
to smile at them. 

"It's time to go with Mr. Herman," she said. “He’s going to take you 
away to a real nice school." Then all hell broke loose. My cousins started 
crying and hid behind my mother, who also hurst into tears. My sisters, 
aunts, and girl cousins all started crying too. But us hoys just stood still, 
frozen with confusion, paralyzed by what was happening. 

As my cousins were led outside by the social worker and my mom. I 
unfroze enough to move to the window to watch them loaded into the 
green car. They continued crying and hanging onto my mother's dress. I 
don't remember my mother coming hack into the house, but as 1 turned 
away from the window after the green car went out of sight, I saw her 
sitting at the table with her face buried in the palms of her hands, crying 
and saying, “I wanted to keep them.” All around her stood my aunts, 
sisters, and girl cousins sobbing. But us boys, we just stood still, unable to 
cry, glancing at one another and the floor. 

Unfortunately, the events described in this narrative occurred not 
only at my house but over and over again in Indigenous homes and 
communities all across the United States and Canada. So widespread was 
the practice of removing First Nations children from their homes that 
Indigenous peoples across North America came to regard social work as 
“baby snatching" and “legalized abduction. "' 




Michali J. YluOw Bm> & Vfnida Chenauii 



legal abduction and ethnic cleansing of Native children remained an 
official social policy in the United States. 2 ” 

Early social work practice, like education, was guided by deficit 
thinking. Governments and religious organizations, which, like Pratt, 
considered the cultures and religious traditions of Indigenous peoples 
inferior and in need of eradication, promoted a model of European 
American Christian belief and virtue. Social workers, who removed 
Indigenous children from their homes and imposed Christianity and 
European American education upon them, contributed to the dis- 
ruption of Aboriginal cultures for many generations. 

In Canada, where the treatment of Indigenous peoples and their 
children was almost identical to that in the United States, social 
workers continued to remove Indigenous children from their homes 
well into the 1990s. The mass removal of Indigenous children was so 
devastating that, when First Nations peoples in British Columbia 
were given the opportunity to review and comment on provincial 
child protection legislation, they called on the Minister of Social 
Services of the province to end the “legalized abduction of aboriginal 



children. " 2,, 

Recently the Canadian government formally apologized to “its 1.3 
million Indigenous peoples for 150 years of paternalistic assistance 
programs and racist residential schools that devastated Indian com- 
munities as thoroughly as any war or disease.” The government 
admitted its role in taking thousands of youths from their families 
and forcing them to attend schools where they were sometimes 
sexually abused and often punished for speaking their languages and 
practicing their customs. The New York Times reported, “Residen- 
tial schools were also operated in the United States, and similar 
abuses took place. The closest the United States Government came 



to apologizing was a 1969 Senate investigation, initiated by Robert V. 
Kennedy, that documented abuses.” 11 ’ 

To practice empowerment-oriented social work, social workers 
and educators must acknowledge the painful legacy of hoarding 
schools and the mass removal of Indigenous children from their 
homes. They must promote honest and meaningful dialogues with 
community members directly or indirectly affected. Social workers 
and educators who engage in such dialogue will experience personal 
empowerment as they become more attuned to the effects ot board- 








O 1 o 




The Role of Sociai Wopk in Advancing ihf Practice of Indigenous Education 



ing schools on the communities where they are practicing. Commu- 
nity members will experience a sense of personal satisfaction when 
their stories are honored and their resiliency is acknowledged. 

On an organizational level, schools and social service agencies 
that recognize these painful legacies can develop strategies to avoid 
similar oppressive practices and policies toward Indigenous stu- 
dents and their families. They should create culturally appropriate 
conditions that promote the personal and political empowerment of 
Indigenous communities. 

However, the point of dialogue is not to saddle current social 
workers and educators with the sins of their profession. Rather, the 
aim is to respect and validate the narratives, survival, and experi- 
ences of Indigenous peoples. Ignoring the oppressive history of 
social work and education promotes narration sickness and perpetu- 
ates mistrust of social work and education by Indigenous children, 
parents, and communities. 



Professional Behavior 

The NASVV Code of Ethics provides direction for social workers 
but does not explicitly define professional behavior; instead, it “of- 
fers a set of values, principles, and standards to guide decision- 
making and conduct when ethical issues arise.’*" The code identifies 
six core values embraced by the social work profession: service* 
social justice, dignity and worth of the person, importance of hu- 
man relationships, integrity, and competence . These values are 
important to the promotion of individual and political empower- 
ment. 



Service. The sere ice value suggests “social workers elevate ser- 
vice to others above self interest [and] . . . draw upon their knowl- 
edge, values, and skills to help people in need . . . and volunteer some 
portion of their professional skills with no expectation of significant 
financial return (pro bono service)."'" 

This value urges social workers to put the needs of Indigenous 
students and families before their own. For example, if a child's 
cultural or emotional needs are not being met by a teacher or school, 
a social worker can (and should) advocate for the child's needs even 
though it may negatively affect the worker's relationship with the 




213 



4 * t 



M: '-Ml J Vt 



school or teacher or jeopardize his or her own employment. I he 
service value suggests meeting a client s need for services is an 
important goal that must he achieved, especially when the client 
holds little power and is vulnerable to racist and oppressive treat- 
ment. 

To this end, social workers can use empowerment-oriented social 
work practice to assist students and parents in identifying and tran- 
scending direct { institutional) and personal) “power blocks 

that denv opportunities important to a child s education. Social 
workers can work closely with educators to find ways to serve that 
enable Indigenous families, communities, and individuals to under- 
stand and address the challenges affecting their lives. l> 

Social justice. To achieve social justice, "social workers pursue 
social change, particularly with and on behalf of vulnerable and 
oppressed individuals and groups of people. 1 his statement sug- 
gests "change efforts are focused primarily on issues of poverty, 
unemplovment. discrimination, and other forms of social injustice 
and "these activities seek to promote sensitivity to and knowledge 
about oppression and cultural and ethnic diversity.” “ 

To challenge education practices or community environments 
that oppress Indigenous children, social workers can examine how 
different forms of social injustice (e.g.. inferior education methods 
and conditions, poverty, poor health, individual and structural rac- 
ism) affect student education. Social workers and educators can 
collaborate with children, parents, and the community to strategi/c 
how to resolve such conditions. On a political level in schools, social 
workers and educators can promote participation of Indigenous 
children and parents in polic\ making, curriculum development, 
and program and teacher evaluation. 

Dignity and worth of the person. Social workers and educa- 
tors must "treat each person in a earing and respectful fashion, 
mindful of indi'idual differences and cultural and ethnic diversity" 
and "seek to resolve conflicts between clients* interests and the 
broader society’s interests in a socially responsible manner consis- 
tent with the values, ethical principles, and ethical standards ol the 
profession.** ' 

Social workers can collaborate with teachers and school adminis- 
trators to promote respectful treatment of Indigenous children and 

i ' * 1 <1 




Th< R'.»a «■? S<x «*'i Work in- Aovaja ino ihi pr..v i!< » ■ j s E1'u«..aiic»4 



their parents. Such collaboration can lead to better understanding 
and support for tribal and individual self-determination, identity 
formation, and increased responsibility as defined by tribal beliefs, 
values, and customs. By promoting such cultural understanding, 
social workers can help teachers and schools create a caring, safe, 
and respectful environment. Social workers can also mediate con- 
flicts between teachers and students or teachers and parents, main- 
taining support for all parties. 

Importance of human relationships. Social workers must 
understand that relationships among people are central in the help- 
ing process. The NASW code encourages social workers to "seek to 
strengthen relationships among people in a purposeful effort to 
promote, restore, maintain, and enhance the well-being of individu- 
als, families, social groups, organizations, and communities." “* 

Social workers and educators must recognize Indigenous family, 
clan, and community strengths, avoiding the tendency to see mem- 
bers of these groups as victims. Community empowerment can he 
promoted when social workers and educators look for the skills, 
knowledge, qualities, and customs people have to heal themselves. 
In many instances, the most effective healing takes place in the tribal 
community and not in the school office. 1 " 



Integrity. Social workers must “behave in a trustworthy man- 
ner" and "act honestly and responsibly and promote ethical practices 
on the part of the organizations with which they are affiliated."*’' 
Social workers can arrange home visits to discuss concerns par- 
ents have regarding their children's education. This includes con- 
cerns about their individual children and about the school or school 
district itself. When attending community meetings, social workers 
can explain their role and inquire how they can support the Indig- 
enous community, 'faking the time to learn about historical oppres- 
sion is important in empowerment, and a knowledgeable social 
worker can enlighten teachers, administrators, and school hoards 
about contemporary effects of this history. Indigenous communities, 
too, often need help in critically understanding this painful legacy. 
Social workers who gain trust by collaborating with community 
members can help people find ways to hasten the healing process. “ 



Competence. The ( 'ode of Id hies states. ‘‘Social workers con- 
tinually strive to increase their professional knowledge and skills 






Mich.au J Yi now Bu<d & Vi nida Cue naui i 



and apply them in practice. Social workers should aspire to contrib- 
ute to the knowledge base of the profession .’' 40 

Social workers and educators can improve their effectiveness in 
working with Indigenous peoples by reading the right literature, 
newspapers, and research; spending time with Indigenous people 
from various walks of life including grassroots populations, profes- 
sionals, scholars, and tribal officials or staff; and using a practical 
approach that is informed by cultural and tribal sensibilities and that 
seeks always to empower people. 



Professional Education 



Social workers receive undergraduate training toward a bachelor 
of social work (BSVV) degree at an accredited program. Many also 
work toward a master of social work (MSVV) graduate degree or 
doctorate in social work or social welfare. In most instances, stu- 
dents are accepted into professional social work programs only after 
successful completion of a two-year liberal arts university program. 
Most social workers practicing in schools have BSVV or MSVV de- 



grees. 

The Council on Social Work Education (CSVVH) provides national 
accreditation for professional schools of social work and social wel- 
fare. This organization’s curriculum policy requires “a ‘professional 
foundation' of content and learning experiences which constitutes 
the essential knowledge, values, and skills that all social workers 
should possess . 1 * 41 The curriculum addresses five areas: human be- 
havior in the social environment (HBSE), social work practice, re- 
search, social welfare policy, and field practicum. 



HBSE. In HBSE courses, students gain knowledge of individual, 
group, community, institutional, and cultural dynamics and behav- 
ior. These courses introduce students to theories of human behavior 
that include culturally diverse perspectives. For example, students 
may learn about the theory of talking circles . a group process often 
used in Indigenous communities for problem solving and sharing. 
They may also be exposed to the theory of the medicine wheel, 
another Indigenous method of explaining human behavior. *•' 



Social work practice. Karen Haynes and Karen Holmes ob- 
serve. “Social work practice courses focus on skill development. 



216 



The Role of Social Work in Advancing wi Practice ci Indigenous Educaiiqn 



ranging from essential interpersonal skills to specific practice prin- 
ciples of selected models of intervention .” 43 These courses provide 
students with skills to intervene with individuals, groups, families, 
organizations, and communities. Social work practice courses also 
provide students with knowledge and skills that can be generalized 
to diverse client populations, for example, in courses on human 
diversity, students learn a general set of Indigenous values and 
helping practices taken from Indigenous social work scholarship. 
Students can use this knowledge when applying intervention skills 
with Indigenous peoples. 

Research. Research courses require students to understand and 
apply basic research methods to relevant social work problems. 
Students, especially those in graduate programs, learn to conduct 
culturally sensitive research on behalf of Indigenous communities. 
They may collaborate with educators and Indigenous communities 
to design research that will help promote social and cultural justice 
in education settings. For example, content analysis can be per- 
formed on classroom textbooks and curricular materials to expose 
insensitive depictions of Indigenous peoples. 

Social policy. Social policy courses enable students to analyze 
social problems, policies, and programs. This course also enables 
students to understand the effects of various social programs and 
policies on their professional practice. With these skills, social work- 
ers evaluate social problems, programs, and policies that oppress 
Indigenous communities. 



Field practicum. Field practicum enables social work students 
to learn under a supervisor or field instructor in direct professional 
practice. Students working in Indigenous community and agency 
settings have an opportunity to experience the unique social needs of 
Indigenous peoples, become involved in cultural sharing, and learn 
to respect and use Indigenous models of helping. Students can bring 
this knowledge into education settings . 1 1 

At some point in undergraduate and graduate social work train- 
ing, students study human diversity. In social work, this term en- 



compasses “groups distinguished by race, ethnicity, culture, class, 
gender, sexual orientation, religion, physical or mental ability, age, 
and national origin."**’ Students learn that practitioners who serve 
diverse populations must use different forms of assessment and 



017 f * » ' 



Mk'h/'Ei J. Yf i-'vs B^r & VrN.pA 



intervention .skills depending on which group they are serving. 

These skills are also useful in education. Social workers can sensi- 
tize teachers and administrators to the need to use culturally appro- 
priate approaches with Indigenous children and their families. 

Generalist Practice 

All social work practice has an u ndcrlyi ng (/cnera/ist orientation. 
This framework is important because social workers can apply gen- 
eralist skills, knowledge, and values to their practice among Indig- 
enous peoples. Many MSW programs also require students to choose 
a special area of study such as family therapy, administration, cor- 
rections, or clinical > >cial work.' 1 " 

So what does generalist practice induce? The 1992 Curriculum 
Policy Statement of the Council on Social Work Education recom- 
mends a generalist practice that 

• emphasizes professional relationships characterized by mutu- 
ality, collaboration, and respect for the client system; 

• focuses practice assessments on the examination of client 
strengths and problems in the interactions among individuals 
and between people and their environments; 



• includes knowledge, values, and skills to enhance the well- 
being of people and to help ameliorate the environmental con- 
ditions that affect people adversely; 

• includes the following skills— defining issues, collecting and 
assessing data, planning and contracting, identifying alterna- 
tive interventions, selecting and implementing appropriate 
courses of action, using appropriate research-based knowledge 
and technological advances, and termination: 



includes approaches and skills for practice with clients from 
different social, cultural, racial, religious, spiritual, and class 
backgrounds with systems of all sizes. 1 ' 



Roles of Social Workers 



Social workers should continually focus on empowerment-oriented 
practice when working with Indigenous peoples. One research group 



* * < . t 



Olft 



The. Role of Sgciai Work in Advancing the Ppacuce or Indigenous Educahon 



characterizes social workers as striving to help people create order in 
a complex world. They do this by helping clients function better and 
promoting social justice. These tasks require a realistic understand- 
ing of how conditions are currently and a positive view of how things 
could be. - ** 

Social workers provide a variety of human services: mental health, 
corrections, medical care, child protection, housing, and vocational 
rehabilitation. Practice options include microinterventions that fo- 
cus on individuals, families, and groups, and macrointerventions, 
where action is aimed at oppressive institutions, laws, or ideas. 
Social work clients are both voluntary and involuntary (e.g., clients 
ordered by courts of law to receive serv ices). 

Bradford Shcafor, Charles Horejsi, and Gloria Horejsi describe 
several professional roles social workers can assume. The following 
descriptions of roles have been adapted from these authors to show 
examples of how social workers can advance Indigenous educa- 
tion. 4V 



The social worker as a human services broker or case 
manager. Social workers collaborate with educators to link Indig- 
enous students and their families to needed human services and 
other resources, and they coordinate and monitor the use of those 
services. Social workers often begin by interviewing students, fami- 
lies, and teachers to assess the urgency of the situation and to 
determine who within the family to involve in the client s treatment. 
Next the social worker meets with all parties to determine what 
resources are appropriate, available, and necessary. Finally social 
workers and teachers offer support and advocacy while students and 
their families arc engaged with service providers and resources. 



The social worker as a teacher. Clients learn what they need 
to know and gain skills to prevent problems or enhance social func- 
tioning. Social workers help parents and educators teach social and 
daily living skills and facilitate behavior changes consistent with the 
cultural norms of Indigenous communities. 

Km powermen t -oriented social work practice compels practitio- 
ners to make sure that what they teach helps increase the personal, 
interpersonal, and political power of Indigenous peoples so they can 
take action to improve their situations. " 




Mu-HAfi J. Yeuow Bipd & Vfn.pa Cknauh 



The social worker as a eounselor/clinician. Social workers 
collaborate with schools to help students improve their social func- 
tioning by helping them better understand their attitudes and feel- 
ings, modify behaviors, and learn to cope with difficult situations. 

The. functions of this role include psychosocial assessment and 
diagnosis, ongoing stabilizing care, social treatment, and practice 
research. There are two important caveats of this role. The first is 
that the ’‘deficits” or problem behaviors of the student often become 
the center of attention and focus of change. The second is that 
assessment and diagnosis flow from this deficit thinking. For ex- 
ample, clinical assessments often do not assess cultural and family 
strengths nor do they focus on deficiencies in the social environment 
when developing treatment plans. 

Social workers and educators must collaborate to avoid these 
tendencies by making sure that assessments of student, family, and 
community strengths are included in any treatment plan. Social 
workers can also critically examine the strengths and deficits of the 
school to resolve the problems of this environment. Educators may 
need to be reminded that using diagnostic labels disempowers and 
shames students and produces a self-fulfilling prophecy. Thus, stu- 
dents become the label or pathology rather than persons and are 
regarded as having no personal resources to help address their 
situations. 

The social worker as a staff developer. Social workers help 
facilitate the professional development of school staff through train- 
ing and consultation. For example, they raise awareness of teachers, 
administrators, and school hoards about the mission of social work 
and the multiple roles of social workers. ’* Social workers can be 
especially helpful by explaining how an important part of their role is 
helping Indigenous students to empower themselves using personal 
and political strategies. Social workers also provide professional 
consultation in such areas as child protection, social services deliv- 
ery coordination, community development, and mental health. 

The social worker as a social change agent. Social workers 
must take an activist position and collaborate with Indigenous stu- 
dents, parents, educators, and communities to identify community 
concents and areas where the quality of life can be enhanced. Phis 
may involve mobilizing interest groups to examine oppressive social 



220 




T>h Rou of Social Work :n Advancing in£ Prachu. of Indigenous EfM*Ai.<>;j 



problems and policies in the school and community and advocating 
tor change. Advocacy can include collecting data and presenting 
evidence of problems, using mediation skills between opposing par- 
ties, or helping others organize protests or boycotts against oppres- 
sive actions or parties. In this role, social workers help school per- 
sonnel to be “sensitive to cultural and ethnic diversitv and strive to 
end discrimination, oppression, poverty, and other forms of social 
injustice .’* 52 

It is clear that social workers have multiple skills, sources of 
knowledge, and commitments at play in their work. Their efforts are 
guided by an excellent and empowering professional code of ethics. 
However, the social welfare and education system often does not 
allow social workers immediately to overturn and transform oppres- 
sive conditions of society or change oppressive agency policies and 
practices. This is especially true when the changes sought are on 
behalf of populations with limited political power and visibility and 
numerous social and economic problems. However, educators who 
are committed to advancing Indigenous education can ally them- 
selves with social workers to form strong, proactive, and justice- 
oriented coalitions to address oppressive forces. 



Micro and Macro (Structural) Issues Affecting the 
Advancement of Indigenous Education 

I here are at least six obstacles to advancing Indigenous student 
success, but social workers and educators can use empowerment- 
oriented practices to address both micro and macro concerns. Micro 
concerns are education issues directly affecting individual Indig- 
enous students and families. Macro concerns involve school systems 
and Indigenous communities. Micro and macro concerns are not 
mutually exclusive. For example, a micro concern can he getting 
parents and teachers to work together for the benefit of particular 
students, while a macro (structural) concern might he raising the 
consciousness of all teachers about the oppressive legacy of educa- 
tion and its aftermath in Indigenous communities. The two become 
intertwined when parents and teachers get together to share narra- 
tives about tlie history of boarding schools. 

Micro issues. One of the most important micro issues is a 
posit ire working relationship between teachers ami Indigenous 

O V" 

/s, l)/v 



991 



Mk mau J. Yt n< av B;wi > & VimiA Chojak.* 



parents. Parents and the extended family strongly influence the 
educational success of children and should be active partners in 
their education. However, Indigenous parents often have been ex- 
cluded from participation. Historically* parents have been regarded 
as barriers to their children’s educational success because they rein- 
force “Indian ness." Dick Littlcbear suggests that one way teachers 
can make education more friendly to Indigenous parents is to have 
them come to school to share their experiences with students.™ 

Social workers and educators can improve relations between teach- 
ers and Indigenous parents by using an empowerment-oriented 
strengths perspective. Educators should call upon the skills, talents, 
and knowledge of Indigenous parents, grandparents, and other ex- 
tended family members. For example, schools can use individuals 
who have good mediation skills to resolve conflicts between teachers 
and parents and teachers and students. Individuals with a lot of 
patience can mentor children who are having a ditficult time in 
school and serve as a lifeline in the community. Individuals who 
have talents such as cooking exotic foods, knowledge of organic 
gardening, or math skills can become helpful partners to educators 
by sharing what they know with students and other parents. Teach- 
ers, social workers, and parents are all empowered through these 
interactions. Teachers and social workers develop a greater under- 
standing of and appreciation for the skills, talents, and knowledge of 
parents; parents, in turn, experience a personal sense of competence 
when they find that their knowledge is valued. 

Another important micro concern is drop-out rates. Indigenous 
students have the highest drop-out rates of all ethnic groups. How- 
ever, the cause has been studied largely from an individual deficit 
perspective. Studies focus on student characteristics related to drop- 
ping out; however, they very seldom investigate the attributes of 
schools that produce dropouts. Donna Deyhle and Karen Swisher 
observe, “Youth who leave school are described as deviant, dysfunc- 
tional, or deficient because of individual, family, or community char- 
acteristics. 

It is important that social workers and educators hear the voices 
of Indigenous students who have dropped out of school. Social work- 
ers have a variety of methods at their disposal for collecting informa- 
tion and soliciting personal narratives. For example, they can use 



O U ^ 



ooo 



T* if R. if <.r Sck i/*5 Woi« in Ah. -vk * 




Imv. ,i n " »s E 




data collection skills to interview students and their parents after 
students drop out. Social workers can collaborate with teachers, 
parents, and students to examine the school characteristics that 
contribute to youths' decisions to drop out. Social workers can hold 
focus groups, bringing together concerned parties and identifying 
key personal and institutional factors that prevent or promote drop- 
ping out of school. 

The crossover effect is a well-known phenomenon among Indig- 
enous education scholars. Deyhle and Swisher explain, “This phe- 
nomenon suggests that, at some point in school Indian students, 
who had been achieving at or above the level of their White peers, 
“cross over’ and begin doing poorly." However, these researchers 
point out that more recent research suggests the crossover effect 
does not exist in schools with a more supportive context for Indig- 
enous cultures, identity, and languages, which suggests this phe- 
nomenon “is not simply a problem of adolescent development." *■ 

Social workers and educators can collaborate with parents and 
the community to raise consciousness about the crossover effect. 
They can design supportive environments in the school and commu- 
nity that honor Indigenous cultures, identity, and languages. Social 
workers can help students understand the strengths of Indigenous 
cultures and can learn to use a helping lexicon in the languages of 
students. 

Structural concerns. Indigenous-developed curricula is needed 
in schools. Cultural materials with positive portrayals of Indigenous 
peoples help Indigenous children develop healthy cultural identities 
and have a positive influence on their education. An assimilationist 
approach in education “often results in school failure while an inter- 
cultural, antiracist orientation allows students to develop the confi- 
dence and motivation that lead to academic success." v ’ 

One explanation for the long-standing lack of culturally appro- 
priate curricular the lack of political power of Indigenous peoples. 
School policies, teachers, or administrators can represent direct 
power blocks for Indigenous students, parents, and communities 
who desire inclusion of their cultures in schools. In such situations, 
empowerment-oriented social workers can collaborate with teachers 
and parents to find suitable textbooks, readings, and lessons for 
different grade levels. Social workers can use their advocacy training 

2\U 



001 






Mu hah J. Yhm *\V BiK' & VtNiL’A ChH-jz-jH 



to organize parents and teachers to present lawmakers with evidence 
of the need for more culturally appropriate curricula. ^ 

The general lack of knowledge among educators and curriculum 
developers about tribal diversity represents another structural con- 
cern. Indigenous peoples share a common history of colonialism and 
educational oppression, resulting in poor economic and social out- 
comes; however, there is no generic Indigenous culture or language. 
Important differences exist among the hundreds of tribal nations— 
and even within particular nations— with respect to levels of adapta- 
tion to majority culture. Also, particular Indigenous students can 
have very different school experiences.'* 8 

Social workers can help schools regard this diversity as an honor- 
able, beautiful, and important part of any child's identity. Social 
workers can share respect for diversity gained through their train- 
ing, experience, and professional code of ethics. Social workers can 
promote appreciation for diversity by helping teachers understand 
that Indigenous peoples compose a unique minority group that in- 
cludes more than 500 different tribes, the majority of which are 
sovereign nations. Each tribe has a unique history, language, land, 
dress, and food. Social workers can also help educators understand 
diversity by bringing Indigenous peoples from different nations into 
the school to share their experiences. 

Deyhle and Swisher indicate that little research has been con- 
ducted on the effects of racism, prejudice, and discrimination on 
students, even though these conditions clearly exist and may con- 
tribute to students’ lack of success in school. Agnes Grant and LaVina 
Gillespie maintain that systemic prejudice and racism must be ac- 
knowledged within the education system and that "teachers with the 
support of administrators and tribal groups must actively work to 
combat racism.” Andv Bowker has found that individual and struc- 
tural racism is a major reason young Indigenous women leave 
school. Vl 

Social workers can do much to address individual and structural 
racism, discrimination, and prejudice. President Clinton’s dialogue 
on race in the United States has proven irrelevant for Indigenous 
peoples. As of 1998 not one First Nations person serves on the 
president’s panel, reflecting the contemporary lack of political power 
and the invisibility of hirst Nations peoples in their own homelands. 



( ■* 






00A 



Th" ?t' ll or S AI Wow IN Am- AN. 't:G Inf PvA<..t,;. ( , f h,C iC;^ El.-,* .V^t; 

Racism is, very often, a much avoided subject. Many people be- 
lieve that racism no longer exists and that ail people in the United 
States are treated equally. To test this notion, social workers and 
teachers can initiate dialogues in schools and communities about 
race and invite parents and students to share their experiences. 
Social workers can collect and publish these stories, making them 
available to all school personnel. Such stories can raise the con- 
sciousness of many people. 

Social workers can also collaborate with educators, racism spe- 
cialists, parents, and children to identify different dimensions present 
in a school and community. For example, presenting Indigenous 
peoples as mascots for sports teams or emblems for selling products 
is visual racism. Words such as sqaaic , used to identify an Indig- 
enous woman, or savage, used historically to explain the habits or 
personalities of Indigenous people, are examples of verbal racism. 
To help develop dialogues, social workers can enlist Indigenous 
grassroots activists who have a wealth of experience with racism. 



Summary 

Social work can be a powerful force in advancing the practice of 
Indigenous education. Social workers and educators can use numer- 
ous empowerment-oriented practice strategies to enable Indigenous 
students, families, and communities to gain a strong voice, under- 
standing, and influence over the education decisions and practices 
that affect their lives. Empowerment-oriented practices also offer 
important ways to increase the personal and political power of stu- 
dents, parents, teachers, school administrators, and communities. 
Social workers can also suggest strategies to overcome oppression, 
achieve social justice, and build on Indigenous peoples' strengths, 
resiliency, and resources. 

The mission of social work is to help people meet their basic needs 
and enhance their well-being. Through a strong empowerment ori- 
entation, the profession pays particular attention to people vulner- 
able to oppression, especially as a result of racism, discrimination, 
prejudice, and poverty. 

An important way for social workers and educators to begin ad- 
vancing Indigenous education is by using empowerment-oriented 
practices to build strong collaborative relationships with parents. 




N/k HAU J. YlU' V. B?'l' & VilO A 0<0;-Vi.1 



teachers, students, and school administrators. A primary agenda of 
collaboration must include movement away from models that seek 
to identify and treat individual deficits. These models are premised 
on the belief that the student, family, and culture are the causes of 
Indigenous students’ low academic achievement, high drop-out rates, 
and nonconforming behavior. Social workers can help teachers and 
school administrators develop strategies for overcoming the oppres- 
sive aspects of school and community life that play such a large part 
in creating disappointing outcomes for Indigenous children. 

Several obstacles remain in front of Indigenous education. Per- 
haps the most important is the painful legacy ot boarding schools 
and the mass removal of Indigenous children from their homes. 
Social workers and teachers can practice empowerment-oriented 
social work by promoting honest and meaningful dialogues with the 
Indigenous peoples directly and indirectly affected by these painful 
legacies. To advance Indigenous education,, social workers and edu- 
cators must seek out narratives of Indigenous peoples to understand 
how these legacies continue to affect people today. 

The professional education of social workers is important to ad- 
vancing Indigenous education because it enables social workers to 
understand human behavior, and, it promotes skills, knowledge, 
and approaches that can work well with Indigenous peoples. Social 
workers can also use their understanding of social policy to analyze 
social problems and programs relevant to First Nations communi- 
ties. The field praetieum aspect of social work education enables 
social workers to experience direct practice situations. Students of 
social work who practice in Indigenous communities and agencies 
can help bring important cultural knowledge and understanding to 
schools. 

Finally several micro and macro issues present obstacles to ad- 
vancing Indigenous education. Social workers and teachers can use 
empowerment-oriented social work practices to address these con- 
cerns. The extent to which social workers can help advance Indig- 
enous education remains to he seen. However, educators and social 
workers with progressive, courageous, and collaborative attitudes 
will make powerful contributions. 



2Wt 





Tuf ROi? r 'f SOOA; Wr-.>. "N 



r. :»«f Pp-^ jrr m Inti E 



Notes 



1. Michael .1. Yellow Bird (Sahnish/IIidatsa) is an assistant professor in 
the School of Social Welfare at the University of Kansas. Venida Chenault 
(Prairie Band Potawatomi) is a faculty member at Haskell Indian Nations 
University. The authors wish to thank Priscilla Rid}; way; Hilary Weaver; 
Francis Waukazoo; Wally Kisthardt; Dennis Saleebey; Fd Canda: Cornel 
Pewewardy; Pern, Mike.Ir., Jason, Pete, and Matt Yellow Bird; Karen Swisher; 
and anonymous reviewers for helpful suggestions and comments. 

2. Garcia and Abler, “Indian Education," 13. This chapter uses the terms 
Indigcnousiu\i\ First Motions peoples to refer to the Aboriginal nations of the 
continental United States. The authors remind readers that Native 1 lawaiianx 
and residents of U.S. territories are also Indigenous peoples; however, this 
chapter focuses primarily on Indigenous peoples of the 4B contiguous states. 
The terms are capitalized to signify their heterogeneity. The terms Indian, 
American Indian , and Native American nxe avoided because they are inaccu- 
rate and confusing colonized identities. For example. Indigenous people in the 
United Stales are not from India; therefore, they are not Indians. Rather, they 
are the descendants of the First Nations of these lands. Indigenous people are 
native Americans, but, so is anyone else who is burn in the Americas. The 
authors believe this term should not be used for or by Indigenous peoples 
because use of the term notice Americans cannot be restricted to mean 
descendants of the original peoples of the Americas. For more information on 
this subject, see Garcia and Abler, “Indian Education": Russell, After the Fifth 
Sun; and Yellow Bird. “Spirituality." 

The term Indigenous peoples is a more appropriate term. Webster's F'cie 
Collegiate Dictionary defines indigenous as “having originated in . . . or 
occurring naturally in a particular region or environment"; whereas Indian is 
defined as “a native or inhabitant of the subcontinent of India or of the East 
Indies." Indigenous peoples is an internationally accepted descriptor for 
descendants of the original inhabitants of the lands wherein they reside and 
have suffered from a history of colonization. For more information on this 
distinction, see Stamalopoulou, “Indigenous Peoples." 

The term First A Unions is also a more appropriate phrase because it 
conveys a clear political statement that such persons are the original inhabit- 
ants of the land, retaining Aboriginal title and self-government. Michael Ascii 
notes, "The United Nations lias stated that this ‘right to. self-determination’ is 
held by colonized peoples everywhere in the world, and that no successor 
colonial regime can extinguish that right by unilateral claims to sovereignty 
over the same territory" (“Political Self-Sufficiency." 47). The term First 
iXutiiws comes from tribal elders in British Columbia who believe a creator 
placed their nations on these lands to care for and control the lands. See 
reference to Assembly of First Nations in Yates and Yates. Canadas Legal 
Fncirontnent . 



2;->o 





M.-. ii/ai J. Yiikv.v B;w» & ViN'i.-A CnitjAuii 



3. Decide and Swisher. "Research." 1 18. 

4. See Robbins and others. “Theories of Kmpowerment." 

5. See Germain and Gitlerman. "Ideological Perspective." 

6. Saleebey. Strengths Perspective* 8. For more information on empow- 
erment, seel.ee, Em pan 'crment Approm ii and Robbins and others. "Theories 
of Kmpowerment." 

7. Robbins and others, “Theories of Kmpowerment/’ 89- 

8. See Milov, O’Melia, and Dubois, Generalist Social Work Practice; Ia’c, 
Empowerment Approach; Pinderhughos, "Kmpowerment for Our Clients"; 
Rose and Black, Adcacacg: Solomon. Black Empowerment; Staples, "Power- 
ful Ideas”; and Zimmerman and Rappaport, "Citizen Participation.” 

9. ( Jutierrez, " Beyond Copi ng,” 202. See also Gutierrez, " Kmpowerment." 
Critical consciousness is "learning to perceive social, political and economic 
contradictions, and to take action against the oppressive elements of reality," 
as defined in ITeire, Pedagogy, 17. 

10. Milov, (VMelia, and DuBois, ( len era list Social Work Practice, 84. 

11. bee. Empowerment Approach, 27-28. 

12. See Saleehey, Strengths Perspeet ice. 

13. National Association of Social Workers, Code of Ethics, 1 (hereafter 
cited as NASW, Code). 

14- Skidmore, Thackeray, and Parley, Introduction. 8. 

15. Johnson, Social Work Practice (1995). 13. See also Pincus and 
Mina ban. Social Work Practice. 

16. See I.ee. Empowerment Approach. 

17. Gil, "Confronting Social Injustice.” 233. See also Kreire. Pedagogy; 
i.ee. Empowerment Approach; Shulman. Skills of Helping; and Solomon, 
Black Empou mm mt. 

18. See Attneave, “Wasted Strengths"; Decide and Swisher. "Research”; 
Bearcrane and others, "Kducational Characteristics"; Du Bray, “Role of Social 
Work”; Dykeman, Nelson, and Appleton. "Building"; Grant and Gillespie, 
Joining the Circle; Kittlebear. “Getting Teachers": Cleary and Peacock, Col- 
lected Wisdom; Meriam, “Kffects of Boarding Schools"; Thompson, Walker, 
and Silk-Walker, "Psychiatric Care”; Noriega, "American Indian Idducation”; 
and Reyhnerand Kder, "I listoryof Indian lddtication.” 

19. See Yellow Bird, "Spirituality"; Adams, Education for Extinction; 
Decide and Swisher. "Research"; Bearcrane and others, "Kducational Charac- 
teristics"; and Dykeman, Nelson, and Appleton, "Building." 

20. Biminer, "Internal Colonialism,” 395. 

21. See Morrisette, McKenzie, and Morrisette, “Towards an Aboriginal" 
and Yellow Bird, "Deconstructing Colonialism.” 

22. See Krideres, Satire Peoples. 

23. Planner. "Internal Colonialism." 306. 

24. Clean - and Peacock. Collected Wisdom. i\[). For more information on 




Tk Roil Of Social Wo:.< n Am-vjrit/.. u«f Pu.v. ir. i pi lrax-iuous Bulk atom 



the negative effects of colonialism, see Anders, ‘Internal Colonization”; Bee 
and (lingerie'll, “Colonialism"; Churchill, "Open Views"; Fleras and Klliot, 
Xations Within ; Frideres, Xative Peoples: Hagen, On the Theory; Jacobson, 
“Internal Colonialism”; Nafziger. "Transnational Corporations”; Snipp, 
"Changing"; and Wilkins, “Modernization.” 

25. Du Bray, “Role of Social Work,” 40. For more information on Indig- 
enous drop-out rates and low school achievement, see National Center for 
education Statistics, Dropout Rates and Swisher and Deyhle. "Research." 

26. Pevar. Rights of Indians. 296. 

27. Aboriginal Committee, Liberating Our Children, 65. See also Ratner, 
“Child Welfare” and Smith, “Young Once.” 

28. Adams, education for Extinction. 51. 52. 54. 

29. Aboriginal Committee. Liberating Our Children, 63. 

30. De Palma, "Canada's Indigenous Tribes." At. A3- 

31. NASW. Code, 2. 

32. Ibid., 5- 

33- See Rappaport, “In Praise of Paradox." 

34. NASW, Code. 5. 

35. 1 hid. 

36. Ibid.. 6. 

37. See Saleebey, Strengths Perspective and Canda and Yellow Bird. 
"Another View.” 

38. NASW, t 'ode. 6. 

39. See Lee, liin/foircnncnt Approach. 

40. NASW, ( 'ode. 6. 

41. Kolevzon, "Conflict and Change," 51. 

42. See Nabigon and Mawhinney, “Aboriginal Theory.” 

43. Haynes and Holmes, Invitation. 227. 

44. See Summers and Yellow Bird. “Building Relationships." 

45. Lum, Social Work Practice { 1996), 3. 

46. See Zaslrow. Practice of Social Work. 

47. Lum, Social ftork Practice (1996), 7-8. 

48. See Miley, O'Melia, and DuBois. Generalist Social Wo/k Practice. 

49. Shea for, llorejsi.and llorejsi, I'echnigues. 16-27. 

50. See Gutierrez, “Beyond Coping." 

51. See Gutierrez. "Working with Women" and Lee. empowerment 
Approach. 

52. NASW .Code. L 

53. For more information on the relationship between parents and 
teachers, see Baruth and Manning. "Cnderslanding"; Cummins. "Km power- 

229 

* y 





M-= ma«i j. Yj.uiv. Bk> & Vi Nil a C'«in 



ment of Indian Students"; Dvkeman. Nelson, and Appleton, "Building"; 
l Jttlebear,“GeUing Teachers"; Lum, Social \\ brk Praeticei 1980): and Deyhle 
and Swisher, “Research." 

54. Deyhle and Swisher. “Research." 127. See also Wehlage and Rutter. 
"Dropping Out." 

55. Deyhle and Swisher. “Research," 120. 

56. Cummins, “Kni powermen t of Indian Students," 5. See also Baruth 
and Manning, "Understanding"; Deyhle and Swisher, "Research"; Grant ami 
Gillespie, Joining the Circle: Littlebear. “Getting Teachers": and Reyhner. 
“Adapting Curriculum." 

57. See McMahon, General Method. 

58. Baruth and Manning. "Understanding": Dvkeman, Nelson, and 
Appleton, "Building"; Gilliland, leaching the Xatice American: Littlebear. 
“Getting Teachers": and Linn. Social 1 1 brk Practice ( 1996). 

59. Grant and Gillespie. Joining the Circle. 48. 



Bibliography 

Aboriginal Committee, Community Panel, family and Children's Services Leg- 
islation Review in British Columbia. Liberating Our Children. Liberating 
Our Nations: Report of the Aboriginal Committee. Community Panel. 
Pa milt/ and ( luidren's Services Legislation Reeieir in British Columbia. 
Victoria. British Columbia: Author, 1992. 

Adams, David Wallace. Education for extinction: American Indians and the 
Hoarding School Experience. lS~S-VVJS. Ltwrence: University Press of 
Kansas. 1995. 

Anders, Gary C. "The Internal Colonization of Cherokee Native Americans." 
Development and Change 10( 1 ): 4 1-55 ( 19"9). 

Asch, Michael. “Political Self-Sufficiency." In Xation to Xation: Aboriginal 
Sovereignty and the Future gt C bnada. edited by Diane Kngelslad and.lohn 
Bird. Concord. Ontario: 1 louse of Anausi Press. 1992. 

Attneave, Carolyn. “The Wasted Strengths of American Indian f amilies." In 
The Destruction of Indian P( unifies, edited by Steven Unger. New York: 
Association on American Indian Affairs. I9~7, 

Baruth. leroy G., and M. Lee Manning. “Understanding Native-American 
Children and Adolescents." In Multicultural Education of Children and 
Adolescents, edited by M. Lee Manning. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & 
Bacon. 1992. 

Bearcrane, Jean. John M. Dodd. J. Ron Nelson, and Steven W. Ostwald. 
"Kdueational Characteristics of Native Americans." Rural Educator 1 1(8): l- 
5(1990). 

Bee. Robert, and Ronald Gingcrieh. “Colonialism. Classes, and f'thnic Identity : 
Native Americans and the National Political Kconomy." Studies in C'om 
parative International Development 12(2): "0-98 (PF7). 

2 A ! 230 . 




Blatmer, Robert. “Internal Colonialism and Ghetto Revolt." Social Problem s 
16(4): 393-408 (1969). 

Bowker. Andy. Sisters in the Blood: The Education of Women in Xatire 
America. Newton. MA; \VKIvr\ Publishing Center. 1993. F.RIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. FD 363 486. 

Canda, Kdward R„ and Michael .1. Yellow Bird. “Another View: Cultural Strengths 
Are Crucial." Families in Society: The Journal oft 'on temporary Human 
Sen 'in *.v 78(3) : 248 ( 1 997). 

Churchill, Ward. “The Open Mews of Native North America." In Fantasies of 
the Master Race: Literature. Cinema and the Colonization of American 
Indians , edited by M. Annette Jaimes. Monroe, MK: Common Courage 
Press, 1992. 

Cleary. Linda Miller, and Thomas D. Peacock. Collected Wisdom: American 
Indian Education. Needham Heights, MA: Allvn & Bacon, 1998. 

Cummins. Jim. ‘The empowerment ot'indian Students." In Teaching Ameri- 
can Indian Students, edited by Jon Reyhner. Norman: Cniversity of Okla- 
homa Press. 1992. 

De Palma. Anthony. “Canada's Indigenous Tribes Receive Formal Apology." 
The Xew )\>rk Times. 8 January 1998, Al. A3. 

Devhle, Donna, and Karen Swisher. “Research in American Indian and Alaska 
Native Kducation: Prom Assimilation to Self-Determination." In Review of 
Research in Education, vol. 22. edited by Michael W. Apple. Washington. 
DC: American Kducational Research Association. 1997. 

I)u Bray, \V. II. “The Role of Social Work Kducation For Indian Child Welfare, 
Developing Linkages for the Future," In Indian Child fi cl/are and Schools 
of Social Wort. Norman: Indian Child Welfare Project. Cniversity of Okla- 
homa School of Social Work: Throe l eathers Associates, 1991. 

Dykeman, C'ass, .1. Ron Nelson, and V. Appleton. “Building Strong Working 
Alliances with American Indian Families." Social Work in Education 1~(3): 
148-68 ( 1995). 

Floras. Angie, and Jean Leonard Fliiot. The Xations 1 1 /thin: Ahoriyiiud-Statc 
Relations in Canada, the l 'nited States, and Xew Zealand Toronto: Oxford 
Cniversity Press, 1992. 

Froire. Paulo. Pedagogy of the O/y/nesscd. Rev. ed. New York: Continuum 
Publishing, 1993. 

Fridoros. James S. Xaficc Pcof>li’s in ( 'anada: ( \m temporary ( o/i/hcts. 2d ed. 
Scarborough, Ontario: Prentice Hall of Canada. 1983. 

Garcia. R. L„ and J. Goldenstein Abler. “Indian Kducation: Assumptions, 
Ideologies. Strategies." In Teaching American Indian Students, edited by 
Jon Reyhner. Norman: Cniversity of Oklahoma Press. 1992. 

Germaine. Carl B.. and A. Gitterman. “Ideological Perspective." In Encyclopedia 
of Soeial It orh. 19th ed. Washington. DC: National Association of Social 
Workers Press. 1996. 

Gil, David G. “Confronting Social Injustice and Oppression." In Hie Eon tufa- 



2 



a tutu /nr*. 





M:< hah J. V’hi' a Bmi & Viwa CmNAi'.i 



turns of Social Work Knot Hedge, edited by Frederic G. Reamer. New York: 
Columbia University Press, 1994. 

Gilliland. Hap. Teaching the Satire American. 3d ed. Dubuque, IA: Kendall/ 
Hunt, 1995. 

Grant, Agnes, and I-iVina Gillespie. Joining the Circle: A Practitioners Guide 
to Responsive education for Xatire Students, Charleston, WV: HRIC Clear- 
inghouse on Rural Fdueation and Small Schools, 1993. FRIC Document 
Reproduction Sendee No. HI) 360 117. 

Gutierrez, Lorraine M. “Beyond Coping: An Kmpowerment Perspective on 
Stressful Life Kvents." Journal of Sociology and Social It cl/are 201- 

19(1994)- 

. “Empowerment in Social Work Practice: Considerations for Practice 

and Education." Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Council on 
Social Work Kducation, Chicago. 1989. 

“Working With Women of Color: An empowerment Perspective.” Social 

Work 35(2): 149-55 ( 1990). 

Hagen. Hvcrett K. On the Theory of Social Change: How Economic Growth 
Begins . Homewood, IL: Dorsey Press, 1962. 

Haynes, Karen S.. and Karen A. Holmes. Invitation to Social Work. White 
Plains, NY: Ixmgtnan. 1994- 

Jacobson, Cardell K. “Internal Colonialism and Native Americans: Indian 
Uibor in the United States from 1871 to World War II.” Social Science 
Quarterly 65(1): 158-71 (1984). 

Johnson, Ionise C. Social Work Practice: A Generalist Approach, 4th ed. 
Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon, 1992. 

. Social Work Practice: A Generalist Approach. 5th ed. Needham I {eights, 

MA: Allyn & Bacon, 1995. 

Kolevzon, Michael S. “Conflict and Change Along the Continuum in Social 
Work Kducation." Journal of Education for Social 1 1 ork 20{2 ): 51-57 ( 1984 ). 

Ix»e, Judith A. B. The Empowerment Approach to Social Work Practice. New 
York: Columbia University Press, 1994. 

lewis, Ronald (1995). “American Indians.” In Encyclopedia of Social Work 
IQthed. pp. 216-224- Washington, DC*: National Association of Social Work- 
ers. 

Littlebear, Dick. “Getting Teachers and Parents to Work Together." In Teach - 
ing American Indian Students, edited by Jon Reyhner. Norman: University 
of Oklahoma Press, 1992. 

Hum, Doman. Social Work Practice and People of Color: A f r r<H.vss -Stage 
Approach. Monterey, C*A: Brooks/Cole. 1986. 

. Social Work Practice and People of ( olor: A Proi'css-Sltu/c Approach. 

3d ed. Pacific Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole, 1996. 

McMahon. Maria O’Neil. The General Method of Social Work Practice: A 
Problem-Soft 'ing Approach. 2d ed. Knglewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice Hail. 
1990. 



O 

1 1 > 




Tut Ron Of Souai \AM<k -n Advancing n*i Ppacik. t <.»f Inpmnuos El>»x Ahuo 



Meriam, U»wis.“The Effects of Boarding Schools on Indian Family Life.” In The 
Destruction of American Indian Tam Hies, edited hv Steven Unger. New 
York: Association on American Indian Affairs, 1977. 

Milev, Karla Krogsrud, Michael 0‘Melia, and Brenda L. DuBois. Generalist 
Social 1 1 'ork Practice: An Empowering Approach. 2ded. Needham 1 leights, 
MA; Allyn & Bacon, 1998. 

Morrisette, Vern, Brad McKenzie, and Larry Morrisette. “Towards an Aborigi- 
nal Model of Social Work Practice." Canadian Social Work Review 10(1): 
92-108(1993). 

Nabigon, Herb, and Ann-Marie Mawhinney. “Aboriginal Theory: A Crce Medi- 
cine Wheel for First Nations Healing." In Social Work 'Treatment: Inter- 
locking Theoretical Approaches, 4th ed.. edited by Francis J. Turner. New 
York: Free Press, 1996. 



Nafziger, Richard. “Transnational Corporations and American Indian Develop- 
ment." In American Indian Energy Resources and Development, edited by 
Roxanne Dunbar Ortiz. Santa Fe: University of New Mexico, 1980. 



National /Association of Social Workers. Code of Ethics oft he National Associa- 
tion of Social Workers. Washington, DC: National /Association of Social 
Workers, 1994. KRIC Document Reproduction Service No. FI) 365 914- 

National Center for Education Statistics. Dropout Rates in the United States. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Government Printing Office, 1988. 



Noriega. Jorge. “American Indian Education in the United States: Indoctrina- 
tion for Subordination to Colonialism." In The State of Native America: 
Genocide. Colonization, and Resistance, edited by M. Annette Jaimes. Bos- 
ton: South End Press, 1992. 



Pevar, Stephen I.. The Rights of Indians and Tribes: The Basic ACLU Guide to 
Indian and Tribal Rights. 2d ed. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University 
Press. 1992. 



Pincus, Allen, and Anne Minahan. Social Work Tractice: Model and Method. 
Itasca. IL: F. F. Peacock, 1973. 

Pinderhughes, Elaine B. “Empowerment for Our Clients and for Ourselves." 
Social Casework 331-38 (1983). 

Ruppaport, Julian. “In Praise of Paradox: A Social Policy of Empowerment over 
Prevention ." American, lournal of C 'onun unity Psychology^ 1 ): 1-25 ( 1981). 

Rattier. R. S. “Child Welfare Services for Urban Native Indians." Report Com- 
missioned by the United Native Indians, Vancouver, British Columbia. 
1990. 



Reyhner, Jon. "Adapting Curriculum to Culture." In leaching American In- 
dian Students. edited by Jon Reyhner. Norman: University of Oklahoma 
Press, 1992. 

Reyhner, Jon, and Jeanne Kder. “A l listory of Indian Education," In Teaching 
American Indian Students, edited by Jon Reyhner. Norman: University of 
Oklahoma Press, 1992. 



Robbins. Susan P.. PranabChatterjee, Edward R. Cauda, C.raeieln Couchonual. 
Monde Snodgress, and Barbara Becker. "Theories of Empowerment." In 

2 4 l 4 




M. MA|. J Y* B • & V- ',- A C>v,- 



Contemporary Unman Behavior Theory: A Critical Perspective for Social 
Work, edited by Susan P. Robbins. Pranab Chalterjee. and Edward R. 
Cauda. Needham Heights, MA: Allvn & Baton. IW8. 

Rose, Stephen M. t and Bruee I.. Black. Advocacy and Empowerment: Mental 
Health Cure in Communities. New York: Rout ledge and Kogan Paul. 1985. 

Russell, .James W. After the Fifth Sun: ( 'lass and Face in Xorth America. 
Englewood Cliff’s, N.l: Prentice Hall, 1994. 

Saleebev. Dennis. ed. The Strenyths Perspective in Social Work Practice. 
White Plains, NY: longman. 1992. 

Sheafor, Bradford \V.. Charles R. llorejsi, and (Gloria A. llorejsi. Techniques 
and Guidelines for Social l fork Practice, .'id ed. Needham Heights. MA: 
Allvn & Bacon. 1994. 

Shuhnan, l.nwrence. The Skills of Helpiny Individuals. Families, and Croups. 
Sd ed. Itasca. I!.: V. K. Peacock, 1992. 

Skidmore, Rex Austin. Milton G. Thackeray, and O. William Parley. Introduc- 
tion to Social Work. 5lh ed. Englewood Cliffs. N.J: Prentice Hall. 1991. 

Smith, .loan. “Young Once. Indian Forever." San Francisco Examiner. IMAGE. 

2 July 1989.2-11. 

Snipp. C. Matthew. “'I he C'hanging Political and Economic Status ol American 
Indians: From Captive Nation to Internal Colonialism. “ .■ American Journal 
of Economics and Soi ioloyy 45(2 ) : 145-57 ( 198b). 

Solomon, Barbara Bryant. /Hack Empoiverment: Social Work in Oppressed 
C'ommunities. New York: Columbia Cniversity Press. 1976. 

Stamatopoulou, Klissavet. “Indigenous Peoples and the I'nited Nations: Hu- 
man Rights as a Developing Dynamic." Human Riyhts Quarterly 16( 1 ): 58- 
81(1994). * 

Staples, !«ee It. "Powerful Ideas about Empowerment. "Administration in 
Social Work 14(2': 29-42 ( 1990). 

Summers, Helena, and Michael .1. Yellow Bird. "Building Relationships with 
Urban First Nations Community Agencies: Implications for Field Education 
and Research." In Social 1 1 ork Field Education: I lews and I is ions, edited 
by Gavla Rodgers. Dubuque. IA: Kendall/I Unit. 1995. 

Swisher. Karen, and Donna Deyhle. "Adapting Instruction to Culture." In 
Teach ini; American Indian Students, edited by Jon Reyhner. Norman: 
University of Oklahoma Press, 1992. 

Thompson. James W.. R. Dale Walker, and Pat Silk-Walker. “Psychiatric Care 
of American Indian and Alaska Natives." In ( ! ulture . Ethnicity, and Mental 
Illness, edited by Albert C. Gaw. Washington, DC: American Psychiatric 
Press, 1998. 

Wehlage, Gary G., and Robert A. Rutter." Dropping Out: l low Much Do Schools 
Contribute to the Problem?" Teachers ( 'alley e Record 274-92 ( 1986). 

Westerfelt, Alex, and Mjchael J. Yellow Bird. “Homeless and Indigenous in 
Minneapolis." Journal of Health and Social Policy, in press. 

Wilkins, David K. “Moderni/ation, Colonialism, Dependency: How Appropri- 
ate Are These Models for Providing an Explanation of North American 



* ! •! 



Thi Rc >u ri S’ W< 



A',: j,*j 



»«i PtfA. •.( i In; • c >i no s E: < 



Indian ‘Underdevelopment ?" Ethnic and Racial Studies 16(3): 390-419 
(1993). 

Yates, Richard A., and Ruth VVhidden Yates. Canada's Lt>gal Environment: Its 
History, Institutions and Principles, Scar l 10 rough, Ontario: Prentice Hall 
Canada, 1993. 

Yellow Bird, Michael J. “Deconstructing Colonialism: A First Nations Social 
Work Perspective." Unpublished manuscript. 1998. 

“Spirituality in First Nations Story Telling: A Salmish-I lidatsa Approach 

to Narrative." Reflections: Xarrativcs of Professional l lelpinq 1(4): 65-72 
(1995). 

Yellow Bird, Michael J., Rovvena Fong. Petra Galindo, Jack Nowicki, and Kdith 
M. Freeman. “The Multicultural Mosaic." In Multicultural Issues in Social 
Work, edited by Patricia L. Kwalt, Edith M. Freeman, Stuart A. Kirk, and 
Dennis L. Poole. Washington, DC: NASW Press, 1996. 

Xastrow, Charles. The Practice of Social 1 1 brk 4th ed. Belmont. CA: Wadsworth, 
1992. 

Zimmerman. Marc, and Julian Rappaport. “Citizen Participation, Perceived 
Control, and Psychological Empowerment." American Journal of Commu- 
nity Psychology 16(5): 725-50 ( 1988). 



f' * { 

Cl • ( ‘ > 



235 






Part III 

Till- Coi.UXil: AND UNIVHRSITY EXPI-RIKNCK 



i i 
* w 




Chapter 10 




American Indians and Alaska Natives 
in Higher Education 

Promoting Access and Achievement 



L). Michaki. P.wi.l' 



A merican Indian and Alaska Native people are deeply con- 
cerned with postsecondary access and achievement, and they 
are not alone.*’ Improving American Indian access to and 
achievement in higher education is part of a national agenda to 
diversify our colleges and universities 1 and is supported by specific 
initiatives intended to serve the Native community. 1 Overall, the 
higher education community and the general public must continue 
to address a legacy of American Indian underrepresentation in higher 
education as our society strives to move closer to developing demo- 
cratic and integrated multicultural colleges and universities. By do- 
ing so. we as a nation strengthen ourselves to confront the social, 
cultural, and economic issues that affect all our lives. 

To address these issues over time, it is important to determine 
periodically how well American Indians are gaining access to and 
achieving in the postsecondary arena. This chapter draws upon ex- 
tensive literature including a national study describing the charac- 
teristics of American Indian K-12 education’ and a source book on 




D Mu has i p.v.r 



American Indians in higher education that examines demographics, 
access, enrollment, degrees conferred, financial aid, faculty repre- 
sentation, tribal colleges, and policy implications." 

The chapter begins with an overview of American Indian access to 
higher education, presenting data on precollege attributes such as 
admission test scores, core curriculum course completion, and col- 
lege admissions criteria. This collection of precollege attribute data 
is balanced by an examination of the possible influences of school 
and environmental attributes on postsecondary access. American 
Indian achievement in higher education is examined using national 
data on enrollment and degrees conferred, in addition to persistence 
and graduation rates at various types of institutions by size and 
source of control. The chapter reviews the literature to identify 
actions that promote American Indian achievement in higher educa- 
tion and concludes with comments on an overall strategy to improve 
American Indian postsecondary access and achievement. 



Access to Higher Education 

The National Kducational Longitudinal Study (NFLS:88) of eighth- 
grade students, which began in 1988, found that American Indians 
are less likely to be college bound than other prominent groups in 
the United States. For example, while American Indians represented 
0.8 percent of the total sample, only 0.4 percent were college bound; 
among White (non-Hispanic) students, who represented 74 percent 
of the total sample, 80 percent were college bound. Myriad reasons 
exist for this discrepancy. This section examines precollege attributes 
of American Indian students in tandem with school caul environ- 
mental attributes to understand better the factors that influence 
movement from high school to college. 

Precollege attributes. College admission test scores, core cur- 
riculum course completion, and the proportion of students meeting 
certain college admissions criteria provide some insight into higher 
education access issues for American Indians. Two predominant 
college admission U*sts administered to preeollegc students are the 
Scholastic Aptitude Test (SAT) and the American College Test (ACT). 
As shown in Table L overall scores among American Indians gener- 
ally lag behind the nation in both tests. Although scores rose be- 
tween 1987 and 1997. on average. American Indians consistently 



Amlrican Indians and Alaska Naiivfs in HiGufR Educaiion 



were 74 to 66 points lower on the combined verbal and mathematical 
SAT scores and 2.0 to 2.2 points lower than the ACT national aver- 
age. 



Table 1. Comparison of American Indian SAT and ACT 
Scores by National Norms: 1987, 1996, and 1997 7 



SAT Scores ACT Scores 



Group 


1987 


1996 


1997 


1987 


1996 


1997 


All Students/National Average 


1008 


1013 


1016 


20.6 


20.8 


21.0 


American Indian 


934 


960 


950 


18.4 


18.8 


19.0 



American Indian students also appear to rank below the U.S. 
average in completion of core curricula for high school graduation. 
As shown in Table 2, only 26 percent of the American Indians did so 
in 1990 and 31 percent in 1992. This compares to 40 percent of the 
total U.S. population in 1990 and 47 percent in 1992. While the 
percentage of American Indian students completing a core curricu- 
lum increased by 5 percent between the two periods, these increases 
are still 14 to 16 percent lower than the total sample. 

Additional analysis of N ELS: 88 data indicates that most Ameri- 
can Indian college-bound high school graduates do not meet any of 
the five specific criteria identified as being important to college 
admissions officers. For example, only 5 percent of the American 
Indians had a grade point average of 3-5, compared to 19 percent of 
the students nationwide. .Just 2 percent of the American Indians had 



Table 2. Comparison of Percentage of American Indians 
Completing a Core Curriculum for High School Graduation to 
Total Sample: 1990 and 1992 8 

Percent Completing Cere Curriculum 



Group 


1990 


1992 


Total Sample 


40% 


47% 


American Indian 


26% 


31% 



241 

i \ , 






D. M-- *«Ad pA.'t l 



a combined SA'r of 1,100 or better, compared to 22 percent of all 
college-bound high school graduates. Approximately 25 percent of 
the American Indians received positive teacher responses to a series 
of survey questions, compared to 42 percent of all students. About 
58 percent of the American Indian students did participate in two or 
more extracurricular activities; however, this compares to 68 per- 
cent of the total sample. The analysis also reveals that only 24 
percent of the American Indian high school graduates completed a 
college preparation curriculum, compared to 56 percent of all col- 
lege-bound high school graduates in the sample. 

At first glance, per-eollege attribute data reveal some gains, but 
they still suggest an inability of American Indian students to perform 
well on standardized tests and to meet important admission criteria. 
It is not surprising that they arc underrepresented in the higher 
education arena, which relies on test scores and academically related 
criteria to screen access and predict success. The problem could, 
then, be fixed if we got American Indians to do better on standard- 
ized tests and to meet important admission criteria that we expect of 
all Americans. 

While attractive on a surface level, the strategy of simply “fixing 
the American Indian” is unacceptable. This personal-deficit approach 
does not adequately address the overall complexity of issues that 
conspire to undermine attempts by American Indians to gain access 
to postsecondary institutions. Evidence suggests college test scores 
and academic criteria such as high school grade point averages are 
not powerful predictors of college success among American Indi- 
ans/' Although it can be helpful to consider such factors, it is still 
necessary to broaden our scope to include appropriate attributes at 
the heart of preparing American Indian students for pursuing a 
higher education degree. Better indicators of success would he the 
school and environmental attributes that determine the quality of 
schooling American Indians receive throughout their K-12 experi- 
ence. 

School and environmental attributes. A 1997 report, which 
uses American Indian data collected through the Schools and Staff- 
ing Survey (SASS), provides another vantage point for examining 
school and environmental attributes that might influence 
postsecondary access among American Indian students."’ SASS is 



< ; / 

/ 



242 




A) A'.r A H-'-hF 1 * t. 



A'.H »*i Ah IN; -AKV .\\ t 



an integrated survey of American schools, school districts, princi- 
pals, teachers, and student records that includes an oversample of 
schools funded or operated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) 
and public schools with high percentages of Indian student enroll- 
ment. The SASS database is unique because characterizing the na- 
tional extent of education services received by American Indian 
students is not easy and is rarely attempted. 

The small size of the American Indian population (approximately 
one percent of the U.S. population) has meant that these students 
and the school personnel who serve them are almost never repre- 
sented in sufficient numbers in national education studies to permit 
reliable and valid generalizations about their characteristics. Fur- 
thermore, tribal and linguistic diversity, geographic dispersion, and 
the tendency of American Indians to reside in remote rural areas 
have made national studies of this population very costly and beyond 
the reach of most education researchers. However, the Indian supple- 
ment to the ongoing SASS data collection program represents an 
important effort by the U.S. Department of Education to explain to 
educators and policy makers many of the issues that confront the 
schools, administrators, and teachers serving American Indian stu- 
dents. 

Using SASS data, a recent study finds that 10 percent of all Ameri- 
can Indian students attend schools funded or operated by the Bu- 
reau of Indian Affairs (hereafter referred to as HI A/tribal schools) 
and that B6 percent attend public schools where American Indians 
constitute 25 percent or more of the total student enrollment (here- 
after referred to as high-Indian-enrollment public schools). 11 Nearly 
all of these schools are small (less than 500 students) and located in 
rural areas of the United States. This combination of school size and 
location presents unique challenges when examining postsecondary 
access issues. For example, educational costs per student are typi- 
cally higher for rural schools, prohibiting the implementation of 
advanced or college preparatory classes, while economic and social 
features such as poverty and low educational attainment among 
adults may contribute to students not achieving their academic po- 
tential. However, small schools also offer potential benefits not en- 
joyed by larger institutions. Studies conclude that drop-out rates are 
lower, teaching is more effective, and fewer behavior problems arise 
in smaller schools. 1 ' 



*) v 





The quality of students' Ivgh school experiences that cultivate 
postsecondary aspirations and intentions is determined, in large 
part, by the learning environment that principals and teachers are 
instrumental in creating. As noted by the Indian Nations At Risk 
Task Force and White House Conference on Indian Education, a 
critical need exists to increase the number of qualified American 
Indian administrators and teachers who can serve as positive role 
models and who possess knowledge of Indian traditions, cultures, 
and learning styles. In the 1993-94 school year, only 47 percent of 
the principals in BIA/trihal schools (where nearly all students are 
American Indians) and just 13 percent of the principals in high- 
Indian-enrollment public schools were American Indians. Sixty-six 
percent of the BIA principals and 29 percent of the public school 
principals had received training in Indian education administration. 
Such training could enhance program development and community 
relationships designed to meet the needs of American Indian stu- 
dents. Only 38 percent of the teachers in HI A/tribal schools and 15 
percent of the teachers in high-Indian-enrollment public schools 
were American Indians; nationally very few teachers reported they 
had majored or minorcd in Indian education (0.05 percent), and 
even in BIA/ tribal schools, only 2 percent held a college major or 
minor in this area. 



The serious issues facing schools in which American Indians con- 
stitute a significant percentage of the student body can provide 
additional insights into learning environments. More than 40 per- 
cent of all principals and teachers in BIA/trihal schools and high- 
Indian-enrollment public schools reported that poverty was a seri- 
ous problem in their communities. Poverty and the associated lack of 
social services in rural areas probably contributed to additional 
problems identified as serious (parental alcohol and drug abuse, lack 
of parental involvement, student absenteeism, and student apathy) 
hv 25 to 40 percent of principals and teachers. These statistics are 



not indictments, but too many resonate throughout Indian country 
for us to ignore the important and far-reaching impact that good 
schools and educated youth can have upon our communities. 



' , ( 
i i o 



n a a 




Amebic, an Indians and Alaska Naims in H'C-he » Er»i< ajion 



Achievement in Higher Education 

This section examines postsecondary enrollment, degrees con- 
ferred, and graduation and persistence rates at various types of 
institutions, and presents findings that promote campus climates 
conducive to American Indian achievement in higher education. 
American Indians appear less likely to enroll in four-year institu- 
tions compared to the national norm. As shown in 'fable 3, between 
1993 and 1995, the percentage of American Indians enrolled in 
public and private four-year institutions ranged from 48.1 to 50.0 
percent: enrollment in public and private two-year institutions ranged 
from 50.0 to 51.9 percent. However, the national norm favored 
enrollment in four-year over two-year institutions, with approxi- 
mately 6l percent attending four-year schools. These findings sug- 
gest American Indians are not on parity with the rest of the nation in 
achieving enrollment in four-year degree institutions that may pro- 
vide better opportunities for employment and graduate education. 



Table 3. Comparison of American Indians to Total 
Percentage Enrolled in Postsecondary Institutions by 
Selected Characteristic: 1993, 1994, and 1995' 3 



Year of Enrollment 

1993 1994 1995 



Selected 

Characteristic 


American 

Indian 


Total 


American 

Indian 


Total 


American 

Indian 


Total 


Men 


42.1°o 


44.9°o 


41.6V 


44.6% 


41.7% 


44.5% 


Women 


57.9V 


55.1V 


58.4°o 


55.4% 


58.3% 


55.5% 


Public 4-year 


37.7V 


40.9V 


37.3V 


40.8% 


38.7% 


40.8% 


Public 2-year 


49.7°o 


37.3% 


49.6% 


37.2% 


48.0% 


37.0% 


Private 4-year 


10.4° o 


20.2°o 


10.7% 


20.5% 


11.3% 


20.7% 


Private 2-year 


2.2% 


1.6V 


2.4% 


1.5% 


2.0% 


1.5% 


Undergraduate 


92.6V 


86.2°o 


92.2% 


85.9% 


91.9% 


85.8% 


Graduate 


6.0V 


11.8V 


CD 

lo- 

o 

o' 


12.1% 


6.5% 


12.1% 


Professional 


1.4V 


2.0°o 


1.4% 


2.1% 


1.6% 


2.1% 






D M — : P 




AufP.CAfi 1 t;u'an$ anL 1 Alaska Nahvls i\> Hiohip El '*on 



Table 5. Comparison of American Indian Six-Year 
Graduation Rates to Total Sample for Division I 
Institutions by Size and Control 16 

Size and Control 





Small Public Large Public 


Small Private 


Large Private 


Group 


1995 


1996 1995 


1996 


1995 


1996 


1995 1996 


Total Sample 


41% 


56°o 56°o 


57% 


65% 


65% 


72% 


71% 


American Indian 


25% 


28% 33% 


35% 


45% 


44% 


56% 


56% 


Difference 


-16°o 


-28% -23% 


-22% 


-21% 


-2 1c o 


-26% -25% 



As shown in Table 6, the one-year persistence rate at Division ii 
public institutions for first-time, full-time American Indian tresh- 
men was 54 percent for the 1993-94 cohort; the three-year persis- 
tence rate was 33 percent for the 1991-92 cohort. These rates were 14 
to 16 percent iower than the total average. The one- and three-year 
persistence rates at Division II private institutions for first-time, 
full-time American Indian freshmen were similar (56 percent and 33 
percent, respectively) hut 17 and 21 percent lower than the total 
average. 

l ; irst-time, full-time American Indian freshmen appear to fare 
better at Division III institutions, with one- and three-year persis- 
tence rates at public institutions being 64 percent and 46 percent, 
respectively, and slightly higher at private institutions, with a one- 
year persistence rate of 69 percent and a three-year persistence rate 
of 49 percent. However, American Indian one- and three-year per- 
sistence rates at public Division III institutions were still 12 and 14 
percent lower than the average of the total sample, and at private 
institutions, the rates were 12 and 18 percent lower. 

Promoting postsecondary achievement. Higher education 
institutions can make a wide variety of interrelated efforts to im- 
prove American Indian postsecondary achievement. On one hand, 
the federal government is an instrumental partner in increasing 
American Indian postsecondary achievement because of treaty obli- 
gations. On the other hand, it is up to the tribes, states, and institu- 
tions within those stales to sustain worthwhile efforts that will result 
in measurable improvements. 




Table 6. American Indian Freshmen One-Year and 
Three-Year Persistence Rates for Divisions II and III 






Institutions by Institutional Control' 7 










Division II 






Division III 






Public 


Private 


Public 


Private 1 




1-year 


3-year 


1-year 


3-year 


1-year 


3-year 


1-year 


3-year 


Group 


1993-94 


91-92 


1993-94 


91-92 


1993-94 


91-92 


1993-94 


91-92 


Total 

Sample 


68°o 


49°o 


73°o 


54°o 


76% 


60% 


81% 


67% 


American 

Indian 


54% 


o 

o 

CO 

CO 


56° o 


33% 


64°o 


46% 


69% 


49% 


Difference 


-14°o 


■16°0 


-17°o 


-21°o 


-12% 


-14% 


-12% 


-18% 



To promote* satisfactory transition from high school to college, 
state governments and postsecondarv institutions need to promote 
K-I6 partnerships with tribal communities to elevate the overall 
level of precollege academic preparation, postsecondarv aspirations, 
and postsecondarv orientation of American Indian students. A na- 
tional assessment of American Indian postsecondarv departure is in 
agreement, finding that weak postsecondarv intentions and the lack 
of ability to integrate social and academic systems both formally and 
informally, into the college campus, adversely influence post- 
secondary outcomes. ■*' 

In response, both the Indian Nations At Risk Task Force and the 
National Advisory Council on Indian Kdueation received testimony 
requesting resources to help American Indians become more aware 
of postsecondarv opportunities and better prepared for the aca- 
demic and social rigors of attending college. Culturally specific aca- 
demic and student support services are needed once the student gets 
into college/ 1 ' If services are provided, it is important to ensure that 
American Indians use and are satisfied with these services,* 1 hope- 
fully reducing their anxiety levels enough to find comfortable niches 
on campus." 

Mentoring programs and sufficient financial aid should be made 
available to American Indian students at postsecondarv institutions. 
The institution should blend linear and holistic thinking within the 



f ; t 

6 ) i 



?48 



Amewk. an Indian-, and- A>. a-jv a Nahvi^ in Hioni;. Ed’k.aiu »n 



classroom. At the same time, the campus community can look be- 
yond overt racism and discrimination in a more concerted effort to 
motivate students to put forth the effort needed to succeed. Institu- 
tional policies to improve American Indian postsecondary achieve- 
ment should spell out the need for multicultural and relevant educa- 
tion that spawns reciprocity in faculty-student interactions . 23 To 
improve outcomes for American Indian students, institutions of 
higher education have to cultivate enduring academic advisor-advisee 
and intellectual mentor-mentee relationships. These faculty-student 
relationships should be characterized by caring attitudes conveyed 
through good communication skills, likable personalities, a willing- 
ness to learn cultural norms, respectful interactions, appreciation 
for different ways of knowing, and high expectations . 1 ' 1 

Some colleges and universities have already responded to the 
challenge of improving American Indian access and achievement in 
higher education .’ 1 Tribal colleges, in particular, are exemplary in 
developing recruitment, retention, and campus environments that 
facilitate American Indian student achievement.-'’ Paul Boyer's re- 
port on the tribal colleges finds that “research, site visits, accredita- 
tion reports, and government audits all confirm their effectiveness. 
Tribal colleges have proven their ability to enroll students who were 
not served by higher education, to graduate students who have 
dropped out of other institutions, and to sponsor successful commu- 
nity development programs."-" 

Another study demonstrates that tribal college personnel know 
and readily accept their roles in serving a wide variety of needs 
within the community.-* The expanded nature of this target popula- 
tion results in programming designed to reach the populations that 
need to be served. The service population includes students with a 
wide variety of characteristics: learning disabilities, low academic 
confidence, a desire but inability (due to conflicting demands) to 
make contact with college staff, the initiative to take advantage of 
services offered by the college to further their education, the need to 
participate in training and workshops, interest in one or two particu- 
lar courses, and aspirations and commitment to obtain a college 
degree. 

On the reservation, being able to initiate a conversation with 
somebody who is functionally illiterate is as meaningful to the tribal 
college staff as being able to clarify a program of study for a student 



0.40 




D. M - ■«*»} i P-- . 1 1 



who enrolls in a degree program. Although this may not he reflected 
in institutional enrollment records, tribal college staff nonetheless 
gain a deep sense of personal satisfaction when reaching out to serve 
people in need, regardless of the need. Whether a person needs 
somebody to read something to them or guidance on how to ge* fully 
enrolled in a degree program, access is promoted and achieved by 
tribal college personnel. Faculty and staff in these institutions are 
impressive in that they care about, encourage, and attend to the 
developmental needs of students and their families in such a way 
that it becomes institutionalized and personalized. This spirit of 
giving provides fertile ground for a growing sense of optimism among 



tribal members. 

Many non-Indian institutions have also strived to meet the needs 
of tribal communities and American Indian college students. Early 
outreach by these institutions evolves into long-term relationships 
with secondary schools and tribal communities. Often the number of 
alumni from particular tribal communities increases, and alumni 
play a vital role in promoting student and faculty organizations that 
advance the institutions mission to serve American Indian students 
and communities. Beneficial activities include academic programs 
and student support services that provide employment opportuni- 
ties; grant support; technical support; culturally sensitive counsel- 
ing; cultural support networks; scholarly opportunities; and the 
chance to interact with faculty about substantive issues regarding 
American Indians past, present, and future. Exemplary institutions 
try to establish family relationships with the American Indian people. 

Important strides are being made to address the needs of Ameri- 
can Indians in different disciplines. In the field of education, various 
observers have called for learning about American Indian students 
and families through immersion into and experience with communi- 
ties;"' creation of nontraditionai admissions policies and instruc- 
tional delivery ; 10 work with tribal governments ; 11 and emphasis on 
hiring knowledgeable personnel and providing professional devel- 
opment. w Institutions like Haskell Indian Nations University and 
Dine College have developed programs that use the best practices in 
teacher education and incorporate valuable knowledge about Indian 
education, learning styles, and culturally appropriate curricular ma- 
terials . 11 



n C ' . 



oc,n 



Ami me an and At ask a Naiivis >n Hk-hoj Eouc.ahon 



However, teacher education is not alone in showing growth in 
positive outcomes for American Indian students. Programs in psy- 
chology recruit and retain promising students through culturally 
appropriate, sensitive programs and outreach” and develop rel- 
evant curricula complemented by job placement services.**’’ Business 
programs arc beginning to see the value of working with tribal 
economic development strategies. The science, mathematics, and 
engineering fields have become more familiar with specific needs 
among American Indians, r assessing enrollment and completion 
trends, ts and offering summer institutes and undergraduate and 
graduate research/support programs. 50 



Conclusion 

As we embark upon each school year, concerned educators should 
review American Indian access to and achievement in higher educa- 
tion. Improvement in these areas will require federal, state, and 
tribal governments to collaborate on an agenda to increase the num- 
ber of American Indian students who enter into and graduate from 
college. Several initiatives can arise from such collaboration: part- 
nerships that link schools serving American Indians to businesses so 
students can explore and get training in various career opportuni- 
ties, schools that work with tribal communities to increase parental 
involvement and community empowerment in determining the mis- 
sion and scope of the school, and higher education communities that 
collaborate with American Indian communities to address harriers 
to advancing the postsecondary recruitment and retention of Ameri- 
can Indian students. 

Schools and postsecondary institutions have established policies 
that clearly articulate a commitment to meet the intellectual and 
cultural needs of American Indian students. Academic disciplines 
have been successful in creating comfortable academic and social 
environments while reaching out to tribal communities to find out 
what needs to be addressed and increasing the pool of prospective 
American Indian applicants. Within the big picture, all these initia- 
tives (small and large) are brought together In’ a level of sincerity and 
commitment that strives to fundamentally change the education 
system to hotter meet the needs of all American citizens, including 
American Indians. 



2S 2v»u 




D. Mu. ha; i Pavh 



Notes 



1. D. Michael Pavel (Skokomish) is an assistant professor in the College of 
Kducation at Washington State University. 

2. From this point, the term American Indian is inclusive of Hskimos. 
Aleuts, and other Alaska Natives. At times, “Indian" or “Native” might he used 
to refer to American Indians and Alaska Natives. 

3. See Bennett, Research on Racial Issues', Justiz, Minorities in Higher 
Education ; Richardson and Skinner, Achieving Quality and Diversity, and 
Shorn, Minority Access to Higher Education. 

4. Indian Nations At Risk Task Force, Indian Nations At Risk, Native 
Kducation Initiative, Promising Programs', and White House Conference on 
Indian Kducation, “Executive Summary." 

5. See National Center for Kducation Statistics, Characteristics. 

6. See National Center for Kducation Statistics, American Indians and 
Alaska Natives in Postsecondary Education. 

7. Figures were derived from the World Wide Web sites for the SAT 
(http://www.collegeboard.org) and ACT (http://www.act.org). Combined 
verbal and mathematics scores on the SAT range from 400 to 1,600, and the 
composite scores on the ACT range from 1 to 36. 

8. National Center for Kducation Statistics, Condition of Education. 78. 
The core curriculum includes four credits in Knglish, three in science, three in 
mathematics, three in social studies, and two in a foreign language. 

9- See Baeza, Test Item Bias. 

10. See National Center for Kducation Statistics, Characteristics. 

It. Ibid. 

12. Ravwid, Current Literature on Small Schools. 2. 

13. The author generated these findings from the National Center for 
Kducation Statistics, “Fall Knrollment Surveys." 

14. Ibid. 

15. See Shoemaker, Graduate Activity Survey. 

16. National Collegiate Athletic Association, 1995 NCAA Division I 
Graduation Rates Report. 6 16- 1 7. 624- 25 and 1996 NC A A Pit 'is ion 1 ( ,’radu- 
otion Rates Report . 622-23, 6.30-31, 636-37. The 1995 four-class average 
graduation rate includes those who entered as freshmen in 1985-86, 1986-87. 
1987-88, and 1988-89. and graduated within six years, 't he 1996 four-class 
average graduation rate includes those who entered as freshmen in 1986-87, 
1987-88, 1988-89, and 1989-90, and graduated within six years. Large public 
and private institutions are those enrolling more than 3,500 students. 

17. National Collegiate Athletic Association, 1999 NCAA Division II and 
III Enrollment and Persistence Rates Rv/>ort. 13-14 and 1995 NCAA Division 
l l and HI Enroilmvnt and Persistence Rates Report. 13-14. A p*. rsistence rate 



2 S > \ ™ 




Awjyu an Ini».an< an{> Aiaska Nai \is in H.t .*.»& Emu aa .i„ 



is based on a comparison of the number of students who started college as 
first-time, full-time students in a given year (one-year in 1993-94 and 3-year 
in 1990-91) and the number of those who reenrolled as full-time students in 
fall of the following year. 

18. See Curley, Future Direction*, Kleinfeld, Gorsuch, and Kerr, Minori- 
ties in Education-, LaCounte and others. A Elan for American Indian Educa- 
tion Minnesota Private College Research Foundation, Divided We Ealt\ 
Morin, State Legislation, New York State Education Department, Higher 
Education Opportunity Programs’, Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Edu- 
cation, Student Transfer Matrix, and White-Tail Feather. Reed, and Zelio, 
State- Tribal Legislation . 

19- See Pavel and Padilla, American Indian and Alaska Native 
Postsecondary Departure. 

20. See Minnernnd others. Benefits of Cultural Immersion Activities. 

21. See Fogel and Yaffe. Ethnic Minority. Dodd and others. American 
Indian Student Retention. 

22. Gupta. Comparison of Anxiety Steward, Two Faces of Academic 

Success. 

23. See Kirkness and Earnhardt. “First Nations and Higher Education" 
and Weasel Head, Learn in y Styles. 



24. See (Jordon, Academic Advising. 

25- See Pavel, Swisher, and Ward, "Special Focus." 



26. See Bad Wound, “Teaching to Empower”: Cross, "Every Teacher a 
Researcher"; Darden and others, "Segregation of American Indian Under- 
graduate Students": and St. Cyr, "Recruiting at Indian Tribal Colleges.” 



27. Boyer, Native American ('alleges, 2. 



28. See Pavel. Postsecondary Access. 

29. See Koordhoff and Kleinfeld. Preparing Teachers for Multicultural 
( tassrooms. 



30. See Grant, "University Reaches Out" and Martin, Kiv'atindee Pino 
( 'ummunity teacher Ediu at ton Program. 

31. See Shonerd, Recruiting and Retaining Native Americans. 

32. See Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. Indian Nations At A'AX and 
Nolev, Native and Non-Native teachers. 

33. See Swisher, "Haskell Indian Nations University Model" and Upvall. 
"Completing the Circle." 

34. See McDonald, "New Frontiers in Clinical Training." 

35- See Marshall and others, "Multiculturalism and Rehabilitation Coun- 
selor Training." 

36. See Smith. “The Issue of Compatibility." 

37. See Colby. "Broadening the Scope" and Haller and Aitken, Mashkiki. 

38. See Campbell and others. Minority Graduation Rates', Denton. 
Minority Medical School Enrollment’. Friedman. "Minorities in Engineering 

Of 





-School"; Matthews, l Underrepresented Minorities- and Watts and Leeca, 
“Native Americans and Minority Access.” 

39 . See Caple and others, "Creating a ‘Leak-Proof Minority Pipeline : 
Morrison and Williams, Minority engineering Programs ; Oros, Indian 
Natural Resource. Science and Fmgineering Program' and “Prescription for 
Success"; and Sweeney. “INMKD Prepares American Indians." 



Bibliography 

Had Wound, Klgin. “ Teaching to Kmpower: Tribal Colleges Must Promote 
leadership and Self Determination in Their Reservations." Tribal College 
Journal ’M l): lf>-19(1991). 

Baeza. .1., dr. Test Item Bias ant! American Indian Students (CD- ROM |, 1989. 
Abstract available from ProQuest Idle: Dissertation Abstracts Item 9019906. 

Bennett, Christine I. “Research on Racial Issues in American Higher lulu ca- 
tion’. In Handbook of Research on Multicultural education, edited by 
James A. Banks. New York: Macmillan. 1995. KRIC Document Reproduc- 
tion Service No. KD 582 785. 

Bover, Paul. Xat ice American Colleges: Progress and Prospects. Princeton, 
Nil: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of ‘Teaching, 1997. 

Campbell, George, R. Denes, Douglas I,. Friedman, and L. Miyazaki. “Minority 
Graduation Rates: Comparative Performance of American Kngineering 
Schools.” A ACM/: Research letter, vol. 2. no. 2 (1991). KRIC Document 
Reproduction Set Le No. KD 346 180. 

Caple, Sharon, and others. “Creating a ‘Leak-Proof Minority Pipeline into 
Chemistry." ( buncil on Undergraduate Research 12(2): 52- 58 (1991). 

Colby. Patricia. ‘Broadening the Scope of Medical Careers: American Indians 
Working in 1 lealth Professions." Winds of Change 1 1(5): 34-59 (1996), 

Cross, K. Patricia. “Kverv 'Teacher a Researcher. Kvery Classroom a labora- 
tory." Tribal College Journal 2(4): 7-12 (1991). 

Curlew John R. “Future Directions for American Indian Kducation in New dork 
State. "1995. KRIC Document Reproduction Service No. KD 384 452. 

Darden. Joe T., J. G. Bagaka, T. Armstrong, and T. Payne. “Segregation of 
American Indian Undergraduate Students in Institutions of Higher Kdiiea- 
tion." Rquitg A* excellence in education 27(3): 61-68 (1994 ). 

Deloria, Vine, Jr. ”1 ligher Kducation and Self-Determination.” f J bids of ( hangc 
6(1): 18-25(1991). 

Denton, David R. Minority Medical School enrollment in SR IIP States. At- 
lanta: Southern Regional Kducation Board. 1993. KRIC Document Repro- 
duction Service No. KD 363 193. 

Dodd. John M.. and others. “American Indian Student Retention. AM.S’/M 
Journal’SM 1 ): 72-78 ( 1995). 

Fogel. Jacqueline I... and Joanne J. Yaffo. “Kthnic Minority and Caucasian 

2 i > < > 264 



Af/iivt an iM*iANS ANf» Ai*WA Naims if* t-U ;nt v E? •>>. av.on 



Student Experiences at the University of Utah and Recommendations for 
Institutional Response.” Paper presented at the annual forum of the Asso- 
ciation for Institutional Research, Atlanta. 10-13 May 1992. ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 349 874. 

Friedman, Douglas L ‘’Minorities in Engineering School: A Data Base for 
Retention Efforts." NAC 'ME Research Letter , vol. 1, no. 1 (1990). 

Cordon, Virginia N . Ai miemic 'Adi 'ising: An Annotated Bibliography. Westport, 
CT: Greenwood Publishing, 1994. 

Grant, A. “University Reaches Out— Programs Bring Education to Communi- 
ties.” The Manitoba Teaeber. vol. 68. no. 4 (1990). 

Gupta, N. C. “Comparison of Anxiety among American and Indian College 
Students.” Journal of the Indian Academy of Applied Psychology 16( 1 ): 18- 
20(1990). 

Haller, Edwin W., and I .any P. Aitken, eds. Mashkiki: Old Medicine Nourish- 
ing the Xew. Dinhaiu, MD: University Press of America, 1992. 

Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. Indian Nations At Risk: Summary of Issues 
S Recommendations from Regional Hearings. Washington IX': U.S. Gov- 
ernment Printing Office, 1990. 

Justiz, Manuel .1., ed. Minorities in Higher Education. Phoenix: Oryx Press, 
1994. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 372 716. 

Kirkness, Verna .1.. and Ray Barnhardt. “First Nations and Higher Education: 
The Four Rs— Respect, Relevance, Reciprocity. Responsibility." Journal of 
American Indian Education 30(2): 1-15 ( 1991). 

Kleinfeld, .Judith, L Gorsuch, and Kerr. “Minorities in Education: The 
Changing North: Alaska." Paper prepared for the annual meeting of the 
Native American Science Education Association, Anchorage, AK. 1988. 
ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 302 364. 

DiCounle. Deborah, and others. A Plan /or American Indian Education in 
Montana: Recommended Goals. I Ielena: Montana State Office of the Com- 
mission of Higher Education, 1991. ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 336 251. 

Marshall, Catherine A., and others. “Multiculturalism and Rehabilitation Coun- 
selor Training: Recommendations for Providing Culturally Appropriate Coun- 
seling Services to American Indians with Disabilities." Journal of Counsel- 
ing and Peeelopment 70( I ): 225-34 ( 199 1 ). 

Martin, .Jim. ed. Eieatindce llino Community Teacher Education Program: 
Program Outline 1990-1992. Rae-Edzo. Northwest Territories, Canada: 
Dogrib Divisional Board of Education, 1990. ERIC’ Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 331 665. 

Matthews, C. M. Underrepresented Minorities and Women in Science. Math- 
ematics. and Engineering: Problems and Issues for the /990s. Washington, 
DC: Congressional Research Service, 1990. 

Mayo. .Judith R„ and others. “Social Integration and Academic Performance 
among Minority University Students . " Journal of ( allege Student Derelop- 
w<v// :«>((»): 542-52 ( 1995). 






\ < i 




D. Ma MAE L Pa.H 



McDonald, Doug. “New Frontiers in Clinical Training: The UND Indians into 
Psychology Doctoral Education (Inpsyde) Program.'’ American Indian and 
Alaska Native Mental Health Research 5(3): 52-55 ( 1994 ). 

Minner,Sam,.I. Tsosie, Robert Newhouse. andd. Holiday. ‘Benefits of Cultural 
Immersion Activities in Special Education Teacher draining Programs." In 
Reaching to the Future: Boldly Facing Challenges in Rural Communities: 
l inference Proceedings of the American C \mncil on Rural Special Educa- 
tion (ACRES). I .as Vegas: ACRES, 1995- ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 381 310. 

Minnesota Private College Research Foundation. Divided We hull: The Declin- 
ing C 'ham e for C 'allege among Minnesota ) out h from Low-Income Fami- 
lies and Communities of Color. St. Paul: Minnesota Private College Re- 
search Foundation. 1994. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 
359 321. 

Mori n, Ki mberly A. long State Legislation on Xatii v American Issues. Denver: 
National Conference of State legislatures. 1994. ERIC Document Repro- 
duction Service No. ED 385400- 



Morrison, Catherine, and I.. E. Williams. "Minority Engineering Programs: A 
Case for Institutional Support." XAC'MF Research Newsletter, vol. 4, no. 1 
(1993). 



National Action Council for Minorities in Engineering. Strategic Solutions: 
Annual Report. Washington, DC: National Action Council for Minorities in 
Engineering, 1993. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 385 397. 

National Center for Education Statistics. American Indians and Alaska Na- 
tives in Rostsecondary Education. Washington DC: U.S. Government Print- 
ing Office, 1998. 

. Characteristics of American Indian and Alaska Native Education: 

Resultsfrom the 1000-0/ and 1003-og Schools and Staffing Surveys. NCES 
97-451- Washington DC’: l l.S. Government Printing Office. 1997. 

. The ( 'audition of Education. Washington. DC: I'.S. Government Print- 
ing Office, 1995- 



. “Fall Enrollment Surveys." Integrated Post secondary Education Data 

System (IPEDS) [Database]. 



National Educational Longitudinal Study of tOSS. Washington, DC: 

U.S. Government Printing Of fice. 



National Collegiate Athletic Association. .VC’l.l Division / Graduation Rates 
Report. Overland Park. KS: National Collegiate Athletic Association, 1995. 

. XL >1.-1 Division l Graduation Rates Report. Overland Park, KS: Na- 
tional Collegiate Athletic Association, 1995. 

. XL 'A A Division l l and III Enrollment and Persistence Rates Report. 

Overland Park. KS: National Collegiate Athletic Association, 1994. 

. AiCM/l Division l l and III Enrollment and Persistence Rates Report. 

Overland Park, KS: National Collegiate Athletic Association. 1995. 

Native Education Initiative, Regional Educational laboratory Network. Prom- 
ising Programs in Native Education. Palatka, FI.: South Eastern Regional 



/ i i 



?hb 



American Iuoian* ai.*: t Ai Asv »\ Na*:v^ in Hu .r«fv Ept/.t,.-*; 



Vision for Education. 1995. ERIC Document Reproduction Sen ice No. HD 
385420. 



New York State Education Department. Higher Education Opportunity Pro- 
gram Annual Report: 1990-91: HEOP Works. Albany: Bureau of Higher 
Education Opportunity Programs, 1991. ERIC Document Reproduction Ser- 
vice No. HD 344 527. 

Nolev, Grayson. Satire and Son-Satire Teachers and Administrators for 
Elementary and Secondary Schools Sen ing Amcrn 'an Indian and Alaska 
Satire Students, 1991. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. HD 343 
759. 



Noordhoff, Karen, and Judith Kleinfeld. “Preparing Teachers for Multicultural 
Classrooms: A Case Study in Rural Alaska." Paper presented at the annual 
meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Chicago. 1991 
ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. HD 335 312. 



Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education. Student transfer Matrix, hall 
199'J. Oklahoma City: Oklahoma State Regents for 1 higher Education. 1993. 
ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 364 295. 



Oros.Tia. “Indian Natural Resource. Science and Engineering Program. 
of Change 8(2): 37-40 (1993). 



i \ mas 



. "A Prescription for Success." / 1 i'nds of ( ha tup *8(3): 48-51 (1993). 

Pavel, D. Michael. Postseeondary Access I ia the Tribal ( 'alleges. Washington, 
DC: American Association of Community Colleges and Hord Foundation, 
1997. 



Pavel, 1). Michael, ami Raymond V. Padilla. “American Indian and Alaska 
Native Postsecondary Departure: An Example of Assessing a Mainstream 
Model Using National Ixmgitudinal Data." .Journal of American Indian 
Education. 32(2): 1-23 (1993). 

Pavel, D. Michael, Karen Swisher, and Marlene Ward. “Special Focus: Ameri- 
can Indian and Alaska Native Demographic and Educational Trends.” In 
Status Report on Minorities in Higher Education: 1994 Thirteenth Annual 
Status Report, edited by Deborah J. Carter and Reginald Wilson. Washing- 
ton, DC: American Council on Education, 1995. ERIC Document Reproduc- 
tion Service No. El) 407 891. 

Ravwid. Mary Anne, t 'urrent Literature on Small Schools. ERIC Digest. Charles- 
ton, \VV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools, 1999. 

Richardson, Richard C„ Jr..and Elizabeth Fisk Skinner. . Quality and 

Diversity: I’nicersitics in a Multicultural Society. New York: Macmillan. 
1990. 



Shoemaker. Curyn K. Graduate. Activity Survey: (loss of loot One ) ear after 
Graduation. Phoenix: Arizona State Department of Education, 1992. ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 360 365. 



Shorn. Charles I., “Minnrih Access to Higher Education: The Premllegiale 
Response to Minority Economic and Social Enhancenu , ut. ,, ./<rw/7/<//f»/YW- 
teye Admission 132 (1991): 16-20. 

Shonerd. 1 lonry. “Recruiting and Retaining Native Americans in Teacher lulu- 



757 




D. M.< ham Pam, 



cation.” A revised version of a paper presented at the annual conference of 
the National Association of Bilingual Kducation, Tucson, 20-24 April 1990- 
KRIC Document Reproduction Service No. KD.331 686. 

Smith. Dean Howard. ‘The Issue of Compatibility Between Cultural Integrity 
and Kconomie Development among Native American Tribes." American 
Indian C. ulture and Research Journal 18(2): 177-205 ( 1994). 

St. Cyr, Denise L. “Recruiting at Indian Tribal Colleges." .Journal of Career 
Planning and employment 54(4): 87-40 ( 1994). 

Steward, Robbie .1. “Two faces of Academic Success: Case Studies of American 
Indians on a Predominantly Anglo University Campus." Journal oft 'allege 
Student Pei viopmenCAMM: 191-96 ( 1993). 

Sweeney. Kathryn. “INMKD Prepares American Indians for the 1 lealth Profes- 
sions." Winds of ( 'hange 5(1): 46-49 ( 1990). 

Swisher. Karen Clayton. ‘The Haskell Indian Nations University Model for 
Klcmenlary Teacher Kducat ion." Journal of. Xai 'ujo education 12(8): 22-40 
(1995). 

University of Arizona's Navajo Fellowship Program. “Gaining Business Savvy 
from the University of Arizona's Navajo Fellowship Program.” Winds of 
Change 5(1): 43-44(1990). 

Upvall, Michelle. I. “Completing the Circle: Nursing Kducation and the Navajo 
Nation.” AAV/C Rersjiectircs on Community F(5): 230-35 (1996). 

Watts. Thomas 1)., and Pedro. I. Urea. “Native Americans and Minority Access 
to the Health Professions." Winds of Change 65-71 (1991). 

Weasel I lead, Patrick. L earning Styles of Tribal C 'allege Indian Students and 
Cniversity Indian Students in Montana |CD-R()Mj, 1989. Dissertation 
Abstract from ProQuest File: Item No. 9020234- 

Wechsler. Marjorie K„ Camille Marder, .1. Ruskus. P. M. Shields, and T. 
Middleton, evaluation of 'Educational Personnel Development Projects in 
Indian education . Medo Park, CA: SRI International. 1994- KRIC' Docu- 
ment Reproduction Sen ice No. KD 368 522. 

White I louse Conference on Indian Kducation. “K\ecutive Summary." Pinal 
Report. Washington. DC: While I louse Conference on Indian Kducation. 
1992. KRIC Document Reproduction Service No. KD.353 124- 

White-Tail Feather. Alev .lames B. Reed, and .ludyXelio. State-Tribal legisla- 
tion: loop and tang Summaries. Denver: National Conference of State 
Legislatures, 1994. KRIC* Document Reproduction Service No. 1*3)385401. 

Ziekrick, Mark Indian education. Student Incentive and Tuition equalization 
(Iranis. Issue Memorandum 92-”. Pierre: South Dakota Legislative Re- 
search Council. 1992. KRIC' Document Reproduction Service No. Kl) 356 
938. 




768 





Chapter 1 1 




Tribal Colleges: 1968-1998 

YVaynk.J. Stkin 1 



T ribally controlled colleges are continuing on their 30-year 
journey of exploration, initiative, and development, which be- 
gan the summer of 1968 with the founding of Navajo Commu- 
nity College (now Dine College) in Tsaile, Arizona. Tribal colleges 
can he described as small tenacious institutions of higher education 
th at serve the smallest and poorest minority group in the United 
States (American Indians) under difficult and challenging circum- 
stances. Those colleges are underfunded, overworked, and viewed by 
the rest of American higher education with some wonder at their 
ability not only to survive, but to survive with panache. 

The development work done by the presidents of the tribal col- 
leges and by the American Indian Higher Kdueation Consortium 
(AIIIKC), the national organization of tribal colleges, has been inno- 
vative and productive. Twenty-five years of persistent labor and 
cooperation have recently culminated in the development of two 
additional strong support systems for tribal colleges. These are the 
Kellogg Foundation's $22 million tribal college initiative program. 
Capturing the Dream, and the passage of Public Law 103-32, the 
Equity in Education Laml-Urant Status Act ( 199 4). The land-grant 




Wa^'h J SifiN 



legislation will help to preserve and expand a solid programmatic 
and financial base for all tribal colleges.- 



Tribal Colleges^ 

Bay Mills Community College, Brimley, Michigan 
Blackfeet Community College, Browning, Montana 
Cankdeska Cikana Community College (formerly Little Hoop 
Community College), Fort Totten, North Dakota 
Cheyenne River Community College, Eagle Butte, South Dakota 
College of the Menominee Nation, Keshena, Wisconsin 
Crownpoint Institute of Technology, Crownpoint, New Mexico 
Dine College (formerly Navajo Community College), Tsaile, Arizona 
D-Q University, Davis, California 
Dull Knife Memorial College, Lame Deer, Montana 
Fond du Lac Tribal and Community College. Cloquet, Minnesota 
Fort Belknap College. Harlem. Montana 
Fort Berthold Community College. New Town, North Dakota 
Fort Peck Community College, Poplar. Montana 
Haskell Indian Nations University, Lawrence, Kansas 
institute of American Indian Arts, Santa Fe. New Mexico 
Lac Courte Oreiltes Ojibwa Community College, Hayward, 
Wisconsin 

Leech Lake Tribal College, Cass Lake, Minnesota 
Little Big Horn College, Crow Agency. Montana 
Little Priest Tribal College, Winnebago, Nebraska 
Nebraska Indian Community College, Macy, Nebraska 
Northwest Indian College, Bellingham, Washington 
Oglala Lakota College, Kyle, South Dakota 
Saiish Kootenai College. Pablo. Montana 
Sinte Gleska University, Rosebud. South Dakota 
Sisseton Wahpeton Community College, Sisseton, South Dakota 
Sitting Bull College, Fort Yates. North Dakota 
Southwestern Indian Polytechnic Institute, Albuquerque, New 
Mexico 

Stone Child Community College. Box Elder, Montana 
Turtle Mountain Community College, Belcourt. North Dakota 
United Tribes Technical College, Bismarck. North Dakota 



To understand the true nature of tribal colleges, one must study 
their histories, missions, participants, and structures. 1 Potential 
benefits of such a study were acknowledged when the Kellogg Foun- 
dation convened a gathering of higher education administrators in 




Ti.m«ai C< ‘i u < -i v 1 968- 1 998 



Albuquerque, New Mexico, in February 1996 to explore the Captur- 
ing the Dream initiative. The consensus of the participants was that 
everyone in higher education had much to learn from these newest 
members of the higher education community. The nontribal college 
administrators present agreed that the ability to serve students and 
communities under very difficult circumstances holds many lessons 
for other higher education institutions. Such service has come with a 
price, but it is one that those who make up the tribal college move- 
ment arc willing to pay. 



History 

American Indian education, like so much of the Indian world, had 
been destroyed by the time of the twentieth century and replaced 
with an education system designed and managed by Kuropean Ameri- 
cans to convert Indians into pale-brown imitations of themselves. It 
took the upheaval of the mid-twentieth century— with the Great 
Depression of the 1930s, World War 11 in the 1940s, and the Civil 
Rights movement of the 1950s and 1960s— coupled with more en- 
lightened legislation concerning American Indians to lay the ground- 
work for change in American Indian education. But serious change 
for American Indian education began when councilmen Guy Gorman 
and Allen Yazzie, Navajo Nation chairman Raymond Nakai, and 
educators such as Ned Hatathii, Robert Roessel, and Ruth Roessel 
founded Dine, Inc. with the intention of taking control of the educa- 
tion of Navajo students. Higher education was one area of Indian 
education that tin* founders of Dine. Inc. desired to affect immedi- 
ately. An attrition rate of 90 percent or more experienced by Navajo 
students attending off-reservation colleges demanded innovative 
solutions, fhe participants in Dine, Inc. began exploring the possi- 
bility of a community college for the Navajo people. * The idea for a 
tribal college had been put forth before, as recently as the 1950s, by 
Robert Burnette of the Rosebud Sioux (Sicangu Lakota), but lack of 
human and fiscal resources forced him to postpone the dream of a 
tribal college on Rosebud for some 20 years.*’ 

flic 1960s were an era of exciting expansion in higher education, 
with community colleges playing a major role. Toward the end of the 
decade, a new community college opened its doors each week some- 
where in the United Stales. Within this historical tradition, triballv 



?(y] 



controlled colleges made their appearance on the U.S. higher educa- 
tion scene.' 

Tribal colleges are in many ways different from nontribal commu- 
nity colleges; some have even grown to be more than two-year 
colleges by adding selected four-year programs to their curricula. 
While their missions are similar, tribal colleges are unique. They are 
the only colleges in the world to support and teach curricula, cul- 
tures, and languages of their Indian nations. Tribal colleges must 
work more closely than other institutions with the federal govern- 
ment to secure base funding, and they have become experts at en- 
gaging the federal system to ensure their continued existence. How- 
ever, it was what the community college movement represented that 
led the founders of the tribally controlled colleges’ movement to 
choose this precise model of higher education as the most appropri- 
ate to meet their people's needs/ 

Today the tribal colleges and their sister non-Indian institutions 
generally remain separate in the political, educational, and tiscal 
arenas, but not in spirit. An atmosphere of mutual trust and appre- 
ciation does exist between the two systems/' 

The founding of Navajo Community College in July 1968 broke 
the ground for a number of other individuals across Indian country 
to establish colleges. The 31 tribal colleges currently operating across 
the United States and Canada demonstrate the success of the tribal 
college movement. 



American Indian Higher Education Consortium (A1HEC) 

headers of the fledgling movement recognized in 1972 that unity 
among the small number of tribally controlled colleges was essential 
to promoting the tribal colleges as viable options tor Indian people in 
higher education. They also understood that a united front allowed 
them to reach their goals as a movement more easily and help limit 
the natural tendencies of tribal rivalries and differences to create 
havoc within this unique movement. Thus, the American Indian 
Higher Kdueation Consortium (AIHKC) was born of political neces- 
sity/’ 

AIHKC has played numerous roles as the national representative 
of tribal colleges over the 26 years of its existence. Possibly its most 
important role has been that of advocate in Washington, D.C., for the 



2 / .1 



262 



Ti*!‘.\{ C iu<-e> 1968-I9b8 



triballv controlled colleges, charged with securing and maintaining 
the principal funding source of the colleges. The tribal colleges inter- 
act with the federal government much as state-supported institu- 
tions do with their state governments. AIHKC s greatest achieve- 
ment to date was convincing Congress and President Carter in 1978 
that funding the tribal colleges was part of the federal governments 
trust responsibility based upon American Indian treaty agreements 
with the government. The Tribal/y Controlled Community College 
Assistance Act (TCCC) of 1978, known familiarly as the Tribal Col- 
lege Act, has had a stabilizing influence on the tribal college move- 
ment. Implementation of the act meant the difference between life 
and death for a number of the fiscally stressed tribal colleges. One of 
the greatest disappointments is that the federal government has 
never funded the tribal colleges at the level authorized in the Tribal 
College Aet but has continually underfunded them in its annual 
appropriations to the colleges. 



Funding 

The 1983 congressional reauthorization of the Tribal College Act 
allots $5,280 per American Indian KIT: (full-time equivalent stu- 
dent). Based on the Consumer Price Index over the past decade, the 
authorization should now be $8,450 per KI'K to keep pace with 
inflation. Either figure is considerably higher than the actual amount 
of $2,900 per KIT. appropriated in the 1996 federal budget. To keep 
the funding of tribal colleges in perspective, these figures need to be 
compared to the national average cost for mainstream nonresident 
community colleges (that is. without dormitories)— approximately 
$7,000 per KI'K, according to the National Association of Colleges 
and Business Officers. 11 

The tribal colleges do seek funding vigorously from a number of 
other federal agencies and sources (other than the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs and the Trihally Controlled Community College Assistance 
Act funds). They look to philanthropic organizations such as the 
Kellogg Foundation and corporate foundations such as U.S. West; 
they also have established their own foundation, the Tribal College 
Fund. These funds are targeted to specific tasks outlined by the 
individual colleges and are generally competed for by tribal colleges 
and other institutions of higher education. 





£.Ts«£S.i',i 



W/mU J 



These additional funds can he instrumental in eanying forward 



much needed educational programs within tribal colleges. A recent 
$12 million grant awarded by the National Science Foundation to 
Oglala Lakota College and Sinte Gleska University for a five-year 
period illustrates the value of such supplementary funding. Oglala 
Lakota College will develop a bachelor of science degree in environ- 
mental science: Sinte Gleska University will develop a bachelor of 
science degree in computer science with a software engineering 
emphasis. Sinte Gleska is also creating a two-year degree program in 
basic engineering.*'’ 

Tribal college boards of trustees are a reflection of their communi- 
ties. All tribal colleges are controlled by boards of trustees that 
comprise nearly 100 percent local American Indian community mem- 
bers. These boards act as buffers between tribal politics and the 
colleges, and also act as mediators among policy makers, personnel 
selection committees, and local watchdogs of and for the tribal col- 
leges. These important responsibilities make tribal college boards of 
trustees unique in Indian country because of their autonomous au- 
thority as granted by the college charters. Most American Indian 
decision-making entities (including tribal governing councils) must 
seek the approval of the Secretary of the Interior for their important 
decisions; tribal college boards of trustees do not. However, board 
members do keep in mind how their decisions will impact their 
communities and long-term relations with their chartering tribal 
governments. 

Administrators and faculty of tribal colleges are a mixture of 
American Indians and non-Indians. Most administrators are Ameri- 
can Indian, but most faculty members are non-Indian. Whatever the 
race of tribal college administrators or faculty members, the stron- 
gest characteristic of both groups i> dedication to the students and 
the missions of colleges. The accreditation associations evaluating 
the tribal colleges, in almost every report made over the past 20 
years, have written about the importance of the dedicated adminis- 
trators and faculty. 

Faculty problems experienced by Iribally controlled colleges gen- 
erally fall into three main areas. First is the difficulty in finding and 
keeping science and mathematics instructors. Second is the high 
turnover among faculty, who often find life on Indian reservations 
too isolated and culturally different. Third and toughest to solve* is 




'.r, 




Twib*u Cfnnr.E^: 1968-1998 



the fact that, as the colleges mature and student populations grow, 
salaries generally remain low. The issue of underfunding is serious, 
and nowhere is it more serious than in recruiting, hiring, and keep- 
ing good faculty, administrators, and support staff. 



Curricula 

Tribal colleges pay particular attention to developing curricula 
and programs in response to tribal community needs. A typical 
academic and teaching curriculum offered today at a tribal college 
would comprise two-year associate degrees in arts, science, and 
applied science and one-year certification programs. 

Associate of arts degrees are academic programs designed to 
prepare students who intend to further their education by transfer- 
ring to a four-year higher education institution. Typical areas ot 
study include general studies, business administration, tribal or 
Native American studies, and the social sciences. 

Associate of science degrees are also designed to prepare students 
wishing to transfer to four-year colleges or universities upon comple- 
tion of their education at a tribal college. Typical courses of study are 
business administration, health sciences, and pre-engineering. 

Associate of applied science degrees combine practical course 
work and general education, designed to prepare students for imme- 
diate entry into the work world the day after graduation. Typical 
disciplines for associate of applied science degrees would he human 
sendees, computer science and information systems, tribal language 
arts, office technology, and tribal administrative practices. 

One-year certificate programs are designed by the tribal colleges 
to respond to local community employment opportunities. Students 
are taught within a sharply focused vocational program with much 
hands-on practical experience. Such programs arc as wide-ranging 
and diverse as the communities and tribal colleges that create them. 
General office skills, health sciences, hospitality, automotive trade 
skills, and manufacturing assembly are examples of certificate pro- 
grams from just one tribal college . 11 

hour tribal colleges, Sinte Gleska University. Oglala I.akota Col- 
lege, Haskell Indian Nations University, and Salisli Kootenai Col- 
lege. have established four-year baccalaureate programs in human 
resources, social sciences, and education. Sinte Gleska University 



has also developed and received accreditation for the first tribal 
college master's degree program in education. This achievement 
marks a major stride bv tribal colleges in curriculum development, 
considering the financial hardships and isolation they have endured. 
'Phis growth is dramatic because in 1972 Sinte Gleska University 
(then Sinte Gleska College) offered only 22 courses in scattered 
disciplines from psychology to math, with 12 administrators and 
faculty making up the college staff. 14 

AIM EC has identified a goal that every tribal college should obtain 
full accreditation from its respective sanctioning agency. Each col- 
lege has had to travel the accreditation path alone, but morale and 
expertise have been shared liberally among AIHKC members to the 
benefit of all tribal colleges. This accreditation effort has resulted in 
27 of the 21 tribady controlled colleges gaining full accreditation as 
institutions of higher education. The four that have not gained full 
accreditation are well on their way to achieving this goal. 



Development 

A relatively new effort by tribal colleges -o build a diversified 
funding base is the founding of the Tribal College Fund. This inde- 
pendent but tribal-college-controlled foundation has raised signifi- 
cant funding over the past decade. From interest earned on the 
endowment, the foundation has awarded each tribal college a sum 
for student scholarships. Fitting these additional funding sources 
into the tribal colleges' fiscal designs allows the colleges to begin 
examining new programs, new curricula, new forums, and addi- 
tional and advanced degrees for their students and communities. 
Sinte Gleska University, Oglala Lakota College. Haskell Indian Na- 
tions University, and Salish Kootenai College have demonstrated 
that advanced degrees arc possible. Many of the tribal colleges arc 
now studying such options for their colleges and arc seriously con- 
sidering whether to become lbur-vear institutions. 

This latest focus of tribal colleges, expanding to four-year col- 
leges, is a strong indication of how optimistic these institutions are 
about their future growth and development. The need for bigger and 
better tribal colleges is borne out by an important statistic in Indian 
country: 50 percent of the American Indian population of the United 
States is age 2 \ or younger. This contrasts with the figure of 20 



766 



T vibai C < '-t * t a s: 1968-1 998 



percent of the general U.S. population being in this youngest age 
group. 1 *’ 

Tribal colleges have also reached out to their non-Indian sister 
institutions of higher education and have been doing so since the 
founding of the tribal college movement. In the early days of the 
movement. non-Indian institutions acted as funding conduits to 
tribal colleges that had not yet earned accreditation candidacy. Non- 
Indian institutions also participated in cross-registration of students 
and lent faculty to the tribal colleges upon request. This cooperation 
has blossomed into full partnerships between tribal colleges and 
four-year mainstream institutions, partnerships that open to both 
kinds of institutions innovative science and mathematics opportuni- 
ties, two-plus-two teacher training programs, distance learning and 
other telecommunications programs, and effective articulation and 
course transfer agreements. The recent land-grant status bestowed 
upon tribally controlled colleges will enhance the opportunities for 
tribal colleges and non-Indian institutions to continue their devel- 
opment of mutually beneficial partnerships. 

Kvcn with all the positives that have transpired over the past 30 
years, major road blocks still face tribes that desire to develop and 
found new tribal colleges. The two major obstacles are funding for 
such efforts and maintaining the will to persevere in the face of all 
the difficulties that appear when trying to start such institutions. 
There are only 31 tribally controlled colleges serving tribes on iso- 
lated reservations scattered across the western and midwestern 
United States; yet there are approximately 300 tribal nations of 
American Indians. This means only about 10 percent of all reserva- 
tions are served by tribal colleges. There is much room for growth in 
the tribal college movement, which hinges on pulling together ad- 
equate resources and leadership in Indian country. 



Conclusion 

The period from 1968 to 1998 has seen the number of tribally 
controlled colleges grow to 31. a remarkable record in the history of 
higher education in the United States. The positive impact of tribal 
colleges on the American Indian people and communities they serve 
is phenomenal, particularly as represented by the successes of their 
students in the workplace and in the mainstream institutions to 



267 



W-V'fJl J. SlfiM 



which they transfer. The impact seems even more powerful consid- 
ering the pride and hope the colleges have spread throughout Indian 
country. 

Tribal college presidents and AIHKC staff are asked frequently by 
tribal people from across the country, “How can we start our own 
college?” The willingness of the tribal colleges, AIHKC personnel, 
and friends and supporters of the tribal college movement to help 
others start their own tribally controlled colleges is the hallmark of a 
truly serious social and education movement. 

The “can do” attitude exhibited by all associated with the tribal 
college movement is an example of inspiration and encouragement, 
and a worthy model to emulate. Tribal colleges still have a long way 
to travel to reach fiscal security, but relative to the most important 
higher education goal— staying true to the school mission— tribal 
colleges have succeeded in abundance. 



Notes 

1. Wayne .1. Stein (Turtle Mountain Chippewa) is director of Native 
American Studies at Montane State University. 

2. See U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee, AIHKC testimony. 

3. This list is updated regularly by the American Indian College Fund. See 
Where Arc the ( 'olhyes? at http://www.collegcfund.org/whercare.htm (12 
December 199B). 

4. A growing hotly of literal uix* about tribal colleges can inform interested 
readers. A comprehensive source is Paul Boyer’s Xalicc American Col/eyes. 
Boyer provides a brief history of American Indian education and the tribal 
college movement before entering into a strong analytical presentation of 
where tribal colleges are today in their development and in carrying out their 
stated missions. Trilnilly C 'out rolled ( ’ol/eyes l>v tin* author of this chapter 
explores the history of American Indian higher education participation and 
the first l() years of the tribal college movement, 'fills publication focuses on 
tile first six tribal colleges, their founders, and their struggles to bring their 
colleges into existence. Also included is the history of the founding of the 
American Indian Higher Kducation Consortium (All I KC) and a brief discus- 
sion ol the second and third waves of tribal colleges, which began in the late 
1970s and early I9«0s. 

Doctoral dissertations and journal articles are other gootl sources of 
information on tribal colleges. The past 10 years haveseen the subject of tribal 
colleges chosen In a nuntberof very knowledgeable individuals such as.lanine 
Pease- Pretty On l op and Nathaniel R. St. Pierre. Both had much experience 
with tribal colleges before researching and writing their dissertations on the 



i % e 



268 




Tdibai C colors: 1968-1998 



subject. .Journal articles are now numerous on tribal colleges and their 
functions. I > ibal C bllegeJournaicove rs a wide array of topics related to tribal 
colleges; each issue usually focuses on a particular topic. Back issues are 
available by contacting journal editor Marjane Ambler at P.O. Box 720, 
Manco, CO, 81328; telephone 970-533-9170. 

5. 0. Gorman, Personal Interview, 22 November 1986. 



6. See Stein, Trihally Controlled Colit yes. 

7. See Ramire/.-Shkweqnaabi, “Roles of Tribally Controlled Community 
College Trustees." 

8. Most community colleges, both tribally controlled and non-Indian 
schools, share common missions. The colleges a re truly neighborhood schools 
with open admissions policies. Their goals are to serve the education needs of 
the community, provide academic courses that prepare students to transfer to 
four-year institutions, offer technical courses that prepare students for the 
work world, accept any high school graduates or GKD certificate students, 
serve the underserved regardless of race, and work closely with community 
leaders to improve local economic conditions. 

9. See Stein, l ’riba III/ Controlled Col ley es. 

10. 0. Risling, Personal Interview, 23 November 1986. 



11. Tiger, Personal Interview, 8 March 1995. 

12. See Butler, “Tribally Controlled Colleges Can Start a Technical Ca- 



reer. 



13- Bay Mills Community College, 1994-96 Cataloy. 

14. See Stein, Tribally Controlled Colleges. 

15. U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans’ Affairs. 
All IPX' testimony, 1995. 



Bibliography 

American Indian Higher lulucation Consortium (A1H1X). Tribal Colleges. 
Informational handout. Arlington, VA; All IRC, 1995. 

Bay Mills Community College. 1994-1996 Cataloy. Bay Mills, MI, 1994. 

Hover, Paul. Native American Colleges: Progress and Prospects. Princeton, 
N.I: Carnegie foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. 1997. 

Butler, M. K. “Tribally Controlled Colleges Can Stall a Technical Career." 
Diversity /Careers 3(7): 20-25 (winter 1995/spring 1996). Publication for 
Technical Workforce Diversity. Springfield. NT Remind Communication. 

Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of 'leaching. Tribal ( 'alleges: Shap- 
ing the bhturc (if Native Anierica. Princeton, N.I; Carnegie Pnundation for 
the Advancement of Teaching, 1989. 

1 looser, Schuyler. “Underfunded Miracles; Tribal Colleges." Indian Nations At 
Risk. Paper no. 8. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of ^duration, 1992. 



OAO c \ ' 





Wawj J. Sn if j 



“Map of Tribal College Locations." Annual C 'allege Guide for American Indians 
for 1994-95- Boulder, CO: American Indian Science & Engineering Society, 
1994. ERIC Document Reproduction Sen-ice No. ED 377 995. 

Ranurez-Shkwecjnaabi, B. “Roles of Tribally Controlled Community College 
Trustees: A Comparison of Trustees' and Presidents' Perceptions ot Trust- 
ees* Role." Ph.l). diss.. University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1987. 

Schmitt, Carl M., and Mark .1. Plata. Trends in Higher Education by Racial/ 
Ethnic Involvement: Fall 1952 through 1991. Washington, DC: National 
Center for Education Statistics. 1993. ERIC Document Reproduction Ser- 
vice No. ED 355 848. 

Stein. Wayne. I. ’Tribady Controlled Colleges: Making Good Medicine. New 
York: Peter Uing, 1992. 

U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on Interior. AIllEC Testimony, 8 
March 1994. 

U.S. House Appropriations Subcommittee on Veterans’ Affairs, Housing and 
Urban Development, and independent Agencies Appropriations. AIHEC 
Testimony. 5 April 1995. 

U.S. Senate Appropriations Subcommittee on Agricultural. Rural Develop- 
ment, and Related Agencies. AIHEC Testimony, 31 May 1995. 



d t ^ 



07 n 



Chapter 12 




The Vanishing Indian Reappears in the 
College Curriculum 



Clara Sri-; Kidwi-m. 1 



S ince their inception in the late 1960s, Native American or 
American Indian studies programs have served as outlets for 
student political activism; as affirmative action programs to 
increase the number of Indian students at colleges and universities; 
and as intellectually coherent, interdisciplinary, academic programs. 
Their development and persistence in college curricula has both 
contributed to and been made possible by a growing body of scholar- 
ship that encompasses key themes of tribal sovereignty, cultural 
integrity, relationship with the land, and importance of Native lan- 
guages for American Indian communities. 



The History of Native American Studies 

Native American studies programs in college curricula have 
changed significantly from their early inception in the late 1960s and 
early 1970s. The first programs were created in the ferment of Indian 
activism and rising political consciousness marked by the Civil Rights 
movement and anti-Vietnam War sentiment of the time. The Civil 
Rights movement raised issues of equal access and affirmative ac- 




Ct Ai/A Suf K-i>‘.vui 



lion in higher education. The political activism spawned by U.S. 
involvement in the Vietnam War increased sensitivity to racism. Not 
without reason, activists compared the massacre of Vietnamese vil- 
lagers by U.S. soldiers at My Uai with the massacres ol Cheyenne 
families at Sand Creek, Colorado, in 1864 and Big Foots band of 
Lakota (Sioux) at Wounded Knee, South Dakota, in 1890. 

For American Indians, the abridgement of rights guaranteed in 
long-standing treaties was also a cause for activism. Yakamas, 
Puvaliups, Makahs, and members of other local tribes staged “fish- 
ins" in Washington state in 1964 to assert fishing rights guaranteed 
by treaties. Iroquois people blockaded bridges between Canada and 
the United States to assert treaty rights of international free passage. 
Urban Indians in Minneapolis established the American Indian Move- 
ment to monitor police brutality against Indian people in the Franklin 
Avenue area of the city.-’ 

The takeover of Alcatraz Island gave the burgeoning Red Power 
movement national visibility. On November 9, 1969, a small group of 
Indian students from the University of California at Berkeley and 
San Francisco State University occupied the abandoned federal prison 
on the island. Although they were forced off the island by federal 
marshals, a larger group retook the facility on November 20. The 
occupation lasted until June 11, 1971, attracting widespread media 
attention and sympathy for Indian causes. 1 

Creating a Center for Native American Studies at Alcatraz was one 
of the proposals made by the occupiers. The center would “train our 
young people in the best of our native cultural arts and sciences, as 
well as educate them in the skills and knowledge to improve the lives 
and spirits of all Indian peoples.” The proposal echoed earlier de- 
mands bv Indian college students that had resulted in the creation of 
the first academic Native American Studies programs in major uni- 
versities throughout the country. The students involved in the Alcatraz 
takeover bad been taking courses in the programs at Berkeley and 
San Francisco State. Many left the classroom to participate in a real- 
life learning experience on “the Rock."' 

These early Native American studies programs arose from a rejec- 
tion of traditional curricula that ignored or misrepresented Native 
Americans, their cultures, and their place in American history. Indi- 
ans wanted to learn about their own cultures and ways ol serving 
their own communities. At Berkelev, the Native American studies 



Vk i 



070 



Tyf Vam>s»'iK'C Indian Reapi* a»^ in tut CouLOt Cumac.uium 



program was part of an Ethnic Studies Department approved by the 
faculty senate in response to the Third World Student Strike that 
shut down the university for about three weeks in the spring of 1969. 
At the University of Minnesota, students and administrators negoti- 
ated a proposed curriculum that would offer “an education that is 
adequate to deal with the complexities of contemporary Indian af- 
fairs.”"’ 

The complexities, however, were often submerged in rhetoric and 
polemic. The widespread popularity of Dee Brown’s Bury My Heart 
at Wounded Knee evoked waves of White middle-class guilt. The 
book was a catalog of injustices and massacres that contributed 
significantly to the idea that all Indians died out after 1890. Vine 
Deloria, Jr. countered the myth of the vanishing Indian in Custer 
Died for Your Sins, a critique of Indian stereotypes that left anthro- 
pologists dismayed and Indians with a new sense of righteousness. 

Demands for Native American studies programs often grew out of 
the political and sometimes physical confrontations that accompa- 
nied the demands of Black students for Afro-American studies. In 
this atmosphere of hostility and challenges to the legitimacy of exist- 
ing curricula, faculty and administrators were often highly suspi- 
cious ot the academic content of newly formed programs. Conse- 
quently their support was lukewarm at best and nonexistent at 
worst, and many programs faded rather quickly from the academic 
scene/* At Minnesota, the Department of American Indian Studies 
was dismantled after a period of internal turmoil, and its faculty 
members were distributed throughout other departments. At the 
University of California at Davis, the Native American studies degree 
program was suspended fora time when faculty retirements seemed 
to threaten the stability of the department. 

During the 1980s, however, Native American studies programs 
were given a new academic role. The initial fervor of Civil Rights 
protests settled into the more mundane routine of court cases and 
legislative processes that institutionalized newly asserted rights: 
affirmative action programs emerged out of national concern over 
equal employment opportunities and access to education. In 1982 
Alexander Astin published an influential study, Minorities in Higher 
li duration . and college administrators, confronted with appalling 
r><atistics on minority attrition rates, saw Indian Studies programs as 
vehicles to recruit and retain American Indian students. If Native 



273V k V 





O'M/aSvi K.ia'.ui 



American students could take courses relevant to their own experi- 
ences, they reasoned, these students would flock to campuses in 
greater numbers, reversing their statistical underrepresentation. 
Many colleges and universities advertised Native American or Ameri- 
can Indian studies programs that consisted of one or two history, 
anthropology, or English courses and perhaps a part-time student 
services person designated as an American Indian counselor. 

In the late 1980s the rhetoric justifying recruitment of under- 
represented groups shifted to issues of demography and American 
competitiveness in a global economy. In 1988 the Commission on 
Minority Participation in Education and American Life produced an 
influential report on higher education, Onr Third of a Nation. It 
projected that by the year 2000, one-third of the U.S. population 
would be composed of members of minority groups— Asian, Black, 
Hispanic, and American Indian. The report brought home to politi- 
cians the fact that unless minorities became more involved in higher 
education, U.S. competitiveness in the world economy would suffer. 

The increasingly multicultural makeup of American society also 
focused attention on issues of multiculluralism in the college cur- 
riculum. As the numbers of minority students increased, adminis- 
trators and faculty turned to the rhetoric of cultural diversity in the 
curriculum. The administration of the University of California at 
Berkeley adopted the motto “Excellence in Diversity." and the fac- 
ulty senate adopted a new graduation requirement— completion of a 
course comparing the experiences of at least three major ethnic 
groups in the United States. Stanford University gave instructors 
greater latitude to include new materials on their reading lists in the 
Western Civilization course required of all students for graduation. 
The call for multiculturalism resulted in a backlash against diversity 
of curricular offerings ( Thick lilk Speaks had joined and sometimes 
displaced Shakespeare in English course reading lists) and led to 
sometimes heated debates over the nature of the ration. 

In the 1990s legislation ended many affirmative action programs, 
discontinuing race-based scholarships and admissions programs. 
The fact that scholars continue to debate the very notion of race as a 
biological way of categorizing human beings only complicates the 
political issues of affirmative action. 

Despite the changing academic politics of Native American stud- 
ies. a number of programs still exist, and they have gained academic 



’)IA 



Tut Vanishing Indian Rc appears in int Coufgf CuRRiCuium 



legitimacy. The University of Arizona established a masters degree 
program in 1982 and added a doctoral degree in the area in 1996. 
The University of California at Los Angeles established the first 
master's degree program in Native American studies in 1985- Pro- 
grams at the University of Minnesota and the University of Califor- 
nia at Davis have been revived after periods of decline. Although a 
number of universities offer a minor in Native American or Ameri- 
can Indian studies (e.g., University of Wyoming, University of Mon- 
tana, Montana State University, University of South Dakota, and San 
Diego State University), only a few offer a full bachelor’s degree 
program (University of Oklahoma, University of Minnesota, Bemidji 
State University, University of California at Berkeley, and University 
of North Carolina at Pembroke). 8 

One of the most notable trends in the development of Native 
American studies programs has been the emergence of the American 
Indian Higher Education Consortium. Beginning with the establish- 
ment of Navajo Community College by the Navajo Tribal Council in 
1968, the number of colleges controlled by tribal councils or tribal 
boards has grown to 31. Although the colleges generally emphasize 
basic college courses and vocational education, many include courses 
that relate specifically to the history, language, and culture of the 
tribe. For example. Little Big Horn College offers a curriculum in 
Crow Studies, and Salish Kootenai College has a tribal studies cur- 
riculum. Staff members often include Native speakers of tribal lan- 
guages and practitioners of traditional arts and cultural activities. 
'Hi esc college courses play an important role in preservation of tribal 
cultural identity.** 



Scholarship in Native American Studies 

The establishment of Native American studies programs has re- 
sulted from and promoted the emergence of serious scholarly atten- 
tion to Native American history, culture, and literature. The rhetoric 
of early Native American studies often challenged the stereotypes of 
Indians and their history (e.g., the hostile savage, the virgin land) 
that prevailed in traditional American history texts, Robert Berkhofer, 
noting the resurgent interest in Indians in the early 1970s, examined 
White perceptions of Indians in The White Mans Indian and illus- 
trated how these perceptions had affected Indian-White relations in 



275 Of/ 




Ci/-«a S>J[ K;t; At u 



the twentieth century. Richard Slotkin's monumental study of Ameri- 
can literature Regeneration Through Violence traced the emergence 
of a uniquely American consciousness out of frontier contact and 
conflict with Indians. 

Although various reports on the social, political, and legal condi- 
tions of Indian people appeared in the first half of the twentieth 
century, it was not until 1971 that the first nufor historical study of 
American Indian legal status appeared. VVilcomb Washburn’s Red 
Man's hand, White Man's haw examined legal attitudes from Fran- 
cisco de Vitoria (1526) to John Marshall (1831) to Supreme Court 
decisions of the 1950s and 1960s. In 1987 Charles Wilkinson empha- 
sized the importance of legal status by pointing out that, except for 
Civil Rights legislation, “Indian law has been the vehicle for the 
modern analysis of laws enacted during the nation’s first century of 
existence more frequently than any other body of law." ,n 

Prompted by the demands of tribal leaders and militant activists 
for true self-government on Indian reservations, Congress reversed 
its policy of terminating congressional recognition of Indian tribes 
(enunciated in House Concurrent Resolution 108 in 1954) by pass- 
ing the Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act in 
1975. This act was a major step forward in the assertion of Indians’ 
rights to administer their own programs rather than relying upon 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, and it helped crystallize the concept of 
tribes as exercising aboriginal sovereignty as nations. In 1984 Vine 
Deloria, Jr. and Clifford Lytle examined the concept of tribal sover- 
eignty in The Nations Within: The East and Future of American 
Indian Sovereignty. w \ hey discussed the development of Indian tribal 
governments and assessed the impact of activism that produced the 
takeovers of Alcatraz in 1969, the Wounded Knee trading post in 
1973, and the Bureau of Indian Affairs building in Washington in 
1992. They called for reform of Indian tribal governments and re- 
newal of Indian cultural traditions as bases for true tribal sover- 
eignty. 

In the field of history, new interpretations of American Indians 
emerged. Until the 1970s, the history of Indian tribes was generally 
political/military history of Indian defeats. In 1972, however. Wilbur 
Jacobs published Dispossessing the American Indian: Indians and 
Whites on the Colonial Frontier and in 1975 Francis Jennings pub- 
lished The fnrasion of America: Indians, ('olonudism, and the ('ant 



-£ r, * ' 



27 6 




Tut VANiSHiNC. lNf«AN R{ AM’t APMN 1*<E Ct.HUOf CuWMC.UlUM 



of Conquest. These works portrayed the English settlers of New 
England as rapacious land grabbers and detailed the process of 
dispossession of New England’s Indians and the effects of Christian- 
ity upon them. 

Alfred W. Crosby, Jr. introduced the biological dimensions of 
contact in The Columbian Exchange: Biological and Cultural Con- 
sequences of 1492, demonstrating that disease played a major factor 
in the destruction of Native habitats and populations. Henry Dobyns 
offered new assessments of the demography of Native American 
populations before European contact, dramatically revising esti- 
mates of Aboriginal population figures for the Americas to upward of 
100 million. His work spawned a vigorous response in scholarly 
circles, and debates continue concerning the size of the Native popu- 
lation at the time of contact. n 

Kthnohistory emerged as a dominant methodology in the study of 
American Indians in the early 1950s, when historians writing about 
Native Americans discovered their ties with anthropologists as stu- 
dents of culture. Their work was prompted by the establishment of 
the Indian Claims Commission, which allowed Indian people to 
press claims against the federal government for infringement of 
treaty rights to land. The investigation of claims required Indians to 
present testimony concerning their traditional land areas, subsis- 
tence patterns, and land usage. Scholars preparing testimony for 
tribes had to use both original documents and testimony by Native 
people about their pasts. Historians learned about the importance of 
culture in historical study, and antluopok^ists learned the value of 
historical documentation for cultural study. 1 *' 

The development of ethnohistory shifted the focus of scholarship 
in anthropology from studies of acculturation (e.g., the total dis- 
placement of cultural values of a subordinate group by those of a 
dominant group) to studies of cultural survival, adaptation, and 
renascence. James Axlell addressed the need to consider situations 
of cultural contact from the perspectives of both cultures in The 
European and the Indian: Essays in the Ethnohistory of Colonial 
Xorth America (1981). His hook The Invasion Within: The Contest 
oj Cultures in Colonial North America (1985) highlighted the re- 
sponses of Indians in Now France and New England to Jesuit ami 
Puritan missionaries. Anthony F. C. Wallace’s The Heath and Re- 
birth of the Seneca (1969) described the Handsome Lake religion 



?// 




among the Seneca in the first years of the nineteenth century and 
demonstrated the power of religious revitalization movements in 
reshaping and reasserting Indian cultural values. James Merrell 
studied the adaptation and survival ot the Catawbas on the hast 
Coast in The Indian*' New World. 

During the 1970s Indians emerged not as passive and disappear- 
ing cultural victims but as dynamic entities in history. Although 
environmentalists adopted the Indian almost as a mascot of conser- 
vation (e.g.. Iron lives Cody, an Indian actor, shed a silent tear on the 
banks of a polluted stream in a television commercial and widely 
distributed poster), serious scholars examined Indian uses and con- 
trol of their environments. The early work ot Carl Sauer on the use ot 
tire for environmental management was complemented by such 
studies as Henry Lewis’s Patterns of Indian Horning in California: 
Ecology and Ethnohistory . Calvin Martin, in Keepers of the Game . 
moved the discussion of indian relationships with nature in a new 
direction, analyzing the role of Indian hunting in the decline of fur- 
bearing animal populations in the Northeast woodlands in terms of a 
spiritually inspired war on the animals. William Cronon examined 
the interaction of New Lngland culture and environment in Changes 
in the Land. He stressed the dynamic nature of Indian cultures, their 
control of their environments, and their strategies of adapting to 
changing patterns of subsistence after Kim. pea n colonists arrived. 

The emerging field of archaeoastronomy has shown that Indians 
were keenly aware of celestial cycles associated with seasons: they 
recorded the cycles in rock paintings, in medicine wheels, and in 
patterns of light and shadow, such as that displayed by the Sun 
Dagger, which marks the sun’s solstice points at Kajada Butte near 
Chaco Canyon in New Mexico. The movement of star clusters such as 
the Pleiades and the three bright stars of Orion’s belt was used to 
determine the timing of certain ceremonies or to mark planting 
seasons for many tribes. 1 1 Studies ot Indian plant domestication and 
agricultural practices reached new levels of sophistication with the 
development of flotation techniques to recover plant materials from 
archaeological sites and electron microscopes to detect changes in 
seed form that indicate domestication.'* 

Because language is an essential cultural marker, language stud- 
ies played an important part in the development ot Native American 
studies programs, whose curricula have generally included Native 



278 




Th? Vanishing Indian Rlaj-pfars in ihf Coufge Curwn.mnM 



language instruction. The University of Minnesota offers Ojibwa and 
Lakota classes. At the University of Oklahoma, Cherokee, Creek, 
Choctaw, and Kiowa are currently taught. In the field of 
sociolinguistics, scholarly studies by Gary Witherspoon of the Na- 
vajo language and by Keith Basso of Western Apache introduce new 
ideas demonstrating aspects of Native languages as a cognitive sys- 
tem. 

Renewed scholarly attention has been paid to Indian voices in 
autobiographies. Several personal narratives collected by ethnogra- 
phers in the 1930s were reissued in the 1960s and 1970s, most 
notably Black Elk Speaks , whose genesis demonstrates both the 
promise and problems of autobiographies as anthropological, his- 
torical, and literary sources. 1 ’’ 

Black Elk Speaks can be read as a collaboration between a non- 
Indian novelist and poet, John Neihardt, and a Native holy man. 
Black Klk, who represents a truly Lakota sensibility. This book can 
also be viewed as the product of Neihardt’s romanticized vision of 
the Lakota and their tragic decline. If the truth lies somewhere 
between these two extremes, the book demonstrated the importance 
of oral history for Native American studies. It also became the sub- 



ject of numerous critical literary studies and a major exegesis, The 
Sixth Grandfather , by Ray Demallie, which placed it in historical 
and cultural context. Demallie offered a sophisticated critique that 
analyzed traditional Lakota religious beliefs and history— White in- 



teraction in the late nineteenth eenturv and Black Klk s life history, 



including his conversion to Catholicism. 

On another level, Black Elk Speaks demonstrates the conjunction 
of history and memory reflected in much of the literature produced 
by contemporary Indian writers and poets. If the reality and impact 



of visionary experiences in traditional Lakota society are essential to 



Black Klk's narrative, the reality of the mystical world is necessary 



too in the powers that Fleur, the medicine woman, commands in 
Louise Krdrieh’s Tracks. The ghost of John Stink plays a prominent 
role in the history of the Osage Indians in the late nineteenth cen- 
tury, the subject of Mean Spirit by Linda Hogan. 

The recognition of American Indian fiction as a distinctive genre 
in contemporary literary studies eneetively began with N. Scott 
Momndnys House Made of Dawn, which won the Pulitzer Prize in 



i 

i 



779 





Ci aw* Sut K'i*.uu 



1968. Momadav mixes memory and history with vivid descriptions 
of the New Mexico landscape to convey the alienation the protago- 
nist Abel feels in Los Angeles. 

Native American art has been the subject of scholarly study for a 
number of years* but in the early 1970s studies of ledger art became 
important in portraying the transition of Indian cultures from tradi- 
tional lifestyles to confinement on reservations in the mid-nine- 
teenth century. Art becomes history, as in the work of Karen Petersen* 
Helen Blish, and Candace Green. 

In the field of fine arts* several scholars began to focus on the 
aesthetic qualities of American Indian material culture. Christian F. 
Feest, an Austrian scholar working in Vienna, produced Native Arts 
of North America* providing a counterpoint to the older anthropo- 
logical interpretative framework of Fran/, Boas. Fees! contributed 
significantly to the development of a history of American Indian art* 
shifting the analysis from the collection of ethnographic materials as 
cultural curiosities to discussion of the stylistic techniques and aes- 
thetic qualities of these works. The establishment of (he Institute of 
American Indian Arts in Santa Fe, New Mexico, in 1962 encouraged 
the development of new artistic styles by Indian artists. Allan Houser 
and Fritz Scholder taught at the institute and influenced a genera- 
tion of students to break away from the flat, pictorial style that had 
characterized the work of artists trained at The Studio, the institute's 
predecessor in Santa Fe. Scholarly attention to the history of these 
developments in Indian painting and sculpture has produced a num- 
ber of recent works. 1 '* 



Intellectual Coherence in Native American Studies 

In 1978 Russell Thornton suggested a group of unique intellectual 
areas as the bases for developing American Indian studies as an 
academic discipline: oral traditions, treaties and treaty rights, tribal 
government* forms of social organization, group persistence. Ameri- 
can Indian epistemology, and contemporary issues. 1 ' As a result of 
the trends in scholar; 'hip inspired by and contributing to the devel- 
opment of Native American studies as an academic area, I propose 
that an intellectual framework is now emerging. It incorporates 
Thornton s concepts into paradigms from several disciplines, prima- 
rily anthropology, history, literary criticism, and legal studies. 

rl'6',1 280 




Tml V*N«>*»Nr. Inpi^n Rom’it-v.'s sn *hi Coc.u.t Ccf?r<n up m 



The key ideas that eonstitule an intellectually coherent statement 
of the nature of the field of Native American or American Indian 
studies include tribal sovereignty, the importance of relationships to 
land in cultural identity, the importance of culture in understanding 
the effects of first contacts between Europeans and Native Ameri- 
cans, and the significance of Native languages as cognitive struc- 
tures. These ideas have inspired scholarly studies and have been 
refined bv the results of those studies. 

Tribal sovereignty is essential to the continued existence of Ameri- 
can Indian tribes in contemporary society. It both depends on and 
contributes to the cultural integrity of tribes, as Deloria and Lytle 
pointed out in 1984. The idea of tribal sovereignty is thus critical to 
studies of past and present Indian cultural and political identity. 
Tribes have asserted their rights to self-government based on Ab- 
original occupancy of lands in North America and on treaty rights 
negotiated with colonial governments and the United States. These 
latter rights have given tribes a unique legal and political status, but 
one that has evolved over time. The study of Indian-White relations 
through history has an intellectually distinctive dimension that must 
be acknowledged. 

Tribal sovereignty implies that Indian nations have the right to 
choose their own forms of government, pursue their ow.i cultural 
forms of governing, determine their own membership, and retain 
government-to-government relationships with federal and state gov- 
ernments. Kaeh of these powers is, however, complicated by both 
historical circumstances and the political positions of tribes in con- 
temporary American society— taxation, regulation of gaming, eco- 
nomic development, and membership complicated by the intermix- 
ing of blood among Indian nations and between Indians and Whites. 
Indian gaming, a very modern phenomenon, is an interesting ex- 
ample. The Indian Ga/ni/u/ Reyulatory Act of 1988 mandated that 
stales and tribes enter into agreements with regard to casino gam- 
bling on reservations, a requirement that imposes federal regula- 
tions upon tribal governments. A recent Supreme Court decision 
{Seminole Tribe of Florida r. I ’nited States) has denied the constitu- 
tionality of the requirement because it imposes a federal mandate on 
state governments. Although the Supreme Court decision gives tribes 
freedom from state constraints, it also throws into significant doubt 
the mechanisms by which Indian gaming is to be implemented and 



281 n . 





ClAWVSl* Ku'.Ut 



regulated. Understanding the complex issues of sovereignty depends 
upon recognition of the unique status of Indian tribes, the dynamics 
of cultural change and adaptation, and the historical evolution oi 
legal systems within which tribal identities are embedded. 

The importance of sovereignty to culture is demonstrated in the 
National Museum of the American Indian Act ( 1989) and the Native 
American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (1990), which 
mandate the return to Native people of Indian human remains and 
cultural materials from museums and other federally funded reposi- 
tories. These laws are premised on inherent tribal rights ot owner- 
ship of those materials; both require museums to send information 
on their collections to federally recognized tribes and to consult with 
tribes in the process of determining tribal affiliation and usage. In 
terms of scholarship, repatriation legislation and practice requires 
examining in detail a range of information to determine affiliations, 
particularly for materials that predate European contact. Archaeolo- 
gists will be asked to determine lines of descent that link contempo- 
rary tribal groups with precontact habitation sites and skeletal re- 



mains. 1 s 



Another key concept is that American Indians have a unique 
cultural and legal relationship with land. Although ethnographers 
and anthropologists have long acknowledged the critical role ot 
environmental factors in shaping cultures, for contemporary Indian 
people, studies of religion and philosophy generally start from the 
premise that Indian cultures both shaped and were shaped by their 
environments. ltl The relationship is embedded historically in treaty 
rights. It is also essential in terms of contemporary literature and 
aesthetics. 'The Southwestern landscape plays an integral part in 
Momadays House Made of Damn. What characterizes Indian litera- 
ture is its situatedness in place. Landscape is part of the story in a 
distinctive way. Indian painting, sculpture, crafts, and performance 
arts derive significantly from cultural affiliation with land. 

Another key paradigm for Native American studies is that contact 
between cultures must be examined from the viewpoints of both 
cultures. If Indians disappeared from American history and largely 
from American consciousness in the early twentieth century, it was 
because the writing and study of history was embedded in a pecu- 
liarly Western Kuropean consciousness. As anthropologist Krie Wolf 



M » . 



Tm[ Vatj&h>no Im-ian R(A( rt.v;s <\ vt O'ilK-l C"W-<. t-iuo 



points out, "We have been taught, inside the classroom and outside 
of it, that there exists an entity called the West, and that one can 
think of this West as a society and civilization independent of and in 
opposition to other societies and civilizations."* 0 

History written from a particular cultural viewpoint essentially 
disregards the reality of other views. Ethnohistorians have attempted 
to construct the differing worldviews of historical actors in situa- 
tions of initial contact. The study of contact situations has been 
enriched by the realization that culture is not s a i generis but a fluid 
and changing phenomenon that constitutes webs of meaning within 
which people act.*' 1 The interpretation of historical encounters be- 
tween Europeans and American Indians reveals much about not 
only Indian cultures but the cultural values of early European colo- 
nists." 

The study of Native languages is a critical part of a Native Ameri- 
can studies curriculum. There is a resurgence of interest in preserv- 
ing and reviving languages in Indian communities, and the federal 
Administration for Native Americans supports community efforts 
with limited federal grants. Although linguists have collected Native 
language materials for many years, Indian languages have been 
forcibly suppressed by boarding schools and federal policies aimed 
at assimilating Indians into American society. There are still ap- 
proximately 209 Indian languages spoken in North America, but 
nearly 80 percent are in danger of extinction within the present or 
next generation. Although it is impossible to save many of these 
languages, the study of a Native language offers unique insights into 
a different way of organizing one’s world conceptually. Studies about 
language can provide some of those insights.* * 

Indian cultures were strictly oral cultures before European con- 
tact and remained largely so even while European missionaries and 
explorers tried to reduce them to written form. The distinctive quali- 
ties of Indian languages— their attention to action, relationships, 
and frequent lack of precisely defined pronouns— derive from their 
dependence upon face-to-face contact between speaker and listener 
(e.g.. social context is vital to understanding). The work of translat- 
ing texts and the influence of speech styles on contemporary litera- 
ture by Indian authors, even those who do not speak Native lan- 
guages. are functions of the oralilv of Indian cultures/ 1 






C.^-aSo K:*u< 

Tribal sovereignty and cultural integrity, relationship to land, 
problems of intercultural interpretation of history, and the centrality 
of language in understanding culture are essential themes in the 
developing discipline of Native American or American Indian stud- 
ies. This is not an exhaustive list of ideas. It is broad enough, how- 
ever, to subsume many ideas that have emerged throughout the 
history of Indian studies programs— the destructive power of stereo- 
tvpes. diasporas of Indian tribes, and historical sources of con tem- 
po rarv social and economic problems on reservations and in urban 
communities. These themes interweave a coherent approach to the 
studv of historical and contemporary American Indian communi- 



Native American Studies in the Contemporary 
Academic World 

Scholarship focused on Native Americans appears in a number ot 
scholarly disciplines and with manyot the trappings ot conventional 
academic life. In the field of literature. Native American studies has 
developed the self-reflexivity that characterizes literary studies. N. 
Scott Momaday, Leslie Marmon Silko, .lames Welch, and Gerald 
Yizenor are subjects ot critical analyses, doctoral dissertations, and 
articles in two journals devoted to new scholarship in Native Ameri- 
can studies, fiie American Indian Quarterly and American Indian 
( 'uiture and Research Journal/ • 

Although indian people will proclaim “There is no word lor art in 
our language.** the discussion around the creation of works ot aes- 
thetic beuutv by Indian people, in both past and contemporary soci- 
ety, continues to produce new scholarship. The Native American Art 
Studies Association meets biennially. At its last meeting, scholars 
presented papers on rock art sites, ledger hook art, and the work ol 
contemporary Indian artists. Here, as in the field of literature, criti- 
cal analysis is being applied to forms of Indian artistic expression. 

Native and non-Native historians and anthropologists meet regu- 
larly at professional meetings to present research on Indian topics, 
albeit in relatively small numbers and generally on panels devoted 
exclusively t* Indians. Degree-granting programs, including several 
at the master's degree level and one at the doctoral degree level, exist 
in colleges and uni\ersities in various parts of the country. 



'Ml 



T'<t 1 m R t ^rrfAr>-~> C %4.t -t C 

From political confrontation to affirmative action to 
multiculturalism, the presence of American Indians as both subjects 
ot scholarship and scholars in their own right has created a new field 
of study that focuses a number ot disciplinary viewpoints on a par- 
ticular group (or groups) of people. As part of this process, disciplin- 
ary lines of inquiry have begun to blur. Anthropologists appear on 
panels at meetings of the American Historical Association and the 
Organization of American Historians, and historians join anthro- 
pologists at meetings of the American Anthropological Association. 
Hie American Society for Kthnohistory brings together both disci- 
plines. Linguistics and anthropology meld in studies of cognitive 
systems in language. Native American studies has thus promoted a 
model of truly interdisciplinary learning. 

In 1977 a group of scholars working in or familiar with American 
Indian studies programs gathered at the Universitx of California at 
Los Angeles (UCLA) to discuss the development of a master’s degree 
program in American Indian studies at UCLA and. in a broader 
context, to discuss the future of the Held. There was general agree- 
ment that Indian studies was not an academic discipline, but that it 
had the potential to develop an intellectual framework to become 
one. '" In the intervening 20 years, the development of new ideas, 
new approaches to the study of American Indians, and new forums 
lor tile exchange of ideas have given academic credibility to the study 
of American Indians in traditional disciplines and to the field of 
American Indian studies as an intellectual enterprise in its own 
right.- 



Notes 

L Clam Sue Kidwoll (Choctaw and Chippewa) directs the Native Ameri- 
can Studies program at the University of Oklahoma. 

2. Smith and Warrior, l.ihc a Hurricane . I2~-S0. 

S. Forbes “Native Struggle lor Liberation." Talbot. "Indian Slu- 

dents." 03-102: Harvey and Johnson. “Uovernnieiil and the Indians," ru-SS. 

4. Fortunate F.agle. "Urban Indians," 46; Kemnil/.er, "Personal Memo- 
ries." lOM-OO. 

■7 Miller. “Involvement in an Urban University" X2~. ,4.41. 

(>. (liven the higliK variable definitions of what constitutes a Native 



78b ? U i 



ClAPA S'j* K>1 \'.Ui\ 



American or American Indian studies program, it is difficult to say how many 
have actually existed over time. A measure of their shifting fortunes is found in 
three studies: a survey of 100 programs in 1974 conducted by the Western 
Interstate Commission on Higher Education (W1C11E). a second WIC.HL sur- 
vey in 1976-77. and a survey of 107 institutions conducted in 1980-81 by the 
American Indian Culture and Research Center at UCl«A. I he overlap between 
the second W1CI IE survey and the UCI A survey was only 57 institutions, from 
which we can infer that although new programs had emerged, many programs 
that existed in 1976-77 had changed or disappeared by 1981. For more informa- 
tion. see ljockc. Survey of College and University Programs (1974); I-ocke, 
Survey of College and University Programs (1978); and 1 loth and Cuvette, 
Issues for the Future. 

7. See Bloom, Closing of the American Mind: Schlesingor, Disuniting of 
America: and D'Souza, Illiberal Education . 

8. Information on the programs was gleaned trom a selective search ot 
college and university Internet sites, identified through the Intoseek Web 
browser and personal knowledge, -'he American Indian Studies Center at 
UCI A has recently conducted a survey of 12 programs; results are available 
from Dr. Duane Champagne, director of the center. Dr. Robert Nelson at the 
University of Richmond has conducted a survey for the Association for the 
Study of American Indian Literature and produced a new guid'* listing 69 
Native American studies programs. An electronic version of the guide is avail- 
able at http://www.richmond.edu/ 'melson/guide.html (12 Decemhei 1998). 

9 . See Carnegie Foundation, Tribal C 'alleges and Boyer, Xalivc Ameri- 
can ( 'alleges. 

10. Wilkinson. American Indians, 14- Earlier studies that locused on 
American Indians include Lindquist, Red Man m the l mfed States: 
Sehmeckebier, Office of Indian Affairs: Institute tor Government Resea ich. 
Problem if Indian Administration: Cohen, Handbook of Federal Indian fair: 
and Brophy. Aberle. and others, The Indian. 

11 . Dobyns, "Estimating Aboriginal American Population. 595-416. See 
also Dobyns. Satire American Historical Demography \\\\<\ Thornton. Ameri- 
can Indian Holocaust. 

12. 'fanner, "Krniinie Wheeler- Voegelin, 65-68. 

15. See Aveni and Urton, Fthnoastronomy: Aveni, Satire American 
Astronomy: Ceci. "Watchers of the Pleiades"; Chamberlain. When Stars 
Came Doirn to Earth: and Williamson. Archaeoastronomy in the Amen- 



14. See Struever, "Flotation Techniques' and Ford. Prehistoric Food 
Production. 

15. See Underman. Red Mother ; Neihardt and Black Elk. Pluck Elk 
Speuks: Plenty-Coups, Amcni'an: Lell Handed. Sim of Old Man Hal. Lett 
1 hu ded. left l landed: and 1 alayesva. Sun ( hie/. 

jo. See High water. Song From the Earth: Wade. Arts of the Sor/h 
American Indian: and Archuleta and Strickland. Shared I ‘isions. 

1”. Thornton. "American Indian Studies,” to- IS. 



t \ i 



9RA 



TmI V**U!;m<n . !m - an Ri - v*m -n m C« ** t i * -t C , ,i»v 



18. Tropo and Hcho-l lawk, “Native American Graves Protection,” 38-48. 
54-59. 

19. See fyennctl, Ecoloyical Transition; Oliver. Ecoloyy: Steward. Evolu- 
tion and Ecology; and Basso, 1 1 Isdotn Sits in Places. 

20. Wolf, Europe, 5. 

21. Geertz, Interpretation of Cultures. 5. 144. 

22. See, for example. Galloway, “The Chief Who is Your Father." 

23. Goddard, “Introduction." 3. Studies about Native language include 
II vines. In I 'a in and Hinton. Elutes of Eire. 

24- See Kroeber, Traditional Literatures. 

25. See Yelic. Four Ameriean Indian Literary Masters. 

2(>. The results of the meeting were published as a special issue of the 
American Indian Culture and Research Journal, vol. 2. nos. 3 and 4 ( 1978). 



27. For current listings of Native American studies programs, visit the 
KRIC Clearinghouse on Rural Kducation and Small School s on-line Satire 
Education Directory at http://www.ael.org/eric/ned.htm {12 December 
1998). 



Bibliography 



Archuleta, Margaret, and Rennard Strickland. Shared 1 'isio/is: Satire Ameri- 
can Painters ami Sculptors in the Twentieth Century, Phoenix: Heard 
Museum. 1991. 



Astin. Alexander W. Minorities in American II iy her Education. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1982. 

Aveni, Anthony, ed. Satii •eAmerii 'an Astronomy. Austin: University ol Texas 
Press, 19”7. 



Aveni, Anthony F., and Gary Urton, eds. Ethnoastronomy and Archaeoas- 
tronomy in the American 'Tropics. Annals of the New York Academy ot 
Sciences, vol. 385. New York: New York Academy of Sciences. 1982. 

Axtell, James, ‘The European and the Indian: Essays in the Ethnohistory of 
( 'olonial Sorth America. New York: Oxford University Press. 1981. 



. ‘The Invasion Within: TheC 'ontest of Cultures in Colonial Sorth America. 

New York: Oxford University Press, 1985. 



Basso, Keith 11. Western Apache Lanyuayc and ( 'ulture: Essays in I.inyuistic 
. I nth i v >j u tl< up/. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 1990. 

. 1 1 Isdotn Sits in Places: Landscape and Lanyuayc Antony the 1 1 \ stern 

Apache. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 1990. 

Bennett. John \V. the Ecoloyical Transition : Cultural Anthropoloyy and 
Human Adaptation. New York: Perganmn, BPO. 







C-. S i K .; . 



Bcrkhofcr, Robert F., Jr. The White Man's Indian: Imayes of the American 
Indian from Columbia; to the l ’resent. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 19~\B. 

Blush, Helen IL, and Amos Bad Heart Bull. Pietoyruphie History of the ( h/lala 
Sioux. Lincoln: Cniversity of Nebraska Press. 196”. 

Bloom. Allan David. I’heC losinyofthe. \ meriean Mind New York: Simon and 
Schuster. 198”. 

Boas, Iran/. Primitive Art. Oslo: I !. Aschohoug &Co.: Cambridge. MA: I laivard 
I’niversity Press, 102'". Reprint, New York: Dover. 1955. 

Boyer. Paul. Xatiee American t alley es; Pntyress and Prospects. Princeton. 
N.I: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. 199'’. 

Brophy. William A.. Sophie D. Aberle. and others, comps. The Indian: America s 
l ’ n/inished business: Report of the Commission on the Riyhts. Liberties, 
and Resp(UisibilitiesqftheAinerican Indian. Norman: I’niversity of Okla- 
homa Press. 1906. 

Brown, Dee. Hurt/ My Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the 
American I list. New York: Holt. Rinehart and Winston. 1970. 

Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of Teaching. Tribal ( 'alley es: Shop- 
iny the future of '.Yu/ire America. Princeton. N.I: Carnegie Foundation for 

■ the Advancement of Teaching. 1989. 

Ceci, Lynn. "Watchers of the Pleiades: F.lhnoaslronomy among Native Cultiva- 
tors in Northeastern North America. Fthnohislory'l 5 ( 19~5): 201-1”. 

Chamberlain, Yon Del. I then Stars (a me Down to Forth: ('osnh/loyy of the 
Skidi Pawnee Indians of Xorth America. Los Altos. CA: Bulletin; College 
Park. MI): Center for Archaeoastronomy. 1982. 

Cohen, Felix. I landbook of 'Federal Indian Lair. Washington. DC’: C.S. Gov- 
ernment Printing Office. 1942. Reprint, Albuquerque: I’niversity of New 
Mexico Press. lyTi. 

Commission mi Minority Participation in Kducalion and American Life. One 
Third of a Xation : . 1 Re/ tort of the t 'om mission on Minority Participation 
in education and. 1 meriean Life. (Washington. DC): American Council on 
(•‘duration in association with the Kducalion Commission of the States. 
1988. KRIC Document Reproduction Sen ice No. Ft) 29” 057. 

Cronou. William. ( Lanyes in the Land: Indians. ( olonists, and the IciJoyy of 
Xeir Knylaihl. New York: Hill and Wang. 1982. 

Crosby. Alfred W„ Jr. The Columbian Fve/mnye: Hioloyieal and Cultural 
( 'onsct/ucnces oj A P*P. Westport, (T: Greenwood. p)”2. 

Deloria. Vine, .Ir. ( 'lister Pied for } bur Sins: An Indian Manifesto. New York: 
Macmillan. 1969. 

Deloria, Nine. Jr., and Clifford M. I a lit*. Hie Xa lions Within: The Past and 
Future of American Indian Sorereiynty. New York: Pantheon Books. 1984. 

Demallie. Raymond. The Sixth ( Ira nd/a tin r: Pluck Flk's Teach inys (lire n to 
John C. Xeihardt. Lincoln: I’niversity of Nebraska Press, 1984. 

Dob\ns. Henry F. "F.stimating Aboriginal Aim rican Population: An Appraisal 



vwftPCT r.OPV AVAIUBST 



Inf VASjxi- ; !Ni ft. a; : . Q. ..s s C • V 

of Techniques with a New Hemispheric- Kstimate." Current Anthropology 
?(()cti>ber 1066): 305-416. 

Satire American Historical l holography: .4 Critical liiblioyraf Jig. 

Bloomington: Indiana University Press. 1976. 

D'Souza, Dinesh. Illiberal education: The Politics gl Rtiee and 'Sex on C 'am/nis. 
New York: Free Press. 1991. 

Krdrich. lxuiise. Tracks. New York: Homy Holt. 1088. 

Feest, Christian 1 ; . Satire Arts if Sorth Americii. New York: Oxford University 
Press. 1080. 

Forbes. .lack 1). “ The Native Struggle lor Liberation: AU*alra/..“ . Vneriean In- 
dian ( 'u It u re and Research Journal 18(4): 123-30 ( 1004 ). 

Lord, Richard I., ed. Prehistoric Pood Production in Sorth America. Ann 
Arbor: University of Michigan, Museum of Anthropology. 1085. 

Fortunate Hagle. Adam (Nordwall). "Urban Indians and the Occupation of 
Alcatraz Island." American Indian ( 'ultiii valid Rescan 'h Journal 18(4): 46 
(1004). 

Galloway. Patricia. “The Chief Who is Your Lather': Choctaw and French Views 
of the Diplomatic Relation." In Powhatan's Mantle: Indians in the Colonial 
Southeast, edited by Peter 1 1. Wood, Gregon A. Waselkov. and M. Thomas 
Hatley. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 1080. 

Gamy, .John, and Troy Johnson. “The Government and the Indians: The 
American Indian Occupation of Alcatraz Island, I969-FF1." Ann ’lican In- 
dian C 'u/tureand Pi si an Li Journal 18(4): 151-88 { 1004 ). 

Gcertz. Clifford. The Interpretation oj Cultures: Selected Pssays. New York: 
Basic Books, lOTL 

Goddard. Ives. “Introduction." In Languages: 1 landhook of Sorth American 
Indians . vol. F. Washington. DC': Smithsonian Institution Press. 1096. 

Greene, Candace S. “Women. Bison and Coup: A Structural Analysis of C'bev- 
enne Pictographic Art." Ph.D. diss.. University of Oklahoma. 1085. 

I lelh. C'harlolte, and Susan Guyette. Issues for the Future of American Indian 
Studies: .1 Seeds Assessment and Program Cuidc. Iz>s Angeles: University 
of California at Los Angeles. American Indian Studies Center. 1985. KRIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. Kl) 316 .V4. 

I lighwaler. .lamake. Song from the Forth: American Indian Paintino. Boston: 
New York ( Iraphic Sncietv . 1076. 

Hinton. Leanne. Flutes oj Lire. Bcrkelev.CA: Heyday Books, 1994. 

Hogan. Linda. Mean Spirit. New York: Atheneum. 1990. 

1 1> i lies. Dell. In l ain / Tried to Tell You: Essays in Satire . \wct icon 
Ft It nopoetics. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press. 1981. 

Institute for Government Research. The Problem of Indian Administration: 
Report of a Surrey Modi' at the Rcyucst of Honorable Hubert II lark. 
Secretary of the Interior, and Submitted f<> Him, February Jt. PtJS. Balti- 
more: Johns Hopkins Press. 1928. Reprint. New York: Johnson Reprint, 
pri. 









Cs A '.‘A Svf K4-.M1l 



Jacobs, Wilbur K. Ids possessing the American Indian: Indians and. l\ 'kites on 
the Colonial Frontier. New York: Scribner. 1972. 

Jennings. Francis. The Invasion of America: Indians . Colonialism . and the 
( 'ant oft '(inquest. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina Press. 1975. 

Kemnit/er. Luis S. "Personal Memories of Alcatraz., 1969. American Indian 
t 'ulture and Research Journal 18(4): 102-09 ( 1994). 

Kroeber, Karl. eel. Traditional Literatures of the American Indian . Lincoln; 
University ol Nebraska Press, 1981. 

I .eft Handed. Left Handed: A Xarajo Autobiography* recorded and edited by 
Waller Hvkand Ruth l)yk. New York: llarcourt, brace & Co.. 1938. Reprint. 
New York: Columbia Univcrsih Press. 1980. 

. Son of Old Man Hat: A Xaraho Autobiography. recorded by Walter 

Dyk. New York: I larcourt. Brace & Co.. 1938. Reprint, Lincoln: University ot 
Nebraska Press, 1967. 

Lewis. Henry T. Patterns of Indian Burning in California: Ecology and 
Fthnohislon/. Ballena Press Anthropological Papers, no. 1. Ramona. CA: 
Ballena, I9~3. 

Linderman. Frank Bird. Red Mother. Rahu.n. NJ: John Hay. 1932. Repub- 
lished as Pretty-Shield: Medicine Woman if the ('rows. New York: John 
Oav. 1972. Reprint. Alexandria. YA: Time- Life Books, 1991. 

Lindquist. (.1. K. K. The Red Man in the l nited States: An Intimate Study of the 
Social Economic, and Religious Life of the American Indian. New York: 
CJeorge H. Horan, 1923. Reprint, Clifton, NJ: A. M. Kelley, 1973. 

Locke. Patricia. .1 Surrey of College and l ' nirersity Programs for American 
Indians. Boulder. CO: Western Interstate Commission lor Higher Kduca- 
tion, 1974. 

. .1 Surrey oft 'allege and l 'nirersity Programs for American Indians. 

Boulder. CO- Western Interstate Commission for Higher F.dncalion. 1978. 

Martin, Calvin. A'ccpers of the Came: Indian-Animal Relationships and the 
Fur Trade. Berkeley: Universilv of California Press. 19~8. 

Morrell. James H. The Indians' Xew World: ( 'a to tea has and their Xeighhors 
from Furopean ( ontaet through the Fra of Renmral. Chapel I lill: Univer- 
sity of North Carolina Press, 1989. 

Miller, Frank C. “Involvement in an Urban University." In The American 
Indian in ( Hum Society, edited by, lack O. Waddell and ( >. Michael Watson. 
Lmham. Ml>: University Press ol America. 1984. 

Momadav, N. Scott. House Made of Pawn. New York: Harper N Row, 1968. 

Neihardl, John ( i.. and Black F.lk. Slack Flk Speaks: Reing the Life Story of a 
Holy Man of the Oglala Sioux. New York: W. Morrow & Co.. 1932. Reprint. 
Lincoln: Unhersily of Nebraska Press. 1961. 

( )liver, Synunes ( *. Ecology and ( 'ulturali ontinuityas ( 'ontrihuting L'aetors in 
the Social (hgani/ation of the Phans Indians. Berkeley; University ol Cali- 
fornia Press. 1962. 



t\ I 







The Vanishing Inpian Riappiaus .n t»-i CoiiU-e Cui-uk un'M 



Petersen. Karen Daniels. Howling Wolf: A Cheyenne l Tarriors Graphic Inter- 
pretation of 1 1 is People. Palo Alto. CA: American West, 1908. 

. Plains Indian Art from For! Marion. Norman: University of Oklahoma 

Press, 1971, 

Plenty-Coups. American: The Life Story of a Great Indian, recorded by Prank 
Bird Linderman. New York: John Day. 1930. Republished as Plenty-Coups: 
Chief of the Crows. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1962. Reprint, 
New York: John Day, 1972. 

Sauer, Carl Ortwin. Man In Xature: America Before the Days of the White 
Men. New York: C. Scribner's Sons. 1939. 

. Sixteenth Century North America: The Land and the People as Seen by 

the Europeans. Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971. 

Schlesinger, Arthur M.. Jr. The Disuniting of America. New York: W. W. 
Norton, 1992. 

Schmeekebier, Uiurence P. The Office of Indian Affairs: Its History. Actin' ties 
and Organization. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press, 1927. Reprint, New 
York: AMS, 1972. 

Slotkin, Richard. Regeneration Through l lolcnce: The Mythology of the Ameri ■ 
can Frontier. /OOO-lSOO. Middletown, CP: Wesleyan University Press. 1973. 

Smith. Paul Chant, and Robert Allen Warrior. Like a Hurricane: The Indian 
Movement from Alcatraz, to Wounded Knee. New York: The New Press, 
1996. 



Steward, Julian Haynes. Evolution and Ecology: Essays on Social Transfor- 
mation. Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1977. 

Struever, Stuart. "Flotation Techniques for the Recovery of Small-Scale Ar- 
chaeological Remains." American A ntiguity 33 (1968): 353- 62. 

Talayesva, Don C. Sun Chief: The Autobiography of a Hopi Indian. 1942. 
Reprint, New Haven, (T: Yale University Press, 1963. 

Talbot. Steve. ‘Indian Students and Reminiscences of Alcatraz." American 
Indian ( 'ulture and Research Journal 18(4 ): 93-102 (1994). 

Fanner, Helen Hornbeek. “Krminie Wheeler- Yoegel in (1903-1988), Founder 
of the American Society for PUh nohistory." Etlun ^history 38{ l ): 65-68 ( 1991 ). 

Thornton. Russell. American Indian Holocaust: A Population History Since 
I gap. Norma:.: University of Oklahoma Press, 1987. 

. “American Indian Studies asan Academic Discipline. "American Indian 

( 'ulture ami Research dourrud 10-18 (1978). 

Trope. Jack I'., and Walter R. Pcho-Ilawk. “The Native American (1 raves 
Protection and Repatriation Act: Background and Legislative Histt)ty.".4/v'- 
zona State Law Journal 2A{\)\ 38-43, 54-59 (1992). 



Vclie. Alan R. Pour American Indian Literary Masters: A'. Scott Momaday. 
James Weh'h. Leslie Mormon Si/ko. and Gerald I Izenor. Norman: Univer- 
sity of Oklahoma Press, 1982, 

Wade. Fdwin. The Arts of the North American Indian: Native Traditions in 



291 



•id. 





C. s. : K 



Evolution. New York. Hudson Hills Press in association with Philbrook Art 
Center. Tulsa. 1986. 

Wallace. Anthem F. C. The Peat Inn id Rebirth of the Seneca. New York: Knopt. 
1069. 

Washburn. Wilcomb K. Red Man's Land. White Man's Law : .-! Studi/ of the 
Past and Present Status of the American Indian. New York: Scribner, 19"1. 

Wilkinson. Charles F. American Indians. Time, and the Law: .Votive Societies 
in a Modern Constitutional Pemoeraeu. New Haven, CT: Yale I’niversity 
Press, 198“. 

WillkiinSon, Ray A., ed. Archaeoastronomy in the Americas. lx>s Altos. CA: 
Ballena, 1981. 

Witherspoon, Gary. Lamjuaye and Art in the .Vova jo T inverse . Ann Arbor: 
I’niversity of Michigan Press. 19"". 

Wolf, Flic R. Europe ami the People Without lliston/. Berkeley: I’niversity of 
California Press. 1982. 



t i 1 j j 




Part IV 

Thk Ni:xt S i i-rs 






I 



Chapter 13 




Research to Support Improved Practice 
in Indian Education 

Kaki;n ( I Avrt >n Swisi i kk 
and 

John VV. Tiim’I-iconnk* III* 



T his book is our attempt to pull together some definitive thoughts 
about the education of American Indians and Alaska Natives 
from a Native perspective. A field as complex as Indian educa- 
tion is not easily defined and packaged into one hook; therefore, we 
hope this is one of many books by Native authors that will present 
issues and ideas for discussion and study in college and university 
classrooms. 

Readers will notice two major and related themes among the 
chapters. The various authors support the concept of tribal self- 
determination in education while they reject the age-old deficit and 
stereotypic approaches to education. I bis paradigm shift represents 
a fundamental change in thinking, attitude, and approach to re- 
search and practice in Native education. Self-determination puts 
Native people in control and uses tribal languages, cultures, and 
values to enhance student work, research, higher education, and 
other areas related to education. Kducators who work from this 
paradigm face a challenge because the deficit approach, with assimi- 



."ifl.s 




G*"K'N $v. •£•»[« & John W Tif-n, « ;\M- ' 111 



lation as a goal, remains deeply entrenched in schools. The; effects of 
the deficit approach reveal themselves in drop-out rates, attendance 
rates, academic achievement test scores, and enrollment and gradu- 
ation rates in colleges and universities. The individual chapters in 
this book stand alone as excellent readings on a variety of topics, but 
together, they represent an in-depth look at current Native thinking 
about topics ranging from the historical foundations of Indian edu- 
cation, to theoretical and practical aspects of curricula at all levels of 
education, to research- based recommendations for the future. 

So what arc the next steps we need to take to advance research 
and practice in the education of American Indians and Alaska Na- 
tives? Clearly, based on chapters in this text, our endeavors must be 
guided by tribal self-determination. The education of Indigenous 
people is complex given the various circumstances and cultural dif- 
ferences of students and their families. Although progress toward 
tribal self-determination has been made over the past 80 years, we 
continue to see the results of past assimilation and termination 
policies and practices play themselves out in the lives of students 
today. Much more needs to be done to ensure full participation of all 
students in achieving community and individual goals. 

This final chapter begins with a description of the student popula- 
tion referred to when we discuss Indian education. We then review 
the research needs articulated by several authors over the past 10 
years or more. We discuss several philosophies and approaches, 
some of which are research based, that show promise for improving 
practice. We conclude with recommendations for the next steps that 
must he taken by researchers and practitioners. 



The Student Population 

Although American Indian and Alaska Native students generally 
attend public, private, and parochial schools, most of the research 
and writing in Indian education emanates from the 187 schools 
funded by the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), The BIA-supported 
schools are located on 6.8 reservations in 28 states; more than 60 
percent are tribally controlled, funded throi gh contracts or grants 
from the BIA. 

About 90 percent of the 600. 000 Native students in the United 
States attend public schools. According to the National Center for 



i 



296 



RrsfAUCM it > Surpnpi Impsovcd pRArfu:r ,n Indian Eiu:- a»kjn 



Education Statistics, 1,260 public schools have an American Indian 
and/or Alaska Native student enrollment of at least 25 percent. 
Another 78,625 public schools have enrollments of American Indian 
and/or Alaska Native students that number less than 25 percent. 
The small number of Native students in most public schools makes 
research and dissemination activities a daunting task. It is much 
easier to do these things in the BIA-funded schools, which is why the 
knowledge base in Indian education is generated largely from these 
schools. 2 

While most Native students are successful, too many are not. For 
example, Native students have the highest drop-out rate (around 36 
percent) of any racial or ethnic group. The National Assessment of 
Educational Progress (NAEP) reports that Native fourth-grade stu- 
dents score below basic levels in reading, math, and history. D. 
Michael Pavel points out that Native students are less likely' to be 
college bound and their SAT and ACT scores are lower compared to 
national norms (see Chapter 10). 

Research 



In 1989 dialogues sponsored by the College Board’s Educational 
Equality Project and the American Indian Science and Engineering 
Society (AISES) were held regionally throughout the country to 
discuss what educational changes American Indians wanted for 
American Indian youth. The National Dialogue Project on American 
Indian Education resulted in Our Voices. Our Vision: American 
Indians Speak Out /or Educational Excellence. This report clearly 
states that research on Indian history and culture must consider the 
perspectives of American Indian people and that American Indian 
scholars must "become involved in producing research rather than 
serving as subjects and consumers of research.”’ In the three years 
after this report, this position was supported by two other significant 
events in which the voices of Native people were heard, recorded, 
and reported, namely the Indian Nations At Risk Task Force hear- 
ings and subsequent report and the White House Conference on 
Indian Education and its final report. Both reports call for basic 
research, applied research, and the development of programs and 
materials from a Native perspective. 

In 1993 the Tribal (bllcf/e Journal published a special issue on 



90 A , , 



Gavic’N Sw t.mlu & J-- hm W 111 



research. An editorial essay, “From Passive to Active: Research in 
Indian Country/’ concludes the following: 

As we approach the twenty-first century there is a strong col- 
lective and collaborative voice ot Indian (and non-Indian) people 
speaking about the role ot research in the lives ot Indian 
people. Included in this voice are professors at tribal, public 
and private colleges and universities; teachers and administra- 
tors in tribal, public and private schools; policy-makers at the 
local, state and national levels; and last but not least, the tribal 
leaders who envision the lives of their people being improved 
by research .' 5 

The need for authentic knowledge developed by Native research- 
ers has been established, but what aspects of Indigenous education 
and community life do we need to study and how will our methods 
differ from what has been done before? Several documents in recent 
vears have identified many nagging quest ions that must be researched 
and reported. 

One report calls for studies of intertribal communication styles, 
learning styles, cognitive skills, alcohol and drug abuse among fami- 
lies, development of industry on reservations, the climate at the 
universitv for Indian professionals and professors, educational rela- 
tionships between American Indian tribes and other sovereign coun- 
tries/nations, and leadership power in education. Similarly the au- 
thors of this chapter have suggested pedagogy, curricula, teachers, 
achievement scores, drop-out rates, higher education, and parental 
involvement as areas in need of more research.* 

The reports of both the Indian Nations At Risk l ask Force and the 
White House Conference on Indian Kducation call tor applied re- 
search in the following areas: extent of adult illiteracy and adequacy 
of current adult literacy funding and programs; unmet needs in 
higher education; progress in higher education including enroll- 
ment, retention, and graduation; elementary and secondary enroll- 
ment and achievement; identification of gifted and talented indi- 
viduals; and demographic characteristics. Development needs out- 
lined in the reports i Delude alternative assessment or unbiased stan- 
dardized tests to assess student achievement and abilities; effective 
parent support programs; instruction, curricula, and program ad- 



* * i / • 






Rrst arch to Surpom Improved PRAcnefc in Indian Eduomion 



ministration for exceptional students of all ages; and alcohol and 
substance abuse issues/’ 

The value of research to decision making is more widely appreci- 
ated in Native communities where Native people have become active 
researchers, looking for solutions to critical issues facing their gov- 
ernments and communities. The insider perspective is valuable in 
setting research agendas and in situations where proper protocol 
must be followed to gain access to information. Two recent examples 
of redefined research paradigms come from the Southwest. Mary E. 
Romero of Coehiti Pueblo directly involved Cochiti (and other Keresan 
Pueblo) elders in even' aspect of a study that developed a definition 
of giftedness from a Keresan Pueblo perspective. Romero's knowl- 
edge of Pueblo protocol was important in this study. By following 
protocol, she gathered rich data and, in the process, developed a new 
and culturally appropriate research methodology. 

In Arizona, members of the Education Standing Committee of the 
Gila River Indian Community Tribal Council helped design a study 
to learn about the choices made by their youth to persist or drop out 
of high school. This partnership included the Center for Indian 
Education and the Strengthening Underrepresented Minorities in 
Math and Science (SUMMS) Institute at Arizona State University 
(ASU). Committee members and ASU faculty defined the role of 
each partner in gathering, processing, interpreting, and reporting 
data, which eventually yielded substantial information about their 
youth and the drop-out problem in their community. Both of these 
examples exemplify tribal control of the research process, thus cre- 
ating models for other communities to follow as they find answers to 
their own perplexing problems. 



Practice 



Much of what needs to be done to improve practice depends upon 
good research. While effective practices can be cited in a number of 
schools attended by American Indian and Alaska Native students, 
those practices are not pervasive enough and arc not sustained over 
sufficient periods of time to produce measurable and generalizable 
effects. 



Several studies indicate that Native language instruction enhances 
academic success (as measured on tests) or shows positive results in 



299 




K a!<i n Gayion Sv.^hi u & Jt •i'f'f W. T.iru onnk; 111 



maintaining or revitalizing Native language use in the community 
and schools. An excellent example of combining local control and 
local knowledge to produce effective practices is found in a public 
school district serving Hualapai students in Peach Springs, Arizona: 

Since bilingual education began at Peach Springs in 1976, stu- 
dent attendance has significantly improved, and Hualapai stu- 
dents now graduate from eighth grade (when the program 
ends) and from high school in far greater numbers than their 
peers in conventional school programs. In 1989, 100% of 
Hualapai students who had completed the eighth grade went 
on to graduate from high school. These instructional changes, 
in which the Hualapai language and culture were authentic and 
integral parts of the school, along with an increase of Native 
teachers enhanced the integration of the school with the com- 
munity. resulted in Indian students* increased success in 
school. 



The Indian Nation* At A* AX' report also identifies successful prac- 
tices in Native education, for example, the Denver Indian Center is 
recognized for its Circles of Learning Pre-K Curriculum, an Ameri- 
can Indian culturally based model for early childhood education. 
Crazy Horse School in South Dakota and St. Peter's Mission School 
in Arizona have service integration programs that promote student 
health. The Pennsylvania State University's American Indian Lead- 
ership Program is noted for preparing educational leaders. Wounded 
Knee Klementary School in South Dakota is noted for parental par- 
ticipation. Peach Springs School in Arizona is recognized as a model 
for its culture-based Hualapai language and technology program. 

In recent years, the schools funded by the HIA through the Office 
of Indian Kducation Programs (OIKP) have concentrated on school 
reform and improvement. In 1987 the OIKP developed a plan to use 
the lessons learned in the effective schools research to improve their 
schools. Kleven correlates were used, based upon the assumptions 
that all students can and will learn, schools can make a difterence, 
what schools care about is what they will teach and what students 



will learn, and evidence of school improvement is based upon stu- 
dent outcomes. ( )ne central correlate was cultural relevance or tribal 



culture into 



grated into all areas of the schools, which supports stu- 



300 



Pc$f AVC H »>":• $-Jl>tx .f,M IMPROVIO Pr?AC V.C{ >N 1\[':AN £( • . All. *] 

dent self-esteem, success, and respect. The effective schools re- 
search combined with the Goals 2000: Educate America Act have 
resulted in school reform and improvement in BlA-supported schools. 
This reform focuses on developing challenging integrated curricu- 
lum-based content and assessment standards. Although these con- 
tent standards and assessment strategies were developed for BIA- 
supported schools, they have the potential to influence public educa- 
tion where schools have significant numbers of Native students. 8 

The 01 EP also developed a family literacy program that has been 
recognized as a model nationally. The Family and Child Education 
Program, known as FACE, was initiated in 1990 to serve children 
ages 0 to 5 and their parents in both home and school settings. It is 
based on the proven models of Parents As Teachers, Parent and 
Child Education, and the High/Scope curriculum for early child- 
hood. A fundamental component of FACE is the integration of tribal 
languages and cultures in the operation of the program." 

As we have noted, many good things are happening in the educa- 
tion of American Indians and Alaska Natives. Self-determination 
efforts arc evident in all aspects of education but especially in the 
control of schools on reservation lands. Research will play an even 
more important role as communities determine the effects of reform 
and improvement and frame the questions that still need to he 
resolved. 



Recommendations 

What is Indian education today? What will Indigenous education 
look like in the future? We believe the momentum that began more 
than two decades ago will continue to grow. Young scholars like 
Tarajean Yazzie and Tim Begay e on the editorial board of the Harvard 
Educational Review will continue to influence what is published 
about Indigenous education in mainstream journals. Recent hooks- 
like Collected 1 1 isdom by Linda Miller Cleary and Thomas Peacock, 
First Person, First Pc copies by Andrew Garrod and Colleen Larimore, 
and To Live Heroically by Delores ,). I lull— and the chapters in this 
hook all tell the story from our perspective and will he joined by 
other Indigenous authors. We need many more Native researchers 
to write our stories and improve schooling for our youth and adults. 



-an i 





Kamn G avi on* Sw»*j»«n^ & John W. T >t-)~£ t unnh 111 



We believe a primary focus of research and practice must be the 
teaching-learning relationship between students and teachers. This 
relationship is the most basic interaction that takes place in schools 
each day and one that determines whether students will persist or 
not. A mutually respectful and caring relationship is essential to 
educational success. We believe that a good teacher is a good teacher, 
but when there is a good Native teacher, the relationship between 
Native student and teacher is enhanced. When examining the cre- 
dentials of potential teachers, school officials and board members 
must also consider the qualities and characteristics that assure re- 
spect, caring, and communication of high expectations. 

Kqual in importance to good teachers is an effective principal or 
leadership team. Leadership development in education should not 
be left to chance but should focus on school improvement efforts. 
Anecdotal evidence in reservation schools suggests school stability is 
in jeopardy when there is a high turnover of principals. For improve- 
ments to take hold, a school must maintain stability long enough to 
plan and implement changes. We must ask research questions such 
as, How can effective practice be sustained over enough time to 
measure the effects? Fresh research approaches can help us address 
this sort of question. 

Communities must join forces with schools to recruit and retain 
the best teachers and administrators. Grow-your-own programs, in 
which local people receive preserviee and professional development 
training, represent hopeful new directions for stabilizing the 
workforce in reservation and rural schools. Distance learning and 
collaborations with nearby colleges— particularly tribal colleges— 
and universities now help communities overcome previous obstacles 
of isolation and scarce population. Culturally appropriate programs 
can be designed through such creative relationships. 

In even* community, the daily lives of our youth must be the 
central focus of our labor in schools. Adults working within institu- 
tions and systems serving youth and their families must begin to 
communicate with one another to collaborate more fully in creating 
conditions for educational success. The resilience of our youth should 
be celebrated and nurtured within the daily settings of families, 
schools, and communities, and also within the systems of health, 
justice, and social welfare. 



dill 



RtoEAPC K IO S' if ’P< 'HI PlJAC lie E. .N 1 n»)IAN EOUC A' ION 









We must make sure the connections between higher education 
and the elementary-secondary systems help students’ transition from 
one phase of schooling to the next. The relationships that can be 
built between the two systems are unlimited and should include 



activities such as mentoring, advanced placement courses, and ap- 
plied research. 

The misconceptions and stereotypes about Native peoples that 
persist in academic content and attitudes and behaviors of school 
personnel must be addressed through preservice and in-service 
teacher preparation, and in the curricular materials used to train 
teachers in colleges, universities, and school districts. We believe 
negative stereotypes coupled with inadequate and inaccurate infor- 
mation about this nation's Indigenous peoples, particularly in social 
studies curricula, damage the self-concepts and subsequent behav- 
ior of our youth. We must design and implement studies to deter- 



mine if this belief is so. Teachers must be convinced that it is not 



appropriate nor feasible to reduce the history of more than 550 
different Indigenous nations to instructional units of two to three 
weeks. Textbook producers, professional organizations, teacher 
preparation programs, and teachers must begin to question what is 
gained by introducing young children to Indian units if the children 
are not developmentally ready to understand the existence of Native 
peoples in the past and in contemporary times. 

Native education research and research-based practice must 
broaden beyond the de facto reservation context, which has been its 
focus up to now. There is a great need to focus research and efforts to 
improve practice in public, private, and parochial schools, especially 
urban or off-reservation schools attended by 90 percent of Native 
students. 



Native communities and individuals need to assume a greater 
responsibility in educating America and the rest of the world about 
our political status and the relationships between our nations and 
other sovereigns (e.g., state and federal government) in this country. 
The general public and others need to know that the education of 
American Indians and Alaska Natives has a historical beginning and 
developmental history different from the rest of public education in 
this country. Until they understand why there is a field of Indian 
education, people will not understand why there is a need to be 
concerned about it now and in the future. 



m'* r. .. . 




Karin G avion Sa*hip & W 1>» o* i *.m>" HI 



Building coalitions for research and development among tribal 
governments, programs in federal departments, colleges and univer- 
sities, professional organizations, and the private sector makes good 
sense. Recent executive orders have required federal departments to 
respect the government-to-government relationships between fed- 
erally recognized tribes and the federal government and to interact 
or partner with tribal colleges to improve the health, education, and 
economic conditions of tribes. These kinds of partnerships also can 
be developed with mainstream colleges and universities and the 
private sector. 

'l‘li rough organizations such as the World Indigenous Peoples 
Conference on Education, American Indians and Alaska Natives 
must continue to build coalitions with Indigenous people from other 
countries of the world. The education-for-assimilation experience of 
other colonized Indigenous peoples has produced similar results. 
But Indigenous communities worldwide have also begun to experi- 
ence a similar renaissance of the self-determination American In- 
dian and Alaska Native communities have undergone in education, 
literature, and the arts in the last 25-30 years. By building on one 
another’s successes, we can further develop and expand our thoughts 
about how to promote use of language and cultural bases tor an 
I nd igenous pedagogy. 

With budgets subject to the uncertainties of congressional politi- 
cal processes, school building and renovation projects on reserva- 
tions are frequently overlooked, and operating budgets remain low. 

1 lowever, tribes can now exercise full control overeducation on their 
lands. They have the authority to establish and enforce policies that 
define the nature of education for their constituents just as states do 
for their school districts. The example set by the Rosebud Sioux 
Tribe’s Education Code demonstrates the impact this government 
has made in assuring that the language and culture of the Sicangu 
Eakota people will lie significant forces in training teachers and 
developing curricula for schools on their reservation lands. 

Educational conditions on several reservations will he affeeted by 
recent tribal economic development as a result of gaining opera- 
tions. Anecdotal evidence suggests both positive and negative re- 
sults. Positive results include the tribes having assigned high priority 
to education and other infrastructural svslotns; in sonic cases, reser- 



til. 



70/1 




Research k;> Suppori Improved Praoice in Indian Ecucahgn 



vation education systems have received better funding than ever 
before. Negative results include the impacts on some home and 
family conditions. The overall effects must be studied sooner or 
later. 

We often say that, as Native people, wc view the world holistically. 
The relationships among the parts are important to understanding 
the whole. Our thinking about education must reflect this compre- 
hensive and holistic view of teaching and learning. Western thought 
and approaches to education have resulted in categorical and sepa- 
rate systems in our lives. Schooling is often viewed as separate from 
other institutions that impact us daily. More connections need to be 
made between schooling and the other critical settings in daily life. 

All in all, the situation for Indian education remains as it was in 
1991 when John Tippeconnic stated: 



There is reason to be cautiously optimistic about the future of 
Indian education in the United States, but it will take a broader 
approach. This approach should include a partnership among 
tribes, states, the federal government and other interest groups 
that will provide leadership and minimize politics while maxi- 
mizing quality education for Indian students. ,!1 



Notes 



1. Karen Ga\1on Swisher (Standing Rock Sioux) is Dean of In- 
struction at Haskell Indian Nations University. John W. Tippeconnic 
III (Comanche) teaches Education Policy Studies and directs the 
American Indian Leadership Program at The Pennsylvania State 
University. 

2. See National Center for Educational Statistics, C 'haracteristics. 

S. National Dialogue Project, Our Voices. 7. 

4. Swisher, “From Passive to Active," 4. 

5. See Robbins and Tippeconnic. Research in American Indian 
Education and Tippeconnic and Swisher, “American Indian Educa- 
tion." 

(\ See Cahape. Blueprints for Indian Education . 

7 - Deyhlc and Swisher, “Research," 170. For additional informa- 







K‘\rin G avion Swismrc & John W. Tih ; (« > nnk HI 

tion regarding the Peach Springs bilingual education effort, see 
Watahomigie and Yamamoto, “Linguistics in Action"; McCarty, 
Huaiapai: and Watahomogie, “Discussants Comments. 

8. See St. Germaine, “BIA Schools Complete First Step" and St. 
Germaine, “Bureau Schools Adopt Goals 2000. 

9. See Tippeconnic and Jones, “Description of Family and Child 

Education." 

10. Tippeconnic, “Education of American Indians," 202. 



Bibliography 

Cahape, Patricia. Blueprints for Indian Education: Research and Develop- 
ment Xeeds for the 1990s. ERIC Digest. Charleston, VVV: ERIC Clearing- 
house on Rural Education and Small Schools. 1993. ERIC Document Repro- 
duction Service No. ED 357 908. 

Clean’, Linda Miller, and Thomas D. Peacock. Collected Wisdom: American 
Indian Education . Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 1998. 

Deyhle, Donna, and Kami Swisher. “Research in American Indian and Alaska 
Native Education: From Assimilation to Self-Determination. In Review of 
Research in Education, vol. 22, edited by Michael VV. Apple. Washington. 
DC: American Educational Research Association. 1997. 

Garrod, Andrew, and Colleen Lirimore. eds. Eirst Person . First Peoples: Xa- 
tivc American College Graduates / ell Their Life Stories. Ithaca, NY : C ornell 
University Press, 1997. 

Huff. Delores J. To Live Heroically: Institutional Racism and American In- 
dian Education. Albany: State University of New York Press. 1997. 

Indian Nations At Risk task Force. Indian Xa lions At Risk: An Educational 
Strategy for Action: Final Report of the Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 1991. ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 343 753. 

McCail v, Teresa l,. / luakipai Bilingual Academic Excellence Program: Mend- 
ing Tradition with 'Technology : Guide for Replication Sit e Administrators. 
Peach Springs. XL: Peach Springs .School District No. 8, 1991. 

National Center for Education Statistics. U.S. Department of Education. Office 
of Educational Research ar.d Improvement. Characteristics of American 
Indian and Alaska Xatiee Education. Washington, DC: U.S. Government 
Printing Office, 1995. ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 381 
338. 

National Dialogue Project. Our Voices. Our I isian: American Indians Speak 
(hit for Educational Excellence. New York* College Board; Boulder. CO: 
American Indian Science and Engineering Society. 1989. ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 324 150. 



7HA 



Research io Support Improved Practice in Indian Education 






Robbins, Rebecca, and .John Tippeconnic III. Research in American Inman 
Education. Tempe, AZ: Center for Indian Education, 1985. 

Romero, Maty E. “Identifying G»fledness among Keresan Pueblo Indians: 'I’he 
Keres Study." Journal of American Indian Education 34(1): 35-58 (1994). 

St. Germaine, Richard. “BIA Schools Complete First Step of Reform Effort.” 
Journal of American Indian Education 35(1): 30-38 (1995). 

. “Bureau Schools Adopt Goals 2000.” Journal of American Indian 

Education 35( 1): 39-43 ( 1995). 



Swisher, Karen G. “From Passive to Active: Research in Indian Country.” Tribal 



College Journal MS): 4-5 (1993). 



Tippeconnic, John W., III. ‘The Education of American Indians: Policy, Prac- 



tice, and Future Direction.” In American Indians: Social .Justice and Public 



Policy, edited by Donald E. Green and V. Thomas Tonnesen. Milwaukee: 
Institute on Race and Ethnicity, 1991. ERIC Document Reproduction Ser- 
vice No. ED 351 158. 



Tippeconnic. John W., Ill, and Karen Swisher. “American Indian Education." 
In Encyclopedia of Education Research, 6th ed., edited by Marvin C. Alkin. 
New York: Macmillan, 1992. 



Tippeconnic, John W., Ill, and Patricia Jones. “A Description of Family and 
Child Education (FACE): A Comprehensive Approach to Family Literacy." 
Journal of American Indian Education 35(1): 6-9 (1995). 

U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, Na- 
tional Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), 1994 Trends in Aca- 
demic Progress. 

Watahomigie, Lucille. “Discussant's Comments: The Power of American In- 
dian Communities.” Paper presented at the annual meeting of the American 
Educational Research Association, San Francisco, April 1992. 



Watahomigie, Lucille, and Akira Y. Yamamoto. “Linguistics in Action: The 



Ilualapai Bilingual/Bicultural Education Program." In Collaborative Re- 



search and Social Change: Applied Anthropology in Action, edited by 
Donald D. Stull and Jean J. Schensul. Boulder, CO: Westview Press, 1987. 



7 



r. ^ ■ 





Index 



acculturation, 3-21, 87, 137, 150, 
165, 182-83, 190, 195, 207. 277 
See also assimilation 
Acorn a Pueblo, 92 
ACT (American College Test), 194, 
240-41,297 

activism, 220-21, 225, 271-73, 276 
Administration for Native Ameri- 
cans, 283 

Adoption Promotion and Stability 
Act , 73 

advanced placement. 303 
affirmative action, 271 
agriculture, 4. 12. 13, 14. 18. 278 
Alaska, 12, 13.44. 84, 93 
Alaska Native Claims Settlement 
,4r/(ANCSA), 93 

Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative, 44 
Alberta, 16 
Albuquerque. 261 
Alcatraz Island, takeover of. 272, 
276 

alcohol abuse. See substance abuse 
Algonquian. 11 
Alta California, 9. 11, 16 
American Anthropological Associa- 
tion, 285 

American Historical Association, 
285 

American Indian Culture and 
A\ search Journal 46, 284 
American Indian Higher Education 
Consortium (All l EC), 37. 40, 
259. 262- 63. 266. 268, 269, 275 
American Indian Movement, 272 
American Indian Quarterly. 284 
American Indian Science and 
Engineering Society (AISKS), 
297 

American Society for Kt h noli istory, 
285 

Americans with Pisahilities Act 
(ADA). 71 

Apache, Western. 2^9 
archaeoastronomy, 278 
Ankara, 128 

Arizona. 9, 12, 13. 125. 259. 300 



Arizona State University, 299 
Arkansas, 112 

Armstrong, Samuel Chapman, 24 n 
art, 278, 280. 284 
Ashton-Warner, Sylvia, 110 
assessment, 47, 70, 71, 90, 94. 96, 
121, 298, 301 

performance-based, 44, 161-76 
assimilation. 59, 67. 74, 85. 87, 88, 
97, 111-12, 114, 138-39, HO, 
206, 207, 223, 283, 295-96, 304 
See also acculturation 
Association of Community Tribal 
Schools (ACTS), 37. 40, 50 
/Vs* in, Alexander, 273 
[uyustus E / tan 'kins- Robert 7\ 
Stafford elementary and 
Secondary School Improi 'cmcnt 
Amendments. 66, 73, 126 
Axtell. James, 277 

Baptists. 19, 210 
Barba, Robert, 155 
Basso, Keith, 279 

Bay Mills Community College, 260 

Begave, Tim, 301 

Bemidji, MN. 124 

Bemidji State University, 275 

Berkhofer, Robert. 275 

Big Foot, 272 

Slack- Elk Speaks (Noihardt ), 274 . 
279 

Blaekfeet Community College, 260 
Biish, I lelen, 280 
Blue Quills Residential School, 16 
boarding schools, 6. 8. 12. 14, 15, 17, 
19. 62. 75. 96. 111.1 13, 136, 146, 
181-82, 207, 208-12, 221, 226, 
283 

Boas. Franz, 280 
Boston, 11 

Brennan, William, 63 
British Columbia, 16, 24n, 212, 

227n 

Broun. Dee. 273 
drown i\ Hoard of Education of 
Topeka. Kansas, 60 




lND£* 



Bruchac, Joseph, 156 

Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), 12, 

13, 37, 42, 53,56, 108, 110, 171, 
173,210, 297 

schools funded by, 33, 35, 36, 

38, 42, 43, 45,’ 58. 67, 69, 71, 

72, 73, 74, 75, 85, 92, 96, 146, 
162, 167, 168, 175, 176, 243, 
244, 296,297,300,801 
Burnette, Robert, 261 
Bury My Heart at l Vou tided Knee 
(Brown), 273 
Bush, George, 73, 116 

Caduto, Michael, 156 

Cajete, Gregory. 44 

California, 11, 12, 24n, 54, 59, 63. 

64, 167-68, 272. 2/8 
missions. 9-10, 13-14. 16 
California learning Reeord. 167, 
169-70, 176 

Cankdeska Cikana Community 
College, 260 

Carl D. Perkins Vocational and 
Applied Technology education 
Act. 66, 73 

Carlisle Indian School, PA, 24n, 111, 
211 

Carter, Jimmy, 263 
Catawba, 278 

Catholic Church, 7, 9-10, 15-16, 19 
Franciscans, 13, 14-15 
Jesuits, 7, 10. 13, 277 
Center for Indian Kducation, 299 
Center for Language in Learning, 
168, 171, 176 

Center for Native American Studies, 
272 

Changes in the Land (Cronon). 278 
Chapter 1 program, 168 
Ch avers. Dean, 175 
Chemawa Indian School. OR. 24n 
Cherokee, 34,40. 112,279 
Cheyenne, 272 

Cheyenne Circle Keepers, 129 
Cheyenne River Community 
College, 260 

Chiloceo Indian Agricultural 
School. OK. 13. 15, 24n 



Chippewa, 13 

Red Lake Band. 126, 127 
Choctaw, 34, 109, 112, 279 
Choris, Ludovik, 16 
Christianity, 3, 6-11, 16-17, 19-20, 
22n, 23’ 26, 30, 181,208,210, 
212,277, 280 
Civil Rights Act, 59, 69 
Civil Rights movement, 271 
Cleary*, Linda Miller, 155. 208, 301 
Clinton. Bill, 224 
Coalition of Indian Controlled 
School Boards (CICSB). 37 
Coast Mi wok. 1 6 
Coehiti Pueblo, 299 
Code of Ethics of the National 
Association of Social I Vorkers. 
205, 213, 215, 233 
Coldwater, Canada, 13 
Collected Wisdom (Cleary), 301 
College of the Menominee Nation. 
260 

Collier, John, 22n 
Colorado. 272 
Columbian Exchange. The 
(Crosby), 277 

Commission on Minority Participa- 
tion in Kducation and American 
Life, 274 

Committee for Native American 
Rights, 53-54 

corporal punishment, 57-58 
Costanoan, 16 

Council on Social Work Kducation 
(CSWK), 216, 218 
counseling, 127, 179-95, 220, 250 
Coushatta, Louisiana, 114 
Crazy Horse School, SD. 300 
Cronon, William, 278 
Crosby, Alfred W„ Jr., 277 
Crow, 92. 275 

Crownpoint Institute of Technol- 
ogy, 260 

cultural diversity. 34, 108, 114, 121, 
122, 128. 130. 152, 182, 188. 194. 
195.214,217.221.224,274 
See also muUicullurnlism 



310 



Indf x 



curricula 

culturally relevant. 21, 36, 39, 

44, 83-98, 107-30, 139, 152, 
153, 154, 156, 175, 223-24, 
250,251,300,301, 304 
legal issues, 58-59, 68 
Native American studies 
programs, 271-85 
social work, 216-17 
traditional, 14. 85-86, 145. 146- 
47, 181, 183,303 
tribal college, 250, 262, 265-66 
Custer Pied for } 'our Sins ( Helena), 
273 

D-Q University, 260 

Panin Report, 14 

Peat ft and Rebirth of the Seneca. 

The (Wallace), 277-78 
Deloria, Vine, Jr., 273. 276, 281 
Demallic, Ray, 279 
Denver Indian Center, 300 
Des Moines. 59 

Dine College. 35, 250. 259, 260 
See also Navajo Community 
College 
Dine, Inc., 261 

discrimination, 19. 59, 62. 71, 78n, 
85, 203, 206, 207, 214, 221. 224, 
225, 249 
See also racism 

disease, 4, 10, II, 15, 2 In, l8t, 277 
Disjjosscssiny (he American Indian 
(Jai obs), 276 
Dobyns, Henry, 277 
drop-out rates, 36. 42, 112, 208, 
222-23, 243, 296. 297. 298, 299 
drug abuse. .See substance abuse 
Dull Knife Memorial College, 260 
Duncan, William, 24n 

Educational Equality Project, 297 
Education Amendment > (1972), 
Title IX of the. 66, 69 
Education Amendments ( 1978), 37, 
66,71-72 

Education of All Handicapped 
( hi/drrn Act . 63. 66, 70-71 
Id Cajun. CA, 168 
HI Paso. 9 



Elementary and Secondary 
Education Act. 66, 68 
Idiot, John, 10— II, 17 
employment, 42, 90, 117, 183, 184, 
187, 208, 245. 250. 265, 273 
encomiendas. 8, 9 
enrollment statistics. 240, 243, 245, 
296-97 

Equity in Education Land-Grant 
Status Act. 259 
Krdrieli, Ixniise, 279 
Erickson, Frederick, 86. 87. 89-90 
etlinohistory, 271-72 
European and the Indian. The 
(Axtell), 277 

facilities, upgrading school, 45 
Fajada Butte. NM, 278 
Family and Child Education (FACE) 
Program, 301 

Eedei 'ally l m pat 'ted A reas Aid Ac 7. 
45 

Fees!, Christian 1\. 280 
Field Museum, 128 
File Hills Colony, Saskatchewan, 
23-24 n 

First Person. Eirst Peoples 
(Garrod). 301 
Fletcher, Alice, 12 

Fond du Lac Tribal and Community 
College, 260 
Fortas, Abe, 60 
Port Belknap College, 260 
Fort Bert hold Community College. 
260 

Fort Peck Community College. 260 
France. See New France 
Franklin r. Gwinnett County Public 
Schools, 69 

('rank's binding, WA, 124 

gaming, 41. 43. 120, 28 1 , 304 
Garrod, Andrew, 301 
Genoa Indian School. NIC 24 n 
Gila River Indian Community 
Tribal Council, 299 
( ioals 2000: Edm • ate 'America Art. 

66.74, 163,301 
Gorman. Guv, 261 
Goss e. Lope/. 58 



311 





Ini ;t x 



government-to-governnu*nl 
relations, 40. 41, 67. 119, 281, 

304 

graduation rates, 240-42, 245-51, 

296 . 300 

Grass Mountain, 13 

Great Britain. .Sir New Kngland 

Green, Candace, 280 

Hampton Institute, VA. 12, 24 n 
Handsome I-ake religion, 277 
I fan r/rd Educational Review. 301 
Haskell Indian Nations University, 
24 n, 250, 260, 265, 266 
Haskell Institu’e, KS, 24n, 18 i 
Hassanimesit, MA, 23n 
Ilatathli, Ned, 261 
Havasupai, 115 
I lawaii. 227n 

Head Start Program Act. 66. 68 
higher education. See 

post. secondary education 
Hogan, Linda, 279 
Homy v. Poe , 63 

House Made of Pawn ( Momaday), 
279-80, 282 
Houser, Allan, 280 
Hualapai, 115, 125-26.300 
Hudson, Hendrick. 63 
Huff, Delores ,L. 301 

Impact Aid, 66. 67-68 
Improi iny A merit *a s St 'iioo/s A t 
66. 74 

Indian Child Welfare Act (ICW A). 

66. 72-73,79-80,211 
Indian Claims Commission, 277 
Indian Education: A national 
Tragedy (Kennedy Report). 35. 
69-70, 212 

Indian Education Act. 36 -3 7 , 45. 
66. 68-69 

Indian Elementary and Secondary 
School Assistance Act. 66, 68 
Indian Cam iny Regulatory Act, 

281 

Indian Health Service. 37 



Indian Nations A t Risk. 163, 297, 
300 

Indian Nations At Risk Task Force, 
244, 248, 297. 298 
Indian Reading Series, 127 
Indian Self-Determination and 
Education Act , 37, 66, 70. 276 
Indians’ New World, ///c(Merrell). 
278 

Individuals with Disabilities 
Education Act (1 DKA), 66, 70- 
71, 175-76 
Inouve. Daniel, 116 
Institute of American Indian Arts, 
260, 280 

Invasion of America. The 
(Jennings), 276-77 
Invasion Within. ///e(Axtell). 2"? 
Iowa. 59 

Iron Hyes Cody. 278 
Iroquois, 11, 173, 272 
Isleta Pueblo, 126 

.Jacobs, Wilbur. 276 
.Jennings, Francis, 276 
Johnson, Lyndon, 35 
Johnson O'Malley Act (JOM ). 37. 

47, 66. 67, 68 
Jojola. 'led. 126 
Journal o f A merit \ an Indian 
Educutnei, 46 

Kansas, 24 n, 128, 181 
Kawagley, Oscar, 155 
"Keepers of the Farth.” 156 
Keepers of the Came ( Martin ). 278 
Kellogg Foundation. SceW. K. 

Kellogg Foundation 
Kennedy. Robert F., 212 
Kennedy Report. See Indian 

Education: A National Tragedy 
Kenlake. Canada. 10 
Keresan Pueblo, 108, 137-39. 299 
Kickapoo, 96 
Kildee, Dale !•., 76 
King Philip’s War, 1 1 
Kotzebue, Olio von. 16 



3 1 . 1 

31 / 



IhCS * 



Lac Com te Oreilles Ojibwa Commu- 
nity College, 260 
Laguna Pueblo, 92, 137 
Lake Sinicoe Narrows, Canada, 13 
Lakota, 188, 272. 279 
Sicangu, 261, 304 
language. See Native language 
Uirimore, Colleen, 301 
I.uu v . Nichols, 58 
Utwrence, KS, 24n 
Learning Record, 162, 167-68, 171— 
72, 173, 175, 176 
Leech Lake Tribal College, 260 
legal issues, 53-76 
Le.feune, Father Paul, 7, 10 
Leupp, Francis K.. 67 
Lewis, Henry, 278 
Little Big Horn College, 260, 275 
Little Hoop Community College. 

260 

Little Priest Tribal College, 260 

Locke. Patricia, 175 

Look to the Mountains (Cajele), 44 

Los Angeles, 54, 280 

Louisiana, 114 

Lytle, Clifford, 276 

Maclvor, Madeline, 155 

Mnkali, 272 

Manitoba, 113 

Maori, 110 

Marshall, .lohn, 276 

Martha's Vineyard. MA, II 

Martin. Calvin, 278 

mascots, sports, 21. 54-55, 225 

Massachusetts. 10. 17. 23n 

Mayliew, Thomas, Jr., 1 1 

Mayhew, Thomas, Sr.. 11 

Mean Spirit ( 1 Iogan ), 279 

Mennonites, 19 

Menominee. 93 

Meriam Report, 22n, 86 

Merrell, James, 278 

Mestizo. 14. 18 

Mellakatla. AK. 1.3, 24n 

Metlakatla. British Columbia, 24n 

Megerv. Nebraska. 64 

Mills r. Hoard of Education. 63, 71 

Minneapolis, 272 



Minnesota, 124, 272 
Minorities in I lip her Education 
(Astin), 273 
Miwok, Coast, 16 
Mohawk, 16 

Momaday, N. Scott, 279-80, 282, 
284 

Montana State University, 275 
Moravians, 19 
Mormons. 19 

multiculturalism. 119, 122, 126. 155, 
180, 239, 249, 274, 285 
See also cultural diversity 

Nakai, Raymond. 26 1 
Natick, MA. 17, 23n 
National Advisory Council on 
Indian education, 69, 248 
National Collegiate Athletic 
Association (NCAA), 246-48 
National Congress of American 
Indians (NCA1), 37, 38, 40 
National Dialogue Project on 
American Indian education, 297 
National educational Longitudinal 
Study (Nei*S:88) f 240-42 
National Indian education Associa- 
tion (NIKA), 37, 39,40, 76 
National Indian School Boards 
Association (N1SBA), 37 
National Museum of the American 
Indian Act. 282 

National Native Curriculum Project, 
129 

National Science Foundation. 264 
Nations Within, ///('(Deloria), 276 
Native American Art Studies 
Association, 284 
Native American Caucus, U.S. 

I louse of Representatives, 76 
A ‘at ii ‘i » A merit 'an ( irai vs Pratt ’i ‘t ion 
and Repatriation Act , 282 
Nat h ’c American Languages Act 
(NAI A), 59. 66, 73-74, 116-18 
Native American Rights Fund 
(NARF). 37. 51,76 
Native American studies. 271-85 
Notice Arts of North America 
(Fees!), 280 



313 . . , 




Index 



Native language 

assimilation, impact on, 10, 18, 
23n, 136, 165, 173-74, 181, 

182, 207, 212 

curricula, incorporated into, 21, 

35, 36, 39, 40, 44, 46, 87, 88, 
89-92, 96-97, 107-30, 151. 
299-300, 301, 304 
disappearance of, 20, 73-74, 
111-18, 155, 207 
study of, 278-79, 283-84 
Native languages, 151 
Cherokee, 34, 279 
Chippewa, 127 
Choctaw, 279 
Clnimash, 116 
Creek, 279 
Crow, 92 
Hopi, 90 

Hualapai, 115, 300 
Keres, 108, 110 
Kiowa, 279 
Dakota, 279. 

Navajo, 36, 90, 114, 279 
Ojibwa, 279 
Pit River, 115 
Red Lake. 127 
Shoshoni, 115 

Navajo, 36, 90-91, 114. 165, 188, 

261 

Navajo Area School Boards Associa- 
tion, 37 

Navajo Community College, 35, 36, 
259, 260, 262, 275 
See also Dine College 
Navajo Community College Act. 36 
Navajo Reservation, 35 
Navajo Tribal Council, 275 
Nebraska, 24n, 128 
Nebraska Historical Society. 128 
Nebraska Indian Community 
College, 260 
Neihardt, John, 279 
New England, 10-11. 16-17, 19, 277, 
278 

New France, 7, 8, 10. H. 13, 15, 16, 
19, 23 n, 277 
New Jersey, 1! 

New Mexico. 9, 261, 278. 280 
New Spain, 9-10. 19, 23n 



New York City, 171 
Nichols, Richard, 175 
Norris. Helen, 128 
North Dakota, 128 
Northwest Indian College, 260 

Office of Indian Education, 69. 176, 
300 

Oglala Dakota College, 260, 264, 

265, 266 
Ohio, 58 

Oklahoma, 12-13. 108. 109, 112, 

128, 129 

Omaha reservation, 12 
Ohate, Juan de, 9 
One Third of a Nation. 274 
Onondaga, Canada, 15 
Oregon, 24n, 64 

Organization of American Histori- 
ans, 285 
Osage, 279 

Our I bices. Our Vision, 297 

parent involvement, 35-37, 39. 4L 
43, 44-45, 67, 68, 70-71, 72, 75, 
76, 89-91, 92, 95, 122-23. 127, 
128, 166, 171-72, 175, 214, 222- 
25, 251, 301 
patio schools, 18 
Patterns of Indian Burning in 
California (Lewis), 278 
Pawnee, OK, 128 
Peach Springs, AZ, 125, 300 
Peacock, Thomas, 156, 208, 301 
pedagogy, 3, 5, 6, 13-18, 19-21. 

209, 298, 304 

Pennsylvania, 11, 24n, 181,211 
Pennsyh *■ ania Association for 
Retarded C 'hildren ( P.A .R.C.) i\ 
Commonwealth of Pennsyh w- 
nia. 63, 71 

Pennsylvania Stale University 
American Indian Leadership 
Program, 300 
Petersen, Karen, 280 
Philips, Susan, 86, 87, 88 
Pierce r. . Society of the Sisters of the 
Holy Names of Jesus and Mary. 
64 

pjerron. Father Jean, 16 
314 



Indix 



Pilgrims, 10 
Pima reservation. 12 
Pine Ridge reservation, 13 
population statistics, 21, 182, 183, 
274, 277 

postsecondary education, 239-51, 
259-68, 271-85 

poverty, 5. 43, 203, 206, 207, 208, 
214,221,225,243,244 
Prairie de la Magdelaine, Canada, 

10 

Pratt, Richard Henry. 24n, 210-11, 
212 

praying towns, British, 8, 10-11, 
16-17, 19 

Progressive Colony, AZ, 12, 13 
Project Preserve, MN, 124 
Pueblo, 9, 11, 156, 160 
Aconia, 92 
Isleta, 126 
Laguna, 92, 137 
Keresan, 108, 137-39, 299 
Zia, 108-09 
Pueblo Revolt, 9 
Punkapaug, MA, 23n 
Puritans, 10, 16-17, 19 
Puyallup, 272 

Quakers. AVr* Society of Friends 
Quebec, 7 

racism, 123, 194, 195, 202, 203, 

206, 208, 212, 214, 223, 224-25, 
249, 272 

See a/so discrimination 
Red Man 's /.and. I Vhite Man s /.air 
(Washburn), 276 
Red Shirt Table, 13 
reduceiones, 8, 10, 19 
reduet ions. 8, 10, 19 
Regeneration Through Violence 
(Slotkin), 276 
Rehabilitation Act. 71 
Republic, NF, 128 
resettlement of Native peoples, 8- 
13, 19, 181-82 
Riverside. CA. 24 
Roessel, Robert. 261 
Roessel, Ruth. 261 
Romero, Mary K.. 299 



Rosebud reservation, 13 
Rosebud Sioux, 40, 41, 261, 304 
Rough Rock Demonstration School, 
AZ, 35-36, 40, 96 

Sacaton, AZ, 12, 13 
Salem, OR, 24n 
Satina, KS, 128 

Salish Kootenai College, 260, 265, 
266, 275 

San Antonio Independent School 
District v. Rodriguez. 64 
Sand Creek massacre, 272 
San Diego Slate University, 275 
San Francisco, 16, 59 
San Francisco State University, 272 
Santa Fe, 280 
Saskatchewan, 14, 16 
SAT (Scholastic Aptitude Test), 163, 
164, 194,240-42, 297 
Sauer, Carl, 278 
Scholder, Fritz, 280 
School District o/Abington 
Township u. Schcnipp, 58 
school facilities, upgrading, 45 
Schools and Staffing Survey (SASS), 
242-43 

Seger Colony, OK, 12 
self-determination. See tribal self- 
determination 

Seminole Tribe of Florida r. United 
States . 281 
Seneca, 12, 277-78 
Serrano r. Priest, 64 
Sherman Institute, CA. 24n 
Sicangu Lakota, 261, 304 
Silko, Leslie Marmon, 284 
Sillery, Canada, 10 
Sintc Gleska University, 40, 260, 
264, 265, 266 

Sioux. See Lakota; Rosebud Sioux 
Sioux Valley Reserve, 113 
Sisseton Wahpcton Community 
College, 260 
Sitting Bull College, 260 
Sixth Grandfather, 7//<'(l)emallie), 
279 

Slotkin. Richard, 276 
Snyder Act, 66-67 
social work, 86, 201-26 



315 




|t','L»E X 



Society of Friends, 11, 12, 19 
sociolinguistics, 279 
South Dakota, 272, 300 
Southwestern Indian Polytechnic 
Institute, 260 
Spain. See New Spain 
Stanford University, 27-1 
stereotypes. 3, 5, 8, 17, 18. 21, 118. 
120* 123. 124. 143, 151, 152, 273. 
275, 284, 303 

St. John l.atcran School. Mexico, 

14, 18 

Stone Child Community College, 

260 

St. Peter’s Mission School, A/. 300 
Strengthening Underrepresented 
Minorities in Math and Science 
(SUM MS). 299 

student assessment. See assessment 
Studio, The, 280 

substance abuse. Ill, 203. 208, 244, 
298, 299 

Swisher, Karen, 175 

7mc//tv - (Ashton- Warner), 1 10 
testing, 44, 161-68. 173-76 

standardized, 97, 161, 162, 163- 
65, 168, 173, 175, 242, 298 
Texas. 9 

textbooks. 21, 59. 120. 123. 124. 

131-32n, 223, 303 
Thinking Woman, 137-39 
Third World Student Strike, 273 
Tinker i\ Pcs Moines Independent 
Community School District. 59- 
60, 65 

Title I funds, 163, 168, 171 
To Lire Heroically ( l luff), 301 
treaty rights. 4h 57, 119. 129, 247, 
263, 272, 277, 280. 281, 282 
Tribal College Journal of American 
Indian Illy her education . 46 
tribal colleges. 37-38, 40, 43, 45, 
72, 125, 249-50. 259-68. 302, 
304 

funding of, 263-65 
list of, 260 



tribal language. .See Native language 
Tribady C bn trolled Community 
College Assistance Act, 37. 66, 

72. 263 

Trihallg Controlled School Act. 37 
tribal self-determination. 5, 6, 20, 

33. 34. 35. 37, 40-41, 45. 46, 70, 
74, 76, 119. 120, 136, 215, 276, 
281-82,295-96.304 
Trueba, Henry T., 86, 87, 88 
Tsaile, AZ, 259. 260 
Tsimshian, 13, 24n 
Turtle Mountain Community 
College. 260 

United National Indian Tribal 
Youth (UNITY). 128 
United Tribes Technical College, 

260 

University of California at Berkeley. 

272, 274, 275 

University of California at Davis. 

273, 275 

University of California at I.os 
Angeles (UCIA), 275. 285 
University of Minnesota. 273. 275, 
279 

University of Montana. 275 
University of North Carolina at 
Pembroke, 275 

University of Oklahoma, 191, 275, 
279 

University of South Dakota, 275 
University of Wyoming. 275 
U.S. Congress, 24n, 36, 37. 38. 42, 
43, 63. 66-74. 128. 209, 263, 
276, 304 

House Native American Caucus. 
76 

U.S. Department of Kdueatiou, 69, 
129, 162, 164. 166. 171, 243 
Office of Kdncational Research 
and Improvement. 74 
U.S. Supreme Court, 20, 54-65. 69. 
74, 76. 276. 281 

Vitoria. Francisco de, 276 
Vizenor, (Jerald. 284 



'l 1 A 



Indf* 



Wa He Lute Indian School. WA. 124 
Wallace, Anthony F. t\, 277 
Wamesit, MA, 23n 
Warm Springs Indian Community, 
88 

Washburn, Wilcomb, 276 
Washington, D.C.. 276 
Washington state, 124. 272 
Welch, James, 284 
Western Apache. 279 
White House Conference on Indian 
Kdueation. 244, 297, 298 
/ f ’hi/e Man *%* Indian . The 
(Berkhofer). 275 
Wichita, 128 
Wilkinson, Charles. 276 
Wisconsin r. Yoder . 64-65 
Witherspoon, Clary, 279 
W. K. Kellogg Foundation. 38. 259. 
260, 263 
Wolf, Kric. 282 

Women’s National Indian Associa- 
tion (WNIA). 12 
1 1 bod r. Strickland . 6 1 
World Indigenous Peoples Confer- 
ence on Kdueation, 304 
Wounded Knee, 81) 

Klementary School, 300 
massacre, 272 

takeover of trading post, 276 



Yakama. 2~2 
Yavapai. 91 
Yazzie, Allen. 261 
Yup’ik, 93 



Zia Pueblo, 108-09 




What is "Indian education" 
today? What will it look like 
in the future? 

These were the questions Karen Gayton Swisher and John 
W. Tippeconnic III posed to a dozen leading American 
Indian scholars and practitioners. 

They responded with the essays in Next Steps: Research 
and Practice to Advance Indian Education , which explore 
two important themes. The first is education for tribal 
self-determination. Tribes are now in a position to exer- 
cise full control of education on neir lands. They have the 
authority to establish and enforce policies that define the 
nature of education for their constituents, just as states 
do for their school districts. The second theme is the need 



KAREN CAYTOH 
SWISHER (Standing 
Rock Sioux) is dean 
of instruction at 
Haskell Indian Nations 
University. In addition 
to serving as chair 
of the Teacher Educa- 
tion Department at 
Haskell, Swisher has 
been a faculty member 
at the University of 
Utah and Arizona State 
University, where she 
directed the Center for 
Indian Education. She 
has also been an ele- 
mentary school teacher 
and principal. 



to turn away from discredited deficit theories of educa- 
tion, and turn instead to an approach that builds on the 
strengths of Native languages and culture and the basic 
resilience of Indigenous peoples. This second theme could 
be especially important for the 90 percent of Indian 
students who attend public schools. 

Next Steps is appropriate for multicultural and teacher 
education programs. It addresses facets of K-12 and post- 
secondary Native American education programs, including 
their history, legal aspects, curriculum, access, and 
achievement. 



JOHN W. 

TIPPECONNIC III 

(Comanche) is a pro- 
fessor of education at 
The Pennsylvania State 
University, where he 
directs the American 
Indian Leadership 
Program. He has also 
directed the Office of 
Indian Education, U.S. 
Department of Educa- 
tion, and the Office of 
Indian Education Pro- 
grams, Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, U.S. Department 
of Interior. 




CLEARINGHOUSE ON RURAL 
EDUCATION AND SMALL SCHOOLS 

Appalachia Educational Laboratory 
Post Office Box 1348 
Charleston, WV 25325 -1348 



ISBN 1-650765 -2 



■ i > ii mwm ii ii 

781880 



7852 



-8 



V 



90000 







