DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 351 688 CS 213 574 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Lang, Nancy H. 

Monolingual Readers/Polylingual Texts: Challenges in 
Ethnic Literatures . 
Mar 92 

lOp.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
College English Association (23rd, Pittsburgh, PA, 
.iarch 27-29, 1992) ♦ 

Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Viewpoints 
(Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) (120) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

^American Indians; Cultural Pluralism; ''Temales; 
Higher Education; ^Language Role; 'Toetry; *Poets; 
United States Literature 

^Ethnic Literature; Text Factors; Voice (Rhetoric) 



ABSTRACT 

Within the texts of most contemporary ethnic American 
literatures, but especially those of Native American women, 
interwoven double-voiced strands of language and physical location 
constantly intertwine through recordings of individual memory and 
experience. The poems that result from these explorations create a 
self inextricably linked to Native Am€*rican socio-cultural and 
spiritual community through continual utterance of the poetic voice. 
Two forms of language rebellion appearing in Native American poetry 
(segues into and out of "Spanglish" and the Uiie of Hopi words) 
reflect an attempt to preserve the ethnic and minority self, while 
simultaneously struggling to articulate it within the dominating 
alien language. The opportunity to confront a cultural and 
intellectual "Other" offers a unique challenge co mainstream Anglo 
readers, students, and interpreters of contemporary literatures that 
exist and indeed flourish beyond the linguistic confines of English 
and the dominant culture. The reader/student has the opportunity to 
construct a frame leading to multicultural understanding. (Three 
samples of poetry are attached.) (RS) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made ^' 

* from the original document. * 



Nancy H. Lang 



MONOLINGUAL READERS /POLYLINGUAL TEXTS: 
CHALLENGES IN ETHNIC LITERATURES 



00 

00 

lO 
CO 



■ PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



A 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) ' 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educmtional Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
. CENTER (ERIC) 

Cirrhis document lias been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

C Minor Changes have t en made to improve 
reproduction quality 

• Points of view or opinions stated in thi3 docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OEi^l position or policy 



n 



2 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Nancy H. Lang 



MONOLINGUAL READERS /POLYLINGUAL TEXTS: 
CHALLENGES IN ETHNIC LITERATURES 

Before I read my paper, I'd like to set the tone by reading the 
final section from Native American poet Paula Gunn Allen's 
"Hanging Out in America" . • • 

We watch. Everywhere. Like Chinese CIA 
running laundry junks up the Mississippi, from the 
plazas 

of our past, from the kivas of our dreams: it's 
not :3[\uch longer: we see the alien way empty, the 
footprints , 

disappeared. Maybe the worlds they seek are 

really empty, this time. 

"Benedito, Benedito, Benedito sea Dios. 

Los angeles cantan, 

A laban a Dios." 

I wonder if they know we're watching. 

All the time, everywhere. 
Within the texts of most contemporary ethnic American 
literatures, but especially those of Native American women, 
interwoven double-voiced strands of language and physical 
location constantly intertwine through recordings of individual 
memory and experience. The poems that result from these 
explorations create a self inextricably linked to Native American 
socio-cultural and spiritual community through continual 
utterance of the poetic voice. As a result of these multi-- 
braided interweavings , and in spite of living within an alien 



language, thus presupposing ongoing language interactions that 
differ from those of a '-native" language speaker, female Native 
American poetic voices speak as heteroglossic, richly polyvocal 
and highly distinctive minority voices within the more Anglo- 
dominated multi-layered mainstreams of contemporary American 
poetry ♦ 

Those powers impacting on the voice of the ethnic poet 
forced to use the language of the conquerors resonate as the most 
distinguishing characteristic of minority poetry in general, and 
Native American poetry in particular • Especially if her first 
(and very possibly only) language is English, the Native American 
writer finds herself in an unusual predicament vis-a-vis both 
language and form. If one must use a socio-culturally alien 
language as one's written language, as well as one's first spoken 
language, then doublevoiced personal language (s) attempting to 
articulate the self must therefore begin to speak as the ongoing 
sources of complex interactive poetic tensions.. Moreover, a poet 
articulates much of this tension by her individual choice of 
landscape and place within a chosen narrative (or story) form, as 
opposed to a lyric (or sony) , or a dramatic form* As a result. 
Native American women poets' combining of story and landscape 
elements within a narrative structure creates a highly 
individualized and distinctive statement of personal, socio- 
cultural, and spiritual place* In "Some Thoughts on Our Uncommon 
Language" Oklahoma Cherokee poet Diane Glancy describes her 
dilemma like this: 

I have trouble with the spoken word. I talk, but often 



do not have the word I want to carry the meaning. . . . 
There is a word somewhere in my suitcase which is 
packed for a long trip. ... I must find that 
term like a dress I know is somewhere in the luggage, but 
with 

difficulty open the grip & take out the word I need for our 
conversation. . . . words are packed tightly in there. 
I do not like to get them out. . . . 

Two forms of language rebellion appearing in Native American 
poetry reflect this attempt to preserve the ethnic and minority 
self, while simultaneously struggling to articulate it within the 
dominating alien language. Clear examples of this rebellion 
appear when the Laguna Pueblo/ Sioux poet Paula Gunn Allen 
occasionally segues in and out of Spanglish, a "quasi-known" 
language for English-dominated readers; and Hopi poet Wendy Rose 
in her later poems uses words from a language completely unknown 
to her average reader. While on the one hand Paula Gunn Allen's 
Spanglish shuts out English-speaking readers to some extent, on 
the other hand it also entices them into meaningful speculations 
with half-familiar echoings of Romance language similarities and 
resonances. Thus, readers can infer meanings, experiment, and 
actively interact with the text itself. This interaction 
intensifies when one reads, rather than hears, the poem, because 
the "frozen," printed text allows more time for intellectual play 
to occur. On the other hand, Rose's Hopi words render non-Hopi 
readers mute, by completely exiling them from signification, and 
at .the same time pointing toward and preserving intact the secret 



messages of the unknown signifier. Whenever she uses the Hopi 
language. Rose politely offers her readers a one-word English 
transient ion that provides a window into meaning; but Rose cannot 
supply those complex, stratified overlayerings of subtle nuance 
that a first-language Hopi reader would bring to the poem. 

Thus, while Allen to some extent invites the reader to 
engage in an interactive dialogic "play" with Spanglish, Rose's 
use of Hopi rigorously limits and thereby more tightly controls 
the reader's response • Moreover. Rose's decision to speak in a 
Hopi voice also plays an ironic and subtle Trickster-like 
linguistic joke on readers who know only the voice of the master 
discourse. As a result, non-Hopi readers, especially English- 
dominated Anglos, may thus experience a slight taste of how it 
feels to be forced into functioning within a language frame of 
discourse that makes no sense. 

Minority poets who choose to use languages other than 
English are not expressing affectation or hostility. Rather, by 
using a "foreign" language, a poet may be choosing to speak to 
the reader within a double-voiced subtext, as well as the 
surface text, thereby creating a stress requiring her reader to 
respond with a shock of familiar recognition, to miss meaning 
coiT.pletely , or to struggle for nuance and understanding. At the 
same time, unfamiliar languages also imply important and special 
secrets, hidden knowledge, and private meanings to those inside 
the language group. In short, a poet's decision to use a 
"foreign" language, just like a decision to use an "exotic" 
setting, often becomes an ideological statement, because it 



implies not only language articulation and accuracy, but also 
cultural authenticity and pride ♦ 

Using a "foreign" language also issues an overt cultural and 
linguistic statement to mute (and muted) readers. Patricia 
Yaeger sees this linguistic demand for freedom as a two-pronged 
articulation through "subversive multivoicedness . " First, use of 
a second language forces a direct and challenging "interruption" 
in the flow of the dominant discourse. Second, again by forcing 
the creation of space in which to develop what is unspoken into 
speech, use of the "foreign" language "signalize (s) what is 
repressed as signifiable content in women's lives" (Zl) . More 
specifically, in her "Preface" to Borderlands: La Frontera (1987) 
Chicana writer and editor Gloria Anzaldua describes her own 
multi-language code changes involving English, Castillian 
Spanish, North Mexico and Tex-Mex Spanish, and Nahuatl as "a 
language of the Borderlands . . . [where] at the juncture of 
cultures, languages cross-pollinate and are revitalized; they die 
and are born" (n.p.). 

Like other minorities and ethnic groups within the United 
States, Native Americans always have and still must constantly 
struggle against implicit and overt Anglo-supremacist, culturally 
genocidal practices within the ideologically dominant and 
dominating culture. One of the most common and at the same time 
safest methods of preserving oneself and oner's culture is to 
linguistically preserve important parts of the culture from the 
dominating group by disguising, hiding, or otherwise codifying 
knowledge under the shelter of an unknown language. For ethnic 



American writers^ rhe overt written use of one's own language 
also means that one foregrounds constructs pointing toward 
secrets, toward meanings and codes that are hidden and therefore 
preserved, although known to, the outside and now excluded 
dominant culture. 

This opportunity to confront a cultural and intellectual 
"Other" offers a unique challenge to mainstream Anglo readers and 
interpreters of contemporary literatures that exist and indeed 
flourish beyond the linguistic confines of English and the 
dominant culture. Whether she reads a text that reflects an 
African-American dialect, Spanglish, a Native American language, 
or a recently "imported" language such as Vietnamese, an Anglo 
reader shut out from a linguistically ethnic secret must choose 
either to skip over the unfamiliar and therefore ignore the 
unknown, or to struggle with unfamiliar sounds, unknown textual 
references, and alien concepts. If a reader chooses the latter, 
she faces frustration; but she also has the 'Opportunity to 
construct a frame leading to multicultural understanding. 



8 



SAMPLES 



I. From Paula Gunn Allen's "Hanging out in America," Coyote' s 
Daylight Trip > Albuquerque: La Confluencia, 1978. 49. 

. . . We watch. Everywhere. Like Chinese CIA 

running laundry junks up the Mississippi, from the pD.azas 

of our past, from the kivas of our dreams: it*s 

not much longer: we see the alien way empty, the footprints, 

disappeared. Maybe the words they seek are 

really empty, this time. 

"Benedito, Benedito, Benedito sea Dios. 

Los angeles cantan , 

A laban a Dios." 

I wonder if they know we're watching. 
All the time, everyv/here. 



II. From Wendy Rose's "Looking Toward Home the First Time: Hopi 
Reservation, Arizona," What Happened when the Hopi Hit New York . 
New York: Contact II, 1982. 4-5. 

. . . and out of my left eye 

stealing steadily moment by moment 

the village itself 

stone and salmon-pink adobe 

sucking up the sunset 

into its broad lips 

Kiatskomovi [Hopi village and seat of tribal government] 
Hotevilla [Hopi village where my father lives] 
Hopitutskwa ["Hopi Country"] 
uh-uh-kwa [ " Bones " ] 



III. From Diane Clancy's "Some Thoughts on Our Uncommon 
Language." Offering . Duluth: Holy Cow!, 1988. 38-39. 

I have trouble with the spoken word. I talk, but often 
do not have the word I want to carry the meaning. . . . 
There is a word for them somewhere in my suitcase which is 
packed for a long trip. ... I must find that 

term like a dress I know is somewhere in the luggage, but with 
difficulty open the grip and take out the word I need for our 
conversation. . . . Words are packed tightly in there. 
I do not like to get them out. . . . 



WORKS CITED 



Anzaldua, Gloria, ed. Borderlands/ La Fiontera: The New Mestiza , 
San Francisco: Spinsters/ Aunt Lute. 1987. 

Yaeger, Patricia. Honey-Mad Women: Emancipation Strategies i n 
Women^s Writing . New York: Columbia UP, 1988. 



