DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 478 401 



SO 035 098 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Old Elk, Arlene'; Stoklas, Jackie 
After the Rain: Dryspell. 

Heard Museum, Phoenix, AZ . 

2001 - 00-00 

68p.; For related units, see SO 035 097-102. 

Heard Museum, 2301 North Central Avenue, Phoenix, AZ 85004- 
1323. Tel:. 602-252-8344; e-mail: education0heard.org. For 
full text: http:// www.heard.org/rain/rainbows/rainbows.pdf. 
Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Art Activities; Community Resources; ^Cultural Context; 
Drought; Educational Facilities; ^Integrated Curriculum; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; Language Arts; Mathematics; 
^Museums; Primary Education; Primary Sources; Sciences; Skill 
Development; Student Educational Objectives; ^Thematic 
Approach 

Native Americans; *Rain; United States (Southwest) 



ABSTRACT 

The Heard Museum (Phoenix, Arizona) has developed and updated 
an integrated curriculum for use in grades K-3-. The goals for this curriculum 
are to: (1)' share museum resources with schools; (2) promote cross-cultural 

understanding through a focus on rain, a universal requirement for life; (3) 
help students understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modern world; (4) develop an awareness 
of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature, and customs of the 
native people of the greater southwest; and (5) use culturally specific 
materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially as they 
relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. The curriculum may be used 
in any order. This unit contains: (1) art prints of artifacts in the Heard 

Museum collection related to rain; (2) specific cultural information and 
materials relating to a particular Native American tribe or nation featured 
through the art prints this cultural information is the basis for some of the 
lessons in mathematics,, science, and language skills; (3) mathematics lessons 
with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing; (4) science lessons, 
usually hands-on -or observational units; (5) language skills, including 
reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary, and poetry skills; and 
(6) art projects. (BT) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 478 401 



J 




s 



Heard Museum 
2301 North Central Avenue 
Phoenix, Arizona 85004-1323 



http://www.heard.org/rairTi/rain pdf main.html 



ERIC 



00 
a^ 
o, 

m: 

01 



GO 



|v 



Updated 2001 



BEST COPY AVAIUEm 



■9 



r' 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

f). 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 






J 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
1 Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

! EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 

/ ; CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
j originating it. 

! □ Minor changes have been made to 

J improve reproduction quality. 

r 

• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
V, offici al OE RI position or policy. ^ 



Introduction 



The Heard Museum has developed this integrated curriculum for use in schools in grades K 
through 3. The overriding goals for this program are to: 

• 1. Share museum resources with schools; 

• 2. Promote cross-cultural understanding through a focus on rain, a universal requirement 
for life on earth; 

• 3. Help students to understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modem world; 

• 4. Develop an awareness of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature and 
customs of the native peoples of the Greater Southwest; 

• 5. Use culturally specific materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially 
as they relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. 

This curriculum is divided into six units that can be used in any order. 

Each unit contains: 

• 1 . Art Prints of artifacts in the Heard Museum collection related to rain. While these 
prints are used for art history and aesthetics lessons, these artifacts are also used to begin 
lessons in math, science and language skills. 

• 2. Specific cultural information and materials relating to a particular Native American 
tribe or nation featured through the art prints. This information includes a map, text from 
the RAIN exhibit applicable to the people, and other information of special interest to 
children. This cultural information is the basis for some of the lessons in math, science 
and language skills. 

• 3. Math lessons with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing. 

• 4. Science lessons, usually hands-on or observational units. 

• 5. Language skills, including reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary and 
poetry skills. 

• 6. Art projects 



This K-3 curriculum was developed teachers by Arlene Old Elk (Dine') and Jackie Stoklas 
diuing a year-long residency at the Heard Museum, made possible by the Lila Wallace-Readers 
Digest Museum Accessibility Fund. Additional information was developed by the Heard 
Museum Education Department staff. 



O 

ERIC 



3 



Rain 



The Southwest United States and Northwest Mexico exist in a rain shadow cast by mountain 
ranges to the west. Rainfall is light and undependable. There are two rainy seasons: summer and 
winter. Often, summer rains are brief and highly localized, as clouds suddenly boil up from the 
south in the afternoon and early evening. Winter storms come from the Pacific Ocean and may 
arrive in waves, soaking the ground. In higher elevations, the rain becomes snow. In between 
these two seasons are dry periods, when great care must be taken to ensure life and growth until 
the next rain. 

The indigenous people of the Southwest welcome rain into their lives and land, praying for the 
blessing of rain through a variety of ceremonies and creative expressions. Many expressions of 
rain and water focus on rain's connection to making life and growth possible. Expressions may 
be enduring, such as embroidered figures on a ceremonial garment. Some are intended to be 
temporary, such as body paint on a ceremonial participant or the pigments of a sand painting. 
Other expressions take the form of music, song, oratory, poetry, and prayer. 

For all of the cultures in this exhibit, rain has deep meanings that reflect a culture's unique 
experience with the universe. This deep spiritual relationship is far from the stereotype of the 
"Indian Rain Dance", or feeble jokes suggesting a superficial and simplistic magic. 

As you look at specific designs or symbols, please remember that they are part of a whole and 
have meaning as part of that whole. Expressions of rain span centuries. Some of the forms 
change, but the intent of people to bring the blessings that come from rain into their lives and the 
world remains unchanged. 



O 




4 



Di H CO 



Calendar Sticks 



Activity: Students create an 
individualized record of 
events that are important to 
them. 

Focus Activity: Look at the 
art prints: "Niman Ceremony 
at Walpi Village" by 
Raymond Naha (Hopi). 

Discuss how each of the 
paintings record a specific 
event. Discuss with the class 
that events can be recalled visually (such as in the paintings), orally (by telling 
someone about the event) or documented (by writing about the event). 

Discuss with students how a single symbol or picture can remind us of an event or a 
time of year. This is the idea behind the traditional O'odham calendar stick. 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will summarize events. 

2) Through sharing their work, students will realize that not everyone thinks that 
the same things are important. 

Materials: *flat, wood sticks (12"-18") or strips of poster board for each student, 
*markers 

Procedure: 

1) Talk about some familiar signs or symbols: a reindeer with a red nose; a 
shamrock; a cracked metal bell; etc.. Have the children realized that they know 
long and complicated stories and events, which they can remember and recite, 
merely from seeing these drawings. 

2) Explain that O'odham people recorded events on calendar sticks using this same 
idea: pictures were drawn or carved on a flat stick, and people could remember all 
the details when they saw the drawing on the stick. 

3) Have children create a drawing to mark an important event that happens each 
day: the event and the drawing should be individualized, not a group decision. 

4) At the end of the week, have the children display and recite the meaning behind 
their calendar sticks. 



best COPY AVAILABLE 




Assessment: 



1) Do the children see that each person has individualized the events of the week? 

2) Are some of the events the same? Why? 



Extension: In the "Language" section of Dry Spell, there is a lesson called "My 
Diary." This calendar stick activity can be done in association with the writing project. 



(6 



BEST COPY AVAiUB = 



Earth Pigment Painting 

Activity; Students paint using earth pigments. 

Focus Activity; Look again at the art print 
"Awatovi Mural" by Pablita Velarde (Santa Clara). 
Review the information about how Velarde makes 
paint by grinding up rocks, clay and other natural 
materials. 

Objective; 

1) Students will develop an awareness of the 
many different colors of earth. 

2) Students will create a painting using dirt as 
the medium. 



Note: If the criteria are written down and posted, they may be used for the assessment. 
Vocabulary; earth, pigment, powder, coat, detail, design 

Materials; eye droppers; *contrasting colors of dirt or other materials that can be 
ground into a fine powder; * large, hand-sized rocks for crushing materials into a fine 
powder; *water; *white glue; 12 muffin tins (for use by one to four students); *paint 
brushes; *sturdy paper, card stock or tag board on which to paint; *pencils; 
*newsprint/newspaper 




Recipe for earth pigments 



• 1 part powdered earth 

• 1 part white glue 

• a few drops of water 

Mix dirt with water to make a stiff paste. 

Add glue. 

Procedure; 

1) Model mixing earth pigments to students. Note; the most common mistake is 
adding too much water. Using an eye dropper helps to eliminate this problem. 



7 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



2) Fold a piece of newsprint into quarters. 

3) Draw a simple design that you might want to paint in earth pigments in each 
quarter. 

4) Choose one of your designs. 

5) Draw the design you chose on the sturdy paper. 

6) Paint. Remember, it takes several coats. When the first one is dry, paint over it. 
When you have enough coats it will have a velvety look. 

7) Clean the brush as soon as you finish. Warm water works best. 



Assessment: 

1) Ask the students to look at the criteria and decide if they followed it. 

2) Do the students see a relationship between their design and using earth 
pigments? (While this does not reflect on the art product, it does give information 
about the students understanding of the focus lesson.) 



8 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Pottery 

Activity: Students arrange designs 
on a pot. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art 
print of the Red-on-buff 
Rectangular Box by an unknown 
Hohokam artist. Notice the red 
painted decoration. Then, read the 
story of the Hohokam potsherd. 




Outcomes: Students will use prehistoric Hohokam designs to decorate a pot. 
Vocabulary: Hohokam (ho-ho-KAHM), potsherd 

Materials: Hohokam potsherd story, *photocopies of the pot shape for each student, 
*pencils/paint/markers, *examples of Hohokam designs cut up to look like potsherds 

Procedure: 

1) After reading the potsherd story, have each student imagine that he or she finds 
some potsherds: scatter the designs on the floor or table. 

2) Have students take one or two "potsherds" and use the designs to create a new 
"pot." 

3) Color the pots and create a display with the "potsherd" and the new "pot." 
Assessment: 

1) Did students use the "potsherd" design? 

2) Did the students realize that the "potsherd" was only a fragment of the whole 
pot and use the design accordingly? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



9 




The Potsherd 



A piece of a broken pot was left behind when the Hohokam moved 
to a new home. 



The potsherd was sitting in the hot desert sun. 

Sandstorm knew the sun would fade the beautiful decorations so it 
blew sand gently over the potsherd. 

After many years the potsherd became lonely. He began to cry. 
Sandstorm heard him crying and came to blow away the sand. 
Then he brought Rain to wash away the dust. 



After the rain, an O'odham potter walked by and saw the beautiful 
potsherd. 



She smiled as she looked at it carefully. When she got home, she 
painted the same design on her own pot. 



Now the potsherd is happy. He shared the beauty of his Hohokam 
makers of the past with his O'odham friends of today. 



BESTCOPYAVAI! ^ 



10 



This is the new pot I created using the designs on my potsherds. 



My name is: 



o 

ERIC 



11 





12 



Rain in the Southwest 



The Southwest United States and Northwest Mexico exist in a rainshadow cast by 
mountain ranges to the west. Rainfall is light and undependable. There are two rainy 
seasons: summer and winter. Often, summer rains are brief and highly localized, as 
clouds suddenly boil up from the south in afternoon and early evening. 

Winter storms come from the Pacific Ocean and may arrive in waves, soaking the 
ground. In higher elevations, the rain becomes snow. In between these two seasons are 
dry periods, when great care must be taken to ensure life and growth until the next 
rain. 

The indigenous people of the Southwest welcome rain into their lives and land, 
praying for the blessing of rain through a variety of ceremonies and creative 
expressions. Many expressions of rain and water focus on rain's connection to making 
life and growth possible. 

Expressions may be enduring, such as embroidered figures on a ceremonial garment. 
Some are intended to be temporary, such as body paint on a ceremonial participant or 
the pigments of a sandpainting. Other expressions take the form of music, song, 
oratory, poetry and prayer. 

For all the cultures of the Southwest, rain has a deep meaning that reflects that 
culture's unique experience with the universe. This deep spiritual relationship is far 
from the stereotype of the "Indian Rain Dance," or feeble jokes suggesting a 
superficial and simplistic magic. 

As you look at specific designs or symbols, please remember that they are part of a 
whole and have meaning as part of that whole. Expressions of rain span centuries. 
Some of the forms change, but the intent of people to bring the blessings that come 
from rain into their lives and the world remains unchanged. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



13 




Rain in Life 



The Sonoran Desert has the same two rainy seasons as do other areas of the 
Southwest. For nearly 2,000 years, people of the desert have based their residential 
patterns, their agriculture, and other food gathering on detailed knowledge of these 
seasons. The importance of rain in O'odham life is reflected in the traditional calendar. 



NAME 


TRANSLATION 


ENGLISH 

EQUIVALENT 


Ha:san Bak Masad 


Month to gather saguaro fruit 


June 


Jukiabig Masad 


Month of rain 


July 


Sopol Esabig Masad 


Short month of planting 


August 


Wasai Gakidaj 
Masad 


Month of dry grass 


September 


A1 Ju:big Masad 


Month of planting squash that can 
withstand frost 


October 


S-ke:g S-he pjig 
Masad 


Month of pleasant cold 


November 


Ge'e S-he:pjig Masad 


Month of big cold 


December 


Gakimdag Masad 
Masad 


Month to depend on stored foods 


January 


U: walig Masad 


Deer mating month 


February 


Ce:dagi Masad 


"Green season" New plants come up 


March 


Uam Masad 


Yellow month/Desert in bloom 


April 


U'us Wihogdag 
Masad 


Month to gather beans; a time of hunger 


May 



Average Annual Inches of Rainfall 




B Tohono O'odham Average Annual Rainfall Statistics 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



For Tohono O'odham, the year begins with early siunmer harvesting of saguaro fmit 
and the attendant ceremony that keeps it raining during the summer months. The iiames 
of O'odham lunar "months" for the summer rainy season reference precipitation and its 
attendant impact on plants. The new year begins with Hasan Bakmasad (roughly 
equivalent to June), "Saguaro moon." It is followed hyJukiabig masad (July), "Rainy 
moon," at the begiiming of summer thunderstorms and the planting of crops. 

Rain in Ceremony 

A rain ceremony or wine feast is a gift to the Tohono O'odham people from /'/to/, the 
Elder Brother and Creator. The ceremony begins with "pulling down the clouds," or 
harvesting ripe fruit from the saguaro cactus. The harvest and production of saguaro 
syrup may take from one to three weeks. The public portion of the ceremony includes 
the preparation, drinking, and regurgitation of saguaro wine as well as ritual oratory 
and dancing. 

The large quantities of wine which the people consume becomes the medium through 
which they pray for rain. The sacred intoxication and regurgitation are referred to as 
"throwing up the clouds." It is said that the saturation of the people with wine is like 
the earth that will soon be saturated with water. Through their songs, speeches and 
sacred intoxication, the people summon the rain. 

Expressions of Rain 

In contrast to the Pueblo cultures in which rain images permeate much that is done and 
made, concrete expressions of rain in O'odham culture are rare. Instead, they are 
founded in the rich oral traditions of the O'odham. 

The rain ceremony includes several examples of ritual oratory. Early in the ceremony, 
runners go to neighboring villages with speeches of invitation to the ceremony. These 
speeches are followed by others associated with being seated, sitting and drinking, and 
finally, the mockingbird speeches that call for the release of the clouds. 



BESTCOPYAVAlUa^RlE 

Td 



i 



The O'odham Today 

Today, the O'odham (meaning people) live in lands they have occupied since the 
beginning of time. This land is currently located in two coimtries, the United States 
and Mexico, and is classified environmentally by Euro-Americans as the Sonoran 
Desert. The Tohono O'odham have been organized as a nation or "tribe" by the United 
States, but the O'odham think of themselves more as members of a particular 
commimity, such as Sells, Ak-Chin, Santa Rosa, etc.. Although they share a common 
language, customs and culture, their identity is based upon their geographic 
commimity and their participation in that community. 




Just as there are different countries in Europe, in the Sonoran Desert there are three 
different groups of O'odham. Depending on where they lived and what natural 
resources could be used, the O'odham developed different and unique ways of life. In 
a general way these can be described as O'odham with no villages, O'odham with two 
villages, and O'odham with one village. Today, the no village way of life has been 
abandoned due to missionary and government pressures as well as environmental 
changes. The two village O'odham are today known as the Tohono O'odham (Desert 
People, formerly "Papago"). The one village people are the Akimel O'odham (River 
People) or Pima. 



■Jj£ BEST COPY AVAIUP' ^ 










"Reservations" reflect only a fraction of the land used by the Tohono O'odham people 
in the past. The area of land currently used by the Tohono O'odham is often referred to 
by Euro- Americans as the "Papagueria." This describes the area that has been 
occupied by the Tohono O'odham for centuries. It is a vast area stretching from the 
Gila River in the north to the Sonora River in the south, and the Colorado River in the 
west and the San Pedro River in the east. The Tohono O'odham manage this land 
wisely; utilizing the water resources to farm; gathering and replenishing the abundant 
wild vegetation; hunting game; and ranching domesticated animals in the valley 
grasslands. Although there are occasionally severe shortages of water, the O'odham 
continue to live successfully in this land. 

The first contact the Tohono O'odham had with non-Indians occurred in the 17th 
century. Until this time, the Spanish largely ignored the O'odham because they did not 
live in an area that was of economic interest to the colonial authorities. In 1687, a 
Jesuit missionary. Father Eusebio Kino, was sent to the area to convert the Tohono 
O'odham. Contrary to the usual Spanish missionary treatment. Kino emphasized 
kindness and goodwill towards the O'odham. Kino promoted cultural exchange with 
the O'odham and introduced many European items like horses, cattle, wheat and 
barley. The missionaries were thought to be good men by the O'odham, but the 
Spanish soldiers were viewed as adversaries. 

During the Spanish colonial period in Mexico, the Spanish did not displace the 
O'odham from their land because the O'odham were subjects to the King of Spain and 
under his protection. The Spanish crown formally acknowledged that the O'odham had 
legal title to their lands in the form of a grant. 

The independence of Mexico from Spain in 1810 brought changes to the O'odham 
people. They became the "frontier" in northern Mexico and without the protection of 
the King, the legal title to their lands was ignored by other people looking for places to 
settle. In addition, the O'odham were subject to raids by the Apache, who were 
negatively impacted by the colonial pressures resulting from Euro-Americans 
expansion into their territory. 

The war between Mexico and the United States (1846-1848) was concluded by the 
Treaty of Guadelupe Hidalgo, which left the O'odham territory intact as the northern- 
most part of Mexico. However, the desire to secure a good route for the trans- 
continental railroad pressured U.S government officials to negotiate the Gadsden 
Purchase in 1 854. This in effect transferred half of the O'odham territory to the United 
States and left the other half under the jurisdiction of Mexico. This division between 
two foreign governments had dramatic consequences for the O'odham. 



17 



BEST COPY AVAII A^' 



According to the terms of the purchase, the United States agreed to honor all land 
rights in the area held by Mexican citizens. The O'odham, who were considered 
citizens of Mexico, were reassured by the United States government that this included 
the legal title to their land, which had been established under the Spanish king and 
recognized by the succeeding governments of Mexico. However, pressure for land 
escalated with the development of mining in this area of the country. 

The United States government finally acted to guarantee land to the O'odham when it 
established a small reservation at San Xavier del Bac in 1874. In 1882, the Gila Bend 
Reservation was established for the O'odham, but in 1909, 12,000 critical acres were 
removed from the Reservation, making the area uninhabitable. The Ak-Chin or 
Maricopa Reservation was established in 1912, but the land was also reduced by two 
separate executive orders. 

These three river reservations - San Xavier del Bac, Gila Bend and Ak-Chin or 
Maricopa - are home to only a small percentage of the O'odham people. Most live on 
the large Tohono O'odham reservation to the west of what today is Tucson. After 
several attempts to secure a guaranteed legal title to the land base for the Tohono 
O'odham, a committee of concerned supporters convinced the federal government to 
establish the reservation in 1916. Although it was only a portion of the land used by 
the O'odham, federal officials further reduced the land holdings in 1917. It was not 
until 1926 that the area was restored to the O'odham. 

The struggle to retain their land and homes is one of the primary issues that has 
unified the Tohono O'odham nation. In the early 1900s, there were several tribal-wide 
organizations that fought for O'odham rights. In 1934, the government passed the 
Indian Reorganization Act and the O'odham voted the same year to form a tribal 
government under the Act. In 1937, the tribal constitution was adopted. Today, the 
O'odham people are governed by a chairman and a co-chairman elected by the people. 

For a long time, the Tohono O'odham were called "Papabotas" or bean eaters by the 
Spanish. Later, Anglo-Americans anglicized this to "Papago." The O'odham did not 
care for this name because it wasn't their proper name. So in 1986, the nation legally 
changed its tribal name to the name they had always called themselves; Tohono 
O'odham, the "desert people." 

The Tohono O'odham are successful at living in the desert because of centuries of 
experience. Through oral tradition, their ancestors have handed down information 
about the location of water and its proper management. Knowing how to use and 
replenish the riches of the desert for food, clothing and building materials is a part of 
Tohono O'odham tradition. Critical information about what, how and where to plant 
seeds is scientific knowledge that has led to the success of the O'odham people. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 






There are many ways to prepare desert foods. Squash, chili, cactus fruits and flowers, 
and other foods are usually dried. Sometimes foods such as com and cholla fruit had 
to be roasted before drying. After drying, the foods can be ground into meal and stored 
in ollas. Stored food can later be used to make tortillas, bread or atole (a drink of dried 
com meal and water). Mesquite pods, which are already dried when collected, are 
immediately taken to special grinding holes. These holes, called cepa, were found at 
places where large slabs of rock were exposed above the soil. The mesquite pods and 
other vegetal foods were tossed into the natural mortars and pounded to a powder 
using hardwood pestles. 




In the past, the O'odham relied on the desert foods. Beans were a staple and important 
part of their diet. In fact, the O'odham grew and ate so many beans that they were 
nicknamed "the bean people" by the Spanish. Beans included mesquite beans, 
ironwood seeds, palo verde pods, acacia pods, red, white and yellow tepary beans, and 
lima beans. Other foods included acorns, nopalitos (new pads of the prickly pear 
cactus), cholla buds and cactus fruit. In the past, the O'odham ran and did a fair 
amount of physical work. Early Euro- American observers describe the O'odham as 
exceptionally healthy people at the time of contact. 

Today, however, it is a different story. The O'odham have one of the highest rates of 
diabetes in the world. In fact, this disease has reached epidemic proportions among all 
Native Americans. At the turn of the century, physicians working among Native 
Americans reported very few cases of diabetes. By the 1980s, Native Americans had 
become ten times more likely to develop diabetes than any other group in America. 
Anglo-American medical doctors now realize that the dramatic change in the O'odham 
diet has created a very serious health problem for that community. 



19 



BEST COPY AVAILA?!' 



Historically, changes in the O'odham environment occurred during contact between 
the O'odham and the Spanish. New foods, including wheat, and new food animals, 
such as pigs and cattle, were introduced into the diet. Before the Spanish, Native 
Americans baked, boiled, or roasted food. Frying, which requires animal fats, was a 
technique learned from the Spanish after contact. 

Since 1900, the damming of rivers has reduced the ability of the people to grow their 
own food, and forced them to purchase processed food. Roads and highways have 
brought pollution, which affects desert plants: some die and others adsorb the toxins, 
thus making them inedible. Boarding school education also "taught" the O'odham that 
their desert foods were primitive, uncivilized and inedible. In addition, the United 
States program of distributing food (commodity food or "commodities") as part of the 
War on Poverty programs of the 1960s emphasized fatty, starchy, filling foods. 
Finally, "natural" or unprocessed foods have become the most expensive of foods. 
Snack foods or low-priced foods are frequently filled with more fat, sugar and salt 
than most. 

Weaving, known as Hohatahas been an important Tohono O'odham activity for 
centuries. Talented weavers are able to make many useful items using products from 
the desert and the skill of their hands. Hoha is the Tohono O'odham word meaning 
baskets of many types. Baskets are extremely useful and can be used for a variety of 
purposes. A basket is used for storage of food as well as personal belongings. A 
special style of basket is used for winnowing grains. The Tohono O'odham also made 
a special basket for carrying heavy things. In addition, basketry weaving techniques 
are used to create trays, sleeping mats, walls and doors for brush houses, traps, hats, 
bags, brushes, cradle boards, sieves, water jug handles and headrings for carrying 
water jars on the head. 

The ability to make so many different things by weaving natural fibers emphasizes the 
long-lasting relationship the Tohono O'odham have had with their desert environment. 
Weavers know which plants to select for use in making each different item. Many 
baskets require natural materials from a variety of plant sources: saguaro ribs, 
mesquite root, yucca leaves and roots, arrowbush, agave leaves, beargrass, devil's 
claw, ocotillo, willow and desert spoon are the most commonly used plants. Each 
material has a different technical purpose. Yucca leaves are excellent for stitching the 
coils in a basket, but beargrass is the best plant to use for the inside or foundation of 
the coil. Devil's claw (marytinia or unicorn plant) is a natural black fiber that is used 
for designs. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Questions and Answers about the 
Tohono O'odham 



In the past, how did the Tohono O'odham obtain food? 

• The life of the Tohono O'odham was based on the seasons: two rainy seasons 
(summer and winter) and two dry seasons (spring and fall). 

• During the summer, they live in the valleys and, taking advantage of the 
summer rains, grew crops of com, beans and squash. 

• During the winter, the Tohono O'odham moved to the mountains where there 
was water available from the springs. They gathered wild plants and ate the 
foods from the summer that had been dried and saved. 

• They also himted animals and gathered plants at other times. 

Was there any special food for the Tohono O'odham? 

• Yes, the fruit of the saguaro cactus. The Tohono O'odham collected great 
quantities of the fruit during the early summer. At the camp, they cooked the 
fruit and made syrup and jam. The seeds were dried and saved as well, and 
could also be eaten. 

Why is it said that the Tohono O'odham had a "Two Village" way of life? 

• Because they lived at the field villages during the summer months and at the 
well villages in the mountains during the winter months. 

In what part of the Sonoran desert do the Pima live? 

• Along the Salt and Gila rivers, at the northern end of the Sonoran Desert. 

In the past, how much water was available to the Pima? 

• Almost constant water from the rivers nearby and between 10 and 15 inches of 
rain per year. 

In the past, how did the Pima obtain food? 

• Since they lived along the Salt and Gila rivers, the Pimas were able to grow 
large quantities of com, beans and squash during the summer. After it was 
introduced by the Spanish explorers, they were able to grow wheat during the 
winter. 

• The Pimas also collected wild plants and himted animals such as deer, rabbits, 
elk and some birds. 



BESTCOPYAVAILABLE 



21 



Name an important special food of the Pimas. 

• The mesquite tree. The Pimas obtained abundant food from the mesquite trees 
and used the wood to build houses and sun shades called ramadas and to make 
fires for cooking. 

Why do we say that the Pima had a "One Village" way of life? 

• Because they lived in permanent villages along the Salt and Gila rivers 
throughout the year. 

What is a desert? 

• Simply put, a desert is a place where moisture is lacking and unpredictable. 
Therefore, the species that live in the desert must be able to adapt to that 
situation. Plants in the desert have evolved unique physical qualities that allow 
them to withstand drought. Some animals, as well, have specialized 
physiology. Others, including human beings, have developed specific behavior 
patterns that allow them to succeed in the otherwise harsh environment. In the 
Southwest, the long periods of high temperatures are yet another factor that all 
life must contend with. 

• In North America there are four major desert areas. They are sometimes 
referred to collectively as the "Great American Desert." Differences in 
geography, elevation, climatic conditions and other factors affect the presence 
and growth of plants in these areas. Some botanists, in fact, use particular 
plants as "markers" that define each of the four desert regions by the fact that 
these plants grow abundantly only in that region. The desert that is discussed in 
this unit is the Sonoran Desert, located in southern Arizona, Baja California 
and northern Sonora, Mexico. The plant "marker" for the Sonoran Desert is the 
saguaro cactus (Cereus giganteus). 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



22 



One Hot, Dry Afternoon... 



Activity: Students put a story in 
order and create a book. 

Focus Activity: Discuss what it is 
like to live in the Sonoran Desert 
during the summer. Look at the 
painting "Rain House/Saguaro Wine 
Festival" by Michael Chiago 
(Tohono O'odham) and talk about 
how he lets you know that it is the 
hot time of the year. Talk about ways 
to cool off! 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will learn to order the events of a story and, in doing so, will create 
their own book. 

Materials: 

"Sunday Swim" for the teacher to read to the class, *photocopies of the "Sunday 
Swim" sheets for each student (6 sheets and cover), *pencils/crayons/markers for 
drawing, * stapler. 

Procedure: 

1. Read the story "Sunday Swim" to the class. Discuss the story: do the students 
know why it is called "Sunday Swim?" Do the students realize that the story 
follows the days of the week? 

2. Give out to each student the seven sheets to make the book. Ask students to put 
the sheets in order. 

3. Discuss the order for the book. Have the students help each other. When you are 
sure that all the students have understood the sequence, have students number the 
pages. 

4. At this point, there could be several activities associated with this exercise: 

• Have the students illustrate their book as an art project. 

• Have the students present the story as a play, with the students 
taking the parts as narrator. Bird, Snake, etc.. 

• Have the students make masks-on-a-stick or paper plate masks as 
an art project to use in presenting the story as a play. 




23 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Assessment: 



• Did the student understand the story? 

• Were the students able to correctly order the text sheets? 

• Did Ae students realize that the story followed the days of the week (in order) 
and that the cast of characters grew larger through the week? 

Extension: 

• For older students: using the same format, have students change the story by 
changing the activities, the weather, the characters or the time frame. Some 
examples are: Sunday Ski; April Busride; Afternoon Rollerblade. 



24 



BEST COPY available 



Sunday Swim 



This is my book: 



o 

ERIC 

hiaifiiifftaiTi-Taaa 



25 



My Diary 



Activity: Students write one 
entry per day summarizing 
what was an important or 
notable event for them. 

Focus Activity: 

Look at the art prints: "Niman 
Ceremony at Walpi Village" 
by Raymond Naha (Hopi). 

Discuss how each painting 
records a specific event. 

Discuss with the class that 
events can be recalled visually (such as in the paintings), orally (by telling someone 
about the event) or documented (by writing about the event). 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students summarize an event. 

2. Students practice putting their thoughts in writing. 

3. Through sharing, students realize that not everyone thinks that the same things 
are important 

Materials: 

*paper or notebook, *pencils 




Procedure: 

1 . After class discussion, set aside a part of every day for students to think back on 
their previous day and select one special thing to remember. 

2. The students should then write about this event in their diary. 



Assessment: 

• At the end of a week, ask students to share their remembrances. Are all the 
diary events the same? 

• Does everyone remember the event the same way. 



2 6 best copy available 






Extension: 

• In the "Art Projects" section of this section there is a lesson on the "Calendar 
Stick." 

• This diary activity can be done in association with the art project. 




27 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



My Yearbook 



Activity: Students write a book, 
highlighting each month of the 
year. 

Focus Activity: 

Look at the "Rain House/Saguaro 
Wine Festival" print, and review 
what artist Michael Chiago 
(Tohono O'odham) said about the 
time of year: "In late June when the 
fruit of the giant saguaro ripens..." Look also at the "Tohono O'odham Calendar of 
Seasons" found in the Cultural Information section. And finally, read "Sonoran 
Seasons: A Year in the Desert" by Gisela Jemigan. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will create booklets while reviewing the months of the year and learn 
to summarize events. 




Materials: 

"Sonoran Seasons: A Year in the Desert," *paper, *pencils 



Procedure: 

1. Read "Sonoran Seasons: A Year in the Desert" to the class. 

2. Go back and review each monthly entry: have the students identify the kind of 
information given— weather, plants, colors, activity. 

3. As a class, do this same exercise: for each month, identify some colors, 
activities, weather, etc.. 

4. Have students work alone or in groups to create a yearbook based on these lists. 



2:8 



BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 





Assessment: 



• Were students able to identify how the author of the book focused on just a few 
impressions to identify each month? 

• Could students compose a text for each month following the guidelines? 



Extension: 



• Students could share their yearbooks. 

• Students could illustrate their yearbooks. 



29 



BEST COPY available 





What’s the Story? 
(for older students) 



Activity: Students create a story. 

Focus Activity: Look at the Red- 
on-Buff Rectangular Bowl. 

Discuss with the students that the 
maker of this piece is not known. 

Discuss how little we know about 
the bowl: Who made it? Why was 
it made? How was it used? Where 
was it used and by whom? Who 
painted the design? How old was 
the maker(s)? 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will create the essentials of a story and write their own narrative. 




Materials: 

art prints of the Red-on-Buff Rectangular Bowl (Hohokam) and Canteen (Cochiti), 
paper, pencils. 

Procedure: 

1. After looking at the Red-on-Buff Rectangular Bowl and discussing all the 
questions, demonstrate to the students that the basic questions — Who? What? 
Where? When? Why? — are the building blocks of a complete story. 

2. Work through the following exercise with the students, based on the art print: 
Who: The Hohokam artist made it. 

What: The Hohokam artist made the bowl. 

Where: The Hohokam artist made the bowl in the plaza. 

When: The Hohokam artist made the bowl in the plaza a long time ago. 

Why: The Hohokam artist made the bowl in the plaza a long time ago to give as a 
gift for her mother. 



3 Q BEST COPY AVAILAP' F 



3. Now look at the art print of the Canteen made by an unknown Cochiti artist. 
Have the children ask themselves or think about the basic questions concerning the 
Canteen. 




4. Give each student paper and pencils. Using the model, ask each student to begin 
with the sentence: The artist made it. Then, add to the information by adding the 
Who? What? Where? When? and Why? sentence by sentence. 

5. Have the students share their work. 



Assessment: 

• Did the students add the appropriate information for each question? 
Extension: 

• Repeat this exercise with other images or items, such as a decorative flower 
pot, a painting, etc. 



31 



best COPY AVAILA.?^’ 




Beans: Odd or Even 



Activity: Students will pair dried | 

beans to determine if the quantity is 
odd or even. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print 
"Untitled" by Tse-Ye-Mu (San 
Ildefonso). It is a drawing of a dance. 

Notice how the dancers are in two 

if 

lines. Notice too that the dancers are 
in pairs: men and women. Discuss . , 

with the students that when there are 
two things or a pair, we say that there 
are an even number. If there is no 
partner, we say that something is an 
odd number. How many even numbers of people or things can be seen in the print? 
How many odd numbers? 

Outcomes: 

1. Students will experience the concept of even and odd using manipulatives. 

2. Students will determine whether a quantity is even or odd. 

Vocabulary: quantity, even, odd 

Materials: a bag with 20 dried beans per group, *duplicate copies of the "Beans: Odd 
or Even" worksheet for each student. 

Procedure: 

1. Explain to the students that when every object in a group has a partner, we say 
that the group has an even number. If there is no partner for an object in a group, 
we say that the group has an odd number. 

2. Let students experience determining even and odd and record their findings on 
the answer sheet by doing the following: 

a. Give each student or group of students a bag of 20 dried beans. 

b. One student selects one of the numbers on the worksheet for 
investigation (e.g., "5"), and counts out that number of beans from the bag. 

c. Students then arrange the beans to see how many "bean partners" can be 
made with the beans. 




3 2 ®^STCOPY AVAIUBLE 





d. If all the beans have partners, then the students write "even" in the box 
next to the number. If students have one bean without a partner, the word 
"odd" is written in the box next to the nmnber. 



3. Students discuss the findings as a class. If there are any nmnbers where the 
findings do not agree, repeat that exercise as a class. 



Assessment: 

1 . Do students realize that nmnbers used when counting by twos are even? 

2. Were students able to predict whether a nmnber was even or odd using the 
information found in the previous experiences? 



Extension: 

1. This activity can be done with many different objects and students often need to 
explore this concept many times. 

2. Higher sums can be more interesting for some children and they will still arrive 
at the same concept. 

3. This activity can be played as a game with cards or dice used to determine 
which quantity to explore. 



BESTCOPYAVAILABJ E 



Beans: Odd or Even Worksheet 



1. Select one of the numbers on the sheet. 

2. Count out that number of beans from your bag. 

3. Arrange the beams in twos - each bean with a partner. 

4. If all of the beans have partners, write "EVEN" next to the number you 
selected. 

5. If one bean doesn't have a partner, write "ODD" next to the number you 
selected. 

6. Put the beans back in the bag. 

7; Select another number and repeat the activity until you have marked all the 
spaces below either "ODD" or "EVEN". 



10 


1 


8 


4 


14 


11 


5 


7 


2 


3 


6 


12 


9 


13 



34 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Dried Beans in a Jar 



Activity: Students will estimate 
how many dried beans are in ajar. 



Focus Activity: Look at the Red- 
on-buff Rectangular Box 
(Hohokam). Ask the students to 
suggest some things that could fit in 
the bowl. Talk about what wouldn't 
fit. Talk about things that wouldn't 
need a container that large. 

Introduce the concept of estimating. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will practice and refine estimating skills to develop number skills. 
Vocabulary: estimate, confirm, quantity, amount 

Materials: clear plastic jar, dried beans (placed in jar by teacher), *copy for each 
student of the estimate sheet. 




Procedure: 

1. Be sure that everyone has an opportunity to see the jar clearly. 

2. Students record their estimate of the number of beans in the jar on their 
recording sheet. 

3. Estimates can be graphed and a range determined. (This is best done after 
students have already had some experience with this concept in previous classes) 

4. The jar is opened and the class counts the beans together to confirm the actual 
number. 

5. Students then write the actual amount and determine the difference between 
their estimate and the actual amount. 

6. Repeat the activity the next day with a different quantity. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



35 



Assessment: 



• 1 . Does the accuracy of the students' estimates improve? 

• 2. Is there evidence of a strategy for making estimates? 

Extension: 

• 1 . This activity should be repeated many times with many different objects and 
different sizes of jars. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



36 



Beans in a Jar 



Estimate 



Actual Number 
Difference 



My Estimate was: 





37 



Rock Message 
(for older students) 



Activity: Students order long 
division problems and arrive at the 
solutions. Using their answers, they 
"decode" the words. 

Focus Activity: Look at the painting 
"Rainhouse/Saguaro Wine Festival" 
by Michael Chiago (Tohono 
O'odham). Look at all the rocks in 
the painting — there are really too 
many to count! Discuss how many, 
different types of rocks are in the painting. Collect some vocabulary words for 
different types of rock 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will practice skills in long division. 

Materials: pencils, copy of the worksheet for each student, copy of the riddle sheet 
for each student with the words to be "decoded," scrap paper. 

Procedure: 

1 . Give each student a copy of the worksheet, a pencil and scrap paper. 

2. Have students rewrite the long division sentences in problem form. 

3. Students should now be given time to work on their problems. 

4. As they finish their work, students can get their riddle sheet. 

5. By filling in the letter that corresponds to the number, students can "decode" 
their words and find the answer to the riddle. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



38 



Assessment: 



1. Are the students able to rewrite the number problems correctly? 

2. Can the students solve the long division problems? 



Extension: 

1. Encourage students to check their answers by multiplying the answer by the 
divider and adding the remainder. 



39 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Name 

Rewrite and solve the long division problems to find out the "code" for 
each letter. 

Then, on the riddle sheet, fill in the blanks to discover the words that 
solve the riddle. 

K: 69 divided by 8 equals? 

A: 6 goes into 37 how many times? 

L: 5 goes into 18 how many times? 

C: 593 divided by 3 equals? 

M: 3,215 divided by 4 equals? 

R: 21 goes into 499 how many times? 

Y: 19 goes into 8,712 how many times? 

E: 7,373 divided by 33 equals? 

D: 21,831 divided by 357 equals? 

O: 123 goes into 35,722 how many times? 

B: 128,933 divided by 618 equals? 

N: 203 goes into 1,407 how many times? 



Use the space below to work your long division problems. 
Use the extra paper when you run out of room. 



Name 



If you like to collect rocks, what kind of cake is your favorite? 



803R3 6R1 23R16 208R389 3R3 223R14 



197R2 6R1 8R5 223R14 



What kind of candy is you favorite? 



23R16 290R52 193R2 8R5 



193R2 6R1 6R189 61R54 458R10 



O 

ERIC 



41 






The Perfect Rock...or That's Your Point 
of View 



Activity: Students will determine 
the attributes of a set of rocks and 
then practice addition skills. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art 
prints Red-on-buff Rectangular 
Box (Hohokam) and Canteen 
(Cochiti). Discuss with students 
how one is not "better" than the 
other, but that the containers are 
different from each other. Which 
would be best for carrying water? Which would be best for serving a sauce? In what 
other ways could you use the containers? Which container do you like the best? 

Why? 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will practice addition facts. 

2. Students will look critically at rocks to determine their attributes. 

3. Students will learn that two people do not necessarily have the same way of 
looking at things. 

Vocabulary: attributes, valuable, prospect 

Materials: rocks with different attributes on cards (A, B, C, D); magnifying glass; 
rock "value" listing *paper, ""pencils 

Procedure: 

1 . Set out the rocks on cards so they can be examined. 

2. Allow students in small groups to feel the rocks and examine them closely. 
With only the one set of rocks provided, this activity works best at a center. 
However, if you made additional sets for every two or three children, this can be 
done as a cooperative activity. 

3. Let students have time to take a good look at each rock, list all the attributes, 
and find a corresponding value for each attribute. 




42 



BEST COPY AVAILS - ' 




4. Students then need to add up the total for all attributes to determine the most 
"valuable" rock in the collection... from their point-of-view. 

5. Students share their sums. What rock was rated most "valuable?" 



Assessment: 

1 . Did students determine all of the attributes for each rock? 

2. Was the addition correct? 

3. Was there evidence of a strategy in gathering the data or was it haphazard? 
Extension: 

1 . This activity can be repeated with different rocks and a different set of values 
for the attributes. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



43 



Rock Values 



Appeal (select only one) 

Beautiful = 4 
Ugly = 2 
Interesting = 5 
Boring = 1 



Color 

Red =5 
White = 4 
Black = 3 
Brown = 2 
Gray = 1 



Shape 

Round = 3 
Regular = 5 
Irregular = 1 
Pointed = 4 
Flat = 3 



Size 

Large = 3 
Mediimi = 1 
Small = 2 



Texture 

Scratchy = 3 
Birnipy = 2 
Smooth = 4 
Rough = 3 
Powdery = 5 
Hard = 1 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



44 





’’Awatovi MuraP’ 




Artist: Pablita Velarde 

Culture: Pueblo of Santa Clara, New Mexico 

Size: Width 22"; Height 38" 

Media:Earth pigments, masonite 
Date: 1960s 

Catalogue Number: IAC14 




A 



BEST COPY AVAII_AP' E 



Description: 

Frog- Frogs are associated with rain because they are found near rain water. 

Hat- On top of the frog is a symbol of a cloud that looks like a hat. 

Lizard- Lizards are often foimd aroimd sources of water. 

Rainbow- Rainbows are associated with new life. 

Lightning- How many places do you see a line that reminds you of lightning? 

Sim- The sun is necessary for life. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - straight, curved 
Shape - natural, symmetrical 
Color - earth pigments, neutral 

Space - Discuss how the artist has filled the space by looking side-to-side, top-to- 
bottom 

Texture -The earth pigments give the work a look of velvet 
Art Principles: 

Concept: Balance 

Discuss with your students the way the artist has offset the images in the picture with 
something of a similar size so that each side of the picture is balanced. 

Cultural Context: 

Pablita Velarde was bom in Santa Clara Pueblo on September 19, 1918. Ms. Velarde 
talks about the earth and the soil with a special love, and she used the soil as the 
medium to create this painting. Of course, we can't know everything that created this 
love for soil in Ms. Velarde, but there are some possible reasons we can consider. 

The first is that Ms. Velarde's father was a farmer like many men in the early 20th 
century. Watching their food grow from the soil was probably very important to her as 
a young child. 



4G 



BESTCOPYAVAIUf" ^ 



A second reason Ms. Velarde might feel the special love she has for soil is that her 
home, as she was growing up, was made of adobe. Adobe is a brick made of mud and 
straw. Adobe homes are very comfortable in summer and winter and safe from storms. 

Another reason Ms. Velarde might feel love for the soil is the tradition of pottery 
making in Santa Clara Pueblo. Families from the pueblo go together to dig the special 
red clay from the earth near the village, which they use to make beautiful red or black 
pottery. 

Probably the most important reason for Pablita Velarde's special love for the soil 
comes from the religion of her people and their regard for the earth. 

Ms. Velarde has taken her love for the soil and crated a unique art form she calls 
"earth pigment painting". She uses soil or rocks that she finds or buys, and grinds them 
into a fine, powdery dirt to mix with water and glue to make an unusual paint. 

She uses this mixture to create paintings in the style of those found on fragments of 
adobe walls removed from the earth by archeologists. These walls were painted from 
mineral paints many centuries ago. Ms. Velarde does not reproduce these paintings, 
but creates new images in the style and spirit of early artists. 

Artist's Response 

Ms. Velarde said of her native earth pigments and subjects: "Somebody has to keep 
preserving some of our ancient past, because if we don't, in time, it will disappear. 
There's a thing about keeping it alive, not just with photographs and recordings, but by 
somebody doing it. I feel that I'm keeping the old art alive by painting the ancient way 
with my earth pigments and my traditional designs. I feel that I am keeping them alive, 
and they're keeping me alive." 

Discuss with your students why Ms. Velarde feels this way about her earth pigment 
paintings, and discuss how students feel about it and how they feel about their own art 
work. 

Questions for discussion: 

1) What animals do you see? 

2) What is the shape on the lizard's head? 

3) There are many zig-zag lines in this painting. Do they remind you of something? 
Image for comparison: 

Pascola Mask 
Cochiti Pueblo Canteen 



47 



BEST COPY AVA!! 



"Canteen" 




Artist: Unknown 

Culture: Pueblo of Cochiti, New Mexico 
Size: Height 5 7/8"; Circumference 21 7/16" 

Media: Clay 
Date: c. 1900 
Catalogue Number: 657P 
Description: 

Lizard - The lizard stands out from the container. A shadow can be seen on the 
canteen. 

Leaves - Plant shapes are used to decorate the container 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



48 




Oiy 



Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - organic, natural 

Shape - organic/natural, hollow, rounded, symmetrical 

Color - Polychrome 

Space - 3 -dimensional, between, below 

Texture - dull, hard 

Art Principle: 

Concept - emphasis 

Finding a three-dimensional lizard on a canteen is a surprise. This is a design used by 
prehistoric potteries as well. 

Cultural Context: 

This canteen was made about the turn of the century. At that time there were very few 
cars and only 150 miles of paved road in the entire United States. People usually 
traveled long distances by walking, riding a horse or riding in a horse-drawn wagon. 
As a result, travelers in the desert would be on the road for a long time between water 
sources. Thus, travelers needed to carry their own water. This canteen shape with a 
small opening and handles was easy to carry or tie to the traveler's horse. 

The artist who made this canteen dug the clay, worked with it and fired it, just as 
he/she would when making a jar or bowl. 

The lizard on the side of the canteen appears to be going toward the water just as 
animals seek water around a watering hole. Artists often get ideas for their artwork 
from what they see in nature. Placing an animal seeking water on the side of a water 
jar or canteen is an idea artists have used since prehistoric times. 

Images for comparison: 

Pascola Mask 

Hohokam Box - “Red on Buff Rectangular Bowl” 

Awatovi Mural" by Pablita Velarde 
Questions for comparison: 

These three photos show images of the lizard family. Which lizard do you think is 
most life-like? Which lizard do you think is the most interesting? 




4:9 



BEST COPY AVAILAPIT 



”Niman Ceremony at Walpi Village” 




Artist: Ray Naha 
Culture: Hopi 

Size: Height 38 1/4"; Width 57 15/16" 

Media: Paint, composition board 
Date: c. 1965 

Catalog Number: IAC1938 
Description: 

Kachinas {Katsinas): 

• Hemis Kachinas (carrying cornstalks and cattails) - These Kachinas present 
gifts as prayers for health and prosperity to Hopi children before returning 
to their home in the San Francisco Peaks. 

• Hemis Kachinmana (wearing a red and white shawl) - In her left hand, she 
holds a water gourd with a rain cloud decoration. 

• Kokosori - Kokosori is one of the smallest Kachinas. He is often seen with 
Eototo, who controls the seasons. 



BEST COPY AVAII ABLE 





Plants - Plants are given during the ceremony as a symbol of water: the cattails 
because they grow in water, and com because it needs water to grow and is essential 
for the life of the Hopi. 



Kachina (Katsina) dolls - In the Hopi language, the dolls are called tihu (tee-hoo). The 
closest English word is doll, but these figures are much more than dolls. Hopi girls 
treat these figures with respect and would never leave them at the bottom of a toy box 
or forgotten on the floor. 

Houses - Adobe building such as these have been built for centuries in the Southwest. 
They are considered the first apartment buildings. 

Valley - The Hopi village of Walpi is built on the top of a mesa. The valley is seen in 
the distance. 

Ladder - This is the way to enter the imderground room where religious meetings take 
place. The imdergroimd room is called a kiva. 

Clouds - There are stratus and cumulus clouds in this painting. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - diagonal, horizontal, vertical, sharp, soft 

Shape - organic, geometric 

Color - natural, neutral, cool, warm 

Space - two-dimensional, illusion, depth, position, size, overlap 
Texture - soft, rough, smooth, scratchy 
Art Principles: 

Concept - perspective 

Things close to you are larger and closer to the bottom of the painting. Things far 
away are small and high on the painting. Notice the use of overlap, as well, to show 
distance. 

Cultural Context: 

The Niman Ceremony is a religious tradition of the Hopi people. It is held in July, and 
this is the last time the Kachinas live among the Hopi people for the current year. In 
English, this could be called "The Going Home Ceremony" because the Kachinas will 
be returning to their homes in the San Francisco Peaks. 



51 



BEST COPY AX /AILABi 



Ray Naha painted this picture of the Niman Ceremony in the 1960s. This was a time 
when all Americans were becoming more aware of the traditions given them by their 
ancestors. Dr. Martin Luther King and Cesar Chavez were telling people to be proud 
of their heritage. 

The American Indian Youth Movement was helping Native Americans, who were 
living away from their traditional homelands in cities, to learn about the customs of 
their people. 

Response from a Hopi woman: 

When Sandra Selestewa looked at this painting, it made her think about how she feels 
at a Niman Ceremony. "It is a sad feeling to see them go because you know it's going 
to be a long time before you get to sit up there again and watch," she said. 

Images for Comparison: 

"Rain House/Saguaro Wine Festival" by Michael Chiago (Tohono O'odham) 

Untitled by Tse-Ye-Mu [Raymond Vigil] (San Ildefonso) 

Questions for Comparison: 

All of these paintings are ceremonies from different tribes and all include dancers. 
Which painting seems to have the most active dancers? 

Which painting is the most colorful? 

Which painting has the most neutral colors? 

Which painting uses symbols? 



BEST COPY AVAIUPi e 



52 



"Pascola Mask" 




Artist: Unknown 
Culture: Yoeme (Yaqui) 

Size: Height 7 15/16"; Width 4 15/16" 

Media: Carved wood, paint 
Date: c. 1970 

Catalogue Number: NA-SW-YQ-I-8 
Description: 

Cross - This is distinctly Yoeme. It may represent the 4 directions. 
Lizard - The lizard is the protector of water and the bringer of rain. 



BESTCOPYAVAILABIF 



53 




A 



Black, red and white - These are the traditional colors for the Yoeme. 

Beard and eyebrows - These are made of horsehair. Vocabulary for discussion of Art 
Elements: 

Line - short, organic curve 

Shape - geometric, natural, triangular 

Color - contrast 

Space - triangle 

Texture - silky, smooth, shiny 

Art Principle: 

Concept - contrast (both color and texture) 

Cultural Context: 

This mask is worn by the Pascola (old man of the fiesta). He is host at every fiesta. He 
opens and closes the fiesta, gives prayers and speeches and, at times, dances and acts 
like a clown. 

The traditional homeland of the Yoeme is in the state of Sonora in Mexico, but poor 
economic and social conditions caused many Yoeme to make new homes in Arizona 
near Tucson and Phoenix. The traditional fiestas are held in these new homes. 

Images for comparison: 

Cochiti Pueblo Canteen 

"Awatovi Mural" by Pablita Velarde 

Questions for comparison: These three photo reproductions show images of the 
lizard family. Which lizard do you think is most life-like? Which lizard do you think is 
the most interesting? 




BEST COPY AVAILABIF 





"Rain House/Saguaro Wine Festival" 







Artist: Michael Chiago 

Culture: Tohono O'odham (formerly "Papago") 

Size: This is a reproduction of the marquette from which a mural was made. The 
mural is in three panels. The first is 71 5/16" by 39 5/8". The second is 71 5/16" by 35 
5/8". The last is 71 5/16' by 39 5/16". 

Media: Acrylic on canvas 

Date: 1993 

Catalogue Number: 3458-lA, B, C 
Description: 

People - Tohono O'odham people have always referred to themselves as Tohono 
O'odham, but other people once called them "Papago." 

Rattle - Rattles are made from gourds, which are grown in the gardens. 

Rain House - A rain house is a structure made with a frame of mesquite trunks, sides 
of ocotillo branches, and a roof of saguaro ribs covered with leaves. It is used to store 
ceremonial materials. 



55 



BEST COPY AVAIIJVP' ' 




Fire - While June days are warm in the desert, nights can be very cold. 

Jars - These jars hold the liquid squeezed from the recently picked saguaro fruit. 

Ladle - This ladle is used to dip the liquid squeezed from the saguaro fruit from the 
jar. 

Saguaro fruit-picking sticks - These are made from the rib of a saguaro and are used to 
pick fruit from the top of the plant. 

Wagon - While this was painted in 1993, this tradition has gone on for many 
generations. 

Moimtains - The moimtains are in the distance 
Vocabulary for the discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - diagonal, vertical, horizontal, short 

Shape - organic 

Color - natural, warm, cool 

Space -depth, space, overlap 

Direct the students to look at the painting from side-to-side and top-to-bottom 
Texture -actual, simulated, smooth, rough, transparent 
Art Principle: 

Concept - balance 

Ask: Does one side seem heavier than the other or are both the same? 

Cultural Context: 

Michael Chiago describes the ceremony depicted in this painting in this way: 

"In late Jime, when the fruit of the giant saguaro ripens, the O'odham conduct a wine 
festival, a ceremony taught them by Elder Brother. In the old days... the saguaro 
provided them with fresh fruit, syrup and cake made from seeds. 

The syrup-making process produces a juice which ferments for three days in the 'rain 
house' imder the care of the "Keeper of the Smoke,' the village headman and 
ceremonial leader. Rain songs are sung, and men and women dance at night. 



BEST COPY AV/Aii 



5.6 



At noon of the third day, the headman gather to recite poems over the baskets of wine. 
The men of the village sit in a circle and pass the baskets until they are drained. The 
planting of the crops takes place after the wine festival to make use of the rains that 
are bound to follow. 

Today, many families still prepare the saguaro wine for their own use, and the custom 
to 'cover the wine with song' continues: anyone who accepts a drink of the wine recites 
a poem, which invariably relates to clouds or rain. 

Because the ceremony is held at night, the children are often asleep, but during the 
day, they run and play ball, their feet pounding hard on the ground, stirring up dust. 
The songs they sing are calling to the clouds." 

Artist's Response: 

Mr. Chiago says when he thinks of this painting, he feels a part of the celebration. He 
says: "I have a good feeling. I am thankful we have ceremonies throughout our lives." 

Images for comparison: 

"Niman Ceremony at Walpi Village" by Ray Naha (Hopi) 

Untitled by Tse-Ye-Mu [Raymond Vigil] (San Ildefonso) 



Questions for comparison: 

All of these paintings are ceremonies from different tribes and all include dancers. 
Which painting seems to have the most active dancers? 

Which painting is the most colorful? 

Which painting has the most neutral colors? 

Which painting uses symbols? 



BEST COPY available 



57 



"Red-on-Buff Rectangular Box” 




Artist: Unknown 
Culture: Hohokam 

Size: Length 9 7/16"; Width 6 7/16"; Height 2 1/2" 

Media: Clay 

Date:c. 750 A.D.-900 A.D. 

Catalog Number: NA-SW-HH-A4-3 1 
Description: 

Animal - Anthropologists are not sme whether this animal is a homed toad or a gila 
monster. The artist made the animal shape by covering the space around the animal 
with paint. The animal is the area where the clay of the bowl is not covered with paint. 

Spots - These spots suggest to some anthropologists that this is a gila monster. 

Stripes - The rim of the bowl is decorated with stripes. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - organic, natural, curved 

Shape - symmetry, rectangular, depth, inside 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



5.8 



Color - neutral, natural 

Space - positive, negative 

Texture - actual, smooth, hard, simulated, rough 

Art Principle: 

Concept - Repetition 
Cultural Context: 

This bowl was made more than a thousand years ago by a Hohokam artist. It was 
made during a time when the Hohokam population was increasing. Because there were 
more people, they needed more land. They spread out along large rivers and extended 
their irrigation canals. 

The Hohokam lived well in the Sonoran Desert. They knew how to manage the water 
from rain and rivers. They planted crops that could adapt to the desert. They knew 
where, when and how best to plant those crops, and they knew how to use desert 
resources to have a good life. 

Images for comparison: 

Cochiti Pueblo Canteen 

"Awatovi Mural" by Pablita Velarde 

Questions for Comparison These three images are from the lizard family. Which 
lizard do you think is most life-like? Which lizard do you think is most interesting? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



59 



"Untitled" 







Artist: Tse-Ye-Mu (Romando Vigil) 

Culture: Pueblo of San Ildefonso, New Mexico 
Size: Height 31 3/16"; Width 33 1 1/16" 

Media: paper, watercolor 
Date: pre-1978 
Catalog Number: IAC2281 
Description: 

Terraced (stepped) clouds 

Rounded clouds 

Rain 

Ladies dancing - Call attention to the fact that they are barefoot, their hair is falling 
straight down their backs, and they are holding evergreens. 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



60 





Men dancing - Call attention to the white sash with fringe hanging down. 



Drums - Drums are used in many ceremonies. They add the sound of thunder. 

Three kossas - These figures are often called sacred clowns. This name often misleads . 
English-speaking people. The kossas play an important part in ceremonials. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - horizontal 

Shape - terraced, round, organic, stiff 
Color - neutral 

Space - imaginary horizon, sky 
Art Principles: 

Concept - pattern (repetition) 

Cultural Context: 

Dances and songs in ceremonials at San Ildefonso are prayers for a good life not only 
for pueblo people, but all people of the world. They sing and dance as prayers for a 
world in balance — no famine, wars, tornadoes or floods. Women dance barefoot. It is 
an honor to touch mother earth's back. As they dance, women stand high on their feet 
calling the clouds down. Their hair hangs straight as a symbol of rain. The tablita 
(headdress) they wear is shaped like a cloud. 

Men, too, wear rain symbols. The white fringe hanging from their sashes is a sign of 
rain. Cloud symbols are often painted on their kilts. One kossa holds a pole 
representing the rainbow. He swings it high and low, never letting it touch the groimd. 
This is a call to rain. 

According to Gary Roybal of San Ildefonso, curator at Bandelier National Monument, 
the kossa acts as though he really doesn't want it to rain, but he is always contrary, 
saying the opposite of what he wants. The kossa will pretend to chase the clouds away 
when what he wants is rain. 

Images for comparison: 

"Rain House/Saguaro Wine Festival" by Michael Chiago (Tohono O'odham) 

"Niman Ceremony at Walpi Village" by Ray Naha (Hopi) 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

ei 



Questions for comparison: 

All of these paintings are ceremonies from different tribes and all include dancers. 
Which painting seems to have the most active dancers? 

Which painting is most colorful? 

Which painting has the most neutral colors? 

Which painting uses symbols? 

If you could choose one of the ceremonies, which one would you like to go to? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



62 




Is It or Isn't It... a Rock? 



Activity: Students sort rocks from 
items that are similar, but are not 
rocks. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art 
print"Rain House/Saguaro Wine 
Festival", by Michael Chiago (Tohono 
O'odham). Look at the mountains in 
the distance— from what materials are 
they made? What would you find 
there? Talk also about the ground 
where the Tohono O'odham are dancing. Chiago shows the viewer what the desert 
floor is like: note the grasses, rocks and pebbles. 

Outcomes: Students will look critically at rocks and rock-like objects. 

Vocabulary: natural, man-made 

Materials: a variety of different types of rocks; an assortment of things that are not 
rocks: potsherds, concrete fragments, road paving fragments, a paper clip, and *any 
other materials you might add; bags; book: "Everybody Needs a Rock" by Byrd 
Baylor. 

Procedure: 

1) Read "Everybody Needs a Rock" by Byrd Baylor. 

2) Ask students to propose ways to determine whether something is natural or 
man-made. 

3) Give students or groups of students a bag with a variety of items-some natural, 
some man-made. Tell students to divide the items into two groups-one natural, one 
man-made. 

4) Ask students to explain how they decided what was natural and what was man- 
made. 

5) Identify the objects for the students, explaining what is natural and what is man- 
made. 

6) In groups, have students discuss the ways they might be able to tell if an item is 
natural or man-made. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



63 



Assessment: 



• Did students develop criteria for deciding what was natural and what was man- 
made? 

• Were students taking a critical look at the objects? 



Extension: 

• Read "If You Are a Hunter of Fossils" by Byrd Baylor. 

• Students can determine the difference between a rock and a fossil. 



best copy available 



64 






Liquid Rocks 






Activity: Forming stalactites and 
stalagmites 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print of 
the Water Canteen (Cochiti). Discuss why 
water is important for people, plants and 
animals. Then, discuss the importance of 
water in shaping the earth: canyons, 
arroyos, deltas, etc.. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will understand that some 
rocks can be dissolved in water. 

2. Students will observe the process that 
forms stalactites and stalagmites. 




Vocabulary: dissolve, stalactite, stalagmite, evaporate, crystals 

Materials: Epsom salts, 2 small jars, string (24 inches long), masking tape, *water, 2 
small pebbles, *paper 

Procedure: 

1) Fill both jars with Epsom salts. Explain that Epsom salts are a mineral similar to 
many minerals found in nature. 

2) Add water to the top of the Epsom salts (warm water works best). 

3) Stir to dissolve as much of the salts as possible. 

4) Tie a rock to each end of the string. 

5) Place one end of the string with the rock attached in one bottle of salt solution, 
and the other end in the other bottle of solution. 

6) Allow the string between the bottles to sag until it is only about one inch above 
the table. Place a piece of paper on the table, between the two jars and under the 
sagging string. 

7) Place the jars in a draft-free location where students can view it imdisturbed for 
a week. 

best COPV AVAILABLE 



65 




S»e» 



8) Call the students' attention to the experiment, periodically explaining that the 
water is going along the string and evaporating. As the water evaporates, it leaves 
the minerals behind. The same thing happens in caves where the rainwater seeps 
through cracks in the roof of the cave and absorbs small particles of calcium 
carbonate. As the water evaporates, it leaves the calcium carbonate in the form of 
stalactites and stalagmites. Although this experiment takes only a week, in nature 
this process may go on for thousands of years. Thus some stalagmites (growing 
from dripping on a surface) and stalactites (deposits hanging from above) are very 
large. 

9) Students should keep a log, recording the changes they observe. 




Assessment: 

• Do the students' logs explain that the minerals are left when evaporation 
occurs? 

• Do the students' logs reflect an understanding of the process--that minerals are 
being dissolved in water? 



Extension: 

• Students can grind rocks into small particles and try to dissolve them in water. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



66 







Rock Museum 




Activity: Establishing a rock museum 

Focus Activity: Look at "Awatovi Mural" by Pablita 
Velarde (Santa Clara). Discuss again how Velarde makes 
some of her colors by crushing rocks and soil and mixing 
the powder with white glue. What kind of rocks do the 
students think would be special for this artist? Why? 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will learn to look critically at rocks 

using specific criteria. lli 

Vocabulary: criteria, attribute, museum 




Procedure: 

1) Read "Rock Collecting" by Roma Cans. With the students, make a chart of the 
different kinds of rocks and the different colors of rocks mentioned in the book. 
Use the butcher paper and marker to make the chart. 

2) Talk to the students about museums. Explain that a museum is a place where 
people are able to see and learn about a particular subject. Since it would not be 
possible to have everything in one museum, most museums have mles about what 
will be collected and exhibited. Suggest to the students that you are going to have 
a rock museum in your classroom. 

3) As a class, or in small groups, discuss what kinds of rocks you would want in 
the class museum collection and what mles you would need to write in order to 
decide if a particular rock qualifies. For example, one group might only want to 
have white rocks. Another group might suggest only igneous rocks. A third group 
might suggest collecting and identifying rocks that have been made into something 
else: chalk, key rings, paperweights, etc.. 

4) If the students have worked in groups, it will be necessary to come back 
together as a class and discuss your decisions. Come to a consensus. 

5) Tell the students that their homework assignment over the next several weeks is 
to bring in a rock that meets the requirements of their museum. Children should 
bring in the rocks and display them in egg cartons. 



Materials: "Rock Collecting" by Roma Cans, *butcher 



BEST COPY AVAiu^ 



67 



6) Have the students write labels for their museum: including an introduction 
explaining exactly what is in the museum; identification of each item in the 
museum and where it was collected; and finally, a closing label rnentioning 
what additional information is available about rocks but which is not included 
in this museum. 

Assessment: 

• Help the students go through the rules that the class has developed for the 
museum to see if each rock meets those requirements. 



Extension: 

• Invite another class into your classroom to visit the rock museum. 

• Have students develop a guided tour of the museum to encourage their public 
speaking skills. 

• Ask students to write a newspaper report about their museum. 

• Instead of selecting only one theme for the rock museum, create a changing 
exhibit program in the rock museum using the different ideas suggested by the 
students. 

• Ask students what other types of museums they can create in their classroom. 
Possible museums could be a museum of containers, fasteners, writing 
implements, etc.. 



BESTCOPYAVAILABLE 



68 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 

National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) ' ^ ■ 

reproduction RELEASE 



m 




MMResoiircuInta^ 



(Specific Document) 




II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 




Sign 

here, ^ 
please 




Documanto wffl b« processed as IfKJkatod pcwklod fBpfodiJCtlon quaPty pom 
If pennisston to reproduc® te bul r» box te chedad, docume^ 



1 hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) ^c IZtoTs a^ 

documer^as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic medm by persrms 

Its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. : Exception is made fy non^fit reproduction by Sbranes and other 
ser^ce agencies to satisfy inforwation needs of educators in. response to discrete inquiries. 




.Printed Narno/PositionmUe: 

/^Ardudf ,J\K (i 




^O) /O. 6yu1?a[4lH 






\^rf^,lpkoa^,0(fcj 





(Over) 




III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless It is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) . , 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 




However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contnbuted) to: ^ 



O 

ERLC 

(Rgy 2/2001) 



ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
4483-A Forbes Boulevard 
Lanham, Maryland 20706 

Telephone: 301-552-4200 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-552-4700 
e-mail: ericfac@ineLed.gov 
WWW: http://ericfacility.org 



