DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 367 998 



CS 214 271 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Patton, Jeannie 

Time and Technology in Native American Indian 

Literature. 

21 Nov 93 

26p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
National Council of Teachers of English (83rd, 
Pittsburgh, PA, November 17-22, 1993). 
Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Viewpoints 
(Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) (120) 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Culture; ^American Indian Literature; 
Characterization; '''Cultural Context; Novels; 
Technology; *Time 
Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 

Understanding Native American Indian literature 
requires that scholars and teachers respect the cultural matrix 
within which the literature is written. The "ceremonial motion 11 of 
time or "Indian time"— is a critical concept in Native American 
texts. When the dominant culture ! s time construct, linear or 
chronological time, superimposes on Indian characters in fiction, 
those characters exhibit patterns of illness and dislocation; 
conversely, when mythical or communal time perceptions dominate, 
characters regain health and harmony. Chronological marking of time 
leads to destruction through the development of technology that is 
out of synchronization with the mythological context of time. Leslie 
Marmon Silko ! s novel "Ceremony" provides an initial study in the 
relationship between time and technology in Native American Indian 
literature. Teachers of Native American Indian literature need to 
understand that the works unfold in several layers, and that one of 
the keystones to understanding the subtleties of the literature is to 
understand the concept of "Indian time." An appendix listing 
differences between technological peoples and native peoples is 
attached. (Author /RS) 



****************** 

Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
from the original document. * 



cs 

I> 

\o 

O Time and Technology 

in 

Native American Indian Literature 



by 

jeannie Patton 



NCTE Conference, November 21, 1993 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 



US DEPARTMENT Of EDUCATION 

OH>ce ol frducalional Researcn and Improvement 
tDUCATlONAl RESOURCES INFORMATION 

CENTER (ERIC) 
Wih.s document has been reproduced as 
\iweived Uom the person or organisation 

originating it 
[1 Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 



Points of view or opinions Stated in this docu 
ment do not necessarily represent ott.Cial 
OF HI position or pOhCy 



'PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) " 



ERIC 



2 



Patton ii 



Abstract 

Understanding Native American Indian literature requires 
that scholars respect the cultural matrix within which the 
literature is written. The "ceremonial motion" of time or 
"Indian time" — is a critical concept in Native American texts. 
When the dominant culture's time construct, linear or 
chronological, superimposes on Indian characters in fiction, 
those characters exhibit patterns of illness and dislocation; 
conversely, when mythical or communal time perceptions dominate, 
characters regain health and harmony. Chronological marking of 
time leads to destruction through the development of technology 
that is out of synchronization with the mythological context of 
time. Leslie Marmon Silko's novel Ceremony provides an initial 
study in the relationship between time and technology in Native 
American Indian literature. 



3 



Patton iii 

Outline 

Thesis: The linear construct of time is in opposition to a more 
"natural" ceremonial/mythic motion of time. Linear time and 
advanced technology go hand in hand; to the degree that 
technology removes one from ceremonial /mythic time, technology is 
destructive . 

I. "Indian time" makes sense. 

A. Spiritual and bodily needs were not separated. 

B. "Indian time" is multidimensional and mythic. 

C. "Indian time" is based on appropriateness of action. 

II. Chronological and linear notions of time contribute to 
dislocation and illness. 

A. Living in bondage to watches is disruptive. 

B. Understanding the "reality" of some literatures means 
understanding ceremonial time concepts. 

C. William Faulkner illustrates these ideas in his novels. 

D. Stress results in mythic illness. 

III. Linear time concepts are linked to the destructive 
tendencies of modern technology. 

A. Technology depends on linear time. 

B. Technology is the chief tool of the military- industrial 
complex . 

C. Technology is destructive and disconnected from the 
natural world . 

D. Technology fills the space where "spirit" once resided. 



ERIC 



4 



Patton iv 

E. Technology is not related simply to white society, but 
has its effects in the Indian world as well. 

IV. When technology's influence is undercut, the result is good 
health and harmony. 

A. Healing begins with re- integration into ceremonial 
time . 

B. The marvelous and the magical are superimposed with the 
"real" which results in healing. 

C. The story of the hero who undergoes the healing process 
must be integrated into the mythic history of the 
people for the healing to continue. 

V. Disruption of Ceremonial time, or "Indian time" has direct 
applications in the white world. 



ERLC 



5 



Patton v 

Preface 

In the pueblo cultures of the American southwest lives a 
deity, Grandmother Spider, or Spider Woman. In Leslie Marmon 
Silko's novel, Ceremony , she is named Ts' its' tsi'nako, or 
Thought -Woman. Grandmother Spider's special power is that she 
creates out of herself. The patron of weavers and storytellers, 
she is revered for rescuing people (especially coyote- -the 
trickster figure of the southwest) by throwing them a lifeline 
when trouble threatens to bring them down. Being a storyteller 
of sorts, I think of her as my totem, and revere spiders for the 
strength and delicacy of their work. 

In the plains Indians culture, particularly in the Sioux 
nations, the spider's name is Ik-tomi. The trickster figure 
himself, Ik-tomi upsets, teaches by his foolishness, and shows us 
the vanity of our human exploits; his cruelty is legendary. 

While writing this paper, I felt Ik-tomi' s nudge, because I 
felt caught up in webs; with each struggle to release myself from 
the threads of language to get to the truth of the thought, I 
entangled myself more deeply. Surely the trickster wishes to 
remind me of the limitations of my knowledge, and the vanity 
required to attempt to teach others that which one only knows 
hazily oneself. 

Pielo mayan. Ik-tomi. Waste. 



6 

ERIC 



Patton 1 



Time and Technology in Native American Indian Literature 
Once upon a time, in the land beneath our feet, sophisticated 
human beings passed through the events of their lives without time- 
pieces strapped across the pulses of their wrists. Time was marked 
by the progress of the sun and moon across the sky; events were 
remembered and planned by season, by weather, by circumstance. In 
this paradigm, people arose at the right "time" - -usually with a 
welcoming song to the sun to celebrate the gift of a new day; slept 
at the right "time" --generally when tired and when free 
circumstances allowed the rest period. 

Once upon a time, human beings ate when hungry, after having 
hunted, gathered, or grown food; they drank when thirsty and water 
was available; and they made love when lusty, hopefully with an 
available and willing partner. 

Surely this concept of time is the absolute definition of what 
constitutes happiness. 

When "time to call a meeting" arrived, individuals who arrived 
within sunrises and sunsets of each other were most certainly "on 
time" for the conference. Matters of importance came up for 
discussion as many times and for as long as was necessary- -meetings 
convened at the "starting time," and broke up when participants 
agreed that the discussion was over. Sufficient and appropriate 
time was "allocated" for thinking over important matters and 
agreements were formed at the appropriate juncture of wisdom and 
opportunity. 



ERLC 



7 



Patton 2 

The inhabitants of "once upon a time" are not fairy tale 
characters, but fully developed cultures- -Native American Indian 
Nations- -who responded to spiritual, biological, geographical and 
ceremonial rhythms of time that modern, technological societies 
lack. Prior to technological intervention, they didn't check 
watches to verify meal times, play times, or love-making times. 

Therefore, in order to understand a basic premise that 
orders much of Native American Indian literature, and because the 
dominant white culture is so deeply immersed in the matrix of 
chronological time (so much so that one checks clocks to confirm 
that not enough "time" exists for allocated tasks) , a definition 
of "Indian time" is required. Dr. Paula Gunn Allen, a celebrated 
Laguna Indian scholar who earned her Ph.D. in American Indian 
Studies, vehemently opposes "outsiders" - -that ' s white, non- tribal 
folks- -interpreting that which she feels non-natives cannot 
understand. Her definition of time, therefore, provides the 
insider's knowledgeable point of view. 

Because "the purpose of literature is clear only when the 
reader understands and accepts the assumptions on which the 
literature is based" (Allen "Ceremonial" 54) , readers must 
understand that the "traditional tribal concept of time is of 
timelessness, as the concept of space is of multidimensionality . 
In the ceremonial world the tribes inhabit, time and space are 
mythic" (147) . 

Allen credits Fred Young, a Navajo mathematician and 
physicist, with explaining the essential movement of time and 



8 



I 

Patton 3 

space; she learned that the tribal sense of "self" as a "moving 
event within a moving universe" reminds one of the physicists' 
interpretation of a particle within time and space (147) . 
Physicist Stephen W. Hawking agrees when he writes in his book, A 
Brief History of Time : "In the theory of relativity there is no 
unique absolute time, but instead each individual has his own 
personal measure of time that depends on where he is and how he 
is moving" (33) . That is, ceremonial and achronological time 
emphasize the interplay of person and event and have nothing to 
do with linear ordering. 

In her study, "The Ceremonial Motion of Indian Time," Allen 
writes that Indians base time on appropriateness of action. 
Indian people have a "ritual understanding of order and harmony. 
For an Indian, if being on time means being out of harmony with 
self and ritual, the Indian will be 'late'" (154). The ritual 
understanding of order and harmony that also includes the active 
influence of all the actors and elements of a culture's mythic 
history comprises my definition of "ceremonial time." 

If chronological time means arranging and understanding 
events in the order of their happening, Native American Indians 
certainly use chronological time as one standard for marking 
their histories. However, the traditional behavior of native 
peoples is not restricted to clocks; rather, it encompasses both 
achronological and ceremonial time referents that respond to the 
deeper rhythms of human "being." 

Try this experiment: remove your watches and any other 



ERLC 



9 



Patton 4 

time pieces to a place where you cannot see them. I predict 
that you'll feel one of two responses: either you'll grow more 
anxious as this session proceeds because you won't know the time, 
or you'll enjoy the liberation from a timepiece that has been 
strangling you today. You might fear that I will keep you too 
long, making you late for your next appointment. If your stomach 
growls, you can't check to see if meal time has arrived. Because 
we sit beneath artificial lighting in an artificially air- 
conditioned room, you won't know the time of day or night, or the 
temperature of the real world. Clocks begin to feel highly 
artificial when put into this context. 

Perhaps this temporary loss of your time-piece provides a 
glimpse into the devastating dislocation suffered by those who, 
paradoxically, do NOT subscribe primarily to chronological modes 
of organization. Your discomfort is temporary; those who live 
within "ceremonial time" suffer anxiety, dislocation, alienation 
and mental and physical illness of mythic proportions when 
trapped in a chronological paradigm that directs every action of 
the day. 

The idea that one can move into and out of ceremonial time 
is important in understanding the primary dislocation and 
alienation of the protagonists in much of Native American Indian 
literature. By looking at Tayo, the protagonist of Leslie Marmon 
Silko's brilliant novel Ceremony , students of "Indian time" will 
better understand ceremonial time in its context of healing. 

Modern Americans live in bondage to their watches- - symbols 

ERIC 



Patton 5 

of high regard for time: wasted, lost, spent, passed, marked, 
used well, bought, whatever. According to themes that reappear 
in Native American Indian literature- -not just Silko's, but of a 
variety of authors —when one forsakes linear time in order to 
enter mythological, ceremonial time, renewed spirituality and 
improved physical health result. Those characters who remain 
victims of the time machine inevitably suffer; their suffering is 
manifested in alcoholism, homelessness , lack of community 
support, emptiness and self -destructive tendencies. 

In Silko's Ceremony , the moments of ceremonial time occur 
both before and after Tayo's session with Old Betonie, when he 
joins in intercourse with Night Swan (Josiah's lover who has 
generative power) and Ts.'eh, the female spirit guide who lives on 
Mt. Taylor and as Tayo steps deeper and deeper on his physical 
wanderings to the uranium site to confront the "destroyers." His 
moments in the snowstorm, by the sandrock pools of rainwater, 
working with Robert and the spotted cattle, all set in motion by 
Old Betonie 's ceremony to counteract the modern witchery, are 
moments of ceremonial, mythic time and space which allow Tayo to 
move in ways that are blissful in their grace. 

Regarding characters and ceremonial \;ime in Native 
American literature, Allen says: 

The protagonist wanders through a series of events ( that 
might have happened years before or that might not have 
happened to him or her personally, but that nevertheless 
have immediate bearing on the situation and the 

ERJC 11 



Patton 6 

protagonist's understanding of it. ("Ceremonial" 148) 

Tribal understanding of reality directly relates to 
ceremonial time, rather than industrial, pastoral, institutional, 
theological or agricultural structuring of time (149) . Humans 
move through past and present, through events others have 
experienced, but which an individual may have not experienced 
himself, and participate in mythological events. The past is 
superimposed on the present, effectively eliminating the concept 
that the past is past. 

In canonical American literature, William Faulkner is the 
greatest practitioner of non-linear time that borders on 
ceremonial implications. (Silko herself says she was influenced 
by Faulkner's writing--Coltelli 145). Faulkner insists that the 
past continues in the present, that life's wheel rolls on dusty 
roads of memory and experience, repeating the circle with each 
round of the hoop. 

When characters are out of harmony- -usually victims of a 
structured world view that allows no quarter for daydreams, night 
chants, songlines, or other mythical movements on the grid- 
stress builds. Tayo stands powerless in the memory of Japanese 
faces who look like his Uncle Josiah. His friends and family 
enjoy few moments of true cheer- -they drink, argue, enrage each 
other. All the characters drive up and down the line, wandering, 
unable to name, much less bridge, the gap that separates the 
pueblo Indians from the cultures that would destroy all living 
beings. Human beings suffer serious illness when they operate 



ERLC 



12 



Patton 7 

within structures that remove them from ceremonial rhythms and 
spirit guides who normally participate in daily life. 

Once readers understand the relationship of non-linear time . 
with deeper patterns of human behavior, the next step is to 
connect the relationship of linear time with the destructive 
outcomes of technology. 

Technology depends absolutely on linear time. Allen 
affirms that the belief that time operates external to the 
internal workings of human and other beings, "contrasts sharply 
with ceremonial time, [which] assumes the individual as a moving 
event shaped by and shaping human and nonhuman surroundings" 
("Ceremonial" 149) . 

In his book In the Absence of the Sacred , sub-titled The 
Failure of Technology and the Survival of the Indian Nations , 
author Jerry Mander offers harsh criticism of the technological 
age, which he defines as "the information society" of 
"computerization, robotization, space travel, artificial 
intelligence, genetics, and satellite communications" (2). 

On the ore hand, Mander notes, society views most technology 
with favor, thanks to expert public relations campaigns on the 
part of the technology's inventors and the illusion that 
technology makes lives easier and work more efficient. He 
suggests that our homilies "Progress is good," "There's no 
turning back" and "Technology will free humans from disease, * 
strife, and unremitting toil" are misplaced, and that the idea 
of technology as a neutral tool is dangerously naive (2-3) , and 



ERLC 



13 



Patton 8 

that technology actually contributes to disease, strife and toil. 
Technology creates stress. Among his primary concerns are that 
technological developments are, if not the direct brain- children 
of the military-industrial complex, the bastards thereof: 

Computers, like television, are far more valuable and 
helpful to the military, to multinational 
corporations, international banking, to governments, 
and to institutions of surveillance and control-all of 
whom use this technology on a scale and with a speed 
that are beyond our imaginings- -than they ever will be 
to you and me. (3) 
He adds that in times of national crisis, the military and 
government use technologies to promote the propaganda of the 
moment, and that, for example, television is "a perfect 
instrument for the centralized control of information and 

consciousness" (3) . 

Mander's most damning words lie in his accusation that in 
the "postbiological age" of nanotechnology and robotics, 
technology's "advocates don't even pretend to care about the 
natural world. They think it's silly and out of date" (4) . 

in Ceremony . Betonie fights a new kind of witchery, "the 
cities, the tall buildings, the noise and the lights, the power 
of their weapons and machines" (169) --technology the likes of 
which the pueblo Indians had not seen before. "They had seen 
what the white people had made from the stolen land [and] tried 
to sink the loss in booze, and silence their grief with war 



Patton 9 

stories about their courage, defending the land they had already 
lost" (169) . 

While many may disagree with Mander' s premise that 
technology per se is flawed at best and evil at worst with regard 
to sensing mythic rhythms, his point is well -taken that 
technology has certainly removed human beings from original 
experience with the natural world (see Appendix for detailed 
comparisons). Few moments in anyone's daily life remain 
unmediated in some way by technology: consider that people 
enclose themselves in boxlike rooms, surrounded by "pavement, 
machinery, gigantic concrete structures. Automobiles, airplanes, 
computers, appliances, television, electric lights, and 
artificial air" (Mander 31) , and people accept these 
technological advances to be the essence of the good life. 
Rather that offering Tayo comfort, technological overload within 
the chronological time scheme contribute to his schizophrenia. 
His life is devoid of spirit- -indeed, at one point in the novel, 
he tells his doctor that everything is either dead or dying. 

Both Mander and Silko agree on this point: that the 
emptiness that results from technology filling the space where 
spirit once resided leads to chaos: 

For more than two hundred years white people had worked 
to fill their emptiness; they tried to glut the 
hollowness with patriotic wars and with great 
technology and the wealth it brought. And always they 



ERLC 



15 



Patton 10 

had been fooling themselves, and they knew it. (Silko 
191) 

Canonical literature devotes considerable attention to the 
negative results of technological age: pick up Melville's 
"Bartleby, the Scrivener" or Rebecca Harding Davis' "Life in the 
Iron-Mills" for primers. In "Bartleby, 11 the scrivener dies 
closed in a fetal position at the foot of a dark wall because he 
"preferred not to" be treated as a human xerox machine. In 
Davis' work, the back-breaking labor and emotional and spiritual 
starvation of the protagonist extends beyond Melville's thesis in 
"The Paradise of Bachelors, The Tartarus of Maids," and points to 
psychic and physical sickness that destroy body and soul. In 
England, people despised industrial revolution in technology so 
much that huge numbers of workers in cottage industries revolted, 
invaded factories and destroyed machines. They opposed what 
Langdon Winner calls "a new economic order, which they predicted 
would destroy their livelihood and traditions, and lead the world 
in a destructive direction" (qtd in Mander 37) . 

Chronological time is to technology as the second hand sweep 
is to the circle of the watch. Lock-step adherence to schedules 
and machines produces goods for the many and wealth for a 
significant few. The single individual struggles amid the 
meshing gears, and becomes defined by the totally manufactured 
world. As noted in Ceremony , Tayo hates whites for "what they 
did to the earth with their machines" (Silko 203) and for 
"destroy [ing] the feeling people have for each other" (229) . 



16 



Patton 11 

According to Silko, technology's capability for destruction 
has no peer in mankind's history. She considers her novels 
statements of "subversion" and notes that "when you confront the 
so-called mainstream, it's very inefficient, and in every way 
possible destroys you and disarms you" (Coltelli 148) . However, 
in Ceremony she warns the people not to identify technology's 
evil completely with white society. Old Betonie includes Indian 
people when he talks about the destroyers: 

The trickery of the witchcraft [is that] they want us 
to believe all evil resides with white people. Then we 
will look no further to see what is really happening. 
They want us to separate ourselves from white people, 
to be ignorant and helpless as we watch our own 
destruction. (Silko 132) . 
Elizabeth Evasdaughter points out that Betoni" would "rather see 
a separation between good and evil, starlight and blackness, than 
between Indian and white" (91) . 

Putting a particle back in motion in the moving universe 
undercuts technology's negative influence. Allen explains: 

Dancing in the midst of turning, whirling hoops is a 
means of transcending the limits of chronological time 
and its traumatizing, disease-causing effects. 
Chronological time denies that an individual is one 
with the surroundings. The hoop dancer dances within 
what encircles him, demonstrating how the people live 



ERLC 



17 



Patton 12 

in motion within the circling spirals of time and 

space. ("Ceremonial" 150) 
In Ceremony , Tayo is the moving particle (protagonist) on 
the background grid (setting) . Quite literally, Tayo meanders 
from event to event. On the one hand, some members of his 
community want to lock him in the mental ward because of his 
less-than-efficient (e.g. too slow) recovery from battle fatigue; 
however, Tayo's relationship to the deeper ritual life of the 
tribe is more critical than an immediate, efficient "cure." His 
inability to recover, to perform in the rhythmless world of the 
whites, results from of his inability to participate in healing 

ceremonial time. 

When Betonie literally sets Tayo within circles of time and 
events that preceded him, Tayo's healing process begins. His 
wanderings put him in full participation with events that 
happened before him, with the spiritual soul of his people, with 
the rhythm of the earth itself. He travels in the four sacred 
directions (though he appears not to be conscious of that) , which 
brings him to the locus of the native people's deepest 
disruption. Trinity site, the place of the first atomic bomb 
explosion, lies only 300 miles from him, and "the top-secret labs 
where the bomb had been created sat deep in the Jemez Mountains, 
on land the Government took from Cochiti Pueblo" (Silko 246) . He 
participates in the convergence of cultures and worlds, and sees 
all humans "united by a circle of death that devoured people in 
cities 12,000 miles away" (246). 



9 

ERIC 



18 



Patton 13 

The understanding of the horrific results of technology's 
power- -the ability to eliminate all living beings with 
computerized efficiency- -merges with Tayo's renewed sense of 
ceremonial time. He sees how all the stories fit together, and 
understands that he participates in the ever-spinning present: a 
place where the "world has no boundaries, only transitions 
through all distances and time" (246) . The "witchery" he 
confronts is the violence and dislocation of the "destroyers," 
achieved by their distancing from ceremonial motions of time for 
the technological benefits of chronological time. The people 
have experienced Tayo's kind of enlightenment before. Tayo's 
grandmother recognizes an old tale when she hears his story: 
Old Grandma shook her head slowly, and closed her 
cloudy eyes again. "I guess I must be getting old," 
she said, "because these goings-on-around Laguna don't 
get me excited any more." She sighed, and laid her 
head back on the chair. "It seems like I already heard 
these stories before . . . only thing is, the names 
sound different. (260) 
In her article "Henry James, Meet Spider Woman," Mary Slowik 
studies the narrative form in Ceremony , noting that two modes 
exist: the magical and real, as evidenced by Silko's positioning 
Indian tales, specifically the Reed Woman/Corn Woman contention 
over water, as independent chapters with the realist text. In 
the first half of Ceremony , the tales interrupt the narrative 
line, while in the later half — during the Fly and Hummingbird 



19 



Patton 14 

stories- -they become superimposed on the main narrative, playing 
off and shaping each other (106) . This is exactly the 
perf ormance of ceremonial time in the text: the marvelous and the 
real become one with each other, resulting in harmony and 
healing. This superimposition takes "time" and cosmic 
understanding that transcends daily reality. 

With Tayo's healing accomplished, he sits among the tribal 
elders to tell his story, thus joining his personal epic to the 
tribal' s mythic and communal history. His journey results in 
healing lessons for his people, and his experience provides 
medicine for those who can understand and live its message. His 
tale becomes a manual for physical survival, and "puts him at the 
center of a web of communal storytelling" (Slowik 112) . His 
actions enter ceremonial time where "space and time are not 
abstract categories of mind but physical realities known through 
practical knowledge passed on by many speakers to many listeners" 
(112) . 

Remember Paula Gunn Allen's observation that humans move 
through past and present, through events others have experienced, 
but which an individual may have not experienced himself, and 
participate in mythological events. The past is superimposed on 
the present, effectively eliminating the concept that the past is 
a historical referent only. At the end of Ceremony Tayo's story 
merges with all the others of his people, becoming part of the 
eternal present. 

According to A. LaVonne Brown Ruoff, general editor of the 



20 



Patton 15 

American Indian Lives series, and specialist on literature 
written in English by American Indians: 

Scholars and teachers cannot approach Indian 
literatures from the western European critical 
traditions in which they have been trained. Instead 
they must approach them from the religious, social, and 
literary traditions of American Indian cultures that 
influence these literatures. (3) 
In her work, "Special Problems in Teaching Leslie Marmon 
Silko's Ceremony," Allen argues that "teaching a native text 
without recourse to ethnographic as well as historical glossing 
is an exercise in obscurity, because texts . . . are firmly 
embedded within the matrix of their cultural base" (379) . 

Therefore, it is essential that teachers of Native American 
Indian literature understand that the works unfold on several 
layers, and that one of the keystones to understanding the 
subtleties of the literature is to understand the concept of 
"Indian time" as ceremonial time; and, finally to know that the 
concept of white linear, chronological time is anathema to mythic 
participation in life and the communal history of the people. 

Further, educators must link the concept of time awareness 
to contemporary readers by pointing out that all people suffer 
this dislocation- -not only Native American Indians. We do native 
literatures a disservice if we relegate their themes to a 
specific cultural world view, rather than assimilate their truths 
within our systems. As I mentioned previously, anglo-American 



21 



Patton 16 

writers also consider these themes regarding the inherent 
destructiveness of modern technology- -and literature is nothing 
if not a commentary on and a redefinition of "truth." 

Should you care to, please strap your watches back onto the 
pulse points of your wrists. Our time together is finished. 
Wopila. Hetchetu welo . 



ERIC 



22 



Patton 17 

APPENDIX 

According to Jerry Mander, native societies and technologized 
societies demonstrate a variety of differences in how they view the 
world. Following is Mander's Table of Inherent Differences, 
covering pages 215 through 219 of In the Ab sence of the Sacred, 



Technological Peoples 



Native Peoples 



ECONOMICS 



Concept of private property a ba- 
sic value: includes resources, 
land, ability to buy and sell, and 
inheritance. Some state owner- 
ship. Corporate ownership 
predominates. 

Goods produced mosdy for sale, 
not for personal use. 

Surplus production, profit mo- 
tive essential. Sales techniques 
must create "need," hence 
advertising. 

Economic growth required, espe- 
cially in capitalist societies, hence 
need for increased production, 
increased use of resources, ex- 
pansion of production and mar- 
ket territories. 

Currency system — abstract 
value. 

Competition (in capitalist coun- 
tries), production for private 
gain. Reward according to task/ 
wages. 

Average workday, 8-12 hours. 
Nature viewed as "resource." 



No private ownership of re- 
sources such as land, water, min- 
erals, or plant life. No concept of 
selling land. No inheritance. 



Goods produced for use value. 



Subsistence goals: no profit mo- 
tive, little surplus production. 



Steady-state economics: no con- 
cept of economic growth. 



Barter system — concrete value. 



Cooperative, collective 
production. 



Average workday 3-5 hours. 

Nature viewed as "being"; hu- 
mans seen as part of nature. 



ERLC 



23 



Patton 18 



Technological Peoples 



Native Peoples 



POLITICS AND POWER 



Hierarchical political forms. 



Decisions generally made by ex- 
ecutive power, majority rule, or 
dictatorship. 

Spectrum from representative 
democracy to autocratic rule. 

Operative political modes are 
communist, socialist, monarchist, 
capitalist, or fascist. 

Centralization: most power con- 
centrated in central authorities. 



Laws are codified, written. Ad- 
versarial process. Anthropocen- 
trism forms basis of law. 
Criminal cases judged by 
strangers (in U.S., western Eu- 
rope, Soviet Union). No taboo. 



Mostly non-hierarchical: "chiefs" 
have no coercive power. 

Decisions usually based on con- 
sensual process involving whole 
tribe. 

Direct participatory democracy; 
rare examples of autocracy. 

Recognizable operative political 
modes are anarchist, communist, 
or theocratic. 

Decentralization: power resides 
mainly in community, among 
people. (Some exceptions include 
Incas, Aztec, et al.) 

Laws transmitted orally. No ad- 
versarial process. Laws inter- 
preted for individual cases. 
"Natural law" used as basis. 
Criminal cases settled by groups 
of peers known to "criminal." 
Taboo. 



Concept of "state." 



Identity as "nation.' 



ERLC 



SOCIOCULTURAL ARRANGEMENTS AND 
DEMOGRAPHICS 



Large-scale societies; most socie- 
ties have high population density. 



Lineage mostly patrilineal. 



Nuclear two- or one-parent fam- 
ilies; also "tingles." 



Small-scale societies, all people 
acquainted; low population 
density. 

Lineage mostly matrilineal, with 
some variation; family property 
rights run through female. 

Extended families: generations, 
sometimes many families, live 
together. 

?A 



Patton 19 



Technological Peoples 



Native Peoples 



Revere the young. 

History written in books, por- 
trayed in television docudramas. 



Revere the old. 

History transmitted in oral tradi- 
tion, carried through memory. 



RELIGION AND PHILOSOPHY 



Separation of spirituality from 
rest of life in most Western cul- 
tures (though not in some Mus- 
lim, Hindu, or Buddhist states); 
church and state separated; ma- 
terialism is dominant philosophy 
in Western countries. 

Either monotheistic concept of 
single, male god, or atheistic. 

Futuristic/linear concept of time; 
de-emphasis of past. 

The dead are regarded as gone. 

Individuals gain most informa- 
tion from media, schools, author- 
ity figures outside their 
immediate community or 
experience. 

Time measured by machines; 
schedules dictate when to do 
things. 



Spirituality integrated with all 
aspects of daily life. 



Polytheistic concepts based on 
nature, male and female forces, 
animism. 

Integration of past and present. 



The dead are regarded as 
present. 

Individuals gain information 
from personal experiences. 



Time measured by awareness ac- 
cording to observance of nature; 
time to do something is when 
time is right. 

Sharing and giving. 



Saving and acquiring. 

It is important to note that the characteristics on each side of this chart 
form an internally consistent logic. In politics, for example, hierarchical 
power makes a great deal more sense for operating a large-scale techno- 
logical society in widely separated parts of the world than does a consen- 
sual decision-making process, which is much too slow to keep pace with 
machinery, electronics, and the need to grow and expand. In relation to 
the environment, the notion of "humans above nature" is more fitting for 
technological cultures, and for capitalism in particular, than "humans 
within nature," which throws wrenches in the wheels of progress. 



?5 



, - Patton 20 

Works Cited 

Allen, Paula Gunn. "The Ceremonial Motion of Indian Time: Long 
Ago, So Far." The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in 
America n Indian Traditions . Boston: Beacon Press, 1986. 
147-154. 

"Special Problems in Teaching Leslie Marmon Silko's 
Ceremony . " The American Indian Quarterly 14 (Fall, 1990): 
379-386. 

Coltelli, Laura. Winged Words: American Indian Writers Speak . 

Lincoln: U of NB P, 1990. 
Evasdaugher, Elizabeth N. "Leslie Marmon Silko's Ceremony : 

Healing Ethnic Hatred by Mixed-Breed Laughter." MELUS 15 

(1988) : 83-95. 

Hawking, Stephen W. A Brief History of Time: From the Big Bang 
to__ Black Holes . NY: Bantam, 1988 . 

Mander, Jerry. In The Absence of The Sacred: The Failure of 

Technol ogy & the Survival of the Indian Nations . San 

Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1992. 
Ruoff, A. LaVonne Brown. "American Indian Literatures: 

Introduction and Bibliography." American Studies 

International 24 (Oct. 198S) : 2-52. 
Silko, Leslie Marmon. Ceremony . NY: Penguin, 1977. 
Slowik, Mary. "Henry James, Meet Spider Woman: A Study of 

Narrative Form in Leslie Silko's Ceremony." North Dakota 

Quarterly Spring (1988): 104-120. 

?6 

ERJC 



