DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 403 952 



JC 970 115 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Northampton Community College, Exploring America's 
Communities. Progress Report. 

Northampton Community Coll., Bethlehem, PA. 

American Association of Community Colleges, 
Washington, DC.; National Endowment for the 
Humanities (NFAH) , Washington, D.C. 

Jan 97 

lip.; In: National Conference on American Pluralism 
and Identity Program Book (New Orleans, LA, January 
18-19, 1997); see JC 970 087. 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Studies; *Black Studies; Community Colleges; 
^Cultural Pluralism; Culture; Curriculum Development; 
*Mul ticultural Education; Textbooks; ^Thematic 
Approach; Two Year Colleges; ,v United States History; 
^United States Literature 
Northampton Community College PA 



ABSTRACT 

In 1996, Northampton Community College (Pennsylvania) 
participated in the Exploring America's Communities project sponsored 
by the American Association of Community Colleges. The project works 
to strengthen the teaching and learning of American history, 
literature, and culture at U.S. community colleges. One of the major 
goals of the project is the revision of two literature classes: one 
course was expanded to include more works by Native American, 
African-American, Hispanic-Amer ican, and As i an- American writers; and 
the other, an African-American literature class, was altered to 
broaden understanding about what it means to be an American. 

Revisions in the general literature class were made through the 
inclusion of new textbooks, new instructional approaches, and new 
course themes. Throughout the semester, the instructor was able to 
integrate conversations around the issues of pluralism, American 
identity, commonalties, and differences by encouraging small group 
discussions held before class and by hosting a lecture by a guest 
speaker. Students responded positively to this thematic approach to 
reading and discussing literature. The African-American literature 
class emphasized classroom discussions on American identity in 
African-American literature and the addition of new themes to the 
course. In the spring, the course syllabus will be revised to include 
more readings and expand discussion about cultural pluralism. Course 
materials, including a syllabus, bibliography, exam materials, and 
paper topics, are included. (HAA) 



* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * ?V * :V * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made K 

* from the original document. * 

* * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * »'c * ?'c * * * * * * * * * * * * * Ve ft * * * * * * ?V * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * * 



511 Obb Ol 



Northampton Community College 
Exploring America’s Communities 
Progress Report 



U.8. DEPARTMENT Or EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improveme n t 



EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 



4 



This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 



□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 



“PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

J. Gollat tscheck 



a Points of view or opinion s atated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC).” 



In: National Conference on American Pluralism and Identity Program Book 
(New Orleans, LA, January 18-19, 1997) 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

. /; 




rtofZ.TH' AWti O'* COMM<JrJ, r ^ CO t TUieT^ 1 K P*'« 

Exploring America’s Communities: In Quest of Common Ground 

Progress Report 
Sharon Gavin Levy 
December 1996 

My work on the AACC grant has focused primarily on two areas: coor dinat i n g the professional 
development presentations by Dr. Eleanor Tignor and Liza Fiol-Matta; and revising my English 
15 1 * literature option* course and English 265G, African -American literature. 

Professional Development 

Dr. Eleanor Tignor conducted an all-day professional development presentation on Tuesday, 
October 22, 1996 on African- American literature. Faculty from the Arts and Science division as 
well as college a dminis trative staff attended the workshop. Many faculty indicated this was one of 
the most beneficial professional development days held for English faculty. Dr. Tignor’ s 
presentation and handouts were excellent. 

Liza Fiol-Matta, Dr. Tignor’ s colleague at LaGuardia, is scheduled to facilitate an all-day 
professional development workshop on Hispanic literature and culture Thursday, March 6, 1997, 
for Arts and Science faculty. I am coordinating this presentation with Dr. Fiol-Matta now to 
ensure that its format and content respond to the needs of our faculty. 

Course Revisions Initiative 

A major goal of this project is revising En glis h 151 (literature optical) to include more works by 
Native American, African-American, Hispanic- American and Asian- American writers, and 
revising English 265G, African- Ame rican Literature, to broaden understanding about what it 
means to be Ameri can In both courses, changes were designed to initiate conversations about 
American plu ralism and identity and to explore individual and collective commonalities and 
differences. To this end, I implemented the following: 

English 151 

I revised the English 151 course this fall semester, used a new textbook, and employed new 
instructional approaches with my students. I treated this semester as an experimental one because I 
wanted to “test” new strategies before sharing than with other faculty who teach the course. In 
previous semesters I taught the course by genre, but I felt I could best examine the concepts of 
plurality and identity if I taught literature by themes. Therefore, I divided the course into four 
major thematic topics: Initiation and identity. War, peace, freedom and justice; Love and 
relationships; and Family. Within each thematic subject, I assigned works by male and female 



writers from diverse cultural backgrounds. In addition, I also included nonfiction (essays and 
speeches particularly), for the first time . The tex t, Legacies edited by Bogard and Schmidt, was 
very helpful because it’s org anize d by themes and contains an extensive number of multi cultural 
works. 

Throughout the semester I was able to integrate conversations around the issues of plu ralism , 
American identity, commonalities and differences in the following ways: 

1. Before discussing a particular work or theme , I asked students to talk in small groups 
about a specific subject or question. For example, I asked them to discuss “what it means 
to be an adult, what is a man or what is a woman ” in preparation for works on initiation 
into adulthood. We talked about the “ Ameri can dream” and its me aning to students in 
the class, indi vid uals from different cultural groups and economic classes, and to 
individ uals throughout thi s nation’s history as we moved into our works related to peace 
and justice. This approach was used successfully throughout the semester. 

2. The lecture by Michael Eric Dyson provided a wonderful opportunity for students to 
sham their ideas about contemporary issues related to identity, inclusion, differences and 
isolation. I assigned several essays for students to read prior to Dr. Dyson’s visit on 
October 17, 1 996. Students were also given a writing assignment that required them to 
write an evaluative paper on the lecture and one essay. In addition, the class discussed at 
l eng th the lecture, the issues raised, and their perspective and response to Dyson’s thesis. 
Students raved about the Dyson lecture; many indicated it was the best lecture they 

had ever attended and others said it was the first tim e they had not fallen asleep during a 
lecture. This activity not only enhanc ed my endeavor to help students explore the concept 
of Ameri can pluralism and identity, but it also raised conversations around the issue of 
generational differences and commonalities. 

Students responded favorably to this thematic approach to reading and discussing literature. 
Responses to the question “What is your reaction to reading and discussing literature thematically” 
included the following: 

“Students can leam more about famous writers and while reading their works, they can 
find issues of their own lives seen by the author’s character.” 

“I like how you split up the different themes (relationships, family, etc.). It really helped 
me understand how different stories of the same subject could be sometimes 
diffe f pnt/ g f»mi>tirm>a the same. I lilfftd the discussions in class about the different themes. 

It really made me understand that people see the literature in a different way than I did.” 



“I fo und that reading and discussing literature thematically helps me to understand the 
commonalities of people and their situations. It also helped me focus on the theme of the 
story and cleared up some confusion.” 

“It really helped me out within my own lifestyle...” 

The course’s design and approach also facilitated conversations around American pluralism, 
American identity , and commonalities and divisions within society. Students were asked to 

respond to the question “How has work in this class changed your view about . 

literature,specificallyy American literature, the American experience, and your American identity” 
AnH responses included the following: 

“The literature we read helped me to realize even more the commonalities and differences 
in society....What I really enjoyed was finally getting to be taught some African-American 

literature...” 

“Since I am not American, for me personally, almost all of the works were new issues 
about American society. Reading about literature helped me a lot to discover 
commonalities within American society.” 



“I think American literature is very diverse and that diversity reflects society. 

“It has given me a different perspective on racial situations. I’ve definitely gained better 
insight on the problems that can occur between people of different cultures. It has also 
given me a greater respect of people of different ethnic backgrounds.” 

“Everyone sees thin gs pretty much alike when it comes to family and relationships. 

Families in America are pretty much alike theses days.” 

“I have learned that there are a lot of problems, too many to list, in this world but an 
individual can make a difference in controlling his own world.” 

In summary, I am pleased with my initial endeavors to revise English 151. Student evaluations as 
well as my assessment of the quality of classroom discussion indicate that this approach can 
greatly enhance the course. The revisions implemented this fall not only facilitated the 
conversation on American pluralism and commonalities, but created a true sense of community 
among the students enrolled in the course. Once they began t alki ng among themselves, that became 
their expectation. I observed as they shared ideas and ideals, questioned values, challenged points 
of view, sought consensu s, and struggled to make meaning in their conversation, I applaud this 
looming environment and will continue my work in this direction. 



En glish 2 6 SG - African-American Literature 

During the fall, my emphas is was on classroom discussions around the experience of African- 
American people in the United States. I focused on several major t heme s: the quest for freedom, 
the quest for equality, the quest for identity and visibility, and the quest for self-actualization. 
Since the literature in this course is written by African-American writers, I used the classroom 
conversations to explore the issues of commonalities and divisions. For example, the concept of 
equality for Afri can - Americans was discussed in the context of equality for women and the 
Women’s Rights movement; conversations around oppression and disc riminat ion considered bias 
based up gender, and class as well as race; and the class e xamin ed societal influen ces on men and 
women fr o m diffe rent racial and cultural backgrounds. Through this approach, students explored 
the literature in its historical, social and cultural context. Further, they were able to draw from 
their individual perspectives and experiences, and become more aware of the experience of 
African-Americans. 



One assi gnm ent that was particularly effective required students to research an African-American 
writer’s life and times, works, artistic experience, and reception by the public and critics. 

Students then shared their work through an oral presentation in class. Students gained tremendous 
insight into the writer they studied and most used that individual as a frame of reference when 
discussing other writers and their works. This was an important experience because I observed 
students forming an important “connection” with their writer and his/her experiences. 

Since one of the course goals is for students to understand more fully African-American life, 
culture and literature and the values and viewpoints expressed in the literature, students were 
asked to discuss new insights about African-American people and American literature, the 
American experience and their American identity on the final exam. Some of their responses 
follow: 



u I have learned that there is a huge body of work that I have not been exposed to, nor just 
by African Americans, but the books I chose for myself to read before and the books I will 
choose in the future are different now. There is so much to leam about America and its 
different people and why people are the way they are; I have a lot to accomplish.” 

tt I can actually say that this class has had an effect on the way I look at t hing s, both 
culturally, socially and historically.” 

“By studying African-American literature a person can leam about the culture and 
experience of African-Americans. There are enormous racial and gender divisions within 
this country, however there are also commonalities. By reading African-American 
literature this semester I learned about their rich heritage. If I could choose three words 
to describe the impression I got for the material we read they would be: stre ng t h , 
determination and love... .” 



“My view of American literature has changed... My view of the American experience has 
been expanded by this course. As far as my American identity goes, I think I am lucky to 
be a part of a great melting pot that has so many beautifully different parts.” 

In spring 1997, 1 will revise the English 265G course syllabus. The goal is to identify works that 
can be used to supplement the course texts so conversations around American pluralism and 
identity can be expanded. 



AACC\EXPLORING AMERICA'S COMMUNITIES Project: Progress 
Report 

American Literature I Survey Course 
Taught by: Dr. Len Roberts 
Northampton Community College 
Bethlehem, PA 18017 

Following are some of the specific activities used to 
incorporate multicultural literature into the American 
Literature I course: 

I . SYLLABUS : many multicultural works were newly 

incorporated into the American Literature I syllabus, 
including the following works: 

....CREATION OF THE WHITES (Yuchi) 

Christopher Columbus, from JOURNAL OF THE FIRST VOYAGE TO 
AMERICA, 1492-1493 

Samuel de Champlain, front THE VOYAGES TO THE GREAT RIVER ST. 
LAWRENCE, 1608-1612: AN ENCOUNTER WITH THE IROQUOIS; from 
THE VOYAGES OF 1615: CHAMPLAIN, AMONG THE HURON, LOST IN THE 
WOODS 

Alvar Nunez Cabeza de Vaca, from RELATION OF ALVAR NUNEZ 
CABEZA DE VACA: CHAPTER VII, CHAPTER VIII, CHAPTER X, 

CHAPTER XI 

John Smith, from CHAPTER 2: SMITH AS CAPTIVE AT THE COURT OF 
POWHATAN IN 1608 

Mary White Rowlandson, from A NARRATIVE OF THE CAPTIVITY AND 
RESTAURATION OF MRS. MARY ROWLANDSON (Removes 1, 2, 3, and 
20 ) 

Handsome Lake (Seneca) , HOW AMERICA WAS DISCOVERED 

John Smith, from A DESCRIPTION OF NEW ENGLAND 

Don Antonio de Otermin, LETTER ON THE PUEBLO REVOLT OF 1680 

THE COMING OF THE SPANISH AND THE PUEBLO REVOLT (Hopi) 

J. Hector St. John de Crevecoeur, from LETTER III: WHAT IS 
AN AMERICAN? 



Thomas Jefferson, from QUERY XVIII: MANNERS ... THE EFFECT OF 
SLAVERY 



(continued) 



AACC Progress Report, page two 

Benjamin Franklin, REMARKS CONCERNING THE SAVAGES OF NORTH 
AMERICA; ON THE SLAVE-TRADE 

Olaudah Equiano, from THE INTERESTING NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE 
OF OLAUDAH EQUIANO, OR GUSTAVUS VASSA, THE AFRICAN, WRITTEN 
BY HIMSELF (Chapters 1 and 2) 

Frederick Douglass, NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE OF FREDERICK 
DOUGLASS, AN AMERICAN SLAVE 

Part three of the course outline for American Literature I 
was also rewritten to incorporate the newly included 
multicultural perspective, as follows: 

3 . ) Trace and discuss cultural and historical ideas 
inherent in the literature studied, including the 
contrasting perspectives of Native Americans and the New 
World settlers; the development of the New Adam in the New 
World; the emergence of materialism in the Enlightenment 
Period, and a subsequent rationale for slavery; the role of 
slavery and the Abolitionist movement in an expanding 
country; the re-emergence of the New Adam in the Romantic 
period, among others. 

2 . BIBLIOGRAPHY WHICH INCLUDES MANY MULTICULTURAL SECONDARY 
SOURCES FOR AMERICAN LITERATURE I (see attached) . This 
bibliography includes the following sections: 

a. General: Re-Evaluations of the American Literature 
"Canon" 

b. General : Critical Works about the Puritan Period and 
Its Writers 

c. General: Critical Works about the Englightenment 

Period and Its Writers 

d. General: Critical Works about . the Romantic Period and 

Its Writers 

e. General: Critical Works about Native American Writers 

f. General: Critical Works about Latino American Writers 

g. General: Critical Works about Afro-American Writers 

h. Individual Writers: Critical Works about Individual 

Writers 




(continued) 



AACC Progress Report, page three 

3. MIDTERM AND FINAL EXAMS (see attached): in addition to 

. ... including quotations from multicultural works to be 

identified, exams also included essay questions which 
questioned students' knowledge of the inter-relationships of 
works both within and without the "Canon, " as is 
demonstrated in the following essay questions: 

a. Choosing four representative texts, one Native 
American, one Spanish, one English (Puritan) , and another 
English (Enlightenment), compare and contrast the religious, 
political, and cultural values they reflect. Be sure to 
consider the individual text's evaluation of such topics as 
God, nature, and man, where applicable. 

b. Compare and contrast the cultural purposes and 
literary styles (including genre choice) of the following: 

1.) a Native American tale (which could include the Hopi 
account of "The Coming of the Spanish and the Pueblo 
Revolt"; 2.) Mary Rowlandson's "A Narrative of the Captivity 
and Restauration of Mrs. Mary Rowlandson"; 3.) Jonathan 
Edwards' "Sinners in the Hands of an Angry God"; and 4.) 
Benjamin Franklin's THE AUTOBIOGRAPHY. Be sure to consider 
why these, works were written, and to note why the authors 
selected the specific genre (type of literature) they did. 

c. Please discuss the similarities and dissimilarities 
between Benjamin Franklin's AUTOBIOGRAPHY and Frederick 
Douglass's NARRATIVE, being sure to mention the writers' 
attitudes toward self, nature, society, and God. 

4. HANDOUT: SOME POSSIBLE PAPER TOPICS FOR AMERICAN 
LITERATURE I . Many of these topics encourage the students 
to draw relationships between works produced by various 
multicultural groups (see attached) . Two examples will 
demonstrate : 

a. Choose FOUR of the following, and compare and contrast 

the perspectives they offer on what Christianity has meant 
to different peoples at particular historical moments. Be 
as specific as possible in your references to the relevant 
texts: Hopi; Yuchi ; Carlos Jose Delgado; Mary Rowlandson; 

Cotton Mather; Jonathan Edwards; Don Antonio de Otermin; 
Olaudah Equiano/Gustavas Vassa; Samson Occum; Chief Seattle; 
Thomas Jefferson; Frederick Douglass. 

b. Images of the New World. Itemize the images used by 
Columbus, Cabeza de Vaca, and John Smith as they attempt to 
characterize the New World for their European readers . 

Think critically about ways the images might have influenced 




(continued) 



AACC Progress Report, page four 



a reader. Write a brief paper, about three pages, that 
addresses this question: Do Columbus, de Vaca, and Smith 

use images to present reliable descriptions or to manipulate 
readers? 

5 . MIDTERM TAKE-HOME ASSIGNMENT MEANT TO ENCOURAGE 
STUDENTS' DIALOGUE ABOUT THEIR MULTICULTURAL READINGS WITH 
THEIR FAMILY MEMBERS AND FRIENDS. (PLEASE SEE ATTACHED 
RESPONSES . ) 

Now that you have read various accounts of slavery (as in 
Olaudah Equiano, Frederick Douglass, and Thomas Jefferson) 
please ask your family members and/or friends what they 
think about the issue of slavery. After recording their 
comments, evaluate them and try to determine whether they 
represent a Puritan, Englightenment , or Romantic view, 
according to the general characteristics of each age as 
discussed in class. 

6. END- OF- SEMESTER TAKE-HOME ASSIGNMENT MEANT TO ENCOURAGE 
STUDENTS TO EVALUATE WHETHER OR NOT THE AMERICAN LITERATURE 
I COURSE CHANGED THEIR VIEW ABOUT AMERICAN LITERATURE, THE 
AMERICAN EXPERIENCE, AND THEIR AMERICAN IDENTITY. (PLEASE 
SEE ATTACHED RESPONSES . ) 

How has the work in this course, such as readings, writing 
assignments, or class discussion, changed your view about 
American literature, the American experience, and your 
American identity? (Please address all three sub- tocpics . ) 

For example, have any of the works presented this semester 
helped you to discover, or become more aware of, 
commonalities and/or divisions within our society? If yes, 
how have such discoveries shaped your new view of what it 
means to be an American? 



7 . ONE IN-CLASS METHOD FOR TEACHING COMMONALITIES BETWEEN 
WORKS FROM VARIOUS CULTURAL GROUPS IN AMERICAN LITERATURE I. 
(PLEASE SEE ATTACHED RESPONSES.) 

8. SUMMARY OF STUDENT RESPONSES TO THE MULTICULTURAL WORKS OF 
LITERATURE INCLUDED IN AMERICAN LITERATURE I. 






(/.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



<Wo IIS' 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 



ERIC 



