DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 457 351 



CE 082 363 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Imel, Susan 

Adult Education for Native Americans. Trends and Issues 
Alert No. 28. 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Adult, Career, and Vocational 
Education, Columbus, OH. 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

2001 - 00-00 
4p • 

ED- 9 9 -CO- 00 13 

For full text: http://www.ericacve.org/fulltext.asp. 

ERIC Publications (071) -- Reference Materials -. 

Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

Acculturation; * Adult Education; ♦American Indian Culture; 
♦American Indian Education; American Indian Languages; 
American Indian Studies; * American Indians; Cognitive Style; 
♦Culturally Relevant Education; Educational Methods; 
Educational Research; Educational Theories; Independent 
Study; Personal Narratives; Postsecondary Education; 

Research Methodology; Research Needs; Story Telling; Theory 
Practice Relationship; Transformative Learning 



ABSTRACT 



In recent years, adult education for Native Americans has 
reflected broader goals and has been concerned with playing a role in 
preserving native language and culture rather than encouraging assimilation. 
These four trends appear in the literature related to adult education for 
Native Americans: how adult education theories and methods such as 
transformative learning, use of narrative, and self -directed learning apply; 
identifying and acknowledging learning styles of Native American adults; 
approaches to conducting research with Native Americans in their communities; 
and identifying strategies for helping Native American adults achieve success 
in postsecondary and higher education. The diffuse nature of the literature 
on adult education for Native Americans is a serious issue. The literature 
base lacks depth; no strands of research and theory building can be detected; 
the literature does not seem to build on itself; and the topics of race and 
culture with regard to Native Americans have received insufficient attention. 
(Contains 21 resources that reflect the diffuse nature of the literature on 
adult education for Native Americans.) ( YLB) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 





Adult Education for Native Americans 
Trends and Issues Alert No. 28 



Susan Imel 



u- »• UtPAHlMENT OF EDUCATION 
Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
J . CENTER (ERIC) 

H This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Pomls of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



ERIC Clearinghouse on Adult, Career, and Vocational Education 
Center on Education and Training for Employment 
College of Education 
The Ohio State University 
1900 Kenny Road 
Columbus, OH 43210-1090 



2 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




by Susan Imei 
2001 




Historically, most adult education for Native Americans was tied to 
the goal of assimilation and was aimed toward individual economic 
improvement. In the 1950s, for example, programs designed to im- 
prove adult English literacy and provide adult vocational training 
were introduced (Szasz 1999). In recent years, adult education for 
Native Americans has reflected broader goals and has been con- 
cerned with playing a role in preserving native language and culture 
rather than encouraging assimilation (e.g., Lockard 1999; Schultz 
and Kroeger 1996; Still Smoking 1999). 

Several trends appear in the literature related to adult education for 
Native Americans. How adult education theories and methods such 
as transformative learning, the use of narrative, and self-directed 
learning apply in Native American adult education is one trend 
(Atleo and James 2000; Beck 2000; Garrett 1996; Luna and Cullen 
1997). Another trend relates to identifying and acknowledging learn- 
ing styles of Native American adults (Aragon 1998; Guerrero 1999). 
Approaches to conducting research with Native Americans in their 
communities is a third trend (Castleden and Kurszewski 2000; Day, 
Blue, and Raymond 1998). A fourth trend is identifying strategies 
for helping Native American adults achieve success in postsecond- 
ary and higher education (Aragon 2000; Guerrero 1999; St. Pierre 
1998; Yurkovich 2001). 

The diffuse nature of the literature on adult education for Native 
Americans is a serious issue. It is true that a number of sources are 
available, but the literature base itself lacks depth. No strands of 
research and theory building can be detected: the literature does 
not seem to build on itself. The topics of race and culture have 
received attention in the literature of adult education during the 
past decade. It appears, however, that Native Americans have not 
yet received the attention that other groups, such as African Ameri- 
cans, have. Before the field of adult education can serve Native 
Americans adequately, this deficiency must be addressed. 

Resources 

Aragon, S. R. “A Conceptual Framework of Learning for Native 
American Adult Learners.” In Academy of Human Resource 
Development Conference Proceedings, Oak Brook, Illinois, 
March 4-8, 1998, edited by R. J. Torraco. (ED 428 252) 

A framework for designing, developing, and implementing formal 
educational experiences for Native American adult learners is pro- 
posed. The framework is based on an assessment of Native Ameri- 
can adult learning styles from community college and university set- 
tings representing tribes ffom across the United States and Canada. 

Aragon, S. R., ed. Beyond Access: Methods and Models for Increas- 
ing Retention and. Learning Among Minority Students. New 
Directions for Community Colleges no. 112. San Francisco, CA: 
Jossey-Bass, Winter 2000. (ED 449 837) 

Alternative models, approaches, and perspectives to consider in 
working with ethnic minority students are offered in this volume. 
Among issues addressed are assessment, career and educational goals, 
learning enhancement, success courses, mentoring programs, edu- 
cational technology, and the integration of nonminority instructors 
into the minority environment. 

Atleo, M. R., and James, A. “Oral Tradition — A Literacy for Life- 
long Learning: Native American Approaches to Justice and 
Wellness Education.” In AERC 2000: An International Confer- 
ence . Proceedings of the 41st Annual Adult Education Research 
Conference , British Columbia, June 2-4, 2000, edited by T. J. 
Sork, V-L. Chapman, and R. St. Clair, pp. 535-536. Vancouver: 



University of British Columbia, 2000. www.edst.educ.ubc.ca/aerc/ 
2000/atleom&jamesa-web.htm 

Native American oral tradition provides a literacy for lifelong learn- 
ing that promotes perspective transformation. This approach is par- 
ticularly suited to justice and wellness education because partici- 
pants engage multiple ways of being and knowing. Oral traditions 
can be understood in the context of transformative learning that 
has implications for adult education. 

Beck, D. R. M. “Native American Education in Chicago: Teach 
Them Truth.” Education and Urban Society 32, no. 2 (February 
2000): 237-255. 

Following an overview of the historical development of the Chicago 
Native American community, the origins of the Native American 
Educational Services (NAES) College in Chicago are described. 
Discusses how adult education with its focus on transformation and 
consciousness raising has had an impact on the way education is 
viewed at NAES College. 

Castleden, H., and Kurszewski, D. “Re/searchers as Co-learners: Life 
Narratives on Collaborative Re/search in Aboriginal Communi- 
ties.” In AERC 2000: An International Conference. Proceed- 
ings of the 41st Annual Adult Education Research Conference, 
Vancouver, British Columbia, June 2-4 , 2000, edited by T. J. 
Sork, V-L. Chapman, and R. St. Clair, pp. 71-45. Vancouver: 
University of British Columbia, 2000. www.edst.educ.ubc.ca/aerc/ 
2000/castledenhk 1 - web.htm 

Ethical and cultural issues related to adult educators conducting 
research in Aboriginal communities are explored based on the au- 
thors’ experiences. Researchers need to be viewed as co-leamers 
rather than as experts. 

Day, E A.; Blue, E. T.; and Raymond, M. R “Conducting Research 
with an Urban American Indian Community: A Collaborative 
Approach.” Journal of American Indian Education 37, no. 2 
(Winter 1998): 21-33. 

The effects of needs assessment or larger system change efforts on 
Native American communities have not been well documented. 
This article outlines a research project undertaken in one urban 
Native American community, documenting specific community- 
based strategies employed by a research team composed primarily of 
Native Americans conducting a needs assessment. 

Elliott, G. A., and Iron Cloud Miller, A. “The United States Su- 
preme Court vs. American Indian Self-Determination: A Case 
Study of Resistance and Social Action.” In 37th Annual Adult 
Education Research Conference Proceedings, Tampa, Florida, 
May 16-19, 1996, compiled by H. Reno, and M. Witte. (ED 
419087) 

Adults engaged in active resistance can effect a recharacterization 
of recorded histories that define social and political relationships 
across generations. The relationship between social action and 
recharacterization of the events in the historical context of the Native 
American struggle for self-determination is examined. 

Garrett, M. T. “Two People’: An American Indian Narrative of Bi- 
cultural Identity.” Journal of American Indian Education 36, 
no. 1 (Fall 1996): 1-21. 

The bicultural Identity Development Model is described and illus- 
trated in relation to the narrative of a Native American elder. The 
narrative or life -story elaborates upon the informal educational in- 
fluences of a traditional Native American approach to “learning the 
Medicine.” 






Guerrero, R. N. "The Strategies of Successful American Indian and 
Native Learners in the Adult Higher Education Environment.” 
In 40th Annual Adult Education Research Conference Proceed- 
ings, DeKalb, Illinois, May 21-23, 1999, compiled by A. Rose. 
DeKalb: Northern Illinois University, 1999. (ED 431 901) 

This study explored and examined the learning techniques used by 
Native American learners in higher education and the factors that 
they believed contributed to their success as Native learners. 
Mentoring relationships, Native American-based support systems, 
determination to give back to the community, and spirituality were 
strategies employed by successful Native learners. 

Haig- Brown, C. Taking Control: Power and Contradiction in First 
Nations Adult Education. Vancouver: UBC Press, University of 
British Columbia, 1995. (ED 391 627) 

This book presents the results of an ethnographic study of the Na- 
tive Education Centre (NEC), an urban adult education center, in 
Vancouver, British Columbia. It focuses on the people at the NEC — 
First Nations students, board members, and teachers — and reveals 
their beliefs about First Nations’ control of education and how they 
put those beliefs into practice. 

Lockard, L. “Navajo Language and Culture in Adult Education.” In 
Providing Culturally Relevant Adult Education: A Challenge 
for the Twenty-First Century , New Directions for Adult and 
Continuing Education no. 82, edited by T. Guy, pp. 67-78. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 1999. 

The importance of language and culture in providing culturally rel- 
evant instruction for Native American adults is stressed. Examples 
of adult education programs serving Navajo adults are discussed. 

Luna, G., and Cullen, D. “Mentoring as Self-Directed Learning for 
Native Americans.” In Expanding Horizons in Self-Directed 
Learning , by H. B. Long and Associates. Norman, OK: Classic 
Book Distributors, 1997. 

Native American students were paired with Native American uni- 
versity professionals, and students worked on self-directed activities 
related to their mentoring goals. The investigation of the self-di- 
rected learning activities revealed that students would continue 
them. 

O’Meara, S., and West, D. A., eds. From Our Eyes: Learning from 
Indigenous Peoples. Toronto: Garamond Press, 1996. 

One purpose of this edited collection of papers is to expose aca- 
demic communities to indigenous learning and indigenous knowl- 
edge. Collectively, the papers illustrate the related problems of au- 
thenticity and authority and suggest that the best way to under- 
stand indigenous knowledge is through the eyes of indigenous 
peoples. 

Orr, J. A. “Learning from Native Adult Education.” In Addressing 
the Spiritual Dimensions of Adult Learning: What Adult Edu- 
cators Can Do, New Directions for Adult and Continuing Edu- 
cation no. 85, edited by L. M. English and M. A. Gillen, pp. 59- 
66. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, 2000. 

Adult educators can learn from Native peoples’ focus on the four 
directions of the medicine wheel: the emotional, physical, spiritual, 
and cognitive. Examples from Native American adult education 
programs are used to illustrate the chapter. 



Sanchez, J.; Stuckey, M. E.; and Morris, R. “Distance Learning in 
Indian Country: Becoming the Spider on the Web.” Journal of 
American Indian Education 37, no. 3 (Spring 1998): 1-17. 

The potential uses of distance learning for maintaining and sustain- 
ing Native American tribal communities within the United States 
are explored. Included are a discussion of traditional education in 
tribal contexts and its relationship to tribal uses of distance educa- 
tion technology and an analysis of the potential outcomes and con- 
sequences of these practices. 

Schultz, M., and Kroeger, M. Teaching and Learning with Native 
Americans: A Handbook for Non-Native American Adult Edu- 
cation. Phoenix,: Arizona Adult Literacy and Technology Re- 
source Center, 1996. www.literacynet.org/lp/namericans 
This practical handbook covers a number of areas including cultur- 
ally relevant curriculum, strategies for teaching Native Americans, 
contrasting values, cultural concepts and lessons, and cultural aware- 
ness. Examples and lesson suggestions are included throughout. 

St. Pierre, N. "Listening to the Student Voice in Adult Education.” 
In 39th Annual Adult Education Research Conference Proceed- 
ings, San Antonio, Texas, May 15-16, 1998, compiled by ]. C. 
Kimmel. San Antonio: University of the Incarnate Word, 1998. 
(ED 426 247) www.edst.educ.ubc.ca/aerc/1998/98stpierre.htm 
How Little Big Horn College (LBHC) is meeting the needs of its 
students in providing tribal college education is documented in this 
paper that presents student perceptions. LBHC has been successful 
in meeting the needs of its adult population and, in many respects, 
the adult learners at LBHC are like other adult learners who attend 
tribal and mainstream colleges. 

Still Smoking, D. M. “The Role of Language in the Preservation of 
a Culture.” In 40th Adult Education Research Conference Pro- 
ceedings, DeKalb , Illinois , May 21-23, 1999, compiled by A. 
Rose. DeKalb: Northern Illinois University, 1999. (ED 43 1 901) 
www.edst.educ.ubc.ca/aerc/1999/99still.htm 
A study described the perceptions of selected Blackfeet elders con- 
cerning what constitutes the traditional Blackfeet knowledge base 
and how they believe it should be transmitted through formal and 
informal institutions in the Blackfeet community. Results revealed 
the belief that formal education has failed to include Blackfeet learn- 
ing and teachings. Elders expressed an urgency for the Blackfeet 
language to be used more often in transmitting knowledge. 

Szasz, M. C. Education and the American Indian: The Road to Self- 
Determination since 1928. 3rd ed. Albuquerque: University of 
New Mexico Press, 1999. 

Adult education is covered in this study of federal Indian educa- 
tion. Included in the third edition is an analysis and interpretation 
of trends that have shaped Native American education in the 1980s 
and 1990s. 

Yurkovich, E. E. “Working with American Indians toward Educa- 
tional Success.” Journal of Nursing Education 40, no. 6 (Sep- 
tember 2001): 259-269. 

Reports on a study to identify factors that supported educational 
success of American Indian baccalaureate nursing graduates. Four 
interactive core variables emerged: individual American Indian stu- 
dent, instructor, institutions, and external variables. 



Richardson, C., and Blanche t-Cohen, N. Adult Education and In- 
digenous Peoples in Canada. Hamburg, Germany: UNESCO 
Institute for Education, 2000. www.unesco.org/education/uie/pdf/ 
Canada.pdf 

Indigenous people participated actively at the Fifth International 
Conference on Adult Education held in Hamburg in 1997 and, as a 
result, the UNESCO Institute for Education initiated an interna- 
tional survey on adult education and indigenous peoples. The Ca- 
nadian portion of the survey is reported in this paper. A number of 
interviews were carried out with experts in the field in an effort to 
capture some of the knowledge, lessons learned, and observations 
of those in the field who lack time to write about their experiences. 



This project has been funded at least in part with Federal funds from the U.S. De- 
partment of Education under Contract No. ED-99-CO-0013. The content of this 
publication does not necessarily reflect the views or policies of the U.S. Department 
of Education nor does mention of trade names, commercial products, or organiza- 
tions imply endorsement by the U.S. Government. Trends and Issues Alerts may be 
freely reproduced and are available at http://ericacve.org/fulltext.asp. 




Center on Education and Training 
for Employment 

College of Education 
The Ohio State University 
1900 Kenny Road 
Columbus OH 4321 0-1 090 



4 





U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 



® 




NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 




This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)" form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a "Specific Document" Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either "Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 



EFF-089 (3/2000) 




