DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 361 714 



CS 214 008 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



ABSTRACT 



Tohe, Laura 

A Native American's Perspective on the Writing 

Classroom* 

Apr 93 

9p,; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Conference on College Composition and Communication 
(44th, San Diego, CA, March 31-April 3, 1993). 
Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Viewpoints 
(Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) (120) 

MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

Cross Cultural Studies; Cultural Awareness; ^Cultural 
Differences; Cultural Pluralism; Higher Education; 
"Literature Appreciation; '''Modeling (Psychology); 
''Multicultural Education; Social Bias; Teacher 
Behavior 

''Ethnic Literature; '''Native Americans 



Except in small doses, the language and literature of 
Native Americans remains invisible in the American school curriculum. 
Undergraduate literature classes fail to offer works by Native 
Americans just as the undergraduate curriculum offers few courses in 
Native American literature. Graduate schools frequently define 
minority literature as African- American and the contributions of 
Native Americans are neglected, distorted, or given minor attention. 
Consequently, students who are confronted with ethnic literature that 
is not "white man*s literature" are initially unwilling to accept the 
credibility of either the literature or the native American 
instructor. A Native American female t^jaching predominantly White 
students struggled with these issues, and with the question of how to 
gain credibility and voice in the classroom. She decided that being 
honest and up front with students at the beginning of the semester 
concerning her own identity, presence, and voice, could help build a 
framework that focuses on history, cultural studies, art, and / 
historical events. This framework can challenge students' convfortable 
world view and provide opportunities for them to reach for their own 
voices as they go beyond their self-made and culturally-made 
boundaries. (NH) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document. * 



U.r OCMRTMCNTOPCOUCATION "PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 

Oftfce 01 Educational ftewrch and impfoiftmtni MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFOfiMATlON --^ ^ 

CENTER (ERIC) V 

"ytThis documant has baan raproducad &a V > y^\!C^ — \0\ 

T T^'^A received from the parson or organization 

irfGtUlir Gt J. one originating It 

4^f^^ hTaTii • y D Minor changes have been mada to improve — 

UDOO W CI r^C i 6 reprodoction quality 

Omaha. NE 68137-3019 • Points of vie* ©'Opinions Staled in this docu- TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 

otm SSsirnT^S?;'^ INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) - 



vo A Native American's 

^ Perspective on the Writing Classroom 

Ed 

To be a woman of color, a tribal woman in an academic setting 
means having to explain one's self. Despite the current move toward 
multicultural education, the voices of native women remains ignored 
or distorted by stereotypes • Moreover, the language, literature, and 
history of Native Americans are often invisible in university 
communities and in classrooms where mainstream students enter with 
stereotypical, romanticized, exoticized and idealized notions of 
Native American people as "the other,'' Native people have been part 
of the forming of this nation since the first European stepped on 
this soil yet students know little of the cultural diversity of this 
nation partly because the curriculum of most American schools fail to 
include subjects on People of Color as part of the regular 
curriculum. 

Teaching students that come from a predominantly Euro-American 
background often means having to undo stereotypes and convince 
students that Native American people have contributed to the history, 
language, culture, literature and government of this country. Giving 
voice to Native American issues is one way that students' education 
can be enhanced, 

O 

"In Indian civilization I am a Baptist, because I believe in 
immersing the Indians in our civilization and when we get them under 
^ holding them there until they are throughly soaked," asserted Richard 

o 2 

ERIC 



2 

Henry Pratt, Brigadier General of the United States Army, in 1883 at 
the fiftieth anniversary of the World Convention at the invitation of 
the Baptists. This stateinent by Richard Henry Pratt set the tone for 
Indian Education for the last decades of the nineteenth century and 
much of the next century for generations of native people • In the 
late 1950 's when I began school on the largest reservation in the 
United States, the Navajo, the Principal placed me in first grade 
because I could speak English and was one of the few students that 
could, though Navajo was my mother tongue. 

The government's policy to assimilate Native people continued 
through the early 1970's. A major emphasis of this assimilation i.e. 
colonization policy meant to obliterate native people and therefore 
native languages on a national scale. In first grade most of my 
Navajo classmates spoke only Navajo. The teacher acting on behalf of 
the government in the day school that we attended made sure that we 
received punishment for speaking Navajo. Utter one word of Navajo 
and we found ourselves standing in the corner of the classroom or in 
the hallway. The most severe punishment brought the ruler down on 
our hands so that we would remember not to speak Navajo. We quickly 
learned that if we didn't want to be shamed in front of our 
classmates that we best speak our language in private far from the 
ears of the teachers or stop speaking. Meanwhile Dick and Jane books 
introduced us to the non-Navajo world and the ''white man's" language. 
Having learned to read and write, this insidious process continued 
when we read that our ancestors, the indigenous people of this 
continent were ''heathens, barbarians, devils, murderers of 



3 



3 

innocent women and children, backward, uncivilized,*' and other 
distorted images that portrayed Native Americans as dehumanized icons 
that "stood in the way of progress,'' no doubt the same images that 
the rest of mainstream America was reading in textbooks. Assimila- 
tion made us feel ashamed for what we were, where we came from, how 
we spoke, our stories, our families, how we dressed, and for using 
our language. Later some well-intentioned Navajo parents prohibited 
their children from speaking Navajo at home to ensure their 
children's chances of "success in the white man's world." Knowing 
how to speak and read the "white man's language," it seemed, was a 
key to success in "his world." 

As one who attended these schools, I was much rewarded for 
knowing English and quickly learning how to read. However, like xny 
Navajo classmates, I believed English was the language of the enemy. 
The only way I was going to survive in "his" schools was to keep 
quiet, to disregard my native voice, and to allow my tongue to drown 
in the waters of assimilation. 

I became afraid to express myself, preferring the quiet margins 
where no one noticed or expected anything of me. It wasn't until 
much later, after I graduated and received my Bachelors degree, that 
I decided to try creative writing. Though I had sometimes written 
"in secret," I was afraid to show my writing to anyone. My thinking 
was that no one would be interested in what I was expressing, that I 
had nothing worthwhile to voice. Like many beginning writers, I also 
feared exposing myself. Allowing my writing to be read by others, 
created feelings of anxiety because letting others read my writing 



ERIC 



4 



4 

was like going naked in public. What business had I to delve into 
the business of writing, I thought. The very subject matter that I 
wanted to express had been tainted by distortions and stereotypes* 
And my native voice had been drowned (temporarily). 

As an undergraduate student, literature classes offered few 
works by Native Americans that I could identify with, let alone 
courses in Native American literature. In graduate school, I was 
dissatisfied with the number of courses offered in the area of Native 
American Studies. On the other hand, myriad classes in traditional 
mainstream courses were offered. Minority literature was often 
defined as African-American literature and as soon as the quota for 
minority literature was filled, no other courses were added or 
instructors hired. Often the courses I took advanced only a 
Eurocentric view of aesthetics and theory. Like the previous 
learning I had been exposed to, the contributions of Native American 
was neglected, distorted or given minor attention, despite the 
current Native American literary renaissance. 

Except in small doses, the language and literature of Native 
Americans remains invisible in the American school curriculum. 
Exclusion created uncomfortable situations in which Native American 
students like myself felt we had to constantly explain ourselves and 
our presence in and outside of the classroom. When writing critical 
papers my sense of aesthetics differed from Eurocentric values and I 
often felt I had to justify my values. When I becaune a Teaching 
Assistant, I naively thought that my students would come to class 
with open minds about minority literature • 



ERIC 



5 



5 

During my first semester at teaching Composition and Ethnic 
Literature that included white ethnic literature, some of my first 
year students appeared irritated at midterm by the text that we were 
using. It seemis some students had expected to read "American 
Literature" i.e. Thoreau, Mark Twain, and one student even asserted 
Shakespeare was American. Clearly, Ethnic Literature was not 
American, that is, not the "white man's literature," not what they 
had learned in high school and certainly not what they expected to 
learn in college. In my student's thinking. Ethnic literature was 
not credible and therefore. I, as a representative of that literature 
was not credible either. If what I had been reading and writing 
about during my educational journey was mainstream literature, why 
should Midwestern students* experience be any different? They had 
had no exposure to the voices of Ethnic literature let alone to 
Native American literature or to voices of native women. Given this 
invisibility, it was not surprising when my teaching evaluations 
included one comment that said I, as a woman of color, who had been 
"mistreated by white people," was now taking my revenge on my white 
students. Another white female student wrote on her quiz over Leslie 
Marmon Silko*s Ceremony that she didn't think it was important for 
her. to memorize the character's names because they weren't American 
names . 

Later when I taught Native American Literature to again mostly 
white midwestern students, one of my teaching goals was to give 
substance to invisibility. I assigned students an essay by Paula 
Gunn Allen, who is among other things, a native woman who comes from 



ERIC 



6 



6 

a matriarchal culture. After reading my student's journals, their 
comments expressed that they had no idea that matriarchy exif5ted. or 
that in certain Indian tribes women possessed dignity, power and 
respect. Given this heretofore unknown fact, student's welcomed a 
lecture by me in which I was able to fill in gaps in their education, 
as I too come from a matriarchal culture. While my students listened 
to my presentation, I too began to feel changed. At last I felt that 
by giving voice to Native American issues, I was empowering myself, 
th^i I too was gaining a voice in literary academia. However, it 
also became apparent that some student's held notions of Native 
people as "other." 

Some of my students saw in Black Elk Speaks the idealized and 
romanticized images and lifestyles of native people as shown in their 
journal writing. Drawn to this heretofore "undiscovered land," 
several of my students focused on the spirituality of_Black Elk and 
his teachings and saw it perhaps as a means to fill voids in their 
personal and spiritual lives. This book was by far the the class's 
favorite . 

While the students saw the idealized in native people, I 
couldn't help but think that they were responding to a way of life 
that was long past and a way some would prefer to see native people. 
On the other hand, students from an earlier semester who read 
contemporary Native American literature elicited responses like "this 
writing is too depressing" or "it's too dismal for me." How then 
does a teacher reconcile these opposing differences in student 
responses? How does a Native American woman teaching predominantly 



ERIC 



7 



7 

white students gain credibility and voice in the classroom? 

I had been schooled in theories and now these theories didn't 
seem to apply to these teaching issues I found myself in. Looking at 
how teaching and learning occurred in ray native ccHonunity, I saw that 
one way is by modelling or simply by doing a given activity, I also 
saw that learning can also take place by letting others voice their 
opinions while taking responsibility for it. The context that I 
bring to a class, my history, my language, my sense of who I am and 
where I come can't be ignored. By being honest and by being up front 
with my students at the beginning of the semester about the context I 
bring with me to my classroom helps to create an environment in which 
students acknowledge my presence and my voice. However, in order to 
enable my students to understand Native American literature, I have 
to do a lot of framework building that focuses on history, cultural 
studies, art, including historical events that challenges my 
student's comfortable world view. 

By showing and modelling my writing process students can see 
that writing doesn't always come easy for me either, I tell my 
students that I failed my English placement exam and was told to take 
remedial writing, I tell my students about ray personal history and 
about how writing for me is an empowering experience when I sit down 
in front of the word processor. And I tell them coyote stories and 
other Navajo tales, I don't know what effect that has on my 
students, except that they tell me they like my stories. I hope that 
by telling these stories the imaginative possibilities of language 
and writing opens for my students. Of course, not all my students 



ERIC 



'8 



8 

will be touched fcy what I have to offer, but by giving them 
opportunities to reach for their own voices, by opening the door that 
allows them to go beyond their self-made and culturally-made 
boundaries and by presenting them with opportunities to empower 
themselves through language will I have presented possibilities where 
students can make a more realized journey through language. 
Moreover, as a Woman of Color, I gain a further sense of having given 
substance to the invisible by reclaiming my voice and space. 



ERIC 



9 



