ED335175 1991-05-00 American 
Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: 
Researcli and Practice. ERIC Digest. 

ERIC Development Team 
www . eric . ed . gov 

Table of Contents 

If you're viewing this document online, you can click any of the topics below to link directly to that section. 

American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: Research and Practice. 



ERIC Digest 1 

LEARNING STYLES: IMPORTANCE FOR NATIVE CHILDREN 2 

TYPICAL CLASSROOM LEARNING ENVIRONMENTS AND NATIVE 
NORMS 3 

CAUTIONS ABOUT GROUP CHARACTERISTICS 3 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR TEACHERS 4 

TEACHING STYLE: THE OTHER HALF OF LEARNING STYLE 5 

REFERENCES 6 



ERIC |||p Digests 



ERIC Identifier: ED335175 
Publication Date: 1991-05-00 
Author: Swisher, Karen 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools Charleston WV. 

American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning 
Styles: Research and Practice. ERIC Digest. 

THIS DIGEST WAS CREATED BY ERIC, THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER. FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT ERIC, CONTACT 



ED335175 1991-05-00 American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: Research and Page 1 of 7 
Practice. ERIC Digest. 



www , eric , ed , gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



ACCESS ERIC 1-800-LET-ERIC 

Educators of American Indian and Alaskan Native students are concerned for a growing 
number of students who do not find school a meaningful place. These students are 
becoming "school weary." Studies of learning style among Native students provide 
some clues about this phenomenon, and this Digest presents a brief review of that 
literature. It includes a definition, specific examples, cautions about overgeneralizing 
learning style research, and suggestions for classroom practice. 

The information is presented with a view respectful of more than 500 tribal groups. 
These groups represent an estimated 200 languages, each with its own unique 
government and social system. Too often, the significance of this variety is overlooked. 
Many observers fail to recognize that American Indian and Alaskan Native children are 
individuals who differ dramatically from one another, even within their own communities. 

LEARNING STYLES: IMPORTANCE FOR NATIVE 
CHILDREN 

Appleton (1983) defined learning style as the method by which one comes to know or 
understand the world. It is the accustomed pattern used to acquire information, 
concepts, and skills. The available literature suggests that cultural values and early 
socialization experiences influence the way American Indian and Alaskan Native 
children ("Native children" hereafter) understand their world. The examples that follow 
point out two important aspects of learning style. These are: 

(1) learning by observation and 

(2) the manner in which competence is demonstrated. 

Wax, Wax, and Dumont (1964) gave examples of learning in Oglala Sioux society, 
where individuals must observe tasks in actual practice before attempting performance. 
Brewer (1977) also suggested that observation, self-testing in private, and then 
demonstration of a task for approval were essential steps in learning. Making mistakes 
in public was not, however, accepted as a way to learn. 

Similar evidence regarding observation as a prerequisite to performance was presented 
about Navajo (Werner & Begishe, 1968; Longstreet, 1978) and Yaqui societies 
(Appleton, 1983). These cultures respect the ability of a person to learn experientially, 
without the constant supervision and correction so characteristic of formal instruction. 
This respect gives individuals the autonomy of knowing when performance of a task is 
ready for public scrutiny. Such studies show that the way in which children demonstrate 
their learning in a school setting is related to the way they have acquired knowledge. 

TYPICAL CLASSROOM LEARNING 



Page 2 of 7 ED3351 75 1 991 -05-00 American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: Researcli and 

Practice. ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www , eric , ed , gov 



ENVIRONMENTS AND NATIVE NORMS 

At the same time, many reports suggest that typical classroom learning environments 
interfere with the way Native children learn. Philips' (1983) now classic study provides a 
general model for looking at how children from Native groups interact in the classroom. 
In classrooms attended by Indian children in Warm Springs, Oregon, Philips observed 
that Indian children hesitated to participate in large- and small-group recitations. On the 
other hand, they were more talkative than non-Indian children when they started 
interactions with the teacher or worked on student-led group projects. 
Philips described a process of acquiring competence that reflected Warm Springs' 
norms: observation, careful listening, supervised participation, and individualized 
self-correction or testing. The norms of their culture helped explain why the children 
were reluctant to speak in front of their classmates. Similar disruption of cultural 
patterns in classrooms attended by Sioux and Cherokee children had been reported 
previously by Dumont (1 972). The work of such researchers as these suggests that for 
many Native children, a public display that violates community or group norms may be 
an uncomfortable experience. Perhaps it is this respect for norms that is responsible for 
the stereotypic "silent Indian child." 

Another circumstance affects the achievement of Indian students, to the frustration of 
concerned observers. Often, a very able student will hide academic competence to 
avoid seeming superior. Brown (1980), for example, presented evidence that Cherokee 
children were more cooperative and less competitive than their Anglo counterparts, 
which seemed to produce lower achievement among the Cherokee children. He 
explained that in Cherokee society, traditional norms called for maintaining harmonious 
relations. In the classroom, these norms required students to hold fast to group 
standards of achievement that all were capable of meeting. Thus, very able students 
may repress their knowledge and contribute to the lower achievement of the group. 

In many Native societies, the humility of the individual is a position to be respected and 
preserved. Advancing oneself above others or taking oneself too seriously violates this 
key value. If Native children learn best cooperatively, they will experience discomfort 
and conflicts in classrooms that are too competitive or in which the competition is unfair. 

CAUTIONS ABOUT GROUP CHARACTERISTICS 

Knowing about group characteristics is important. Such knowledge, however, is not 
much help when it comes to individual learners. Diversity within cultural groups exists 
and reveals itself as differences among individuals in language use, child rearing, and 
formation of social networks. The degree to which members of a group absorb customs 
from the larger society ("macroculture") also determines diversity within the group. For 
this reason, assuming that a particular group will have a particular learning style is not a 
good idea. 



ED335175 1991-05-00 American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: Researcli and Page 3 of 7 
Practice. ERIC Digest. 



www , eric , ed , gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



A recent exploratory study demonstrates this point. Swisher and Page (1990) assessed 
Jicarilla Apache students for field dependence and field independence. These 
researchers wanted to test the comnnon notion that Native students tend to be field 
dependent. Their study concluded that within-group differences exist to the point that no 
general tendencies could be determined without further research. 

Although group characteristics may provide a basis for further investigation into 
individual characteristics that may constitute a learning style, overgeneralizing group 
tendencies can have three important ill effects (Swisher, 1990). Such overgeneralizing 
can contribute to: 

* Stereotypic notions about the relationship between learning style and cultural group 
membership. 

* Discriminatory practice (for example, inappropriate grouping). 

* Inappropriate excuses for failure in teaching and learning. 

RECOMMENDATIONS FOR TEACHERS 

Cox and Ramirez (1981) recommend that teachers use direct observation and 
classroom experience for instruction that takes account of learning styles. Their 
field-tested process has six steps: 

(1) Assess students' preferred ways of learning and the way(s) in which student 
behaviors change from situation to situation. 

(2) Plan learning experiences that incorporate the students' preferred ways of 
learning-using teaching methods, incentives, materials, and situations that are planned 
according to student preferences. 

(3) Implement the learning experiences that were planned. 

(4) Evaluate the learning experiences in terms of attainment of conceptual or other 
goals, as well as in terms of observed student behaviors and involvement. 

(5) As the year progresses, plan and implement student participation in learning 
experiences that require behaviors the student has previously avoided. Incorporate only 
one aspect of the less familiar behaviors at a time-focusing on only the reward, the 
materials, the situation, or the task requirements. This way, the student can use what is 
familiar to support the new learning experience. 

(6) Continue to provide familiar, comfortable, successful experiences, as well as to 
gradually introduce the children to learning in new ways. 

(Cox & Ramirez, 1981, pp. 64-65) 



Page 4 of 7 ED3351 75 1 991 -05-00 American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: Researcli and 

Practice. ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www , eric , ed , gov 



The following tips address more specific issues. Ask yourself how they apply to your 
school or classroom. These tips come from many sources, including teachers attending 
workshops across the nation (see Swisher & Deyhle, 1989, for more details). 

* Get to know the norms and values of the community from which the children come. 

* Be aware of students' background knowledge and experiences. 

* Discuss the students' learning styles with them; help them understand why they do 
what they do in learning situations. 

* Be aware of the pacing of activities within a time framework that may be rigid and 
inflexible. 

* Be aware of how questions are asked; think about the communication style of 
students. 

* Remember, some students do not like to be spotlighted in front of a group. 

* Provide time for observation and practice before performance; let students save face, 
but communicate that it is "okay" to make mistakes. 

* Be aware of proximity preferences; find out how close is comfortable. 

* Organize the classroom to meet the interactional needs of students; provide activities 
that encourage both independence and cooperation. 

* Provide feedback that is immediate, consistent, and private, if necessary; give praise 
that is specific. 

* Consider the whole child when organizing and planning for learning experiences; 
consider a whole-language, thematic approach. 

* Be flexible and realize that while the goals remain constant, there are alternative ways 
for students to reach the goals. 

Informal student- and teacher-observable behavior checklists have been developed by 
Ramirez and Castaneda (1974). Other instruments that assess cognitive style, affective 
style, perceptual modality, and multidimensional mental functioning have been 
developed and are described in a publication by Cornett (1983). 

TEACHING STYLE: THE OTHER HALF OF 
LEARNING STYLE 



ED335175 1991-05-00 American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: Researcli and Page 5 of 7 
Practice. ERIC Digest. 



www , eric , ed , gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Teachers must first of all know their own learning style and related teaching style 
strengths. Teaching style, after all, is a critical factor in comnnunicating expectations of 
school learning styles. The assessment instruments noted in the previous paragraph 
are valuable tools for identifying both learning- and teaching-style tendencies. 
Above all, teachers must be what Kleinfeld (1979) described as "warm demanders," 
adults who balance humanistic concerns with high expectations for achievement. They 
must communicate an attitude of understanding and caring while at the same time 
demanding high performance. 

REFERENCES 

Appleton, N. (1983). Cultural Pluralism in Education. New York: Longman Press. 
Brewer, A. (1977). On Indian education. Integrateducation, 15, 21-23. 

Brown, A. (1980). Cherokee culture and school achievement. American Indian Culture 
and Research Journal, 4, 55-74. 

Cox, B., & Ramirez, M. (1981). Cognitive styles: Implications for multiethnic education. 
In J. Banks (Ed.), Education in the 80s: Multiethnic Education (pp. 61-71). Washington, 
DC: National Education Association. 

Cornett, C. (1983). What You Should Know about Teaching and Learning Styles 
(Fastback No. 191). Bloomington, IN: Phi Delta Kappa Foundation. 

Dumont, R. (1972). Learning English and how to be silent: Studies in Sioux and 
Cherokee classrooms. In C. Cazden, V. John, and D. Hymes (Eds.), Functions of 
Language in the Classroom. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Longstreet, E. (1978). Aspects of Ethnicity. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Philips, S. (1983). The Invisible Culture. New York: Longman Press. 

Swisher, K. (in press). Learning styles: Implications for teachers. In C. Diaz (Ed.), 
Multicultural Education in the Twentieth Century. Washington, DC: National Education 
Association. 

Swisher, K., & Page, B. (1990, April). Determining Jicarilla Apache Learning Styles: A 
Collaborative Approach. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Educational Research Association, Boston, MA. 

Swisher, K., & Deyhle, D. (1989). The styles of learning are different, but the teaching is 
just the same: Suggestions for teachers of American Indian youth. Journal of American 
Indian Education [Special Issue on Learning Styles, August], 1-14. 

Wax, M., Wax, R., & Dumont, R., Jr. (1989). Formal Education in an American Indian 



Page 6 of 7 ED3351 75 1 991 -05-00 American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: Researcli and 

Practice. ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



Community. Prospect Heights, IL: Waveland Press. 

Werner, O., & Begishe, K. (1968). Styles of Learning: The Evidence for Navajo. Paper 
presented at a conference on styles of learning in American Indian children, Stanford 
University, Stanford, CA. 

Prepared by Karen Swisher, Arizona State University, Tempo, AZ. 



This publication was prepared with funding from the U.S. Department of Education, 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement, under contract no. RI88062016. The 
opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of the 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement or the Department of Education. 



Title: American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: Research and Practice. ERIC 
Digest. 

Document Type: Information Analyses— ERIC Information Analysis Products (lAPs) 
(071); Information Analyses— ERIC Digests (Selected) in Full Text (073); 
Descriptors: Alaska Natives, American Indian Education, American Indians, Cognitive 
Style, Cultural Awareness, Cultural Differences, Elementary Secondary Education, 
Individual Differences, Observational Learning, Teaching Styles 
Identifiers: ERIC Digests 
### 



[Return to ERIC Digest Search Page] 



ED335175 1991-05-00 American Indian/Alaskan Native Learning Styles: Researcin and Page 7 of 7 
Practice. ERIC Digest. 



