DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 336 225 RC 018 290 

AUTHOR Tamaoka, Katsuo 

TITLE Measuring Intelligence of Minority children in 

Canadian Multicultural Contexts. 
PUB DATE 66 
NOTE 23p. 

PUB TYPE Information Analyses (070) 

EDRS PRICE MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS Academic Achievement} American Indian Education; 

-Canada Natives; Culture Fair Tests; *Educational 
Testing; Elementary Secondary Education; Foreign 
Countries; Intelligence Quotient; * Intelligence 
Tests; *Minority Group Children; -Test Bias; Testing 
Problems 

IDENTIFIERS Canada; United States 
ABSTRACT 

Heavy migration into Canada and migration from Native 
rural communities to urban areas has made it necessary to identify 
appropriate instruments for assessing minority children's academic 
abilities. In Canada, IQ tests have ieen used extensively for 
academic placement in school. This paper reviews the literature 
evaluating cultural bias in IQ tests used in Canada and the United 
States. Studies conducted in the United States suggest that Blacks 
and Hispanics are at a cultural disadvantage on the major IQ tests, 
while Hispanics are disadvantaged in language skills as well. With 
respect to the mainstream Canadian population, the WISC and WISC-R 
contain items reflecting an American cultural bias. However, 
Canadianization of such items may not guarantee the proper difficulty 
level for the substituted items. Cultural bias against Native 
children is found on some WISC-R items, and degree of acculturation 
seems to influence IQ results of Native children. Alternative means 
of assessing minority children's intelligence have included 
culture-free (or culture-fair) tests, and recalculation of IQ scores 
taking into account family size, family structure, socioeconomic 
status, and urban acculturation to indicate "estimated learning 
potential." These methods did not predict school achievement more 
accurately than the WISC-R. While the commonly used IQ tests in 
Canada do not necessarily assess a child's true general ability, they 
are reasonably predictive of academic success in school (perhaps 
partly because they reflect cultural biases in school) . A multiple 
assessment approach for minority children is recommended. This paper 
contains 39 references. (SV) 



********************************************************************* 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the boat that can be made 

* from the original document. 



1 

Measuring Intelligence of Minority children 
in Canadian Multicultural Contexts 



Katsuo Tamaoka 
Matsuyama university, Matsuyama, Japan 



Canadlanlzatlon for the Items of Wise and wisc-R would 
not guarantee the proper difficulty levul for the substituted 
items. Failure of adjusting the questioning items of Information 
lf« subtest Indicate an American cultural bias with respect to a 

main-stream Canadian population. For Native children, cultural 
content bias against Native children is indicated in the question 
Gto items of the WISC-R Information subtest. The degree of 

acculturation seems to influence, to a certain degree, IQ tests' 
^_ results of Native children. Cultural fair tests to remove 

f *'* cultural effects on IQ scores did not indicate a strong 

:.0 predictive power for academic achievement. The attempt at 

computing an Estimated Learning Potential (ELP) also failed to 
predict a child's academic success. A simple re-calculation of 
WISC-R scores based on family size, family structure, socio- 
economic status and urban acculturation dose not Indicate ELP. 
The two attempts at cultural free tests and ELP scores also 
failed to assess intelligence of minority groups as a predictor 
jf child's school achievement. Though a compromise, but the most 
careful and sensitive approach to assess intelligence of Canadian 
minority children have to be a multiple assessment approach using 
already established tests as a part of the Information used to 
assess a child's learning abilities in order to facilitate 
adequate education and counselling. 



U.S. MMNTMINT OP IOUCATION 

oihce ot Educational Research and improvameni 

EDUCATIONAL RrSOURCES INFORMATION 
J Cf NTKR (ERIC) 

Vnit document hat Man reproduced as 
S received Irom iht) person or orgamjalion 
onyinaling >l 

r Mino' changes have bean made to impiove 
taproducdon quality 

• Point* oi view or opinions stated in ihn docu- 
ment do «ot necessarily represent official 
OtRl poiidon or policy 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



Abstract : 



1. Introduction 



Although an attempt to understand human intelligence has 
drawn extensive attention in the area of psychology, there seems 

£2 t0 be neither a single instrument nor a clear-cut definition for 

intelligence to which no psychologist raises a question. A lack 

sQQ of consensus in studies as to the definition of intelligence 

indicates the intricate complexity of human intelligence. 

e 

However, heavy migration into Canada and migration from Native 

erjc 2 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



2 

rural communities to urban areas has made It necessary to 
Identify appropriate Instruments for assessing children's 
academic abilities In order to facilitate adequate education and 
counselling. 

In Canada, IQ tests have been extensively used for academic 
placement at school. IQ tests partly reflects the main-stream 
culture which has passed its cultural heritage to the next 
generation. Although various studies in psychometrlcs suggest 
that the predictive power of these IQ tests is high enough to use 
for the placement of children at Canadian schools, cultural bias 
in IQ tests often acts as an element to decrease the predictive 
power of children's school achievement. Hence, the present study 
focused on evaluating whether newly-developed and commonly-used 
IQ tests In North America obtain a strong cultural bias when 
examining children from other social and cultural environments, 
and if so what would be the best approach to facilitate the 
proper education of those children. 

2. Issues In Assessing Intelligence of Minority Groups 

Canada has been inviting numerous immigrants from various 
countries where English and French are not necessarily spoken as 
an official language and are not used as an instructional 
langauge at school. The census of Canada in 1981 (Statistics 
Canada, 1984) showed that 1,608,645 people in Canada do not speak 
English or French as a mother tongue. Assessing Intelligence of 



ERJ.C 



3 



these minority children for academic placement Is one of the 
difficult tasks for Canadian school psychologists. Therefore, In 
this Section, effects of linguistic and cultural differences on 
IQ tests have to be considered when assessing these children. 
For the effects of linguistic differences, several studies In the 
United states, which has been experiencing cultural difficulties 
among minority groups longer than Canada, are used to examine the 
difference between verbal and performance iqs and are applied a 
Canadian multicultural context. For cultural bias and adjustment 
of IQ questioning Items, 'Canadlanizat Ion • of WISC-R proposed by 
Vernon (1976) Is examined In this section. 

2.1 Effects of Language Skills on Verbal Intelligence 

IQ tests have been conducted on some major ethnic groups in 
the United States. Differences In the means of black and white 
Americans seem, more or less, to be duplicated in a series of 
studies (Jensen, 1969, 1976; Vernon 1969 for early studies and 
Eysenck & Kamln, 1981; Sattler 1982, 1988 for recent review). 
However, uncertainties remain in determining the factors 
influencing the results of IQ tests. Comparing the average IQs 
of black and white Americans, blacks seems to produce lower IQ 
scores than whites. This may be partly caused by culturally 
handicapped conditions of blacks. Yet, there is no definite 
explanation for it. 

Although the difference in mean IQ scores between blacks and 



4 



whites Is constantly reported, Johnston and Bolen (1984) and 
Naglierl (1966) argued that black and white Americans showed 
almost Identical patterns In both scores of the Wechsler 
intelligence Scale for children - Revised (wisc-R) and Kaufman's 
Assessment Battery for children (K-ABC) . The study on the 
discrepancy between verbal (VIQ) and Performance (PIQ) IQs 
(Vaylor, Zlegler and Partenlo, 1984) showed significant 
differences among black, white and Hispanic groups, [£(2, 
533)=16.62, q.<.011. Post hoc multiple comparisons indicated that 
the Hispanic group had significantly larger VIQ-PIQ splits than 
did the white or the black group, but no significant differences 
were found between the black and white groups. Furthermore, as 
shown in Table 1, the direction of VIQ-PIQ discrepancies for 
black and white groups were similar, while significantly more 
Hispanics obtain PIQ>VIQ (74.4%) than PIQ<VIQ (23.9%). This 
result suggests that the Hispanic group may have a disadvantage 
in language skills which prevents better scores in VIQ . 

Table 1 

Direction of VIQ-PIQ Discre pancies by Ethnic Group 
Ethnic Group Direction of discrepancies 



VIQ>PIQ 



VIQ<PIQ 



VIQ=PIQ 



Black 

Hispanic 

White 



44.1% 

23.9% 
44.2% 



51.1% 
7 4.7% 
49.7% 



4.8% 
1,7% 
5.9% 



(Taylor, Ziegler & Partenio, 1984, p. 439) 



9 

ERIC 



5 



5 

Concerning IQ tests and language skills, the comparative 
study, using the Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test (PPVT), the 
revised PPVT (PPVT-R) and placement IQ tests, was conducted among 
black, white and Hispanic Educable Mentally Retarded (EMR) 
students (Bracken & Prasse, 1981). This study concluded that 
mean IQs were nearly Identical for the three ethnic groups. 
However, PPVT and PPVT-R Indicated great differences In language 
skills; the Hispanic group scored the lowest In PPVT and PPVT-R . 
In addition, Teuoer and Furlong (1985) conducted the research 
using the Expressive One-Word Vocabulary Test and PPVT-R, 
Indicated that bilingual Mexican American children (Hispanic 
group) on both tests scored almost two standard deviations lower 
than the normative mean. With the finding of great PIQ>VIQ 
Hispanic population (Taylar, Ziegler & Partenio, 1984), these 
studies suggests that the Hispanic group has a disadvantage in 
taking the language-related subtests of IQ tests in comparison 
with black and white groups. 

The findings of the American cross-cultural studies are 
applicable to Canadian multicultural contexts in two ways. 
First, the VIQ-PIQ discrepancy in IQ tests will appear between 
the main-stream cultural group and minority groups. Second, the 
disadvantage in English learning conditions (e.g., growing up in 
a non-English family) will affect scores of Verbal IQs, and 
minority students may display lower scores in language ability 
tests and language-related IQ tests. For those children, the 
VIQ-PIQ discrepancy in IQ tests should be considered with a 



ERIC 



6 



6 

cross-examination of other mental and language ability tests. 
2.2 Effects of Cultural Context on Intelligence Test 

One of the major arguments for the use of wise and WXSC-R to 
assess minority groups in Canada is whether the Information 
subtest contains a somewhat American cultural bias. If so, is it 
necessary to modify the items according to groups such as French, 
Ukrainian, Chinese and Aboriginal Peoples (Indians, Inuit and 
Metis)? The first attempt to modify American IQ tests was to 
adjust the Information subtest for the use of Canadian children. 

WISC-R, which is designed for assessing intelligence of 
children in America (Wechsler, 1974), contains materials related 
to an American context. The Information subtest in particular 
contains questions pertaining to American history and geography. 
As shown in table 2, Vernon (1976) has encouraged Canadian school 
psychologists to substitute the seven items of Information 
subtest (116, #17, #19, #20, #21, #24 and #27) for Canadian 
users. However, conducting WISC-R to a randomly selected sample 
of 300 urban Saskatchewan children, Perters (1976) did not find 
any evidence of a systematic bias on the Information subtest. 

Furthermore, using 342 adolescent psychiatric inpatients and 
outpatients, Cyr and Atkinson (1987) found that the substitutes 
for items #16 and #19 should be abandoned because of their 
unacceptably high pass rates. The study concluded not only that 
the ranks of difficulty order were affected by modified items, 



ERIC 



7 



7 



Table 2 

Canadlanlzatlon Items for the WISC-R Information Stihfcesfc 



Item # 

16 (A) Who Invented the electric light bulb? 
(C) Who Invented the telephone? 

17 (A) From what country did America become independent in 

1776? 

(C) From what country did most of the first sellers in 
Canada come? 

19 (A) Name the two countries that border the United States? 
(C) Name two oceans bordering Canada. 

20 (A) How many pounds make a ton? 

(C) How many weeks are there in a year? 

21 (A) In what continent is Chile? 
(O In what continent in Sweden? 

24 (A) How tall is the average American man? 

(C) How tall is the average Canadian man? 

27 (A) How far is it from New York to Los Angeles? 

(C) How far is it from Toronto to Vancouver? 



(Vernon, 1976) 
Note ! (A) is an original American item while (C) is a 
Canadlanized item. 



but also that those items were significantly easier for the 
respondents. Thus, ths view that such a bias exists is, for the 
most part, based on the face validity of items, and not construct 
validity. 

On the other hand, Marx (1984) suggested to adopt Vernon's 
change on the basis of his research finding with the use of both 
the manual items and modified items of WISC-R Information subtest 
comparing Canadian children (210 junior secondary school students 
in Burnaby, B.C.) with the American standardization group. 
However, as shown in Table 3, although the ranking order seems to 
be rearranged in a sequential order from one to seven, all seven 
modified items proposed by Vernon (1976) were higher than the 



9 

ERIC 



8 



comparable data from the standardization group In the passing 
percentages. The results of Marx's study actually Indicated that 
the Vernon's canadlanizatlon Items will cause a higher score on 
the Information subtest. 

Table 3 

Ranks and Percentage of Standardization Sample and Burnaby Sample 
Passing Each Item 



Burnaby Sample 

Standardization Sample Manual Items Modified Items 



Item 


% 


Rank 


% 


Rank 


% 


Rank 


16 


50.7 


1 


38.6 


3 


65.7 


1 


17 


50.0 


2 


41.4 


2 


54.8 


3 


19 


48 .9 


3 


45.7 


1 


60.5 


2 


20 


43.9 


4 


32.9 


6 


53.3 


4 


21 


40.2 


5 


37.6 


4 


51.4 


5 


24 


23.1 


6 


34.3 


5 


38.6 


6 


27 


16 . 4 


7 


10.0 


7 


18.1 


7 



(Marx, 1984, p. 32) 



2.3 Summary 

Despite these research results, the majority of Canadian 
school psychologists regularly adopted the Canadlanlzed Items of 
the Information subtest In 1980s. Since Canadlanizatlon for WISC 
and WISC-R would not guarantee the proper difficulty level for 
the substituted Items, the main purpose of substitution Is to 
Increase the face validity for use with the Canadian population. 
It seems Impossible to avoid cultural bias In the existing IQ 

9 



tests, in addition, failure of adjusting questioning items of 
Information subtest indicate an American cultural bias in the 
main-stream Canadian population. Again, with language 
differences, cultural differences should be taken into account 
when assessing minority children for educational placement and 
counselling. 

3. Issues of Assessing Intelligence of Native children 

A great increase of Native population (Indian, inuit, and 
Metis) in urban areas has been reported by the Department of 
Indian and Northern Affairs (1977). In 1980, approximately 30 
percent of Indians (status Indians) in Canada were estimated to 
live off the reservation (reserve), of which nearly 80 percent 
are now living in urban areas (Frideres, 1988). For example, 
Regina predicted to have over one-forth of the Native (status and 
non-status Indians and Metis) population by 1985. In 1980-1981, 
the cumulative drop-out rate of Native students in urban 
Saskatchewan was calculated 90.5 percent in Grades 7 to 12, while 
non-Native students were 40.0 percent (Saskatchewan, Department 
of Education* 1985). 

This great migration of Native peoples to urban areas has 
created cross-cultural situations of Native students who have 
grown up in remote Native communities. English skills are often 
a major consideration for placement of Native students with their 
former school records. Because of the handicapped social and 



10 



cultural conditions of their English learning, Native students 
are often placed two or three grades lower in city schools than 
the ones they previously were in. Still, a high drop-out rate 
was reported among Native students. Hence, the placement process 
should be re-examined for Native students in order to provide 
adequate learning conditions and counselling. As for providing 
an appropriate assessment of intelligence for Native students' 
placement, studies of iq tests should be explored to examine 
their fairness of information and interpretation. 

3.1 Cultural content Bias for Native children in the WISC-R 
Information Subtest 

Like the difference in the mean scores of IQ tests between 
black and white Americans, the mean scores of Native students 
were generally lower than the norm means of IQ tests (Goodenough, 
1962; Vernon, 1966 & 1969; MacArthur, 1968 & 1969; Krywaniul & 
Das, 1976; Seyfort, Spreen & Lahmer, 1980; Connelly, 1983; 
Mueller, Mulcahy, Wilgosh, Hatters & Mancini, 1986). In 
addition, the results of WICC and WISC-R among Native children 
indicated that thty yield higher scores on Performance IQ than 
Verbal IQ. This pattern of PIQ>VIQ "may be a reflection of a 
visual style of learning and limited familiarity with English" 
(Sattler, 1982, p. 376). Furthermore, sattler (1982 & 1988) 
explains that the degree of discrepancy between PIQ and VIQ may 
illustrate the degree of acculturation which Native peoples have 



11 

experienced. 

Acculturation, however, indicates how much Native peoples 
adapted to the main stream culture; consequently, it should not 
be measured by IQ tests. For example, the items in the 
Information subtest, wisc-R which contain American history and 
geography are "who discovered America?", "From what country did 
America become Independent in 1776?", "Name the two countries 
that border the United states?*, "How tall Is the average 
American man?", "How far Is it from New York to Los Angeles?" 
(Wechsler, 1974). Even the Canadlanlzed Items (Vernon, 1976) 
such as "From which country did most of the first settlers in 
Canada come?", "How tall is the average Canadian man?" (the 
average white man) also show cultural content which most Native 
children will not be aware of, unless they learn It at school. 
If the items were to be sensitized to Native children, they would 
be changed to "which Indian tribe contacted to the first arrlvers 
from Europe in Canada?", "which is the most spoken Indian 
language in Canada?". The Information subtest seems to present 
the cultural group who has a governing power of the country. 

In addition, the twelfth item of the WISC-R Information 
subtest, "who discovered America?", which Vernon (1976) did not 
suggest to change for Canadian uses, represents an ethnocentric 
view of history. In current history textbooks, this statement 
has been replaced by the expression of the first European to 
arrive in America. Testing Native students, this Item will 
affect motivation of native students to continue and complete 



12 



WISC-R. Furthermore, there Is a clear evidence that the Norse, 
filrlk Thorvaldsson (Eric the Red) arrived in Baffin island in 982 
(Magnussen & Palsson, 1986). 

Effects of cultural content bias are shown in the study of 
Canadian Inult children (Mueller, Mulcahy, Wllgosh, Watters & 
Ma..cini, 1986) which administered the nine WISC-R subtests 
(Object Assembly, Coding and Hazes excluded). They found that 
several items of the information subtest were misplaced in rank 
order and the twelfth item, "who discovered America?", was a 
harder question for inult children. Nevertheless, this research 
group concluded that the Information subtest is H a reasonably 
good measure of the WISC-R verbal construct" (p. 17). If the 
argument of Marx (1984) is accepted as a reason for WISC-R 
Canadianization, then by the same reasoning, the Information 
subtest should be adjusted for Inuit children. 

3.2 Applying Bannatyne's RecategoL izat ion to Native Children 

The another aspect of cultural bias against Native children 
is observed in the reorganized scores of WISC and WISC-R subtests 
commonly known as Bannatyne's system. Bannatyne (19 74) 
reorganized the WISC subtests: the Spatial category (Picture 
Completion, Block Design and Object Assembly), the Conceptual 
category (Similarities, Vocabulary and Comprehension), the 
Sequential category (Arithmetic, Digit Span and Coding), and the 
Acquired Knowledge category (Information, Arithmetic and 



13 



Vocabulary). According to this recategor ization of WISC, 
Bannatyne suggested that learning disabled (LD) children were 
likely to exhibit a pattern of Spatial>Conceptual>Seguential 
scoring order. However, this pattern is not always commonly 
observed among Native LD children. 

Recategorization of WISC and WISC-R was examined with 
respect to Native children, zarske and Moore (1982) conducted 
the research concerning Bannatyne' s system with WISC-R for non- 
handicapped (M.= 113), learning disabled (U.= 150), educationally 
disadvantaged (H-189), and regular classroom (K-44) Navajo 
children. The study found that the classic Bannatyne's LD 
pattern failed to occur for the LD Navajo children. Instead of 
Bannatyne's system, all four groups of Navajo children presented 
a pattern of Spat ial>Sequential>Conceptual scoring order. 
Another study on Yukima Indian tribe (Diessner & walker, 1986) 
also indicated the same pattern as the study by Zarske and Moore. 
The pattern of Spat ial>Sequential>conceptual scoring older may be 
typical across American Indians; consequently, Bannatyne's system 
was not the pattern observed in LD children of some Indian 
tribes . 

A further investigation of WISC-R recategorization by 
Connelly (1983) provided an additional factor influencing the 
scoring pattern of Bannatyne's system. With WISC-R administered 
to 146 LD Tlingit children in southwestern Alaska for whom 
English was the first language, Connelly found that an younger LD 
group at the ages of 6 to 10 displayed Bannatyne's LD pattern of 



14 



spatial>Conceptual>Sequential scoring order while an older group 
at the ages of 11 to 16 exhibited the typical Indian pattern of 
Spatial>Sequential>Conceptual . In addition, the study of 81 
Chippewa, Muncey and Oneida children from two reserve schools in 
southwestern Ontario (English was also the first language; 
exhibited the LD sequence of the Bannaytne's recategor ization in 
WISC-R (Scaldwell, Frame & Cookson, 1985). Since both studies 
used Indian children who speak English as their first language, 
as McShane and Plas (1982) suggested, it could be assumed that LD 
Indian children from more traditional settings tended to produce 
the typical Indian pattern in WISC-R while more acculturated LD 
Indian children displayed Banna tyne's pattern. Thus, the degree 
of acculturation towards the main-stream English speaking culture 
could be an additional factor to exhibit Bannatyne's 
recategor ization of WISC-R subtests differently. 

3.3 Summary 

For measuring intelligence of Native children, cultural 
content bias against Native children is indicated in the question 
items of the WISC-R information subtest. In addition, 
Bannaytne's recategor ization of WISC and WISC-R subtests 
suggested that the scoring pattern for LD children was 
Spatial>Conceptual>Sequential . However, Indian children from 
traditional settings were likely to exhibit the pattern of 
Spatial>Sequent ial>Conceptual which is commonly known as the 



15 



typical Indian pattern. The degree of acculturation seems to 
influence, to a certain degree, Bannaytne's recategor ization of 
intelligence among Native children. Hence, interpretation of the 
intelligence tests results (e.g., WISC, WISC-R) should take into 
an account of acculturation factor for Native children. 

4. Discussion: Is There Alternative Approach to Measuring 
Intelligence of Minority children? 

The item difficulty pattern of WISC-R subtest showed a 
cultural content bias against minority groups. The study on 
measuring intelligence of Native children indicated some cultural 
biases in question items of the WISC-R Information subtest. In 
addition, the LD pattern of Bannytne's recategor ization was not 
observed among LD Indian children when they grew up in a 
traditional Native settings. Therefore, the degree of 
acculturation rr>ay affect intelligence scores of minority 
children. Then, what is the possible approach to assess the 
intelligence of children from the outside of the main-stream 
culture? Two attempts to assess intelligence of minority 
children are examined in this section; first, cultural free (or 
fair) tests to remove cultural effects on IQ scores, and second, 
re-calculation of IQ scores using an Estimated Learning Potential 
to predict academic success without interference of cultural 
effects . 

To eliminate the cultural influence, cattell designed the 



16 



16 

Cultural Free Test which consisted of entirely nonverbal 
materials. The shorter revised version is called the Personality 
and Ability Testing (IPAT) cultural Free Intelligence Test. The 
test was intended to ensure the results of IQ tests freedom from 
bias by cultural learning effects (Smith, 1959). in 1950s, the 
Cultural Free Test was evaluated as containing a high reliability 
and validity (Drake, 1953; Schwesinger, 1953; Smith, 1959). 

Milholland (1965), however, pointed out that five references 
of the manual cited for Scales 2 and 3 did not provide any 
evidence of the *g' saturation of the tests. Besides, a few 
cross-cultural studies cited by the manual are not readily 
available in the literature. In addition, "these results hardly 
seem to furnish definitive evidence of the outstanding freedom 
from culture effects of the culture fair test" (Milholland, 1965, 
p. 721). The IPAT Cultural Free Test are constructed on the 
basis o£ the concept of crystallized and fluid intelligence which 
cannot be clearly separated from each other in the scores on the 
tests. Occasionally, black children are reported to find 
cultural free (or fair) tests are more difficult than verbal 
tests (Sattler, 1982). 

As another means to assess the learning abilities of 
children from minority groups, Mercer and Lewis (1978) proposed 
to use an Estimated Learning Potential (ELP). since WISC-R As 
useful to predict an academic success of students, WISC-R serves 
as a measure of School Functioning Level (SFL). However, 
children from minority groups cannot be evaluated solely against 

erJc 1 7 



17 

the standard WISC-R norms. Hence, Mercer suggested using ELP 
scores, to be calculated by re-adjusting the wisc-R scores in 
consideration of child's socio-cultural characteristics. 

Oakland (1983) conducted the study of concurrent and 
predictive validity for both WISC-R and WISC using 396 children 
from Grades 1 to 8 analyzed on the basis of racial-ethnic groups 
(Anglo, Black and Mexican American) and social classes (middle 
and lower). The subtests of the California Achievement Test were 
used to measure abilities of English-reading and mathematics as 
criteria. The study found that concurrent predictions of reading 
and mathematics achievement are made more accurately with WISC-R 
IQ scores than with ELP scores, and that predicting achievement 
three years later (1976-1979) was likely to be make more 
accurately with WISC-R scores than ELP scores (Oakland, 1983). 
Thus, the WISC-R score modifying method of ELP scores resulted in 
a decrease of predictive power. 

As Vernon (1969) pointed out, cattell misstated that fluid 
ability tests are largely immune to cultural influence; actually, 
the skills of these tests (fluid ability tests or cultural free 
tests) "would appear to be built up In just the same way as those 
involved in verbal reasoning" (Vernon, 1969, p. 25). In other 
words, since even mathematical concepts including spatial and 
sequential understanding are taught at school differently 
according to each cultural context, the cultural experience of 
children will also affect performance of nonverbal tests. The 
attempt at computing an ELP also failed to predict a child's 



13 



18 

academic success. A simple re-calculation of WISC-R scores on 
the basis of family size, family structure, socio-economic status 
and urban acculturation does not indicate so-called Estimated 
Learning Potential; ELP scores cannot predict school achievement 
more accurately than WISC-R scores. These two attempts at 
cultural free tests and ELP scores failed to assess the 
intelligence of minority groups as a predictor of a child's 
school achievement. 

As long as the purpose of IQ tests remains to predict 
scholastic performance in Canadian main-stream schools for child 
placement and counselling, the tests should be able to measure 
those abilities most relevant to the curriculum and type of 
instruction which were shaped largely European and North American 
middle-class populations. Therefore, IQ tests ironically have to 
contain a certain degree of cultural bias toward children with 
non-main-stream cultures in order to have a reasonably high 
correlation with an academic success at school. Accordingly, IQ 
tests will be able to provide more accurate prediction for 
child's academic success when these IQ tests reflect a certain 
degree of the cultural context of the dominating school 
environment . 

Still, as pointed out earlier in this paper, the results of 
IQ tests could be influenced by various factors of the child's 
cultural background, primary language and handicapped conditions. 
Maintaining a tolerant view towards cultural bias in IQ tests 
implies the necessity that the minority child adjusts to the 



19 



19 

main-stream culture, which may result In the rejection o£ the 
child's own cultuial heritage. This view is often cast as 
'assimilation* and considered not to be of value to maintain the 
cultural identity of minority groups. Since Canada proposed 
•multlculturallsm' in the Constitution Act, 1982, education 
system should play a role to preserve and enhance the 
multicultural heritage of Canadians. 

Furthermore, the commonly-used IQ tests in Canada do not 
necessarily represent the child's true general ability, even 
though these tests will have a reasonable predictive power of 
child's academic success at Canadian schools. Therefore, though 
a compromise, but the most careful and sensitive approach to 
assess intelligence of Canadian minority children have to be a 
multiple assessment approach using already established tests as a 
part of the information used to assess a child's learning 
abilities in order to facilitate adequate education and 
counselling. 



ERIC ?() 



20 



References 

Bannatyne, A. (1974). Diagnosis: A note on recategor ization of 
WISC scale scores. JflHIJiaJ Q* Learning Disabilities, 1, 272- 
273. 

Bracken, B. A., & Prasse D. P. (1981). Comparison of the PPVT, 
PPVT-R, and intelligence tests used for the placement of 
black, white and Hispanic EMR students. Journal of School 
Psychology. 12., 304-311. 

Canada, Indian and Northern Affairs (1977). Urbanization and 
Indian people and an analyt ical literature review. Ottawa: 

Development Planning Associates. 

Connelly, J. B. (1983). Recategor ized WISC-R score patterns of 
older and younger referred Tlingit Indain children. Psychology, 
in th» Schools. 2JL, 271-275. 

Cyr, J. J., & Atkinson, L. (1987). Test item bias in the WISC-R. 
Canadian Journal of Behavi oural Science. 12., 101-107. 

Diessner, R., & Walker, J. L. (1986). A cognitive pattern of the 
Yakima Indian students. Journal of American Indian Education, 
IS., 66-70. 

Drake, R. M. (1953). The IPAT cultural free intelligence tests. 
In O. Buros (Ed.), worth mpntal measurements yearbook. New 
York: Gryphon Press, 401-402. 

Eysenck, H. J., & Lamln, L. (1981). The intelligence controversy. 
New York: John Wiley & Sons. 

Frideres, J. S. (1988). Native peo ples in Canada: Contemporary 
Conflicts . Scarborough, Ontario: Prentice-Hall Canada. 

Goodenough, F. (1962). Racial differences in the intelligence of 
school children. Journal of Experimental Psychology, i, 368- 
397 . 

Jensen, A. R. (1969). How much can we boost IQ and scholastic 
achievement? Harvard E ducational Review. 1£, 1-123. 

Jensen, A. R. (1976). Race and the genetics of intelligence. In 
N. J. Block & G. Dworkin (eds.), The iq controversy. New York: 
Pantheon Books. 

Johnston, W. T., & Bolen, L. M. (9184). A comparison of the 
factor structure of the WISC-R for blacks and whites. 
Psycholog y In the Schools. 21, 42-44. 




CI 



21 



Krywaniuk, L. W., & Das, J. P. (1976). cognitive stratefies in 
Native children: Analsyis and intervention. Al berta Journal 
of Educational R esearch . 21, 42-44. 

MacArthur, R. S. (1968). Assessing intellectual potential of 
Native Canadian pupils. Alberta Journal of Educational 
Research. 21/ 271-280. 

McShare, D. A., & Plas, J. M. (1984). Response to a critique of 
the HcShane & Plus review of American Indian performance on 
the Wechsler intelligence scales. School Psychology Review . 
11, 83-88. 

Magnussen, M., & Palsson, H. (1966). The Vlneland saga» ; 

The Norse discovery of America! Graenlendlnga saoa and Elrlk's 
sjiaa.. New York: University Press. 

Marx, R . W. (1984). Canadian content and the WISC-R information 
subtest. Canadian Journal of Behavioural Science. If., 30-35. 

Mercer, J. R . , & Lewis, J. F. (1978). Systematic multicultural 
pluralistic assessment! student assessment manual . New York: 
Psychological Corporation. 

Milholland, J. E. (1965). Cultural free intelligence tests. 
In 0. Buros (Ed.), Sixth mental measurements yearbook . New 
York: Gryphon Press, 719-721. 

Mueller, H. H . , Mulcahy, R. P., wilgosh, L . , watters, B., & 
Mancini, G. J. (1986). An analysis of VISC-R item responses 
with Canadian Inuit children. Alberta Journal of Educational 
Kcaearch ,. 12., 12-36. 

Naglieri, J. A. (1986). WISC-R and K-ABC comparison for matched 
samples of black and white children. Journal of school 
Psychology. 2A, 81-88. 

Oakland, T. (1983). Concurrent and predictive validity estimates 
for the WISC-R IQs and ELPs by racial-ethnic and SES groups. 
School Psychology Review. 12, 57-61. 

Perters, H. D. (1976). The validity of the wechsler intelligence 
scale for children - Revised. Canadian Journal of Behavioral 
Science. £, 414-417. 

Sattler, J. M. (1982). Assessment of children's intelligence and 
special abilities . Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Sattler, J. M. (1988). Assessment of children . Boston: Allyn and 
Bacon . 



ERJC 22 



22 



Saskatchewan, Department of Education. (1985). inner-city dropout 
study . Regina, Saskatchewan: Department of Education. 

Scaldwell, W. A., Frame, J. E., & Cookson, D. G. (1985). 

Indivisual intellectual assessment of Chippewa, Muncey, and 
Oneida children using the WISC-R. Canadian Journal of school 
Psychology . 1, 15-21. 

Schwesinger, G. C. (1953). The IPAT cultural free intelligence 
tests. In 0. Buros (Ed.), Forth mental measurements yearbook. 
New York: Gryphon Press, 402. 

Seyfort, B., Spreen, 0., & Lahmer, V. (1980). A critical look at 
the wiflC-R with Native Indian children, Alhfirfrfl ilouxnaJ nf 

Educational Research , 26 f 14-24. 

Smith, I. N. (1959). IPAT cultural free intelligence tests. In 0. 
Buros (Ed.), Fifth mental measurements yearbook. New York: 
Gryphon Press, 473-474. 

Statistics Canada (1984). 1981 Census of Canada; Population; 
Ethnic origin . Ottawa: Minister of supply and Services 
Canada . 

Taylor, R. L., Ziegler, E. W., Partenio, I. (1984). An 

investigation of WISC-* verbal-performance differences as a 
function of ethlnlc status. Psychology In the Schools , 21 , 
437-441. 

Teuber, J. P. t & Furlong, M. J. (1985). The concurrent validity 
of the expressive one-word picture vocabulary test for 
Mexican-amer lean children. Educational Review ,. 22.* 269-273. 

Vernon, P. E. (1966). Educational and intellectual development 
among Canadian Indians and Eskimos. Part 1, 2. Educational 
Review , L$_, 79-91 & 186-196. 

Vernon, P. E. (1969). Educational and intellectual development 
among Canadian Indians and Eskimos. Part 1,2. Educational 
Review . i&, 79-91 & 186-196. 

Vernon, P. E. (1976). Modifications in WISC-R for Canadian use. 
' Canadian Psychological Association Bulletin, £, 4-5. 

Wechsler, D. (1974). Manual for the Wechsler I ntelligence scale 
for children - Revised . New York: Psychological Corporation. 

Zarske, J. A., & Moore, C, L. (1982). Recategor ized WISC-R scores 
for non-handicapped, learning disabled, educationally 
disadvantaged and regular classroom Navajo children, school 
Psychology Review, H, 319-323. 



ERIC C3 



