ED369577 1994-06-00 Asian-American 
Children: What Teachers Should Know 

ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Development Team 
www . eric . ed . gov 

Table of Contents 

If you're viewing this document online, you can click any of the topics below to link directly to that section. 

Asian-American Children: What Teachers Should Know. ERIC Digest.. 1 

ASIAN-AMERICAN CHILDREN: WHO ARE THEY? 2 

ASIAN-AMERICAN CHILDREN: ARE THEY ALL "WHIZ KIDS"? 2 

ASIAN-AMERICAN CHILDREN: HOW DO THEY DIFFER FROM 

OTHER CHILDREN? 3 

HOW CAN TEACHERS HELP ASIAN-AMERICAN CHILDREN? 4 

FOR MORE INFORMATION 5 

ERIC i^p Digests 

ERIC Identifier: ED369577 
Publication Date: 1994-06-00 
Author: Feng, Jianhua 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood Education Urbana IL. 

Asian- American Children: What Teachers 
Should Know. ERIC Digest. 

THIS DIGEST WAS CREATED BY ERIC, THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER. FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT ERIC, CONTACT 
ACCESS ERIC 1-800-LET-ERIC 

Asian-Americans constitute a significant minority in the U.S. and are one of the fastest 



ED369577 1994-06-00 Asian-American Children: What Teachers Should Know. ERIC Page 1 of 6 

Digest. 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



growing ethnic groups in this country, yet little is known about their particular 
educational needs, especially at the early childhood and elementary levels. This digest 
provides information to help teachers gain a better understanding of Asian-American 
children, particularly those from East and Southeast Asian cultures, and identify 
culturally appropriate educational practices to use with those children. 

ASIAN- AMERICAN CHILDREN: WHO ARE 
THEY? 



The term Asian-American covers a variety of national, cultural, and religious heritages. 
Indeed, Asian-Americans represent more than 29 distinct subgroups who differ in 
language, religion, and customs. The four major groups of Asian-Americans are East 
Asian, such as Chinese, Japanese, and Korean; Pacific Islander; Southeast Asian, such 
as Thai and Vietnamese; and South Asian, such as Indian and Pakistani (Pang, 1990). 
Although there are similarities among the various subgroups, they have different origins, 
ecological adaptations, and histories. 

In addition to these between-group differences, diversity exists within national groups 
and among individuals. Individual differences are found in reasons for migration, related 
hopes and expectations, and reception by the dominant culture. Some immigrants are 
refugees from countries torn apart by war, others from the middle class of stable 
countries. Some came with nothing, others with skills and affluence (Brand, 1987). 
Many Asian-Americans were born in the U.S. Some are fourth- or fifth- generation 
Americans. A disparity exists between foreign-born Asians living in this country and 
American-born Asians who are often quite acculturated (Hartman & Askounis, 1989). 

ASIAN- AMERICAN CHILDREN: ARE THEY ALL 
"WHIZ KIDS"? 



Asian-Americans are generally stereotyped as successful, law-abiding, and 
high-achieving minorities. The success of many Asian-American students has created a 
new "model minority" stereotype. They have been described in popular and professional 
literature as "whiz kids," and as "problem free." Some claim that Asians are smarter 
than other groups; others believe there is something in Asian culture that breeds 
success, perhaps Confucian ideas that stress family values and education (Brand, 
1987). However, Asian-Americans' educational achievement cannot be attributed to 
natural superiority or shared cultural and family values, but rather to the interaction of 
those cultural and family values with social factors (Siu, 1992). 
The "whiz kids" image is a misleading stereotype that masks individuality and conceals 
real problems. If Asian students are viewed as instant successes, there is less 
justification for assisting those who may need help. The result may be neglect, isolation, 
delinquency, and inadequate preparation for the labor market among those students. 
For many Asian children, the challenge of schooling can be overwhelming. Not only 



Page 2 of 6 ED369577 1994-06-00 Asian-American Children: What Teachers Should Know. ERIC 

Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



may American schooling contradict their own cultural system, but it may also undermine 
their sense of well-being and self-confidence (Trueba & Cheng, 1993) because the 
ethnic identity of Asian children is often based on their relation to their group. In 
contrast, American schooling emphasizes independence, individualism, and 
competition. 

Asian-American children are a diverse group. Not all are superior students; some have 
various kinds of learning difficulties (Shen & Mo, 1990). Some lack motivation, 
proficiency in English, or financial resources; others have parents who do not 
understand the American school system because of cultural differences, language 
barriers, or their more immediate quest for survival (Yao, 1988). Many children, 
struggling with a new language and culture, drop out of school. Further, the majority of 
Asian-American students do not reach the starry heights of the celebrated few, and an 
alarming number are pushing themselves to the emotional brink in their quest for 
excellence (Brand, 1987; Trueba & Cheng, 1993). 

ASIAN- AMERICAN CHILDREN: HOW DO THEY 
DIFFER FROM OTHER CHILDREN? 



Although diversity among Asian-American groups makes overall descriptions difficult, 
there are general cultural characteristics, values, and practices shared by most Asians, 
particularly East and Southeast Asians, that are different from the mainstream American 
culture. 

In many East and Southeast Asian cultures, Confucian ideals, which include respect for 
elders, deferred gratification, and discipline, are a strong influence. Most 
Asian-American parents teach their children to value educational achievement, respect 
authority, feel responsibility for relatives, and show self control. Asian-American parents 
tend to view school failure as a lack of will, and to address this problem by increasing 
parental restrictions. Asian-American children tend to be more dependent, conforming, 
and willing to place family welfare over individual wishes than are other American 
children. 

Teachers in Asian culture are accorded a higher status than teachers in the United 
States. Asian-American children may be confused by the informality between American 
teachers and students and expect considerable structure and organization. Asian 
children tend to need reinforcement from teachers, and work more efficiently in a 
well-structured, quiet environment (Baruth & Manning, 1992). 

Self-effacement is a trait traditionally valued in many Asian cultures. Asian children tend 
to wait to participate, unless otherwise requested by the teacher. Having attention 
drawn to oneself, for example, having one's name put on the board for misbehaving, 
can bring considerable distress. Many Asian children have been socialized to listen 
more than speak, to speak in a soft voice, and to be modest in dress and behavior. 



ED369577 1994-06-00 Asian-American Children: What Teachers Should Know. ERIC Page 3 of 6 

Digest. 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



HOW CAN TEACHERS HELP ASIAN- AMERICAN 
CHILDREN? 

Teachers can adopt practices to address problems that relate to their unfamiliarity with 
Asian-American cultures and to the differences that exist in Asian-American 
populations. When developing curriculum and instruction that are developmentally 
appropriate, culturally sensitive, and methodologically adaptable, teachers should: 

* Familiarize themselves with the values, traditions, and customs of various cultures; 
and learn the migratory conditions specific to each of their students' families. If possible, 
a home visit should be made to gain insight into the student's family life and support 
system (Baruth & Manning, 1992). 

* Learn at least a few words of their Asian students' native languages. By showing such 
interest, teachers can set the tone for better communication. Classroom teachers 
should also collaborate with language professionals and ESL teachers (Trueba & 
Cheng, 1993). 

* Encourage parents to help children maintain their native language at home, while the 
school helps the child attain proficiency in English. Teachers can also use 
English-proficient Asian students as interpreters with Asian parents. 

* Base academic expectations on individual ability rather than on stereotypical beliefs. 

* Alleviate the disjunctures Asian children may experience between school and home. 
For example, while a student may be told at school to challenge others' views, the same 
child may be told at home to be quiet and not challenge authority. To avoid such 
conflicts, teachers can organize classroom activities around naturalistic interactions that 
permit the child to take the lead and to build upon modeling. 

* Consider peer teaching. Asian-American children who are not fluent in English may 
feel threatened by having to answer questions in front of the whole class. Peer tutoring 
can be an effective means of engaging these children in activities that foster language 
skills. 

* Utilize the student's natural support system, including family, friends, and the 
community. Know who makes the decisions about education in the family, who provides 
care for the child after school, and, when applicable, who provides translation for the 
family. 

* In planning instruction and activities, avoid assumptions about what the children know. 
For example, not all children have experienced a birthday party. 

* Learn about the Asian population in their school district. Teachers can encourage 
parents to assist one another in serving as facilitators and informants (Trueba & Cheng, 



Page 4 of 6 ED369577 1994-06-00 Asian-American Children: What Teachers Should Know. ERIC 

Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



1993), and can work with a network of Asian parents, encouraging parents established 
in the community to provide assistance for new arrivals. 

FOR MORE INFORMATION 

Baruth, LG. and M.L Manning. (1992). MULTICULTURAL EDUCATION OF 
CHILDREN AND ADOLESCENTS. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 
Brand, D. (1 987). THE NEW WHIZ KIDS. Time, 1 30(9, Aug 31 ): 42-51 . EJ 358 595. 

Hartman, J.S. and A.C. Askounis. (1989). Asian-American Students: Are They Really a 
"MODEL MINORITY"? SCHOOL COUNSELOR, 37(2, Nov): 85-88. EJ 408 177. 

Pang, V.O. (1990). Asian-American Children: A Diverse Population. Educational Forum, 
55(1, Fall): 49-66. EJ 416 435. 

Shen, W. and W. Mo. (1 990). REACHING OUT TO THEIR CULTURES: BUILDING 
COMMUNICATION WITH ASIAN-AMERICAN FAMILIES. ED 351 435. 

Siu, S-F. (1992). How Do Family and Community Characteristics Affect Children's 
Educational Achievement? The Chinese-American Experience. EQUITY AND CHOICE, 
8(2): 46-49. EJ 443 932. 

Siu, S-F. (1994). TAKING NO CHANCES: PROFILE OF A CHINESE-AMERICAN 
FAMILY'S SUPPORT FOR SCHOOL SUCCESS. Boston, MA: Wheelock College. ED 
361 446. 

Trueba, H.T. and L. Cheng. (1993). MYTH OR REALITY: ADAPTIVE STRATEGIES OF 
ASIAN AMERICANS IN CALIFORNIA. Bristol, PA: Falmer Press. 

Yao, E.L (1988). Working Effectively with Asian Immigrant Parents. PHI DELTA 
KAPPAN, 70(3, Nov): 223-225. EJ 379 981 . 



References identified with an ED (ERIC document) or EJ (ERIC journal) number are 
cited in the ERIC database. Most documents are available in ERIC microfiche 
collections at more than 825 locations worldwide, and can be ordered through EDRS: 
(800) 443-ERIC. Journal articles are available from the original journal, interlibrary loan 
services, or article reproduction clearinghouses, such as: UMI (800) 732-0616; or ISI 
(800) 523-1850. 



This publication was funded by the Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. RR93002007. the opinions expressed 



ED369577 1994-06-00 Asian-American Children: What Teachers Should Know. ERIC Page 5 of 6 

Digest. 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of OERI. ERIC Digests 
are in the public domain and may be freely reproduced. 



Title: Asian-American Children: What Teachers Should Know. ERIC Digest. 
Document Type: Information Analyses— ERIC Information Analysis Products (lAPs) 
(071); Information Analyses— ERIC Digests (Selected) in Full Text (073); 
Descriptors: Academic Achievement, Asian Americans, Confucianism, Cultural 
Awareness, Cultural Differences, Cultural Influences, Cultural Traits, Elementary School 
Students, Elementary Secondary Education, Ethnic Stereotypes, Family School 
Relationship, Limited English Speaking, Parent Student Relationship, Secondary School 
Students, Teacher Role, Teacher Student Relationship 
Identifiers: ERIC Digests 
### 



[Return to ERIC Digest Search Page] 



Page 6 of 6 ED369577 1994-06-00 Asian-American Children: What Teachers Should Know. ERIC 

Digest. 



