DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 437 229 



RC 022 079 



AUTHOR 



TITLE 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Reese, Debby; Slapin, Beverly; Landis, Barb; Atleo, Marlene; 
Caldwell, Naomi; Mendoza, Jean; Miranda, Deborah; Rose, La 
Vera; Smith, Cynthia 

A Critical Review of Ann Rinaldi's "My Heart Is on the 
Ground: The Diary of Nannie Little Rose, A Sioux Girl, 
Carlisle Indian School, Pennsylvania, 1880. " 

1999-00-00 

21p. 

Web site: <http://www.oyate.org/main.html> (choose "Books to 
Avoid" ) . 

Historical Materials (060) -- Book/Product Reviews (072) 

MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage . 

♦Acculturation; *American Indian Education; American Indian 
History; Boarding Schools; Book Reviews; *Books; *Childrens 
Literature; Educational History; Elementary Secondary 
Education; Federal Indian Relationship; *Literary Criticism; 
Sioux (Tribe) ; Stereotypes; *Student Experience 
♦Carlisle Indian School PA 



ABSTRACT 



This paper critically reviews the book, "My Heart Is On the 
Ground: The Diary of Nannie Little Rose, a Sioux Girl, Carlisle Indian 
School, 1800." The review begins with a profile of Captain Richard Henry 
Pratt who founded the Carlisle (Pennsylvania) Indian Industrial School in 
1879. Pratt's philosophy was to "kill the Indian and save the man." 

Statements from former students describe life at the school as a horrific 
experience in which Indian children were forced to cut their hair, replace 
traditional clothing with military uniforms, and speak English. Children were 
also stripped of their Indian names, a source of cultural pride and identity. 
Despite all the documented horrors, the book casts the school in a positive 
light through the eyes of the main character, Nannie Little Rose. The review 
contends that from a literary perspective, the book lacks consistency and 
logic; as a work of historical fiction, it has many factual errors; and as a 
work of multicultural literature, it lacks authenticity. For example, 
throughout the book Nannie Little Rose uses the phrase "my heart is on the 
ground" whenever she is sad or upset. In its original form this statement 
conveys the strength and courage of Indian women, but in the context of the 
book, it trivializes the Indian belief system. Many other examples show how 
the book lacks historical accuracy and cultural authenticity and is replete 
with stereotypical language and treatment of girls and women. The review 
suggests that this book adds to the great body of misinformation about Native 
life and epitomizes the lack of sensitivity and respect that has come to 
characterize the vast majority of children's books about Native Americans. 



(LP) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



t OZ'Z0'?i 



V- — 



ON 

CS 



cn 

@ 



U.8. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

OHice of Educational Research and improvement 

DNAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

r'fhis document has been reproduced as 
received from' the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction Quality. 

• Points of vievi# or opinions stated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy. 




"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

bet>b;i 



l\e.csej 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC).” 



A Critical Review of Ann Rinaldi’s 




My Heart Is On the Ground 
The Diary of Nannie Little Rose, a Sioux Girl 
Carlisle Indian School, Pennsylvania, 1880 

New York: Scholastic (1999) 

205 pages, b/w photos 
grades 4-7 
ISBN 0-590-14922-9 

This review can be found on Oyate’s website 
www.oyate.org 
(“books to avoid”) 

2 






f 



A Critical Review of Ann Rinaldi’s 
My Heart Is On the Ground 
The Diary of Nannie Little Rose, a Sioux Girl 
Carlisle Indian School, 1880 
New York: Scholastic (1999) 

205 pages, b/w photos 
grades 4-7 
ISBN 0-590-14922-9 



INTRODUCTION 

There is a story behind this review and how it came to be. In March, Debbie Reese (Namb6), a doctoral student 
at the University of Illinois, saw My Heart Is On the Ground in a local bookstore. She picked it up, skimmed it, 
and put it down in distaste. She walked away from it, took a few steps, and felt it couldn’t be ignored. Reading 
through the book, she was outraged and called Beverly Slapin of Oyate in Berkeley and read excerpts to her. 
Beverly had already ordered a review copy from Scholastic and was not looking forward to reading it. A day 
later and equally outraged (or “stunned but not surprised” as she said), Beverly called it the “worst book she had 
ever read.” Both women began talking about this book to colleagues. 

Debbie contacted Barb Landis, a research specialist on the Carlisle Indian Industrial School. Barb had also read 
the book and felt it was an outrageous depiction of a tragic period in Native American history. A series of inter- 
net and telephone discussions followed, and the circle came to include Marlene Atleo (Nuu-chah-nulth), Naomi 
Caldwell (Ramapough), Jean Mendoza, Deborah Miranda (Ohlone-Coastanoan Esselen), LaVera Rose (Dakota), 
and Cynthia Smith (Creek). We quickly drew up a first draft of what came to be this review, with each of us con- 
tributing particular areas of knowledge about Carlisle Indian School, Dakota culture and history, and critical 
evaluation of children’s books; and, a few days later, Debbie raised the issues it contained at a children’s litera- 
ture conference at the University of Wisconsin in Madison. 

As individuals, we write and speak in many voices, but we feel that our collective authorship of this piece adds 
to its strength. This piece represents a first-time collaboration among nine women. Some of us are Indian and 
some of us are not. Some of us are parents and grandparents and some of us are not. We all call ourselves teach- 
ers in some way; as well, we are learners. For purposes of practicality, we are listing our names alphabetically. 

We do this for our children and grandchildren — Elizabeth, Carlos, Will, Michael, Michele, Stephanie, Miranda, 
Danny, Robert, Aimee, William, Thomas, Terri, Jamal, Kiana, Rose, Brittany, Shelena, Noah, Kevin, Tyson, Tara, 
Alexandria — and for their children and the next seven generations. 



A BRIEF DIGRESSION ABOUT PRATT, CARLISLE, 

AND THE BOARDING SCHOOL EXPERIENCE 

Because Captain Richard Henry Pratt figures so prominently in this book, it might be a good thing to stop for a 
moment and look at who he was and what his relationship was to Carlisle Indian Industrial School. Bom in 
1840, Pratt began his military career by enlisting in the Union army in 1861. As a young cavalry officer, Pratt 




3 



1 



commanded a regiment of Buffalo Soldiers. The Buffalo Soldiers were a Black regiment, that, along with hired 
Indian scouts, were used as mercenaries, Indian-fighters, for the benefit of white expansionism during the post- 
Civil War period. In 1875, Pratt was assigned the command of Fort Marion, the notorious prisoner-of-war camp 
in Saint Augustine, Florida, where Kiowa, Comanche, and Cheyenne prisoners were taken as hostages to ensure 
the subjugation of their people. 

A decade later, Chiricahua Apache men, women, and children were also sent to Fort Marion, where the children 
were separated from their parents and sent on to Carlisle. It was at Fort Marion that Pratt began to formulate his 
early ideas about “civilizing” the Indians: he cut off their hair, replaced their traditional clothing with military 
uniforms, organized them into hierarchical-structured regiments, and taught them English. After enrolling sever- 
al of the Fort Marion prisoners at the Hampton School for Negro Children in Virginia, Pratt recruited young chil- 
dren from the Standing Rock Agency and his ideas about Indian “education” began to take shape. 

In 1879, Pratt founded the Carlisle Indian Industrial School, which he ruled with an iron hand, his stated philos- 
ophy being “Kill the Indian and save the man.” Carlisle, and the Indian boarding schools which followed, were 
set up to break spirits, to destroy traditional extended families and cultures, to obliterate memories and lan- 
guages, and especially to make the children deny their Indianness, inside and out. 

Sun Elk, from Taos Pueblo, told of his experiences at Carlisle in 1890: 

They told us that Indian ways were bad. They said we must get civilized. I remember that word, 
too. It means 'be like the white man.’ I am willing to be like the white man, but I did not believe 
Indian ways were wrong. But they kept teaching us for seven years. And the books told how bad 
the Indians had been to the white men — burning their towns and killing their women and chil- 
dren. But I had seen white men do that to Indians. We all wore white man ’s clothes and ate 
white man’s food and went to white man’s churches and spoke white man’s talk. And so after a 
while we also began to say Indians were bad. We laughed at our own people and their blankets 
and cooking pots and sacred societies and dances. I tried to learn the lessons — and after seven 
years I came home... (Nabokov, 1991, p. 222). 

During the period in which My Heart Is On the Ground takes place. Native people were confined to reserva- 
tions and not allowed to leave without permission of the government-appointed Indian agent assigned to their 
reservations. 

In 500 Nations (1994 ), Alvin Josephy writes: 

By the mid 1870s, reservations had become virtual prisons, ruled like empires by authoritarian 
agents who were given almost total power over the Indians. Shut inside the reservations, where 
outside eyes could not see them, the Indian peoples were subjected to unspeakable abuses. 

Housing monies were stolen, food rations were inadequate or spoiled, people were left to die 
without medical treatment or medicines, others were forcibly separated from their families to be 
punished without trial for real or trumped-up offenses, and individual Indians were frequently 
murdered. 

The Indians were at the mercy of a system of corrupt government officials and private suppliers 
and speculators, known collectively as the Indian Ring, who, taking advantage of public indiffer- 



er|c 



2 



4 



ence, cheated the powerless tribes. Trapped on the reservations, without freedom and the ability 
to provide for themselves in time-tested fashion or make their complaints known, the Indian fam- 
ilies lived in poverty and misery. 

Many parents were coerced into sending their children to these early schools. Many times, children were kid- 
napped and sent far away to schools where they were kept for years on end. Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
Thomas Jefferson Morgan described his procedure for taking the children from their families. He said: 

I would.. .use the Indian police if necessary. I would withhold from [the Indian adults] rations 
and supplies... and when every other means was exhausted...! would send a troop of United 
States soldiers, not to seize them, but simply to be present as an expression of the power of the 
government. Then I would say to these people, 'Put your children in school; and they would do 
it.' (Josephy, 1994, p. 432) 

Still, some parents found ways to avoid sending their children to the schools. In her autobiography, Helen 
Sekaquaptewa (Hopi) remembers that parents taught their children to play a game similar to hide-and-seek to 
avoid being taken away to boarding school. In Boarding School Seasons: American Indian Families 1900-1940, 
Brenda J. Child (Ojibwe) reports: 

The most painful story of resistance to assimilation programs and compulsory school attendance 
laws involved the Hopis in Arizona, who surrendered a group of men to the military rather than vol- 
untarily relinquish their children. The Hopi men served time in federal prison at Alcatraz, (p. 13) 

Many children died at Carlisle, and they died running away from the institution. Child (1995), in her study of 
boarding schools, found that running away was a universal thread that ran across boarding schools and across 
generations. Physical and emotional abuse, including sexual abuse, is well documented in the stories of survivors 
of the boarding schools in the United States and Canada. Children were beaten and worse for not understanding 
English, for speaking their languages, for minor infractions of military rule, for running away, even for grieving. 
Many died of illnesses, many died of abuse, and many died of broken hearts. 

It must be remembered also, that at this time, the Indian boarding schools were a cross-cultural experience for 
children who were taken from their parents and families, who were abruptly thrust into a foreign world, who 
were harshly punished for not knowing what was expected of them. 

Lone Wolf (Blackfoot), tells this story: 

It was very cold that day when we were loaded into the wagons. None of us wanted to go and 
our parents didn't want to let us go. Oh, we cried for this was the first time we were to be sepa- 
rated from our parents. I remember looking back at Na-tah-ki and she was crying too. Nobody 
waved as the wagons, escorted by the soldiers, took us toward the school at Fort Shaw. Once 
there our belongings were taken from us, even the little medicine bags our mothers had given to 
us to protect us from harm. Everything was placed in a heap and set afire. 

Next was the long hair, the pride of all the Indians. The boys, one by one, would break down and 
cry when they saw their braids thrown on the floor. All of the buckskin clothes had to go and we 
had to put on the clothes of the White Man. 



O 

ERIC 



3 



5 



I 



If we thought that the days were bad the nights were much worse. This was the time when real loneli- 
ness set in, for it was when we knew that we were all alone. Many boys ran away from the school 
because the treatment was so bad but most of them were caught and brought back by the police. We 
were told never to talk Indian and if we were caught, we got a strapping with a leather belt. 

I remember one evening when we were all lined up in a room and one of the boys said some- 
thing in Indian to another boy. The man in charge of us pounced on the boy, caught him by the 
shirt, and threw him across the room. Later we found out that his collar-bone was broken. The 
boy *s father, an old warrior, came to the school. He told the instructor that among his people, 
children were never punished by striking them. That was no way to teach children; kind words 
and good examples were much better. Then he added, *Had I been there when that fellow hit my 
son, I would have killed him.' Before the instructor could stop the old warrior he took his boy 
and left. The family then beat it to Canada and never came back. (Nabokov, 1991, p. 220). 

Part of the education students received at boarding schools included distorted instruction about who Indian peo- 
ple were. Chippewa student Merta Bercier wrote: 

Did I want to be an Indian? After looking at the pictures of the Indians on the warpath — -fight- 
ing, scalping women and children, and Oh! such ugly faces. No! Indians are mean people — Tm 
glad Tm not an Indian, I thought. (Josephy, 1994. p. 434). 

Many of those who survived Carlisle came out thoroughly brainwashed, and suffering from what we now call 
“post-traumatic stress syndrome.” 

“The point of brainwashing,” Paula Gunn Allen (Laguna/Sioux) says, 

is to take away all sense of self, of community, of value, of worth, even of orientation, to be 
replaced by habits of mind and behavior that the captor finds acceptable. The boys and girls at 
Carlisle Indian School were trained to be cannon fodder in American wars, to serve as domes- 
tics and farm hands, and to leave off all ideas or beliefs that came to them from their Native 
communities, including and particularly their belief that they were entitled to land, life, liberty, 
and dignity. 

In a short time, the child comes to love and admire his captor,... a not uncommon adjustment 
made by those taken hostage; separated by all that is familiar; stripped, shorn, robbed of their 
very self; renamed. 

By and large the procedure was successful, although the legacy of damaged minds and crippled 
souls it left in its wake is as yet untold. Psychic numbing. Post Traumatic Stress Syndrome, bat- 
tered wife syndrome, suicide, alcoholism, ennui — are there any names for psychecide? A century 
after..., the great-great grandchildren ofdecultured Indians struggle to find the world that was 
ripped away.. .by a deliberate, planned method euphemistically called education. (Allen, 1994, 

pp. 111-112). 



6 



o 

ERIC 



4 



A BRIEF DIGRESSION ABOUT NAMING 



When the administrators at Carlisle took the Indian children’s names away, they knew what they were doing in 
the long, painstaking process of “killing the Indian.” In taking away the linguistic Indian name — which had been 
a source of strength, cultural pride and psychic identity — and making the “new” names very common, written 
everywhere, used again and again, they in effect erased all spiritual aspects of the children’s identities. 
Traditionally, Indian children did not have their names spoken often. When someone was referred to, it was usu- 
ally either by relationship or by a nickname. But the children knew who they were: they belonged to the name, 
and the name belonged to them, and to no other. Naming and self-naming was a fluid, ongoing process which 
changed throughout a person’s life according to circumstance, personal experience, loss, triumph, foolishness, or 
social commentary. So a person could have (at least) a birth name, a baby name, several nicknames, a child 
name, a “young adult” name, an adult name, and an elder name. In addition, there might be a “secret” or cere- 
monial name, known only by the individual and the holy person who gave that name. 

Compare all this, if you will, to the act of “re-naming” at Carlisle, as related by Ota K’te, Plenty Kill, who 
became known as Luther Standing Bear: 

One day when we came to school there was a lot of writing on the blackboards. We did not know 
what it meant.... None of the names were read or explained to us, so of course we did not know 
the sound or meaning of any of them. 

The teacher had a long pointed stick in her hand, and the interpreter told the boy in the front 
seat to come up. The teacher handed the stick to him, and the interpreter told him to pick out 
any name he wanted... When the long stick was handed to him, he turned to us as much to say, 

'Shall / — or will you help me — to take one of these names?' He did not know what to do for a 
time.... 

Finally, he pointed out one of the names written on the blackboard. Then the teacher took a 
piece of white tape and wrote the name on it. Then she cut off a length of the tape and sewed it 
on the back of the boy's shirt. Then that name was erased from the board.... Soon we all had 
names of white men sewed on our backs. (Standing Bear, 1928, in Allen, 1994, pp. 1 16-117) 

Once the children’s naming in this random way became enforced, they were denied the ability to express their 
life stories in name, an act of independent, autonomous identity central to Native ways of being in the world. It 
was a small, but important, step in “killing the Indian.” 

With this history in mind, let us now turn to the children’s book. My Heart Is On the Ground by Ann Rinaldi. 



ABOUT THE DEAR AMERICA SERIES AND 
MY HEART IS ON THE GROUND 

The Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data summary of My Heart Is On the Ground states, “In the 
diary account of her life at a government-run Pennsylvania boarding school in 1880, a twelve-year-old Sioux 
Indian girl reveals a great need to find a way to help her people.” 




5 

7 



In this account, Nannie Little Rose, who refers to herself as “Sioux,” describes her life at Carlisle Indian 
Industrial School, where she has been sent to be educated in the English language, and “American” customs and 
lifeways. Although determined to make her people proud, she finds this new world overwhelming — from its 
inside buildings and cumbersome dress, to the requirements that she take an English name, submit to having her 
hair cut, and adapt to a foreign culture. With the arrival of Nannie’s friend, Lucy Pretty Eagle, the tenor of the 
story shifts. Lucy’s propensity to lapse into self-induced trances causes her to be buried alive by the white people 
who mistakenly think she has died; and Nannie, who was not there to save her, suffers from not only grief but 
overwhelming guilt. But Nannie overcomes all of this, and adapt she does. Resolute in learning all she can in 
order to share her knowledge with her people, Nannie Little Rose meets every challenge and overcomes every 
obstacle, finally deciding to become a teacher “to help other blanket Indian children to learn.” 

All of the books in the “Dear America” series are identical in format. Each book begins with a title page, fol- 
lowed by “the diary.” There is an epilogue, telling us what happened to the protagonist and her descendants 
afterwards. There is a Historical Note and a section of photographs, followed by a section called “About the 
Author,” which gives a biographical sketch and then quotes directly from the author about her research. The fic- 
tional aspect is played down, with the dedication, acknowledgments, and CLP pages in the back. 

The authors of the books are not identified on the book covers or on the spine. Each cover carries the “Dear 
America” logo, a small image of the protagonist, the book title, and a place/time note that indicates setting. Each 
book looks like a genuine diary. The books are attractive to look at and comfortable to hold. Special features 
include a sewn-in satin ribbon bookmark and cream-colored pages cut with a deckled edge that give them the 
look of quality diaries. 

The portrait of the child on the cover of My Heart Is On the Ground, originally entitled “Cree Indian Girl, Little 
Star,” is listed on the permissions page as “Indian Girl, Little Star.” It was done by James Bama, a painter of 
romantic western and Indian subjects. The child in the portrait has her long hair parted and loose. She is wearing 
a headband, with two eagle feathers hanging straight down near her left temple. Her head is tilted forward, and 
her eyes are lowered. Behind her portrait is an underlay of an 1892 photograph of the Carlisle students, their hair 
cut short, in front of the school. 

Discussions with child readers, teachers, and librarians reveal initial confusion about the Active nature of this 
series. The epilogue, especially, continues to confound both professionals and young readers. Are these real 
diaries? Are these fictional diaries of real people? Are the epilogues, at least, real? Given the format of this 
series, it’s hard to tell, unless one is an expert, a detective, or just naturally suspicious. 

“Launched in September 1996, and with over 5 million books in print,” according to Scholastic, “Deeir America 
has become one of the most popular book series in America, charting regularly in the Top 5 on Publisher Weekly 
bestseller lists.” The “Dear America” series clearly has mass appeal, and Scholastic aggressively markets these 
books to nine- to twelve-year-old girls. Marketing strategies and tie-ins include the “Dear America Desk 
Collection,” a “new line of desk accessories for fans of the best-selling book series,” and a series of six hour- 
long “Dear America” movies on HBO. 

The “Dear America” website, also playing down the fact that this series is fiction, states: 

Dear America invites you into the personal experience of girls from different times in American 
History. The books and television show are inspired by real letters and diaries from girls who 



er|c 



6 



lived in extraordinary circumstances. You will experience firsthand what it was like to grow up 
and live in another time and place. 









and 



Open Their Diaries.... Make History Your Own! Today* s most distinguished authors lend their 
voices and talents to these moving narratives — presented in an intimate diary format — with each 
book extensively researched and inspired by real letters and diaries of the time. 

My Heart Is On the Ground is described simply as, “A Sioux girl is sent to the Carlisle Indian School to help 
save her people.” 

The “Dear America” series continues to receive overwhelming critical acclaim. The Chicago Tribune notes that 
the “Dear America diaries represent the best of historical fiction for any age,” and School Library Journal cites 
the books as “engaging and accessible.” 

Like the series. My Heart Is On the Ground has received extremely favorable reviews. School Library Journal 
says, “Rinaldi depicts widely divergent cultures with clarity and compassion.... The period, the setting, and 
Nannie herself all come to life. An excellent addition to a popular series.” 

And Booklist states, 

The entries are a poignant mix of past and present — Nannie* s life with her family, encounters 
with other students, the horrific death of a friend, the efforts of both well-meaning and misguid- 
ed adults. They burst with details of about culture and custom, adding wonderful texture to this 
thought-provoking book, which raises numerous questions as it depicts the frustration, the joy, 
and the confusion of one of yesterday* s children growing up in two cultures. 



THE REVIEW 

There I found the Indian burial ground, with dozens of white headstones bearing the names of 
the Native American children from all tribes who died while at the school. The names, with the 
tribes inscribed underneath, were so lyrical that they leapt out at me and took on instant person- 
alities. Although many of these children attended Carlisle at dates later than that of my story, I 
used some of their names for classmates of Nannie Little Rose. (p. 195) 

Like Lucy Pretty Eagle, not all the children in the book were at Carlisle that first year. But like 
Lucy Pretty Eagle, their personalities came through to me with such force and inspiration, I had 
to use them. I am sure that in whatever Happy Hunting Ground they now reside, they will for- 
give this artistic license, and even smile upon it. (p. 196) 

Individuals in the field of children’s literature may dismiss our concerns and ask, “But is it a good book?” We 
think not. From a literary perspective, it lacks consistency and logic. As a work of historical fiction, it is rife with 
glaring factual errors. As a work of “multicultural” literature, it lacks authenticity. 




7 



9 



•t 



Appropriation 

Appropriation of our lives and literatures is nothing new. Our bodies and bones continue to be displayed in 
museums all over the U.S. and Canada. For the last hundred years, many of our traditional stories have been 
turned into books for children without permission and with little if any respect given to their origins or sacred 
content. Now, Rinaldi has taken this appropriation of Native lives and stories one step further. That she would 
take the names of real Native children from gravestones and make up experiences to go with them is the coldest 
kind of appropriation. These were children who died lonely and alone, without their parents to comfort them. 
They were buried without proper ceremony in this lonely and sad place. Native people who visit the cemetery 
today express a profound sense of sadness. 

Rinaldi chose to name this book by appropriating a Cheyenne proverb that goes, “A nation is not conquered until 
the hearts of its women are on the ground. Then it is done, no matter how brave its warriors nor how strong their 
weapons.” In its original form, this statement is about the strength and courage of Indian women. In its original 
form, the phrase suggests total defeat, the conquering of a nation, the death of a way of life. Throughout this 
book, the child protagonist, Nannie Little Rose, uses the phrase “my heart is on the ground” whenever she hap- 
pens to feel sad or upset. This is a trivialization of the belief system of a people. 



Lack of Historical Accuracy 

A basic criterion of historical fiction is that facts about people who actually lived and events that actually hap- 
pened must be accurate, or, at least, any deviations clearly spelled out. This is especially important in books for 
young readers. Factual errors abound here; they are on nearly every page. 

• There was no such person as “Chief Sitting Bull of Cheyenne nation.” (p. 14) His name was Tatanka lotanka, 
whom the whites called Sitting Bull. He was a spiritual leader, not a chief; and he was Hunkpapa Lakota, not 
Cheyenne. 

• American Horse was not a “chief of the Red Cloud Sioux.” (p. 20) He was a cousin to Red Cloud. 

• Spotted Tail did not take his band west to “be free.” (p. 12) He left Whetstone Agency to get away from the 
alcohol that ran heavily there. 

• The Cheyenne and Oglala “Sioux” were not the only ones to fight Custer, (p. 50) Hunkpapa and Arapaho were 
also part of the battle. 

• The whites did not “give” the Lakota the Black Hills in a treaty (p. 12); by treaty, the people were able to retain 
a portion of what had been theirs for millennia. They are still fighting to keep it. 

• In a diary entry, composed only six months after her arrival at Carlisle, Nannie Little Rose writes in perfect 
English, but transcribes Red Cloud’s speech into her diary, using stilted language instead of Red Cloud’s own 
flowing and eloquent words (pp. 103-104). 

• Spotted Tail sent his sons to Carlisle because he knew it was going to be important for them to learn to speak, 
read and write English. He did not instruct his daughter. Red Road, to recruit children or to convince them to go. 




8 

10 



Yet in this book Red Road says, “You must leam the white people’s ways. To help our people. You will see great 
trees with red apples. You will ride on the iron horse. You will wear a school dress.” (p. 27) As Hyde (1979) 
notes: 

[BJefore he openly supported the plan and ojfered his sons as pupils, [he] stipulated that his 
daughter Red Road and her husband Charles Tackett should go with the children... and be paid a 
salary to act as their guardians.... [He] had the mentality to realize that these children, in far- 
away Pennsylvania, would be terribly frightened and unhappy if some adults of their own tribe 
were not there to protect and advise them. (p. 278) 

• When Spotted Tail visited Carlisle in 1880 and found his children, unhappy, in military uniform, drilling with 
rifles, he insisted that they return with him to Rosebud. In Rinaldi’s rendition of this episode, Nannie writes: 

“We all knew Max and his three brothers did not wish to go, not even Paul. There was much screaming and cry- 
ing. Red Road tried to calm her little brothers. Spotted Tail made them take off their citizens’ clothing and put on 
their blanket clothing. He had to drag Max into the wagon.” (p. 121) But according to historical accounts, the 
scene was just the opposite: 

Spotted Tail [talked] in private with his sons and the other boys from Rosebud and found that 
most of them were miserable and homesick.... None of them had learned English or to read or 
write, (p. 290) 

[He] took all his children, apparently four sons, a grandson, a granddaughter, and another 
small boy he claimed as a close relative. He carried them of] under guard of Sioux chiefs and 
headmen, daring Pratt to try and stop him. Pratt was too overwhelmed to attempt that. He had 
to guard the rest of his school, as there were indications that a general stampede for the train 
might take place. As it was, some of the heartbroken children who were being left at the school 
managed to steal away and hide themselves on the train.... At Harrisburg the train was searched 
again and a little Oglala girl (Red Dog*s granddaughter) was found and dragged screaming 
back to captivity. (Hyde, 1 979, pp. 292-293) 

• Rinaldi paints Pratt as a model of sweet reason, kind to the children, counseling them, talking with them about 
their futures: “Mr. Captain Pratt has been having private talks with every student in our class. He is making sure 
we are doing the right lessons for what we want to become.” (p. 167) Again, written accounts paint a different 
picture: 

It seems curious that church people, humanitarians, and idealists should fall so much in love 
with Pratt. He was a quite ordinary army ojficer who had developed a marked ability for knock- 
ing the spirit out of the Indians and turning them into docile students who would obey all orders. 

Pratt was a domineering man who knew only one method for dealing with anyone who opposed 
his will. He bullied them into submission. (Hyde, 1979, p. 289) 

• All of the references to loaning money or having access to money are inaccurate, (p. 122) Money was not 
available to the children, no matter how much they had earned. It would have been highly unlikely for Nannie to 
have given her brother money without the approval of the administration. 

• Contrary to Rinaldi’s statement in the historical note that “most of the graduates were able to earn a living 
away from the reservation,” and “others went on to higher education,” evidence points to the opposite. Earning a 



ERIC 




9 



I, 



living “away from the reservation” meant going into Indian service and working on a reservation or agency — or 
in one of the dozens of off-reservation boarding schools modeled after Carlisle. And very few children graduat- 
ed. Of the total population of 10,000, only 758 students — or fewer than 10% — graduated. More students ran 
away than graduated — 1,758 runaways are documented. 

Lack of Cultural Authenticity 

The events in My Heart Is On the Ground are not plausible. In 1880, a Lakota child of the protagonist’s age 
would have been well-educated by her aunties and grandmothers in Lakota tradition and lore, and ways of seeing 
the world and behaving in right relation to it. She would probably have had younger children to care for, as well 
as older sisters in her extended family, her tiospaye, to emulate. 

• A Lakota child in 1880 would not have referred to herself as “Sioux.” (beginning at p. 6) It is a French corrup- 
tion of an enemy-name used by the Ojibwe. She would have referred to herself by her band (Sicangu) or location 
(Spotted Tail Agency) or from a much smaller familial group, her tiospaye. And she would certainly not have 
referred to Indian men as “braves.” 

• A Lakota child would not have been misinformed about her own people: “I come from a place called Dakota. 
My people belong to the Great Plains tribe.” (p. 12) Nor would she have voiced stereotypes such as “Our men 
are very brave and honorable. Our women are noble.” (p. 12) Nor would a Lakota child have used phrases such 
as “our men” and “our women”; she would probably have referred to people by their relationships, e.g., “our 
mothers” or “our grandfathers.” Nor would she have used the French word “travois” — she would have used the 
Lakota word, or its English equivalent, pony-drag (p. 33). 

• If this Lakota child had in fact been given a diary (which is highly unlikely at Carlisle in 1880), she would 
probably have been much more circumspect in her writing, because she would have known that words have 
power, even written words. And she would have known that she could be severely punished for speaking her 
thoughts. 

• She would probably not have written about the wholesale slaughter of the buffalo, broken treaties, land theft, 
and “ann-u-itees” (p. 5 and throughout), nor would she have written disparagingly about the white people — 
including the teachers who would read this diary — who held the power of life and death over the children. 

• And a Lakota child certainly would not indict her own people for the theft of the land — “our chiefs have made 
large mistake in giving over our lands.” (p. 5 and throughout) 

• Children who knew some English were used at Carlisle and other boarding schools to help control the other 
children. The respect they were taught at home for their elders was used against them in boarding school. They 
were not taught to be simple interpreters, or “Friends-To-Go-Between-Us” (p. 3 and throughout) — they were 
taught to be informants, and used as such. 

• Children were severely punished for speaking their own languages. They were beaten, confined, forced to eat 
lye soap, and worse. Although they often would speak their own languages in secret, perhaps whispering after 
lights-out, they would not have engaged in such risky behavior in the dining room or in front of Pratt (p. 69) 

• Children might certainly have made fun of their teachers in secret, giving them names like “Miss Chipmunk,” 




10 

12 



V 



J 



but again, they would not write negatively about white adults (in a place where there was no privacy of any 
kind), “She is bad to the eye. Fat and ugly.” (p. 1 3) 

• On page 7, Nannie says, “The white people are very powerful. They know almost everything on the earth’s sur- 
face and in the heavens also. So much to learn!” Here, the young reader is set up to believe that Lakota people 
had/have no scientific knowledge, no education system. By the age of 1 2, Nannie would have been educated by 
her elders in Lakota history, ways of the Earth, Stars, Thunders, Spirits, and healing plants. Although the wisdom 
of these things was passed down through the oral tradition, it does not diminish the wisdom of the people. To 
assume that, one week after arriving at Carlisle, Nannie would have negated all of her traditional teachings is 
unbelievable. 

• After a week at Carlisle, Nannie says, “I think Missus Camp Bell (a teacher) would make a good Sioux 
woman.” (p. 11) Does “Missus Camp Bell” know about traditional ways of being? How could she know how to 
care for a traditional Lakota family if she is not connected to the culture? Could she do quillwork, find food, 
skin animals, cure skins, prepare meat, make traditional clothing? 

• Lakota children were taught to be deferential, cooperative, and respectful to their elders. A Lakota child would 
not have written about her mother, “My mother is jealous of Red Road because she is so young and pretty.” (p. 

1 1) Most plural marriages included sisters or cousins so that there was harmony in the family. Young girls 
learned quillwork from their mothers or aunties. Nannie would not have gone to Red Road’s tipi to learn quill- 
work. 

• On page 4, Nannie says, “I have been on no battles or hunts. Of what worth am I, a girl of twelve winters?” A 
young Lakota girl feeling worthless? One of the seven sacred ceremonies involves a girl’s passage. At 12, she 
would have certainly known her importance to her own family and community as both a cherished child 
(wakanyela, sacred being) and a new young woman. 

• Brothers and sisters have a special bond in Lakota society that was even more pronounced in this time period. 
They were taught to honor each other above all others, including spouses. That way, if there was a divorce, they 
could turn to their siblings for help. Given this bond, a Lakota girl would not criticize her brother this way: “He 
much time acts like a fool.... On the way here he made much trouble.... Whiteshield is always trouble” (pp. 9- 
10 ). 



• Moreover, Nannie would not have been shamed by her brother’s doing a war dance in the yard: “You 
are no warrior.... A warrior does not shame his people.” (p. 39) More than likely, she would have sup- 
ported everything he did because he was being extremely brave in rebelling. 

• Nannie would not have considered her brother “spoiled” for having been honored for counting coup on 
a dead enemy at age 12. “Spoiled” is not a Lakota concept; the honoring of children is; and counting 
coup is counting coup, whether the enemy is dead or alive. 

• And, of course, Whiteshield would not have referred to his sister, or any girl, in a derogatory way, such 
as: “Only a stupid girl would say such a thing.” (p. 39) 

• When Whiteshield, in an act of open rebellion, does a war dance, this is how Nannie describes it: “There was a 
strange figure carrying a torch and doing a dance. He was wearing only a breechclout and moccasins. In his belt 




11 



13 



4 



he had a knife. Around and around he danced while he chanted a war song.” (p. 37) This “strange figure” is her 
brother. He would be known to her and not be considered strange. If he were dancing a particular dance, she 
would name it and understand its significance. If he were singing, she would know the words and what the 
words meant. If all of their traditional clothing had been taken to be sold or destroyed as was the case at Carlisle, 
where did he get a breechcloth and moccasins? And where did he get a knife? 

• He hates baths, Nannie says of her brother (p. 16). Traditionally, Indian people bathed every day. This has 
been documented. Whiteshield may have disliked bathing at the school, in tubs, which would have been far less 
sanitary than bathing in a lake or stream; but this suggests that Indians didn’t like bathing when in fact they 
bathed much more regularly than the newcomers. 

• However, the rebellious Whiteshield finally does a brave deed, according to Nannie: He catches, and brings to 
the guardhouse, a “tramp” who crawled over the school wall, entered the grounds, and stole some wood (p. 82). 
For children who are raised to be generous above all things, it is highly unlikely that they would participate in 
capturing a poor homeless person. And, in any event, it would certainly not be seen as an act of bravery. 

• Nannie’s father would not have asked her to do an act that would have been her brother’s responsibility: “Then ' 
he says I must study and work and obey, and do one act of bravery.... I must bring him honor with this act. I ask 
him if he would also ask one act of bravery from my brother.... [H]e shakes his head and says. ..my brother is 
older, but I am wiser.” (p. 30) It just would not have happened that way. Men and women have different roles in 
Lakota society; they are not subordinate, they are just different. 

• Nor would her father have ever suggested that she take on a vision quest (p. 30). This was and is a male activi- 
ty. Women experience moontime (menstruation) and special ceremonies and practices to acknowledge them. 

• On page 31, Nannie says, “My grandmother.. .has powerful medicine. She has visions. She tells them to the 
shaman, our holy man, who explains it to our people.” (p. 31) If a child’s grandmother indeed had visions, she 
might or might not share them with a spiritual leader. But visions are a private thing; they wouldn’t be 
“explained” to anyone. And “shaman” is not an Indian term. 

• Nannie would not have said, written, or thought; “I think sometimes that Pretty Eagle is going to be a shaman, 
even though she is a girl.” (p. 33) Pretty Eagle is a child, and only post-menopausal women can attain the status 
of spiritual leader. 

• Later, Rinaldi has Nannie’s grandma teaching Pretty Eagle to go into trances, which she practices, and sending 
her on a vision quest, where her “spirit helper” tells her to come to Carlisle and “show the children it is not 
wrong to be here...” (pp. 75-76). This passage suggests a Native spiritual affirmation of the mistreatment of 
Indian children at Carlisle. 

• On page 40, Nannie says, “We learned about the Devil in Sunday school. I think he is like some of our medi- 
cine men. He can change his shape if he wishes.” (p. 40) To compare a respected and loved spiritual leader to the 
foreign Christian concept of “devil” is not something a Lakota child, steeped in Lakota cosmology, would do. 
More likely, she would compare the “devil” to an evil spirit. 

• On page 32, Nannie’s mother asks, “What will you learn? To be more silly than you are?” Lakota children 
were, and are, treated with more respect than that. The Lakota did not/do not talk down to their children. 




12 



14 



• On page 33, Nannie says to Pretty Eagle, “We will gather all the wildflowers on the plains and put them in 
front of every tipi.” This is not something that Lakota children would do. This would be considered wasteful and 
overlays a European perspective on Lakota daily life. 

• On page 58, Nannie is fasting “to find her spirit helper,” something she, as a young woman, would not have 
done. When the doctor orders her to eat, she does, with gusto, then feels guilty: “I had two pieces [of chocolate 
cake]. How can I ever be pure enough to find my spirit helper when I love choc-o-late cake so?” This reflects an 
overlay of European-style guilt upon Lakota belief and ritual. Lakota children would have preferred a big bowl 
of soup, some fry bread and, for “dessert,” a bowl of wojapi instead of chocolate. 

• Nannie Little Rose describes Sun Dance, the most sacred ceremony of the Lakota people, this way: “Part of me 
is missing. I feel like a young warrior in our Sun Dance, who has had the skin near his breasts cut and sticks put 
in the openings. The sticks are fastened to two ropes and I am left hanging, to show my bravery.” (p. 29) This is 
an exoticized description that reflects a lack of understanding of Sun Dance, which is a thank-offering for the 
good of the community. In Sun Dance, 

“participants offer Wakantanka the greatest gift they have, their flesh and blood.... The dancers move in a 
circle around and around and around. The circle represents our universe.... As the participants dance, 
they pray hard for their personal prayers and the prayers of the entire Lakota nation. Family members 
and friends stay nearby to offer their support and send their own prayers to Wakantanka.” (Rose, 1999, 
pp. 34-35) 

Moreover, a Lakota child in 1880 would not likely think about talking to strangers about (or writing about) Sun 
Dance in any way, nor would she obsess over it or dream about it (pp. 123, 127, 131). 

• And a young woman in art class would not be drawing pictures of Sun Dance, as Red Road does (p. 60). She 
just wouldn’t. 

• Later in the diary (p. 44), Nannie Little Rose says, “Today we buried Horace Watchful Fox. The ground was 
hard and cold. I know some of the boys and girls wanted to tear their garments, cut their hair, cover themselves 
with mud, and slash at their arms because the Death Angel took Horace. But we were made to stand in citizens’ 
clothing, clean and quiet.” This is more a description of Rinaldi’s fantasy than it is of a Lakota grieving ceremo- 
ny. Moreover, it is unlikely that children of other nations would participate in a Lakota ritual, nor would children 
of that time period have engaged in the same kind of grieving ceremony as adults. 

• And Indian children would not be gathering evergreen and berries to make funeral wreaths (p. 43) unless they 
had been forced to by school officials. 

• The passage where Nannie describes her father shows a lack of understanding of the clothing traditional people 
wore: “He is wearing his chief’s garments. A shirt with fringe and beaded bands on the shoulders and sleeves. 
Also his chief’s leggings with beads, his bear claw necklace, and his braids are wrapped in otter tails. On his 
head is a stick headdress. I know he wears it to show the white people who we are. But no other men on the 
reservation wear their chief’s clothing. I think my father wishes to be what he once was, maybe so.” (pp. 29-30) 
Tribal leaders did not dress in headdress and regalia every day and every moment. And none of us can even 
guess as to what a “stick headdress” might be. 



13 



^ ^ BEST COPY AVAILABLI 



o 



% 



• A Lakota child would not have been able to give away the possessions of a friend who has just died (p. 147). 

At home, it would have been the parents’ responsibility; and here, at Carlisle, everything would have been taken 
away from the children anyway. 

• The characterization of Belle Rain Water is also confusing. Hopi children were, and are, taught to be quiet, 
respectful people. Hopi children in the foreign culture of a boarding school would be even more likely to keep to 
themselves or to try to seek out their relatives, rather than openly engage in conversation, not to mention argu- 
ments, with people outside their culture. For a Hopi child to be so belligerent and aggressive just does not fit 
with how her society would have raised her. 

• Later, Belle Rain Water, in apology, gives Nannie a prayer stick. A Hopi child would not have given a “prayer 
stick” to a Lakota child, (p. 145) First of all, sacred objects like these were/are not things children have or share, 
especially intertribally. Second (see above comment), all the children’s things were taken away from them; they 
were not permitted to own anything of a cultural/spiritual nature. And finally, where would Belle Rain Water 
have gotten an eagle feather? 

• Wealth is not, and never has been, measured by the number of poles in a tipi! (p. 41) Wealth was measured by 
how much one gave away, not by how much one collected. 

• Among the Plains peoples, kinnikinnic (“kin-ni-kin-nic”) is not tobacco. It is willowbark shavings often mixed 
with tobacco (p. 1 5). 

• Lakota people did not grow corn and wheat in 1 880 (p. 62). 



Stereotypes 

A basic criterion of good children’s literature is that it be free of stereotypes, but stereotypes abound in chil- 
dren’s books about American Indian peoples. They are usually found in descriptive passages about Native char- 
acters. A few authors like Rinaldi take this one step further, by placing stereotypical language and images in an 
Indian child protagonist’s own words. 



Stereotypical Language 

Throughout, Rinaldi uses stereotyped language to express Lakota (or “Indian”) speech and thought patterns. These 
include over-emphasis on compound words (e.g., “Friend-To-Go-Between-Us,” “Time-That-Was-Before,” “night- 
middle-made”) to “sound Indian,” when there is no basis for such use. For instance, Rinaldi makes up the term 
“Friend-To-Go-Between-Us” as Nannie’s word for “interpreter.” Yet there is a Lakota word for “interpreter”: 
iyeska, literally, one who speaks well. The original term meant “translator,” since most translators at the time were 
the mixed-blood children of Indian women and white traders. Hanco’kan is the Lakota word for midnight. 

Rinaldi also uses romantic-sounding metaphors throughout the book: “[T]he path between my mother and me is 
filled with rocks” (p. 27), “The council fire bums bright” (p. 21), [Hjis spring is poisoned with anger” (p. 49), and, of 
course, the ever-present “My heart is on the ground.” A favorite among us is this multi-metaphor: “And her words are 
not empty gourds, with nothing inside to quench our need, but full of meaning, from which I drink hope.” (p. 29) 




14 



16 



* 



Throughout, Nannie romantically obsesses over the concepts “bravery,” “honor,” and “nobleness.” Nannie also 
repeatedly uses the term “blanket Indians” as descriptive, rather than as a derogatory term used by whites at the 
time, to refer to traditional people. 

As well, Nannie Little Rose speaks and writes in the stilted speech pattern we call “early jawbreaker” at the 
beginning of the book (“My teacher. Missus Camp Bell, say I must write in this book each day. She calls it die- 
eerie. It is the white man’s talking leaves. But they talk not yet.... Teacher tells it that I know some English, that 
she is much proud of me, but wants be more proud.”), (p. 3) Yet, in only ten months, Nannie is speaking and 
writing perfect, if not eloquent English, except for when she “lapses” back into “Indian” thought-patterns. 



Stereotypical Nobility 

Throughout, Nannie “explains” Lakota belief and ritual to the child reader, a transparent literary device we find 
annoying. As well, these “beliefs” are wrong. Besides the Sun Dance and mourning ritual, discussed above, there 
are many examples of this. 

• “With my people we believe that all things have a spirit. A war club has a spirit. A prairie dog has two spirits.” 
(p. 81) This is a gross oversimplification of the belief that everything has life and purpose. 

• “In order to be brave I must have a spirit helper.” (pp. 30-31) This obsession with bravery and “spirit helpers” 
runs throughout the book, and, again, is a gross oversimplification of the value of courage. 

Nannie is obsessed with doing “a brave deed to bring honor to my people.” This is practically the only thing she 
thinks about. At the end of the book, young readers are left to believe that her “brave deed” is to play the part of 
a pilgrim in the school’s Thanksgiving play. In the scene which is supposed to show her victory, this little girl 
has successfully made the transition from Indian to white — she has become a clear victim of colonialism. 



Stereotypical Treatment of Girls and Women 

Derogatory references to girls and women abound in this book. Besides coming from Nannie herself (e.g., “Of 
what worth am I, a girl of twelve winters?” — p. 4), most of these references are mouthed by her brother, Charles 
Whiteshield (“only a stupid girl would say such a thing — ^p. 39, “women’s dreams are worth nothing” — p. 67, 
“he says I am not a warrior, just a girl” — ^p. 105). This is not, and never has been, a Lakota way of expression; 
and is the opposite of honored brother-sister relationships (see above). 

As well, traditional Lakota girls and women were not obsessed with appearance. That is not meant to say that 
they did not dress well. But concepts such as “fat and ugly” (p. 13) and “young and pretty” (p. 11) are not 
Lakota concepts. 

Long hair had, and has, great significance for Lakota people. Traditionally, hair was/is cut only at a time of 
mourning. At Carlisle, children’s braids were lopped off to frighten and subdue them, to “cut them off’ from 
their people. When Pretty Eagle gets her hair cut, .Nannie says, “Pretty Eagle is very frightened. I held her hand 
while they cut her hair. When it was cropped short. Pretty Eagle shook her head and only she laughed. “It feels 
so light,” she said. “I think I will like it.” (p. 71) This is not how Lakota children experienced this awful first 
assault. Often, they screamed and cried, and would be beaten for it. 




15 



17 



% 



In describing the practice of Lakota courtship, Nannie says, “If I came of age to wed before our ways were done, 
the man, he puts on his best robe and walk by our tipi. Then he come closer and grab of me. I would struggle, 
but he would win. If I like him I bring him water and ask him to come another time....” (pp. 5-6) This description 
is a mixture of TV-caveman ritual and fantasy. In any event, it is nothing like traditional Lakota courtship. By the 
age of 12, Nannie would probably have received traditional womanhood instruction from her elders in addition 
to having witnessed the courting process (and perhaps giggled about it many times with her girlfriends). 



A BRIEF DIGRESSION ABOUT LUCY PRETTY EAGLE AND COLONIALISM 

We don’t know very much about Lucy Pretty Eagle. We know that her Lakota name was Take the Tail, that she 
was the daughter of Pretty Eagle, that she came to Carlisle from the Rosebud Agency at age ten on March 9, 
1884, and that she died four months later. Hers is the first gravestone in the Carlisle cemetery. 

According to the author’s note, “Some research indicates that Lucy may not have been dead when she was 
buried. She could have been in a self- induced trance, to try to appeal to spiritual powers for any number of rea- 
sons.” (p. 180) So Rinaldi has taken a well-known ghost story that has been circulating around Carlisle for sever- 
al decades, embellished it further with her own interpretation of Lakota cosmology, and crafted a children’s book 
around this “event.” 

Whether Rinaldi did this unconsciously or not, an Indian girl being buried alive is a gruesome metaphor for col- 
onization and the spiritual, cultural and psychic suffocation and trauma Indian children suffered at Carlisle and 
other boarding schools. 

But this is much more than a metaphor: Nannie Little Rose, Lucy’s friend, knew about the trance-like states and blames 
herself for not being able to tell the white people in charge that Lucy wasn’t really dead. Here we have Indian children 
responsible for the death of Indian children — after all, the white people had just made an “honest mistake.” And the 
story, crafted this way, allows both Rinaldi and the non-Native reader to avoid the issues and erase the real reasons that 
many, many children died at the boarding schools: malnutrition, tuberculosis, pneumonia, smallpox, physical abuse 
(including sexual abuse), and — no less importantly — broken hearts and spirits, and loneliness. 

Moreover, the “trance-mistaken-for-death” scenario that Rinaldi uses here again perpetuates the stereotype that 
Indians died or were decimated because they were Indians: unable to adapt, unwilling to change, and — worst of 
all — physically and emotionally different from white people. A possible translation of this scene: Lucy is killed, 
not by the tragic boarding school experience, not by the loss of parents and homeland, not by inadequate diet or 
disease — but by her own “Indianness.” In other words, Indian people have only themselves to blame for their 
own demise. They just couldn’t become civilized — it was inherently, genetically impossible. 

It is entirely possible that Rinaldi may not even be conscious of what she’s done. Such stereotypical colonialist 
attitudes as expressed in this book may be so embedded in the American psyche that we often miss it even at its 
most blatant. We call this to the non-Native reader’s attention because it is easy to miss otherwise, this attitude 
that colonization is “meant to be” or “inevitable.” It is neither. 



18 



er|c 



16 



t* 



# 



A BRIEF DIGRESSION ABOUT PERSPECTIVE 

In many ways. My Heart Is On the Ground reflects what can go wrong when a non-Native author writes about 
Native cultures. One of the more controversial questions in literature is who should be writing books that include 
characters or themes related to members of a particular ethnic, racial, or religious group. Those who prefer that 
such books be written from within communities perhaps justifiably fear exploitation, misrepresentation, or hav- 
ing their voices pre-empted. However, some non-Indians have written quality books about Native peoples, histo- 
ries, and cultures, so it won’t be argued here that only Native authors can write Native-themed stories. 

While many fine books are written by authors outside of a community who do their homework, the voice of an 
insider still offers a unique perspective that is in many ways a rare gift to young readers. We sometimes see sto- 
ries from those who have married Native people, borne Native children, been adopted into Native families, or 
known Native people who called them “friend.” Even more directly, we sometimes see stories by Native people, 
stories that have been passed down or reshaped to reflect family and personal histories. 

Indeed, books written by Native authors do not usually contain conventions that are typically used to signal the 
book as being about a Native character. For example, characters in books written by Native authors don’t speak 
in guttural English. They don’t act like savages and they don’t seem like mystical creatures. Rather, they are 
often eloquent speakers. But this eloquence may not fit the non-Native reader’s (or publisher’s) expectations of 
how Natives speak, so they may reject the book as not being “authentic enough.” 

But on more subtle grounds, Indian writers have to do their research as well. A story from one’s great uncle may 
actually be more authentic than anything written by someone with a Ph.D. in anthropology. A childhood experi- 
ence may lend itself to a scene, even a whole story. Not everything crafted by Native writers will necessarily 
present the most popular or desirable or comfortable picture, even within their communities, certainly to the 
mainstream. Although each story will have the individual storyteller’s own vision and voice, they are all taking 
care to fulfill their responsibility. 

An outside researcher, however careful, who goes on to write a story based entirely on written words — especial- 
ly the words of another outsider — rather than experiences may craft a book that few would hesitate to share with 
children. However, these authors may unknowingly mimic misconceptions or stereotypes inherent in the research 
material, and still others may “whitewash” history to make the non-Native audience more comfortable with 
issues like stolen land and forced assimilation. 

Indian voices are grossly underrepresented in books with Native characters and themes. It is common that 
African-American literature classes or book lists feature a number of books by African-American authors and 
illustrators. It is common that Asian- American and Latino literature classes and book lists feature a number of 
books by Asian Americans and Latinos. It is also common that Native- American literature classes and book lists 
often fail to feature a single title by any person with any sort of tie to a Native community. The proportional dis- 
parity is staggering. A child could read literally hundreds of books with Native characters and not one by anyone 
who had ever so much as shaken hands with a real live Indian. 



19 

ERIC 



17 



FINAL COMMENTS 









Despite all the documented horrors of the “noble experiment” that was Carlisle, My Heart Is On the Ground 
casts the Carlisle Indian Industrial School in a positive light as though it were a good thing. Rinaldi even says in 
her author’s notes, “Those first Sioux children who came to Carlisle could not have been happy there. But it was 
their only chance for a future.” (p. 1 77 ) 

The legacy of Carlisle and the other Indian boarding schools — this “future” — is a legacy of hopelessness and 
despair, of alcoholism and Other substance abuse, suicide, dysfunctional parenting; an open, gaping century-long 
wound that will take many more years for the Indian communities all over the U.S. and Canada to heal. 

Yet, the only “bad” characters in this book are Indian people— Belle Rain Water, a jealous, spiteful Hopi child, 
who eventually comes around to seeing the error of her ways; Charles Whiteshield (Nannie’s brother), a “rene- 
gade” who “acts like a fool” and makes “much trouble,” and whose behavior “shames” Nannie, until he eventu- 
ally comes around to seeing the error of his ways; Goodbird (Nannie’s mother), who is jealous and spiteful; 
White Thunder (Nannie’s father), who ignorantly tries to maintain the old ways; and Spotted Tail, who takes his 
children back, even though they don’t want to go home. 

Nowhere in this book is to be found the screaming children, thrown onto horse-drawn wagons, being taken away 
from their homes. Nowhere is to be found the desperately lonely children, heartbroken, sobbing into the night. 
Nowhere is to be found the terrified children, stripped naked and beaten, for trying to communicate with each 
other and not understanding what was expected of them. Nowhere is to be found the unrelenting daily humilia- 
tion, in word and deed, from the teachers, matrons and staff. Nowhere is to be found the desperate runaways, 
lost, frozen in the snow. Nowhere to be found is the spirit of resistance. Nowhere. 

Resistance among the Indian students was deep, subtle, long-lasting and valiantly carried on for as long as 
boarding schools existed. Besides running away, this resistance took many forms — ^physical, spiritual, intellectu- 
al. Children destroyed property and set fires. They refused to speak English. They subverted teachers’ and 
matrons’ orders whenever they could. But except for Charles Whiteshield’s “war dance,” which is presented as a 
shameful thing, that resistance — and the courage it represents — receives no attention in this book. As in Francis 
LaFlesche’s The Middle Five and Basil H. Johnston’s Indian School Days, an Indian author would have made 
this resistance a central part of such as story. 

To those who would argue that “it is possible” that a Native child might have had Nannie Little Rose’s experi- 
ences, the overwhelming body of evidence — written and oral — suggests otherwise. The premise of this book — 
that a Native child would come in and, within a period of ten months, move from someone who reads and writes 
limited English and has a totally Indian world view to someone who is totally fluent in a language that is foreign 
to her and totally assimilated to a foreign culture — and be better for the experience — is highly unlikely. 
Brainwashing did not come readily. Brainwashing took time. 

Given the marketing and distribution forces behind My Heart Is On the Ground, we know that it will probably 
be more widely read than any other book about the boarding school experience. The book adds to the great body 
of misinformation about Native life and struggle in the United States and Canada. This one book epitomizes the 
utter lack of sensitivity and respect that has come to characterize the vast majority of children’s books about 
Native Americans. Non-Native readers of My Heart Is On the Ground will continue to be validated in whatever 
feelings of superiority they may have; Native children will continue to be humiliated. 




20 



18 



Rinaldi goes on to say in the author’s note that “J am sure that in whatever Happy Hunting Ground they now 
reside, they will forgive this artistic license, and even smile upon it.” (p. 196) This is the epitome of white fanta- 
sy: that Indian people will forgive and even smile upon white people, no matter the atrocities — past and present. 






REFERENCES 

Paula Gunn Allen (Laguna/Sioux), editor. Voice of the Turtle: American Indian Literature 1900-1970. 
Random House, 1994. 

Brenda J. Child (Ojibwe), Boarding School Seasons: American Indian Families, 1900-1940. University of 
Nebraska, 1998. 

George E. Hyde, Spotted TaiTs Folk: A History of the Brule Sioux. University of Oklahoma, 1979. 

Basil H. Johnston (Ojibwe), Indian School Days. University of Oklahoma Press, 1989. 

Alvin M. Josephy, Jr., 500 Nations. Alfred A. Knopf, 1994. 

Francis LaFlesche (Omaha), The Middle Five: Indian Schoolboys of the Omaha Tribe. University of 
Nebraska Press, (1900), 1978. 

Peter Nabokov, Native American Testimony. Viking 1978, revised 1991. 

La Vera Rose (Lakota), Grandchildren of the Dakota. Lemer, 1999. 



Marlene Atleo (Nuu-chah-nulth), is a mother and grandmother, adult educator and doctoral candidate at the 
University of British Columbia investigating transformational learning strategies in First Nations narratives. 

Naomi Caldwell (Ramapough), is a mother, doctoral candidate at the University of Pittsburgh, £ind past president 
of the American Indian Library Association. 

Barbara Landis is a mother, and the Carlisle Indian School Research Specialist for the Cumberland County 
Historical Society in Carlisle, Pennsylvania. 

Jean Mendoza is a mother and doctoral student in early childhood education at the University of Illinois. She has 
been teaching children for more than 20 years. 

Deborah Miranda (Ohlone-Costanoan Esselen/Chumash) is a poet, mother, and doctoral candidate in English at 
the University of Washington. Her article, “A String of Textbooks: Artifacts of Composition Pedagogy in Indian 
Boarding Schools” is forthcoming in Journal of Teaching Writing. 

Debbie Reese (Nambe), is a mother and doctoral student at the University of Illinois studying representations of 
Native Americans in children’s literature. She is a regular reviewer for Horn Book, and her articles include 
“Look Mom, It’s George and He’s a TV Indian!” and “Teaching Young Children about Native Americans.” 

La Vera Rose (Lakota), is a mother and grandmother, an archivist at the South Dakota State Historical Society, 
and author of Grandchildren of the Lakota and Meet the Lakota People/Oyate Kin. 

Beverly Slapin is a mother, co-founder and executive director of Oyate, co-editor, with Doris Seale 
(Santee/Cree), of Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in Books for Children and co-author of How to 
Tell the Difference: A Guide to Evaluating Children's Books for Anti-Indian Bias. 

Cynthia Smith (Creek) is a reviewer of Native-themed children’s books. 




19 



21 



Page 1 of 3 



U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

ERIC REPRODUCTION RELEASE 



I. Document Identification: 

Tide; |\ i 

if iMU ^ S'vi.-v^v . CcS‘ U(<^ 






Author: . 

Ar-fWo, ^ ^ S^Tvr^U 



Corporate Source: 



Publication Date: • , - 



II. Reproduction Release: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant 
materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in 
the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education 
(RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper 
TOpy, and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 



reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to 
the document. 



Page 2 of 3 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified 
document, please check one of the following three options and sign the 
release form. — 

Level 1 - Permitting reproduction and dissemination in microfiche or 
other ERIC archival media (e.g. electronic) and paper copy. 



Level 2 A - Permitting reproduction and dissemination in microfiche and 
in electronic media for ERIC archival collection subscribers only. 

Level 2B - Permitting reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only. 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality 
permits. If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, 
documents will be processed at Level 1. 

Sign Here: ”I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center 
(ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic 
media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system contractors 
requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for 
non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy 
information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries.” 



Si^ture: 

Printed Name: 

Address: 

(ol^ 

(s>m\ 



Position: 

Organization: 

kj/a 

Telephone No: 
Date: 

-Oo 



in. Document Availability Information {from Non-ERIC Source): 



If permission to reproduce is hot granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to 
cite the availability of the document from another source, please provide 
the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC 
will not announce a document unless it is publicly available, and a 
dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that 
ERIC selection criteria are significantly more stringent for documents that 
cannot be made available through EDM.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price per copy: 



Quantity price: 



IV. Referral of ERIC to Copyright/Reproduction Rights Holder: 




If the right to grant this reproduction release is held someone other 
than the addressee, please complete the following: 

Name: 



Address: 



V. Attach this form to the document being submitted and send both to: 

Velma Mitchell, Acquisitions Assistant 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools 

P.O. Box 1348 

1031 Quarrier Street 

Charleston, WV 25325-1348 



Phone and electronic mail numbers; 

800/624-9120 (Clearinghouse toll-free number) 
304/347-0467 (Clearinghouse FAX number) 
mitchelv@ael.org 




Velma J. Mitchell <mitchelv@ael.org> 
ERICVCRESS at AEL, Inc. 

POBox 1348 
Charleston WV 25325 

800-624-9120 ext. 461 fax: 304-347-0487 




