I 



Calendar No. 1017 

ft 0S f Report 

100th Congress ] SENATE 100-560 

q£ 2d Session J 1 



00 

®^ ^» n T TQuiwr a q thf POLICY OF THE UNITED STATES THE PRESERVE 
A ^^P^OTO^AND PROMOTION OF THE RIGHTS OF INDIGENOUS 
mEmC^ VVk A V^^I> DEVELOP NATIVE AMERICAN LAN- 
W GUAGES AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES 

September 28 (legislative day, September 2K>, 1988,-Ordered to be printed 



Mr. Inouye, from the Select Committee on Indian Affairs, 
submitted the following 

REPORT 

[To accompany S.J. Res. 379] 

The Select Committee on Indian Affairs, to which was referred 
the ioinT rewlutSn (S.J. Res. 379) to establish as the policy of the 
United Stetes the Preservation, protection and pro^ 
rights of indigenous Americans to use, practice and develop 
ffican kn^aW and for other purposes J 
same, reports favorably thereon without amendmet.t and recom 
mends that the joint resolution do pass. 

PURPOSE 

The purpose of this resolution is to makt a policy statement that 
it is tb. r&bt of Native Americans, mcluaLng Indians, Alaska Na- 
tives LrivfHawa^ans and Native American Pacific Islanders to 
practice and develop their indigenous languages. 

BACKGROUND AND NEED 

THp constant threat of termination of indigenous cultures due to 
p«^ffX^ .interferen W with tfieir 
ftJ7 traditions and beliefs is a problem that has piaguea tne 
. native ^"his Wintry from* the moment of European con- 

LO wi h once y the unwritten policy of the United States Govern- 

ed rnpnt to reorimSd children for speaking their own languages m 
L school They weTe nSk Tto feel like foreigners in the classroom, 

r * 19-006 U 8 OCPAHTMCNT OF EDUCATION 

OtlK-e Of E duc«t 'Onar Ra$*an;n and improvement 

p*** eOUQATiONAL RESOURCES iNf ORMATiCN 

v " / CENTER lERlCJ 



'l^his document has be<* ft reproduced as • ^ 



'«»ce«v$d *'Om lh© o«'5on o' Drga^ifatiOo 



Sic • ikt copy Nmm 



and, worse, in their own homelands. Children were thus rendered 
incapable of forging a connection between two worlds which were 
already so different from one another, yet which would have to be 
reconciled as it came time to choose future paths. This kind of 
alienation till occurs today. 

In some .tates, this policy has been formally repealed. For exam- 
ple, the Hawaii State 'Legislature passed a resolution that became 
law acknowledging the Hawaiian language as the second official 
State language. Based on this resolution, the Hawaii State Depart- 
ment of Education now allows children to be taught in the Hawai- 
ian language. 

Traditional languages are an integral part of Native American 
cultures, heritages and identities. History, religion, literature and 
traditional values are all transmitted through language. Language, 
like religion and other traditional practices, must be perpetuated if 
the culture is to survive. 

A clear statement of Federal policy is mandatory to help prevent 
the silencing of Native languages and ultimately, the destruction of 
the original cultures of this country. This resolution represents an 
acknowledgement that indigenous Americans have a right to prac- 
tice their cultures and choose their own lifestyles. If native cul- 
tures are to survive, then the United States must do all it can to 
protect and encourage cultural practices. 

In this regard, this resolution recognizes the right of native cul- 
tures to continue to survive, and that their indigenous languages 
may be used as a medium of instruction as well as an official L n- 
guage in their traditional territories. 

In addition to this policy statement, the resolution recommends 
that educational institutions recognize indigenous languages in the 
same way that foreign languages are recognized, including the in- 
clusion of such languages in academic curricula. 

This resolution is based on two resolutions adopted at the Eighth 
Annual International Native American Language Issues Institute, 
held in June, 1988, in Tempe, Arizona. Institute members requested 
that the Senate Select Committee on Indian Affairs introduce this 
resolution and have it adopted as the policy of the United States. 

LEGISLATIVE HISTORY 

On September 15, 1988, Senator Inouye introduced S.J. Res. 379 
for himself and Senators Evans, Daschle, DeConcini, McCain, Mur- 
kowski, Domenici and Matsunaga. The bill was referred to the 
Select Committee on Indian Affairs for consideration. On Septem- 
ber 21, 1988, the Select Committee on Indian Affairs marked up 
S.J. Res. 379, and ordered it reported favorably. 

COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATION AND TABULATION OF VOTE 

The Select Committee on Indian Affairs, in open business session 
on September 21, 1988, by unanimous vote with a quorum present, 
recommends that the Senate pass S.J. Res. 379. 

SECTION-BY-SECTION ANALYSIS OF S.J. RES. 379 

The whereas clauses establish the reasoning and iv^ed for the 
resolution. 



3 



The resolution states that it shall be the policy of the United 
States to preserve, protect, and promote the rights of indigenous 
Americans to use, practice and develop Native American lan- 
guages, including the right to use such languages as the media of 
instruction in State and Federal institutions of compulsory educa- 
tion and as the official language in the traditional territories of 
Native Americans. 

The resolution further states that academic credit should be 
granted for proficiency in an indigenous language in the same way 
that it is granted for foreign languages. 

Finally, the resolution strongly recommends that all institutions 
of education include indigenous languages in their curriculum in 
the same way that foreign languages are included and that compe- 
tency in such languages be granted the same academic credit. 

COST AND BUDGETARY CONSIDERATION 

The cost estimate for S.J. Res. 379, as evaluated by the Congres- 
sional Budget Office is set forth below: 

U.S. Congress, 
Congressional Budget Office, 
Washington, DC, September 26> 1988. 

Hon. Daniel K. Inouye, 

Chairman, Select Committee on Indian Affairs, 

U.S Senate, Washington, DC 

Dear Mr. Chairman: The Congressional Budget Office has exam- 
ined the federal cost impact of S.J. Res. 379, as ordered reported by 
the Select Committee on Indian Affairs on September 21, 1988. S.J. 
Res. 379 would establish as a policy of the United States the preser- 
vation, protection, and promotion of the rights of indigenous Amer- 
icans to use, practice, and develop Native American languages. 

Based on our analysis, there would be no increase in direct feder- 
al, state or local government costs as a result of passage of this bill. 

If you wish further details on this estimate, we will be pleased to 
provide them. Deborah Kalcevic (226-2820) is the CBO staff con- 
tact. 

Sincerely, 

James L. Blum, 
Acting Director. 

EXECUTIVE COMMUNICATIONS 

The Committee received no communication from the Executive 
branch on S.J. Res. 379. 

REGULATORY IM PACT STATEMENT 

Paragraph 1Kb) of rule XXVI of the Standing Rules of the 
Senate requires each report accompanying a bill to evaluate the 
regulatory paperwork impact that would be incurred in carrying 
out the bill. The Committee believes that this resolution will have 
a minimal impact on regulatory paperwork requirements. 



ERLC 



4 



4 



CHANGES IN EXISTING LAW 



In compliance with subsection 12 of rule XXVI of the Standing 
Rules of the Senate, the Committee notes no changes in existing 
law. 

O 



