DOCUHENT RESUKE 



ED 339 856 



CE 059 785 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



Crawford, Everett; And Others 

A Changing Nation — Its Changing Laloor Force. Research 
Report Number 91-04. 

National Commission for Employment Policy (DOL) , 
Washington, D.C. 
Nov 91 
70p. 

Reports - Research/Technical (143) 



INSTITUTION 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



HF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Alaska Natives; American Indians; « Blacks; Data 
Analysis; «Empioyment Patterns; "Equal opportunities 
(Jobs) ; Ethnic Discrimination; "Ethnic Groups; 
Females; Futures (of Society) ; CSeographic 
Distribution; Human Capital; -Labor Economics; *Labor 
Force; Labor Supply; Literature Reviews; Racial 
Discrimination; Salaries? Salary Wage Differentials; 
Sex Discrimination; Spanish Americans; Unemployment; 
Wages 



ABSTRACT 



The multidimensional nature of the diversity of the 



nation's labor force was examined, with emphasis on the economic 
diversity within the population generally and within and among the 
demographic groups. Principal activities were a literature review 
focusing on the economics of the labor market, analysis of data from 
the 1980 Census, and a conference on training a diverse population. 
Findings were as follows: (1) the work force of the future will not 
be dramatically different; (2) Blacks had great difficulty in finding 
and keeping employment; (3) Hispanxc men had unemployment rates 
between those of Whites and Blacks but earned very low wages; (4) 
Asians/Pacific Islanders had high rates of labor force participation, 
relatively low unemployment, and high earnings; and (5) Native 
Americans had low rates of labor force participation, high rates of 
unemployment, and low earnings. Sources of the diversity of 
experiences were human capital, sociological diversity, 
discrimination, and geographic location. Groups varied among and 
within themselves as to the human capital their members possessed. 
They varied among themselves along several sociocultural dimensions 
and showed patterns of geographic concentration. Discrimination was a 
fact of life for minorities and woman. Analyses point to policy 
implications in these areas, including the need to: increase human 
capital, expand opportunity, help people to adjust to U.S. society, 
and reduce or eliminate discrimination. (Appendixes include a 76~item 
bibliography, supporting tables, and a list of attendees at the July 
1990 conference on Training a Diverse Population. (YLB) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
» from the original document. * 



A Changing Nation — Its 
Changing Labor Force 



Everett Crawford 
Carol J. Romero 
National Commssioii for Employment Policy 



Assisted by 
Burt S. Barr.ow 



Lewin/ICF^Inc 



Ri DOtftion <v p^cy 



November 1991 
Research Report Number 91-04 
National Commission for Empioyment Poiicy 



PREFACE 



The Natioxal Commission for Employment Policy is pleased to release this report, A 
Changing Nation - Ite Changing Labor Fo rre. This report is a product of the Commission's 
project on training a diverse population. 

The US. population has imdeigone a rapid and profotmd transformation over the past two 
decades. New arrivals from Southeast Asia and Central America are changing its fiace and 
accent It seems axiomatic that as a country's population change, so does its labor force. 
Together, the immigrants and the many groups of native-bom workers are creating a more 
diverse / merican workforce. 

While these demographics are adding diversity to the supply skie of the labor market, the 
demand side is being altexed also. Work is being reorganized and restructured, and greater 
skills are being r^quSsd of persons entering the job market. This report focus» on the changing 
labor supply; it: 

• examines the changing workforce, giving particular attention to groups that will constttute 
the growth in the labor force between now and the next century; 

• focuses on the diversity that ecists among and within the groups; 

• analyzes the economic dimensions of this diversity; and 

• g^. 'es special attention to both those persons who might be expected to experience difficulty 
in the labor market and the reasons for those difficultly. 

The convergence of changes on both the supply and demand sides of the labor market can be 
expected to put pressures on the institutions on which a»e society relies for the preparation of 
persons for participation in the labor market This report provides a framework for assessing 
current programs and strategies and for planning hiture education and employment and 
training approaches. 

The report is base*' on staff and contractor research and disa^sions at the 
Commission-sponsf^red Conference on lyaining a Diverse Population, held in July 1990. Uad 
staff responsibility for the project was assigned to Everett Crawford. The report was written by 
Crawford and Carol Romero with assistance from Burt S. Bamow of Lewin/ICF, the project 
contractor. 

On behalf of the Conunisslon, I express our appreciation to all those who provided assistance 
to the project including the conference participants, those who provided papers for the 
coitference, and Dr. Bamow and his associates at Le'.vin/ICF. 



JOHN C. GARTLAND 
Chairman 



Table of Contente 



I. BMTRODUCnON 1 

Dimeitsions of Diversity 1 

Demand Side Changes 2 

Project Methodology 3 

Outline of Report 4 

n. PROFILE OF THE CHANGING LABOR FORCE: 

Beyond the Demographics 5 

Demographic Diversity 6 

Economic Diversity 6 

Conclusions 18 

m. SOURCES OF LABOR MARKET DIFHCULTIES FACING 

GROUPS IN THE DIVERSE POPULATION 21 

Himvan Capital 22 

Social Psychology 30 

Geographic Locf tion 34 

Discrimination 38 

Conclusion 41 

IV. POUCYIMPUCATIONS 43 

Increasing Human Capital 44 

Expanding Opportunity 45 

Assisting the Adjustment Process 46 

Reducing Discrimination 46 

Improving Population Data - 46 

REFERENCES 47 

APPENDIX A 53 

APPENDIX B 65 



o 

ERIC 



4 



L INTRODUCTION 



Dimensions of Diveisity 

Nittional attention was drawn to the 
increasing diversity of the workforce by the 
1 987 book. Workforce 2mh Wwkeis for the 
2l8t Century.* The authors reported on 
sizeable demographic shifts in the labor 
force that could be ecpected by the year 
2000. These changes Include a decline in the 
number of youth entering the labor force, the 
aging of the existing workforce, and a 
substantial increase in the proportions of 
women, minorities, and immigrants in the 
American labor force. 

While the book projected changes that 
would be occurring in the 19^, titere is 
every indication that the process had 
already begun during the 1980s and 
diversity in the workforce had become an 
established fact of life by the early 199(te. For 
example, a Digital Equipment Corporation 
factory in Boston reports that its 350 
employees come from 44 countries and 
speak 19 different languages. 

Also, preliminary results from a 1990 
Towers Perrin-Hudson Institute survey 
indicated that over 60% of the corporations 
responding to the survey ranked cultural 
dlveiBity as a major comrem. In addition, 
35% of the survey respondents stated that 
changes in the composition of the workforce 
have influenced management decisions in 
areas such as recruitment budgets, and that 



their company's strategic plan incorporates 
initiatives to address a culturally diverse 
work force. Similar concerns were also 
expressed by the respondents about 
accommodating more women in their work 
forces. Fortune reported that some large 
companies such as Goodyear, 
Hewlett-Packard, and Proctor and Gar-ible 
are hiring managers with the term 
"diversity" in their job titles.^ 

Much of the concern about "diversity'' has 
focused on the changing demographics of 
the labor force. While demographics are an 
important dimension of any analysis of 
diversity, there are other dimensions that 
overlay demographics and are equally 
important for understanding the changing 
nature of the workforce. Some of the 
dimensions are economic and others are 
sociological "Sorting out" these dimensions 
is necessary to an understanding of 
"within-group" as well as "among-group" 
differences. 

The term "economic dimension" refers to 
indicators such as labor force participation; 
employment and unemployment; and 
distributions of wages, wealth, and poverty. 
The tenn "sociological dimension" (which 
could also be called the sodal-i»ychological 
dimeiulon) refers to factors that <»n and do 
have a bearing on individuals' and groups' 
relative fuccess in the labor market. They 
include education and language, location of 
residence, family status and structure, 



WiUiam B. Johnston and Arnold Packer, Indianapolis, IN: The Hudson Institute. 

Joel Dreyfus, "Get Ready for the New Work Force, "Fortune (April 23, 1990), pp. 167-180. 

Dreyfus, 1990. 



1 5 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Fdks 



culture, and psychological consid^tions. 
A significant aspect of the latter - "cultural 
and psychological considerations" -- 
includes the growth In the numbers of 
potential and present participants in the 
laboi' market who might be homely have 
drug abuse problems, or may be limited by 
disability. 

Analysis of the diversity of the labor force 
along all these dimensions is significant for 
several reasons. Much of the coiKem about 
growing diversity has focused on 
demographic diversity and projected or 
expected declines in the skill level of these 
newer members of the labor force, especially 
when they are compared with the core of the 
"traditional" labor force, le., white males. 
Maintaining a high skill levd is essential to 
the nation's present and future economic 
well-being. 

Understanding the diversity among ami 
within demographic groups is vital to short- 
and long-term planiUng in education and 
training. Traditionally, attention has been 
given to the differences between blacks and 
whites; somewhat later, attention was given 
to comparing these two groups with each 
other and with Hispanics. Now some 
consideration is also being given to Asians 
as a group. However, as is shown later in 
this report, there is great diversity within 
each of these broadly defined groups. 

* Most whites are native bom, but not 
all are. About two-thirds of them are 
in the middle class, but what about 
the other third? Some whites are 
immigrants with limited English 
language proficiency. 

• About 60% of blacks live in inner 
cities. Some live in suburbs. Ahnost 
half of blacks live in the South. More 
than half are in the middle class. In 
some places, substantial numbers of 
blacks are immigrants and have 
limited English proficiency. 



• Although about 75% of Hispanics 
are of Mexican origin, the balance 
have different coimtrles of origin 
and differ in some of their 
characteristics. 

• Asians come from different 
countries and have different 
languages and traditions 
(sometimes within countries). 
While they share many 
characteristics, they also differ in 
many. 

Focusing solely on demographics could 
lead to misdirection and misuse of 
resources; while there are many differences 
among the demographic groups, it is 
important to understand that there are 
important difiterences within the groups as 
welL Not all members of the nonwhite 
demographic groups and immigrants bring 
skill deficits to the workplace. Nor do all 
members of the core of the "traditional" labor 
force {K)ssess all of the skills necessary for 
the future. 

It should be noted further that while the 
issue of divosity is a national issue, it is not 
necessarily an issue in evexy r^on, state, or 
dty. While some membeis of each of the 
demographic groups can be found in each of 
the 50 states, there are definite patterns of 
concentration that may have a significant 
bearing on the relative labor market success 
of memt^rs of the groups. 

Demand Side Changes 

oranges in the supply side of the labor 
market resulting from increasing diversity 
are takivtg place against a backdrop of 
important and rapid changes on the demand 
side as well. A fundamental r^ult of the 
demand-side changes has been the 
increased importance of basic skills as a 
qualification for employment. 



ERIC 



2 



I. Introduction 



The U.S. economy is one that has been 
transformed from an economy that 
depended upon the production of goods as 
the primary source of employment to one 
that depends on the service sector as the 
major source. Increasingly, the U.S. 
economy is interdependent with the 
economies of other nations. The decline in 
employment opportunities in 
manufacturing and changes in technology 
have affected employment in the production 
of both goods and services - both fectory 
and office depend upon technology-based 
processes to an unprecedented degree and 
this places a greater premium on basic skills 
(education). 

The Qty of Chicago provides an example. 
Often perceived as the quintessential 
goods-produdng city, Chicago lost 129^ 
manufacturing jobs during the 1980s and the 
service sector became the "dominant «>un:e 
of employment," according to a recent study 
of the hiring of Job Training Partnership Act 
program participants. Sixty percent of sdl the 
jobs in Chicago are provided by wholesale 
and retail trade, finance, insurance, and real 
estate and various other sevices. 

Other changes on the demand side took 
place during the 1970s and 1980s that have 
changed the relationship between many 
employers and their employees. In 
particular, employers in many industries 



have found it necessary to have more 
flexibility in the ways they produce goods or 
services. Tbi» has resulted in increases in 
part-time work» temporary work, and leased 
and /or contract work. The name 
"contingent work" has been given to these 
developments. In the past, concern has been 
expressed by some analysts^ that contingent 
work would fall primarily to the 
economically disadvantaged and would 
re»ilt in low wage^ loss of cpportimity for 
employer-^nced training, and loss of 
employee benefits. Tl« limited number of 
studies on this topic suggest that there are 
some "good jobs" (with good pay and 
benefits) in the contingent work 
environment, but that these jobs will be held 
by workers with skills. 

Pipject Methodology 

Three principal activities were undertaken 
as part of this project: (Da literature search 
and review; (2) a data review and analysis; 
and (3) a National Commission for 
Employment Policy-sponsored (NCEP or 
the Commission) conference on 'Training a 
Diverse Population" which was held in the 
summer of 1990. 

The literature search was extensive. 
Although it concentrated first on studies 
focusing on the economics of the labor 
market, it included examination of books 



Examples of reports by the National Commission for Employn«nt Policy in these areas include 
Co Tiputers in the Workplace: Selected Issues, Report No. 19, 1986: and US. Employment in an 
International Economy, Report No, 24, Washington, DC: The Commission (1988). 

Kenneth Woi^ and Becky RoseUus (1990), Fmding Work: A Pilot Project to Study the Hiring of 
FTP A Participants, Unpublished paper, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago, 1?W. 

See, for example, Richaid Belous, "COntin^t Woikers and Equal Employment Opportunity" in 
Proceedings of the Forty-First Annual Meeting of the Industrial Relations Association, Madison, 
WI: IRRA, 1988. 

For a review of these deveopmenls see Susan Christoplwrson, Theirry Noyelle and Betii Redfield, 
Flexible Employment Continggit Work: Implications for Workers' Benefits, Washington, D.C.: 
U.5. Department of Ubor, 1990, (available through NTIS). 



A Changing Nation - Its Chai^ng Labor Force 



and reports from several disciplines and 
reports in the print media. 

The data used for this project are based 
laigely on the 1980 Census of Population 
because the project work began at about the 
same time the 1990 Census was getting 
underway. Persons conducting studies of, 
and preparing articles on, the groups were 
also limited by the data available to them 
While some used (survey) data more recent 
than the 1980 Census, others used the 1980 
and even older sources.^ 

Before discussing the third activity, the 
conference on Training a Diverse 
Population, it is appropriate to mention a 
major limitation of both thedata sources and 
the literature. Much of what follows 
provides information, in considerable 
detail, on whites, blacks, and Hisi^nics 
(who may be black or white, or members of 
any race). Much less is provided on other 
groups, such as Native Americans and 
Asians, especially more recent immigrants 
from Southeast Asia. In this regard, the 
report reflects what is available. Detailed 
information on blacks really began with the 
Census of 1940 and the collection of detailed 
data on Hispanics began in 1970. In the past 
two decades, social and labor market 
r^arch has concentrated largely on the 
Nation's two largest minorities - blacks and 
Hispanics. 

NCEP's Conference on Training a Diverse 
Population was designed in part to help fill 
this gap in information. An effort was made 
to invite participants with special 
knowledge of the range of groups making 
up the diverse population so that the 
Commission could expand its knowledge 
about the groups and their needs. 



Approximately 75 persons participated; 
they represented a broad spectrum of 
government, private, and employer 
organizations. 

Conference discussions were organized 
around four topics: the growth of the 
diverse population; the changing demand 
for labor; employer-led efforts In training a 
diverse population; and public sector efforts 
in training the diverse population. The 
conference discussions and the papers 
prepared for it have contributed 
importantly to this report. 

Outline of Report 



This report examines the 
multi-dimensional nature of the diversity of 
the nation's lalKir force. It does so in ways 
ttiat place the issues of diversity in a labor 
market context and perspective. Greatest 
emphasis is placed on various measures of 
economic diversity within the population 
generally and within and among the 
demographic groups specifically. The 
report also focusses on the reasons for the 
differences thai: lead to difficulties in the 
labor market; as will be seen, the extent to 
which these reasons can be understood is 
limited by the availability of relevant 
information. 

Section II of the report summarizes data on 
the several dimensions of economic 
diversity that were described earlier. 
Section III discusses reasons why some 
members of the work force have difficulty in 
securing and retaining employment. 
Section IV examines the program and policy 
implications that grow out of the analysb. 



The supporting tables based on these data can be found in Appendix A. 
Sec Appendix B for a list of conference partidpants. 



IL PROFILE OF 
; CHANGING LABOR FOB 
Beyond the Demographics 



This Chapter has two purposes. One 
purpose is to describe diversity in the 
American work force. The Chapter's second 
purpose is to illustrate the amount and type 
of national information on the "diverse 
population" that is generally available to 
policymakers at all levels of government 
and among private sector employers, to 
educators, and to members of the 
employment and training commui\ity. 

Diversity in the workforce can be described 
along two dimensions. The first is 
demographic, the typical way in which 
diversity has been viewed. The second 
dimension is economic, important because it 
portrays the demographic groups' current 
and likely future well-being. Differences 
across demographic groups as well as 
changes in their relative positions over time 
are discussed. As will be shown, M)mc 
indicators suggest that diversity across 
groups has increased; other indicators 
suggest diversity has decreased; and still 
other indicators suggest no changes have 
occurred. 

The review of the available information 
relies first on data published by the 
government and then on information from a 
variety of sources - academic studi^/ the 
print media, and publications of 
organizations that represent race/ethnic 
^ups. This approach mak^ apparent the 
relative paucity of information that is 
readily accessible to individuals and 
organizations responsible for educating. 



training, and employing people from many 
backgrounds and culttires. 

Published data are available on the major 
demographic groups - men and women; 
whites, blacks, Hispanics, and Asians. 
Additional, but more limited, data are 
available on Hispanics of Mexican or Cuban 
descent, and Puerto Ricans. For the Asian 
subgroups there is a small amount of 
information available on Chinese, Filipinos, 
Japanese, Indians, Koreans, and 
Vietnamese. 

It should be noted that Hispanics may be of 
any race. There are white, black, and 
Oriental Hispanics, In general, due to data 
limitations, groups are described as white, 
black, or Hispanic. However, where 
possible, data are presented in terms that 
spedly "white non-Hispanic," and "black 
non-Hispanic." In developing this report, it 
has been necessary to use both kinds of data. 

The differences between the white and 
black populations are well-documented. 
However, the differences within each of 
these groups are not well-understood 
largely because data on their experiences are 
not readily available. For example, only 
local or anecdotal information is available 
on the large community of Russian 
immigrants, as well as other immigrants, 
who moved into New York City during the 
1980s and for the black immigrants from 
various Caribbean and African countries 
who located in other East Coast cities during 
the past decade. 



ERIC 



A Changing Nation - Us Chuigii^ Labor Fbrce 



Demographic Diversity 

Over 141 million people will be in the VS. 
labor force in the year 2000/ up from about 
122 million people in 1988, according to 
projections of the Bureau of Labor 
Statistics.^ This projected increase of almost 
19.5 million people takes into account both 
the number of people expeaed to enter the 
labor force as well as the number projected 
to leave it. It translates into an annual rate 
of growth which is somewhat smaller than 
that of the 1976-1988 period (1.2% versus 
2%). 

Much of the interest in the growing 
divensity of the labor force has focused on 
how much of the projected net growth is 
attributable to the growth of various 
demographic groups. Data such as those in 
Table 2.1 surest that there will be dramatic 
changes in the demographic composition by 
the year 2000. For example, the net growth 
in the labor force that is due to the growth of 
white non-Hispanic women far exceeds that 
of white non-Hispanic men (almost 7 million 
women compared to 23 million men). In 
addition, the net growth of both Hispanic 
men and women is somewhat greater than 
that of white non-Hispanic men (2.9 million 
and 2.5 n\ilIion Hispanic men and women 
rrapectively). 

Table 2.2 puts these figures on net growth 
into perspective. It provides snapshots of 
the demographic composition of the labor 



force in 1988 and that proved for 2000. 
These data makeapparent the fact that while 
there will be changes in the proportions of 
various grou{^ who are in the labor force, 
the overall composition will be about the 
san^ as it was in 1988. For example, the 
proportion of white men will have declined 
only slightly (from 48% to 45%) and the 
proportion of white women will have 
Increased only slightly (from 38% to 39.5%). 

The most dramatic shift projected tor the 
composition of the work force is within the 
"minority groups." In contrast to the 
situation in 1988, by the year 2000 there are 
likely to be nnore Hispanic than black men in 
the labor force (8.0 million blacks and 8.3 
million Hlspanics.) 

Economic Diversity 



How can these various demographic 
groups be expected to fare in the labor 
market over the coming years? Since 
projections on their economic status are not 
available, it is necessary to look to historical 
patterns for indicators of possible future 
behavior. The measures of economic 
diversity discussed here include: labor force 
participation rates, unemployment rates, 
occupational distributions, and various 
indicators of income. This range of 
measures is im}x>rtant to examine, because 
each connotes a different aspect of 
"economic success" and the groups vary 
among and within themselves. 



The labor force protection figures in this section, unless otherwise indicated, are from Howard N. 
Fullerton, Jr., "New Labor Force Projections, Spanning 1988 to 2000," [U.S. Bureau of Labor 
Statistics, Monthly Labor Review, Volume 112, No, 11, November 1989.1 

Net labor force growth or "net change ' is the difference between the number of people who enter 
the work force and the number who leave it. The number of new entrants is determined by 
historical birth rates and immigration. The number of leavers is determined by retirement and 
deaths. 



ERJ.C 



6 



II. Profile of the Changing Labor Fbrce 



Table 2.1 

Net Change in the Composition of the Civilian Labor Force 

horn 1988 to 2000 (a) 





Net Change (in yiQOs) 


Percent of Total 


White nim-Hispanlc Men 




U.6 


White non-Hispanic Women 


6,939 


35.7 


Black non-Hispanic Men 


1^ 


6.7 


Black non-Hispanic Women 


1,7S4 


9.0 


Asian and Other Men 


950 


4.9 


Asian and Other Women 


910 


4.7 


Hispanic Men 


2,877 


14.8 


Hispanic Women 


2,464 


12.7 


Total 


19,461 


100.0 



(a) Persons 16 ycm and older. 
Source; Fullwiort Table 7, 



Table 2.2 

Number of Persons 16 Years and Older in the Qvilian Labor Force by Race/Ethnicity, 
1988 (Actual) and 2000 (BLS Moderate Projections) 



Group 


1988(int000s) 


Percent of Total 


2000(inl,0{»s) 


Percent of Total 


White Men 


58^17 


47.9 


63,288 


44.8 


White Women 


46,439 


38.2 


55,693 


39.5 


Black Men 


6,596 


5.4 


sm 


5.7 


Black Women 


6,609 


5.4 


8,458 


6.0 


Asian Men 


2,015 


1.7 


3/)29 


2.1 


Asian Women 


1,694 


1.4 


2,659 


1.9 


Hispanic Men (a) 


5^ 


4.4 


8,284 


5.9 


Hispanic Women(a) 


3373 


2.9 


6/)37 


4.3 


Total 


121^9 




141,134 





(a) Persons of Mispank origin may be of any race; thus the peroentages do not add to 100. 
Source; FuUcrton, Table 1. 



- ERIC 



A Chai^ng Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Labor Forco Participation Rates 

The labor force participation rate is the 
percentage of a population that is employed 
or unemployed (on temporary layoff or 
looking fbr work). It may be interpreted as 
a measure of attachmott to the work force; 
such attachment is important because most 
people's income is derived from 
employment in the conventional labor 
nwket. For men, being a member of the 
labor force is a traditional and expected role. 



While being a member of the \a\x>r force has 
not been a traditional role for all women, 
both economic necessity and personal 
choice have caused increasing numbers of 
women to join the labor force over the past 
several decades. 

Civilian labor force participation rates for 
ivhite, black, and Hispanic men are shown 
in Figures A. The data are for selected years 
between 1970 and 1990.^ 



Figure A 

Men's Labor Force Participation by Race/Ethnicity 
1970-1988 (actual) and 2000 (projected) 




(NOTE Hie are several sources for thl» Figme and Bgurc C They Include U.S. Bureau of d>e Census, Statistical Abstract of 
the United States. 1988; US. Bureau (rf Labor Statistic*, Employment and Earnings, Annual Averages-15W; Fullerton, 1989, 
Table 4.; US. Cbmmisadon oai Qvll Ri^to, The Econcanlc Status of Blade Women: An Exploratory investigation, 1990, 
Washington, PC The Commission, Table 1 .2.1 



The years were chosen so that as much historical information as possible could be presented on 
the demographic groups. 



ERIC 



1 ) 



8 



11. Profile of the Changing Labor Force 



Examination of men's labor force 
participation rates reveals two points. First/ 
there is a wide range in the proportions who 
are in the work force. Hie lowest rate of 
participation is found among black men 
(71% in 1988). Hispar.ics had the highest 
rate of participation (82%). 

Differentiation within the Hispanic and 
Asian groups indicates considerable 
diversity there cis well. Hispanic men's high 
rate of participation is due largely to the 
experience of one group, Mexican- 
Americans.^ The proportion of Puerto Rican 
men who are in the work force is closer to 
that of both black men (for example, 73% in 
1988).^ 

Among Hispanic men, the foreign bom 
have a somewhat higher rate of labor force 
participation than native born (69.9% 
compared with 64.4%). However, 
Hispanics who immigrated in the latter half 
of the 1970s have a lower participation rate 
than those who immigrated earlier.^ 

The proportions of Asian- American men 
who are in the work force also varies widely 
depending upon their country of origin and 
their place of birth (native born or 



immigrant). For example, in 1980 among 
native-bom Asian-Americans the highest 
proportion in the work force was for men 
from the Philippines (93%); the lowest 
proportion was from India (80%). Among 
immigrants, the high^t proportion in the 
work force was from India (94% in 1980); tl.e 
low^t proportion was from Vietnam (80 
%)? 

The second point about men's labor force 
participation is that the patterns of the 
groups have differed over time. Asian and 
Hispanic men appear to have had 
consistently high and stable rates of 
participation. In contrast, the proportions of 
both black and white men who are in the 
labor force have been declining for several 
decades. The two groups differ in the 
reasons for the decline. 

For white men, the decline has been largely 
associated with the decreasing proportion of 
okler workers who are in the labor force. 
For black men, the decline has been 
associated with decreasing participation of 
both older and younger workers. The 
decline in the proportion of older black 
workers who are in the labor force has been 
sharper than that of white men. For 



Over 80% of Mexican- Amencan men were in the work force in 1988. 

The figure is for Puerto Rican men on the mainland only. The data on Mexican-American and 
Puerto Rican men are from U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Employment and Earnings, Volume 
36, Number 1, January 1989. 

William P. CHare, Assimilation and Socioeconomic Advancement of Hispanics in the U.S., 
Washington, D.C: Population Reference Bureau, 1989. 

The comparable figure for white non-Hispanic men was close to 90%. US. Commission on Civil 
Rights, The Economic Stahis of Americans of Asian Descent: An Exploratory Investigation, IVSii, 
Washington, D.C: The Commisaon. 

Between 1970 and 1980, the proportion of older men who were in the labor force fell from 83% to 
73%; by 1988, the percentage had fallen to 68%. Older men are defined as being 55 to 64 years of 
age. The data given here are from the Employment and Training Report of the President, 1982 
and U-S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Emplovment and Earnings, January 1989. For a discussion of 
the reasons for the declining participation rates of both white and black men, see National 
Commission for Employment Policy, Older Workers: Propsects. Problems, and FoHdes, 9th 
Annual Report, Report Number 17, 1985, Washington, D.C: The Commission 



9 23 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



example, while it took a decade for the 
participation rate of older white men to 
decline by 10 percentage points^ it took only 
five years for a similar declhie to occur 
among older black men. 

The decreasing labor force participation of 
young black men is well known and has 
been a longstanding public policy 



concern. As Figure B demonstrates^ close 
to 90% of iu)nwhite young men (age 20 to 24) 
were in the labor force between the n\id 
1950s and mid 1960s. By the 198Qs, fewer 
than 80% were in the work force. 

Figure C presents infonmtion on the labor 
force participation of women from the 
race/ethnic groups. 



Figures 

Trends in Labor Force FarticipaHon IVMte and Non-White Men Aged 20-34 

1954-1987 



TRENDS IN LABOR FORCE PARTICIPATION: 1954 TO 1987 




7 ' — ■ • » — »— • ■ ■ T ■ ■ ■ .^il.'l'* -■■»■■ ■ I 

t«SO tMO 1*70 IBM ItSO 



SpuweJtonald lyAinlco, The Extent and Patten of toblessness Amo ng MlBOTltv Men. 1^ Washington, D.C VS. 
Department <rf Labcg. (Obtainable throu^NTlS). 



Women's patterns of labor force 
participation differ from those for men in 
two ways. 

* In contrast with black men, black women 
have had the highest participation rates 
and Hispanic women have had the 



lowest participation rates (58% compared to 
53% in 1988, for example)." Among 
Hispanic women, those of Puerto Rican 
origin have the lowest labor force 
participation rate. Thus both Puerto Rican 
men and women are the least likely to be in 
the labor force.^^ 



Between 1970 and 1975, the partidpatioii rate for older bladt men fell from 79% to 69% and by 
1988 it had declined to 60%. Employment and Training Rep m of the President, 1982, Table A-5. 

For example, see National Commission for Employment Policy, 5th Annual Report, Expandine 
Employment Oppominities for Disadvantaged Youth. 1979, Washinton D.C: The Commission. 

In 1980 Native American women had a participation rate similar to that of Hispanic women, 
47.7%. US. Commission on Qvil Rights, 1990. 

U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1990, The Hispanic Population of the United States: March 1989, 
Current Population Reports - Population Characteristics - Series P - 20, No. 444, Wa^ington, D.C. 



10 



n. Profile of the Changing Labor Force 



Figure C 

Women's Labor Force Participation by Race/Ethnicity 
1970-1988 (actual) and 2000 (projected) 




White Women 
Hispanic Women 



Black Women 
Asian Women 



(For sources sec the Note to Rgure A. See AppCTdlx Table A-2 for data chi v»^td» figure is based) 



* The participation rates of the 
various groups of women are both 
increasing and becoming more 
similar. By 2000, close to 60% of the 
women of all the major 
demographic groups are projected 
to be in the labor force. 

Unemployment Rates 

The unemployment rate is the proportion 
of the workforce that is without 
employment, but is actively looking for 
work (or is on temporary layofO. The 



statistic is important because it is a measure 
of a group's success in finding jobs. 

Unemployment rates for Native 
Americans are the highest of any group in 
the Nation. Estimates of unemployment 
rates for American Indians are in the range 
of 40 to 60%. The Bureau of Indian Affairs, 
which publishes official estimates of Indian 
unemployment, put the unemployment rate 
for reservation Indians in the mid-1980s in 
the range of 38 to 48%. The higher range of 
estimates, 40 to 60% is for off-reservation 
Indians." 



Robert G. Ainsworth, An Overview of the Labor Market Problems of Indians and Native 
Americans, Research Report No. 89-02, 1989, Washington, D.C.: National Commission for 
Employment Policy. 




11 1 5 



A Chai^ng Nation - lis Changing Labor Force 



The unemployment rates of men and 
women in the three major demographic 
groups are shown in Hgure D for selected 
years, chosen to show the groups' 
unemployment rates at different points of 



14 



the nation's most recent business cycle. 
The unemployment rate was low in 1979; it 
was high in 1982; and wa« low again in 1989. 
The year 1988 is included for purposes of 
consistency with other tables. 



Figure D 

Unemployment Rates of Persons 16 Years and Older by 
Race/Ethnicity and Sex for Selected Years (a) (b) 




1979 



1982 



1988 



1989 



While Men 
Black Women 



While Women 
Hispanic Men 



Black Men 
<y- Hispanic Women 



<a) Data for blacks Include "black and other." 

(b) Data for hispanlcs are for peisons 20 and older. 

Sources: Employment and "ftalnlng Report of the President 1982; V3. Bureau of the Census, Persons oiLHlspanic Origin in 
the UnltedStates: Miydt 1979. Current Population Reports. POtmlation Characteristtcs, Scries P-2a No 354, Ottober 198Q; VS. 

Bureau of Labor Statistics, ~ * - - - - 

Number 1 , Washington, 



loyment and Earning s, January Issues 1989 and 19SK), Volume J6, Number 1, Volume 37, 



When examined from the perspective of 
diversity, the data make three points. 

* There is relatively little diversity 
in labor market opportunities 
between men and women v^thin 
race/ethnic groups. For example. 



the unemployment rate of white 
women was only slightly below 
that of white men in 1982 (8.3 
versus 8.8%); in 1989 the 
unemployment rates were 
identical 



14 



Supporting data are shown in Appendix Table A-3. 



ERIC 



12 



n. Profile of the Changing Labor Forcse 



* There are wide difference in 
unemployment rates across 
racial/ethnic groups. The black 
unemployment rate is twice ' .nat of 
whit& and the unemployment rate 
of Hispanics is between that of 
blacks and whites. 

* The relative positions of the 
unemployment rates for men and 
women and for the race/ethnic 
groups has remained virtually 
unchanged over time. 

Data on the unemployment rates of 
Hispanic subgroups show a similar pattern: 
there are differences among Hispanic 
subgroups and the differences are relatively 
stable over time. Puerto Ricans have the 
most difficulty finding jobs; for example, 
their unemployment rate was 12.1% in 
1988.^^ 

Data for the other race/ethnic groups are 
not provided on an annual basis. An 
analysis of 1980 Census datdf^ shows that 
there is diversity among the subgroups of 
the Asian population and differences 
between immigrant and native-bom Asian 
workers. 

The unemployment rates of immigrant 
Asian men were consistently below those of 
white non-Hispanic men (4.3%). They 



ranged froxr a high of 3.6% among 
Vietnam^ t^ a low of 1.8% for Japanese. 
Within the native-bom population, there 
was a greater variation in unemployment 
rates. Indian and Filipino men had 
unemployment rates higher than 
non-Hispanic white men (7.6% and 5.3% 
respectively compared to 4.0% for the white 
men). Korean, Japanese and Chln»e men 
had unemployment rates below 2%. 

Overall, the data on Asian women indicate 
an unemployment rate that parallels that of 
non-Hispanic white women (5.2% 
compared to 5.6%).^ 

Earnings 

Statistics on earnings and occupations 
indicate the economic success of those who 
are employed. A dose relationship exists 
between the kind of job an individual has 
and the amount he or she earns. Along these 
dimensions there are differences within 
groups as well as among them. 

The earnings of white men comprise the 
yardstick against which the earnings of the 
other demographic groups usually are 
measured. Earnings of particular groups 
are expr^ed as ratios of the earnings of 
white men.^^ 



U.S. Bureau of the Census, The Hispanic Population in the United States: March 1989, Current 
Population Reports, Population Characteristics, Series P-20, No. 444, Washington, D.C. Table 2. 

" U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 1988. 

The data reported here from the Commission on Qvil Rights are based on an analysis of 1980 
Census data. The Census data are self reported as contrasted with the interview infonnation 
gathered in the Current Population Survey on which the estimates for the largest race/ethnic 
groups are based. 

* ^ U.S. Commision on Civil Rights, 1990. 

There are shidies of course that compare the earnings of women by race/ethnic group, as well as 
women's earnings with those of men. The analysis by the U.S. Conwnission on Qvil Rights of the 
economic stahis of black women, 1990, cited previously is an example. 




:7 



13 



A Changing Nation - Its Chai^ng Labor R)rce 



In general white i^ten have the highest 
earnings, black men are in the middle, and 
Hispanic men have the lowest earnings. In 
1990 the figures for the three race/ethnic 
groups were: white m&\ almost $500; for 
black men, $360;and for Hispanicmen, $322. 
Women's earnings were much lower. 
(These figure are for emfdoyed persons 
with earnings; they would be somewhat 
different if persons with zero earnings were 
included in the calculation.) See Appendix 
Table A-5. 

Earnings data for black workers are 
available back to 1940, about 30 yearslonger 
than data for Hispanic workers. Over the 
decades employed black workers have 
made progress in narrowing the gap 
between their wages and those of their white 
counterparts. As Appendix Table A-6 
shows, in 1940 black men earned about 40% 
as much as white men; by 1980 black men's 
earnings were almost 75% of their white 
coimterparts' earnings. After 1980, the ratio 
of black to white male wages fell to 68% (in 
1985) and then began to rise again. By 1987, 
it was 703%.^^ 

Employed black women have made more 
progress in closing the earnings gap 
between themselves and white women, but 
both lag behind meaPdor to World War n, 
black women earned 40% that of white 
women; by 1980, they earned 90% of the 
amount earned by white women. The 
relative decline in black women's wages 
seen in 1986 (to 87%) parallels the decline 
found among black men and is likely to be 
due to the recession of the early 1980s. See 
Appendix Table A-7. 



Hispanic men, with the exception of 
Cuban- Americans, have lost grourd in their 
earnings as compared with those of white 
men. Mexicans gained over most of the 
period, but then lost ground during the 
latter part of the 1980s. Mexican 
immigration has proceeded apace, and there 
is ait unresolved question as to whether the 
lower earnings of the recent immigrants (as 
compared to the earnings of native-bom 
workers) might account for some of the 
decline. These comparisons, for the period, 
1971-72 to 1985-87, are shown in Appendix 
Table A-8. 

In the ^ly 1970s, black males had lower 
earnings than Hispanics, but by the 1980s, 
the positions were reversed and Hispanic 
men had the lowest earnings gnong men 
among the race/ethnic grouj^. 

The US. Civil Richts Connmission's study 
of 1980 Census data provides some 
information on the earnings of Asians. 
Native-bom Chinee, Japanese, and Korean 
men appear to earn slightly more than 
native-born while men. Among 
foreign-bom Asian men, Japanese and 
Indianseamslightlymore than foreign-bom 
whites. Earning less than foreign-bom 
whites are Chinese, Blipinos, Koreans, and 
Vietnamese. 

Among Asian women, foreign-born 
women from ail groups except the 
Vietnamese earn more than their 
foreign-bom white counterparts. For 
native-born Asian women, data were 
available for Cnin^, Filipino, and Japeuiese 



20 

Some Asian men have higher earning than white men. 

James P. Smith, The En^dng Hispanic Underclass, RAND Corporation for U S. Depatrment of 
Labor, Table 2.4. 1990 (available through NTIS). 

^ Smith, 1990. 

23 

U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 1988. 



Er|c 14 



n. I^fUe of the Changing Labor Force 



who all earned more than native-born 
non-Hispanic white women. 

The official^ published income figures tell 
an important part of the story about all the 
grou{», but there are grou{» for whom more 
information is needed. Large gaps remain 
in our knowledge of the true economic 
status of certain race/ ethnic groi^ Not 
enough is known, for example, about the 
Asian ethnic enclaves that exist in a number 
of places. In information provkied for the 
National Commission for Employment 
Policy's Confierence on Training a Diverse 
PopiUatioiv it was revealed that some recent 
immigrant waiters in New York City's 
CMnatown worked oidy for tips; their 
earnings are not known. Likewise, little is 
known about the earnings of other 
restaurant employees who worked in 
nontipped positions. 

In another example, some fectories in the 
garment industry are owned by persons 
from particular race/ethnic groups who 
hired primarily recent immigrants from 
their own ethnic group and little is known 
about the wages they receive. Still another 
example: Asians reportedly have high 
family incomes, but not enough is known 
about the number of employed family 
members in certain Asian groups. It is 
thought that among some groups, children 
begin to workand contribute at a young age. 
If this is true, the high Asian family incomes 
might be seen in a different light. 



Perhaps the same points could 
undoubtedly be made about recent 
immigrants in other black and Hispanic 
ethidc enclaves such as the Dominicans in 
New York or Cubans in Miami. 

Occupations 

As indicated in the beginning of this 
subsection, there is a close relationship 
between one's occupation and one's 
earnings. By and large, the earnings figure 
for the race/ethnic groups reflect their 
distribution in the oanipational structure. 
The occupational distributions for the three 
largest demographic groups in 1990 gid 
1983 are shown in AppendU Table A-9. 

In general blacks and Hispanics are found 
in occupational groupings that traditionally 
have been highly susceptible to the 
expansions and contractions of the business 
cycle and have lower pay. Blacks and 
Hispanics have relatively more of their 
workforces in the lower-paid, more 
vxilnerable occupations. In 1983 some 47% 
of Hispanic workers were in the service and 
operative/laborer category, as were 48% of 
black workers. By 1990 both groups had 
reduced this concentration slightly to 45%. 
In contrast, the corresponding rates for 
white workers were 28% in 1983 and 26% in 
1990. Asians and whites have had larger 
shares of their workers in groups that 
traditionallj^have been less sensitive to the 
business cycle and have higher pay. 



See Louise Kamikawa, ThePacific/AsianMvth and Anna Stem, Immigrantsand Refugees, papers 
prepared for the National Commission for Employment Policy Conference on Training a Diverse 
Population, 1990. 

It should be noted tiiat in Tables 2.8 through 2.10 that the term "managerial and profes^onal" 
includes a wide variety of workers. The variety includes the range of workers from the 
owner /operator of a coffee shop to the owner of a filling station to the Chief Executive Officer of 
a ma^r multinational corporation. 

'Traditionally"isused advisedly here;recentexperience suggests thatmiddlemanagers and other 
salaried workers have become less Immune to the business cycle. 



ERIC 



15 - 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



There is diversity within groups in their 
occupational distributions. The overall 
figures for the Hispanic population 
approximate the figures for those workeis of 
Mexican origin/ who have the highest 
concentrrtion of workers in service and 
operatives/laborers - roughly one-quarter. 
Workers of Cuban origin have the lowest 
concentration - not significantly different 
from that for white workers. Cubans have a 
significantly larger percentage of workers 
represented among managers and other 
professionals (almost 25%) than do the other 
groups of Hispanics. Cubans^ of course, 
established a sizeable economic ethnic 
^clave in and around Mianni wiUi many 
large and small businrases. The owners and 
operators of th^ busin^ses are classified 
as managers and professionals. Data are 
shown in Appendix Table A-10. 

Asian workers generally are arrayed quite 
differently in the occupational distribution 
than are other demographic groups. 
Chinese, Indians, Japanese, and Koreans 
have much larger percentage of their 
workers among managers and professionals 
than do whites. Among Asian workers, 
about 60% of foreign-bom Indians are 
managers and professionals as are alx)ut 
31% of native bom. In comparison, slightly 
more than 25% of white workers are 
classified as managers and professionals. 
Almost half of foreign-bom Japanese ars so 



classified as a^inst 31% of native bom. 
About 40% of native-bom Chinese and 
Koreans are managers/professionals. 
Asians, with the exception of the Filipinos 
and Vietnamese, have much lower 
percentages of their workers in the service 
and operatives/laborer classifications. Data 
on the occupational distributions of Asian 
workers are provided in Appendbc Table 
A-11. 

Poverty Status 

Over the past 30 years there has been a 
general downward trend in the size of the 
poverty population In the late 1950s the 
national poverty rate was about 22%; by the 
mid 1980s it was at about 13.5%, having 
reached a low of about 11% in the 
mid-1970s.^^ Hov^rever, not all groups in the 
society have shared in this general decline in 
poverty. As is the case with the other 
dimensions of diversity discussed iri this 
chapter, there are variations among and 
within the race/ethnic groups. Sizeable 
differences in poverty levels exist among the 
groups that have been the subjects of this 
report The data are presented in Appendix 
Table A-12.® 

Poverty data for the 1980s, suggest that 
among men there have been some shifts in 
the poverty figures. One study of the 
incomes of men traces the growth of both 



27 



28 



29 



30 



U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1988, Washington, D.C., Table 
713. 

This table is drawn from a study that used data from die full 1980 Census to compare poverty 
rates among groups on a much more detailed ba^ than do the studio based on the Current 
Population Surveys which tend to classify groups in laiger more inclusive categories. Tlie table 
gives poverty rates for Native Americans, blacks, Hispanics (in four sui^iroups), and A^ans (in 
six Asian and Pacific Island subgroups). 

Smith 1990, The Emerging Hispanic Underclass. Smith devised his own method for m^suring 
poverty that establishes the initial poverty criterion at 11% of white male earings in 1979, and 
makes adjustments for income growth or contraction. Smith's measure of affluence is 4/3 of the 
white male median income. 



^1 



Er|c 16 



II. Profile of the Changing Labor Force 



poverty and relative affluence among the 
race/ethnic groups- ^ 

The figures from that study (Appendix 
Table A-13) tell two stories. The first is that 
the rate of poverty grew among whites, 
blacks, and all Hispanic groups. The second 
is that there is diversity within these 
demographic groups and that generalizing 
about any group is imwarranted. All have 
poor, middle dass, and affluent members. 
The size of the affluent category grew for all 
race/ethnic groups, but the increase since 
1971 was fastest for blacks. Tracing the 
Bguresbackto 1940, data indicate that in that 
year only two percent of black men could be 
counted among the economic elite. By 1980, 
that figure had risen to almost 12%. The 
proportion of men in the middle class 
diminished in all groups. 

Other Groups 

Three additional categories or groups are 
included in the analysis: the homeless, 
persons with disabilities, and persons with 
drug abuse problems. Fragmentary 
information is available about their labor 
market status. 

Homeless 

Estimate of the number of homeless vary 
widely. In the mid-1980s, the U.S. 
Department of Housing and Urban 
Development estimated the number to be 
between 250,000 and 350/KX). Advocates for 
the homeless use a figure in excess of 2 



million. The Urban Institute estimated the 
number at about 600,000. Qearly, most of 
the homeless have problems of low income 
since they can not afford housing, but not all 
are unemployed. A 1989 study of the 
homeless surveyed homeless people in 
soup kitchens and shelters. It found that 
almost 6% indicated that they were working 
steadily; about a quarter had worked for pay 
sometime during the three months 
preceding the interview; and more than half 
said that they had looked for work during 
the previous month. 

Drug Abusers 

Abuse of drugs, both legal and illegal, is a 
matter of concern in employment and other 
public policy arenas. Employers aie 
concerned because the impact on 
productivity and payroll costs. Public 
policy is concerned because of the demand 
placed on human service systems generally; 
health care, sodal services, criminal justice, 
are all affected by demands resulting from 
drug use problems.^ 

Drug abusers are found among both the 
employed and the unemployed. They are 
found at all levels of society and among all 
race/ethnic groups. Appendix Table A-14 
provides data on illicit drug use iri 1988 for 
persons 12 years of age and older. It gives 
percentage figures on usage for the major 
race/ethnic groups. 

Examination of the data for young adults, 
aged 18 to 25, makes two points. First, the 



It should be remembered that the figures in Table A-13 reflect the positions of men who are 
working and not the entire population. 

National Commission for Employment Policy, Helping the H omeless be Choosers: The Role of 
ITPA in Improving lob Prospects, Special Report No. 28, 1990, Washington, D.C.: The 
Commis^on. 

The Urban Institute, 1989, telephone interview with Commission staff. 

NCEP Conference on Training a Diverse Population, 1990. 

The term "illidt drug use" does not include alcohol and tobacco usage. 

21 

17 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



size of the "drug using" population varies 
widely depending upon the reference 
period. For example, if the refo^nce period 
is "ever used," then over 50% report having 
used illicit drugs; but if the ref^ence period 
is "used last month," then the proportion 
declines to less than 20%. 

Second, regardless of the reference period 
used, the proportion of whites who report 
having used drugs is higher than that for 
either Hispanics or blacks. However, the 
size of the difference decreases with a 
shortening of the reference period. For 
instance, over 60% of whites, but under 50% 
of blacks and Hispanics, report ever having 
used illicit drugs. By comparison, 18% of 
whites reported using drugs during the past 
month; the comparable figure for Hispanics 
and blacks is almost 17%. 

Persons with Disabilities 

Persons with disabilities liave been a topic 
of special concern during the past few years. 
Activities surrounding consideration and 
passage of the Americans with Disabiliti^ 
Act in 1990 helped to draw attention to their 
concerns. 

Persons with disabilities are found in all 
race and ethnic groups. The number of such 
persons may depend on the definition of 
"disability." One widely used, but highly 
qualified, figure estimates that mtlllon 
Americans have some degree of disability.^ 
A definition based upon impairment 



according to medical criteria would yield a 
number slightly below 20 mlllion.^^ 

There is an extensive body of writings on 
labor market issues affecting persons vdth 
disabilities. The authors use different 
approaches and have figures that vary but 
the conclusion is the same. Their labor force 
participation and rates of employment are 
quite low, and many are poor. Several 
authors suggest that about one third of 
working age persons (16-64 years) with 
disabilities are employed, and that two 
thirds are not. One estimate is that 42% of 
disabled men of working age were 
employed; this contrasts with 29% of 
women. These figure include people 
working full and part-time and year round 
and part-year workers.^ 

Conclusions 



This chapter has printed information on 
the changing demography of the labor force 
and has examined aspects of economic 
diversity that exist among and within the 
race/ethnic groups making up the diverse 
population. The chapter synthesizes 
information about their economic 
differences. This background is part of the 
information that should assist policymakers 
in understanding the issues before the 
society and the economy resulting from the 
increasing diversity of the work force. 



36 



37 



38 



Discussed in Robert L. Burgdorf, Jr. (1990), Changes in the Workforce, Changes in the Workplace: 
Employment Policy and People with Disabilities, paper prepared for Commission Conference on 
Training a Diverse Population, 1990. 

For a discussion of approaches to defining and counting the disabled see Monroe Berko witz and 
Edward Beikowtiz, "Labor Force Participation Among Disabled Person," Investing in People - A 
Strategy to Address Amo-ica's Workforce Crisis, Vol. II; Report of Commission on Workforce 
Qualify and Ubor Market Efficiency, 1989, Washington, D.C. 

Reviewed and sununarized by Burgdorf, 1990. 



22 



Er|c 18 



n. Profile of the Changing Labor Force 



In overall terms, the workforce of the 
future will not be dramatically different 
from that of today. Much of the ^neral 
discussion of the changing labor force has 
focused on the net change in the labor force 
between the present and the year 2000. Too 
often, however, the discussion has not 
distinguished between the "net change" and 
the entire lalx)r force. The largest gains in 
the net growth of the labor force in the next 
decade or so will be registered by women 
and the race/ ethnic groups. However, the 
aggregate profile of the labor force will be 
about the same in the year 2000 as it was in 
1988. The shares of the net growth of the 
labor force by women and the race/ethnic 
groups are forecast to be as follows: 





White non Hispanic Women 


35-5% 


• 


Hispanic Men 


14.8 


• 


Hispanic Women 


127 


# 


White non Hispanic Men 


lh6 


• 


Black non Hispanic won^n 


9.0 


# 


Black non Hispanic men 


6.7 


• 


Asian and other men 


4.9 


• 


Asian and other women 


47 



C^pite these changes, the labor force in the 
year 2000 will be about the same: 84% white 
instead of the 86% found in 1988, It will be 
about 60% male in 2000 just as it was in 1988. 
(The percentage of white males will decline 
from 48% to 45%.) 

Although the aggregate profile of the labor 
force will not change a great deal, it is 
changing markedly in a number of locations 
because the race/ethnic groups are 
concentrated in particular places. Issues 
related to geographic location of the diverse 



population are considered in the next 
chapter. 

The data summarized in this Chapter 
reveal the following broad portraits of the 
groups that are considered: 

* Blacks. Blacks, especially black males, 
appear to have great difBculty in Ending 
and keeping emplojonent. They have a low 
and apparently still declining rate of labor 
force participation as compared with -nen in 
the other groups. The black men who are 
employed earn less than white and Asian 
men but more than Hispanic men. Black 
women also have high unemployment rates, 
but they have higher rates of labor force 
participation than women in the other 
groups (except Asian women). Their wages 
are only slightly lower than those for white 
women. Almost a third of the total black 
popubtion is below the poverty line; more 
than 1 1 % could be classified as affluent. 

* Hispanics. Hispanic men appear to have 
I^ difficulty in finding employment than 
black men; their unemployment rates fall 
bet'veen the rates for whites and blacks. 
Their labor force participation rate is higher 
than those for whites or blacks. However, 
Hispanic men earn very low wages. 
Hispank women have both low labor force 
participation rates and low earnings. 
Around one-quarter of the Hispanic 
population is bdow the poverty line; about 
13% could be classified as affluent. 

* Asians/Pacific Islanders. Asians/ 
Pacific Islanders (for whom data are 
available) have high rates of labor force 
participation, relatively low 
unemployment, and high earnings. 
Generally, their levels on each of these 



In Fullerton, Op. Cit. 



ERIC 



19 



A Changing Nation • Its Changing Labor Force 



measures exceeds those for whites. The 
same is true for Asian women when 
compared with women in other groups. 
Overall, the poverty rate for Asiaris/ Pacific 
Islanders is near that for whit^ (in the 
11-12% range). 

* Native Americans. Useful data on 
Native Americans are sparse. Ho%vever,the 
data that are avaibble show that Native 
Americans have low rates of labor force 



participation, high rat^ of unemployment 
and low earning. Among the demographic 
groups Native American women have the 
lowest rates of labor force participation. 

These findings highlight the principal 
areas where problems exist for the 
demographic groups. The next chapter 
looks at the major sources of the problems 
and point to potential areas of action to 
address them. 



ERIC 



:M 

20 



III. SOURCES OF LABOR MARKET 
DIFFICULTIES FACING GROUPS IN THE 
DIVERSE POPULATION 



This Chapter examines the reasons for 
differences in the experiences of the groups 
and for changes over time from the 
perspective of public policy needs — 
especially needs in the fields of education 
and employment and training. 

The discussion is organized into four 
subject areas: 

• Human Capital 

• Social Psychology 

• Geographic Location 

• Discrimination 

In considering the gn)u{% and the sources 
of their labor market difficulties, it is 
important to remember that both native 
bom and immigrant persons are involved. 
Although pr^ently the largest numbers of 
immigrants are Asians and Hispanics, 
Immigrants are foimd in all race/ethnic 
groups. Immigrants are likdy to differ from 
native-bom members of the same group on 
several dimensions - English language 
proficiency, education, work experience/ 
and occupational skills, for example. 
Furthermore, immigrants come to the 
United States for a number of reasons. Some 



come for economic gain; others come to join 
their lanxilies; and still others come to escape 
political repression. These reasons are not 
mutually exclusive, and many immigrants 
may come for more than one reason. 
Finally, immigration patterns have changed 
markedly over time, both as a result of U.S. 
policies, and the desires of various groups to 
come to the United States. 

For these reasons, it is difficult, if not 
impossible, to generalize about the 
characteristics of various immigrant groups. 
Not only must one distinguish immigrants 
from native-bom members of ethnic groups, 
one must take into account that the 
characteristics have changed over time. 
Some of the differences between immigrants 
and other members of the groups were 
discussed In Chapter II above (the economic 
dimensions of diveraity). In this section, 
additional Information is presented on the 
characteristics of immigrants. 

An important issue regarding immigrants 
Is the extent to which they assimilate into the 
American economy. Some researchers have 
concluded that immigrants initially earn less 
than their native-bom counterparts, but that 
they achieve eamin^ equality within 11 to 
ISyears.^ These studies generally are based 
on cross-section data (usually census data or 



See Barry R. Chiswick, "Immigrant Earnings Patterns by Sex, Race, and Ethnic Groupings," 
Monthly Ubor Review, Volume 103, Number 10, October 1980; Barry R. Chiswick (1978), "The 
Effects of Amercanization on Foreign-bom Men," loumal of Political Economy . Volume 86, 
October 1978; and Ellen Sehgal (1985), Toreign Bom in the U.S. Ubor Market: the Results of a 
Special Survey." Monthly Labor Review, Volunte 108, Number 7, July 1985. 



ERIC 



21. .) 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Current Population Survey data) where 
earnings of immigrants with different 
periods of residence in the United States are 
compared at a single point in time. This 
methodology has been criticized on the 
grounds that if the labor market skills of 
earlier immigrants are higher than those of 
more recent immigrants, then the catching 
up that is observed might be an artifact. 
There is evidence that on some measures 
average skill levels of immigrants have 
declined in recent years, but other 
researchers have concluded that the 
proportion of hieh-skill immigrants has 
increased as well. 

Although there is yet no consensus on how 
the labor market characteristics of 
immigrants have changed over recent 
decade or on how well immigrants fare 
after their arrival in the United States, it is 
clear that immigrants come from varied 
backgroimds and it is unwise to consider 
them as being hontogeneous.* Thus, there is 
significant diversity among immigrants as 
well as between immigrants and 
native-bom members of the groups. 



Human Capital 



The term "human capital" generally refers 
to the amount and type of skills a worker or 
groups of workers bring to the labor 
market.^ The term includes education, 
training, English language proficiency, and 
work experience. Variations are found both 
within and among the race/ethnic group is 
to the skills their members possess and the 
returns they receive for the human capital 
they acquire. Ttiose persons whose skills are 
not well developed can expect to have 
difficulties hi the labor market. 

The importance of human capital in the 
current and future labor market cannot be 
overemphasized. In the following 
sul^ections information is presented on 
education/basic skills and language 
proficiency. It is presented in the ways that 
basic skills usually are discussed, i.e., 
mastery of the "three Rs" and educational 
attainment. Although data are limited on 
the other dimensions of human capital, such 
as problem-solving skills or 



See George J. Borjas, "Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immigrants," 
loumal of Labor Economics, Volume 3, October 1985. 

For evidence on the decline in skills of immigrants, see James P. Smiht, "Hispanics and the 
American Dream: An Analysis of Hi^»nic Male Labor Market Wages 1940-1980," Final report 
ot the VS. Department of Labor, 19^ and George J. Borjas, Freinds or Strangers: The Impact of 
Immigrants on the U.S. Economy, 1991, New York: Basic Books. For contrary arguments aee Barry 
R. Chiswick, "Review of Friends or Strangers, " Journal of Economic Literature, Volume 29, June 
1991. 

Perhaps the most well-known example of how the characteristics of immigrants from a single 
country have changed over time is Cuba. The early immigrants were generally from the middle 
and upper classes, while the Mariel boatlift Cubans included criminals and mental patients. See 
David Card, 'The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market/' Industrial and Labor 
Relations Review, Volume 43, Number 1, Januaiy 1990. 

The pioneering work in human capital was carried out by Mincer, "Investment in Human Capital 
and Personal Income Distribution," loumal of Political Economy. Volume 66, 1985; Theodore W. 
Schultz, 1963, The Economic Value of Education, New York: Columbia Univ. Press; and Gary S. 
Becker, 1964, Hunnan Capital; A Theoretical Analysis with Special Reference to Education, New 
York: Columbia Univ. Press for National Bureau of Economic Research. The term human capital 
is sometimes used to include other types of investments in workers such as migration and health. 



22 



III. Sources of Labor Market Difficulties 



communications ability, to omit these "other 
dimensions" would be misleading. 

While it is necessary for one to have 
mastered the "three Rs" and have at least 
rudimentary language skills in order to get 
u.iy kind of a job, more is necessary to 
succeed. Workers with only rudimentary 
skills will be consigned to low-skilled }obs 
with poor pay and with little hope of 
advancement. 

There is a general societal interest in 
upgrading the skills of the labor force, 
especially those of the younger entrants. 
Upgrading the skills of the vwrkeis will help 
our economy to remain competitive in the 
global market, it will help to reduce the 
growing inequality in incomes and to 
maintain and perhai» increase the standard 
of living. 

There is growing agreement that the 
contemporary workplace requires different 
(and more) skills than the workpbce of only 
a few years ago. The "three Rs" are necessary 
as the base on which the other skills are 
developed. One study listed 13 
competencies necessary for the modem 
workplace: initiative, cooperation, ability to 
work in groups, peer training, evaluation, 
communication, reasoning, problem 
solving, decisionmaking, obtaining and 



using information, planning, capacity to 
learn, and multicultural skills. 

This list of competencies reflects the needs 
of a rapidly reorganizing workplace for the 
production of both goods and services - a 
workplace where greater emphasis is being 
placed on production through team efforts/ 
flexibility, and response to consumer tastes 
and choice in terms of products and/or 
service.* 

Education/Basic Skills 

Education is fundamental to the 
development of the workplace 
competencies just discussed. Education aiKi 
knowledge are important to the functioning 
of the overall economy, and they are vital to 

the success of the individual worker in the 

7 

economy. 

The usual way of assessing the educational 
accomplishment-level of an individual or 
group is to look at "educational attainment," 
Uuit is tiie number of years of schooling 
completed. That is the topic on which the 
most data are available. Most of what 
follows in this subsection presents data on 
the groups' educational attainment. 
However, data on educational attainment 
do not provide infonnation on knowledge 
gained or competencies developed. Before 



Russell Rumberger and Henry Levin, "Schooling for the Modem Workplace," in Investing in 
People, Volume I, Background Papere for Report of the Commission on Workforce Quality and 
Ubor Market Efficiency, 1^9, Washington, DC: US. Department of Labor. See also, Anthony 
Camivale, America and the New Economy. 1991, American Society for Training and 
Dcvelopmentand U.S. Department of Labor and Robert B. Reich, The Work of Nations, 1991, New 
York: Knopf. Ths recently released report of the Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary 
Skills (SCANS) (chaired by former Secretary Bill Brock), What Work Requires of Schools , makes 
the same point Washington, DO US. De|»rtment of Labor. 

Several recent reports of the National Commission for Employment Policy have been concerned 
with this issue; see, for example. Computers in the Workplace: Selected Issues, Report No. 19, 
1986: Another Ounce of Prevention: Education and Employment Interventions for 9 to 15 Year 
Olds, Report No. 23, 1988; and U.S. Emptoyment in an International Economy, Report No. 24, 
1988; Washington, DC; The Conunission. 



23 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



beginning the discussion of educational 
attainment it is useful to review briefly 
recent research that was designed to 
appraise whet was learned during the 
schooling experience. 

Measures of Literacy, An effort was 
launched during the past decade to measure 
the skills and competencies developed 
dtuing the schooling process. Called the 
National Assessment of Eduactlonal 
Progress (NAE?)? this project is developing 
profiles of the skills of students at 
elementary and secondary school levels^ 
and of young adults (21-25) beginning their 
working careers. 

Data published in 1986' provided profiles 
of the literacy of young adulte on three 
scal^: prose literacy, document literacy^ and 
quantitative literacy. 

• Prose literacy refers to the 
knowledge and skills needed to 
understand and use information in 
textual material. A mid-level 
performance ndght involve writing 
a letter to explain an error in a bill 
that the writer had received. 

• Document literacy involves the 
proficiency in using documents for 
purposes of obtaining needed 
information. A mid-level example 
might be locating the amount 
withheld for state income taxes on a 
pay stub. Understanding and using 
a week-end public transit bus 



schedule is a somewhat more 
complex activity. 

• Quantitative literacy involves the 
ability to use mathematical 
operations to solve problems that 
might be present in printed 
materials. An example of a 
mid-level operation might be 
computing the tip for a lunch check. 
A more complex example is making 
the computations necessary to 
estimate the least costly product 
from the shelf information in a 
supermarket 

"Tie examples are ordinary but they do 
provide clues to the kinds of abilities 
mentioned in the workplace competencies 
above. 

NAEFs studies indicate that there is not a 
general illiteracy problem as the term is 
contunonly used. On the prc^ literacy scale 
employed (0 to 500) substantial percentages 
of all groups performed at least at the 200 
level which is sufficient to perform relatively 
simple tasks. Data show that 86% of blacks, 
94% of Hispanics, and 96% of whites 
perform at the 200 level.^^ Data were not 
provided for other demographic groups. 

The data suggest that the problem of 
deBdendes in literacy emerges when more 
complex operations are involved. At the 325 
level on the profidency scale, the numbers 
seem to be related directly to the amoimt of 
time the person has spent in school. Among 
those with eight or fewer years in school 



Conducted for the US. Department of Education by the Educational Testing Servie, Princeton, 
NJ. 

Irwin S. Kirsch and Ann Jungeblut, Literacy: Profiles of America's Young Adults, National 
Assessment of Educational Progress, 1986, Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Summarized in Paul E. Barton and Irwin S. Kirsch, Workplace Competendes; The Need to 
Improve literacy and Employment Readiness, Policy Perspectives Series, 1990, Washington, DC: 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement, US. Department of Education. 



24 S 



m. Sources of Labor Market Difficulties 



there were none at the 325 level Among 
high school dropouts, 10%; among high 
school graduates, 27%; and among those 
with a postsecondary degree, 63%. The 
general relationship among blacks, 
Hispanics, and whites is maintained 
throughout the range: whites have the 
highest scores, blacks the lowest, and 
Hispanics are in between. 

Educational Attainment. There are 
substantial differences in educational 
attainment within, as well as among, 
demographic groups. Overall, in terms of 
educational attainment, the available data 
show that Asians generally have the highest 
level of attainment, followed by whites, 
blacks, Hispanics, and Native Americans. 
Except for the Chinese, the educational 
attainment of the foreign-bom Asians is 
higher than that of native-bom men. 
Foreigr-born women, again except for 
Chinese, have higher levels of attainment 
than native-bom women for whom data are 
available. See Appendix Tables A-15 and 
A-16. 

These referenceddata are based on the 1980 
Census. The large nim*er of immigrants 
from Southeast Asia, arriving since the Viet 
Nam war have changed the mix 
considerably. Arrivees during the I98te^ 
from Cambodia, Laos, and Viet Nam appear 
to have less developed workplace skills, and 



partly as a result, are experiencing: more 
difficulties in the U.S. labor market." Data 
from the 1990 Census will provide 
additional information on the status of these 
groups. 

When compared with Asians and 
non-Hispanic whites, Hispanics and blacks 
are less well educated. Smaller percentages 
of blacks and Hispanics have completed 
high school and college than have either 
Asians or whites. 

In terms of years of elementary and 
secondary schooling completed, the gap 
between blacks and whites is closing 
rapidly. By 1988, the median years of 
schooling completed by whites was 12.9 and 
for blacks it was 12.7; between 1980 and 
1988, the percentage of black high school 
graduates, age 25 to 34 increased ftom 75 to 
80% and for whiles the percentage remahied 
constant at 87%.^^ There was not a 
corresponding growth in the percentage of 
black college graduates (as compared to 
high school graduates) during the same 
period; In 1980, ahnost 18% of whites had 
four or more years of college as compared 
with about 8% of blacks. In 1988, 21% of 
whites had completed college as compared 
withll%ofblacks.^^ 

There is a paucity of information on 
within-group differences among blacks. For 



Barton and Kirsch, 1990. 

The number of arrivees during the 1970s was quite small. 

See Louise Kamikawa, 1990. The author observes iliat these recent immigrants and refugees have 
lower college enrollment rates than the national average. 

Although the education gap between blacks and whites has narrowed, for several reasons one 
should not be too sanguine regarding black educational credentials. First, in many large central 
cities dropout rates for black youth approach SOpercent Second, the quality of education attained 
by blacks may not be equal to that obtained by whites because blacks more often live in areas with 
poor school systems. 

U.S. Bureau of the Census, The Black Population in the United States; March 1988, Current 
Population Reports - Population Characteristics, Series P-2a No. 442, 1989, p.6 and Table 1. 



25 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



example/ data are not available to comji^e 
the educational attainment of the 
foreign-born black population with the 
native-bom. This fbreign-bom population 
includes among others: Ethiopians^ 
Somalis, Jamaicans, Haitians, and 
Dominicans. 

Another difficulty with the data 
concerning the black population is the 
scarcity of readily-available data on the 
educational attainment of urban, suburban, 
and rural blacks. While national data 
suggest that the educational attainn^t gap 
between blacks and whites is closing, 
information on the "underclass" suggests a 
significant, if not growing, high school 
drop-out rate among inner city black youth. 

Three points should be made about 
Hispanic educational attainment. First, 
overall the Hispanic population has a lower 
level of educatiorud attainment than the total 
population. But, there are substantial 
variations among the several subgrouj^; 
persons of Central and South American 
origin have the highest levels of attainment 
followed by persons of Cuban origin (this 
may change when full reports are available 
from the 1990 Census due to changes in the 
composition of Central American 
immigrants over the past decade). Mexican 
Americans have the lowest level and Puerto 
Ricans are in the middle. 

Second, steady progress in educational 
attainment has been made by the Hispanic 
groups between the early 1970s and the 
mid-1980s; between 1974 and 1986 the 
Hispanic population as a whole increased its 



level of educational attainment by 
three-quarters of a year. Puerto Ricans 
made the largi»t gain iiKxeasing their level 
by 1.28 years,^* Puerto Rican's improving 
levd of educational attainment, on the one 
hand, and their low level of labor force 
participation, on theother hand, are difficult 
to explain. One would expect that labor 
force participation wouki increase as the 
level of education increases, but that pattern 
does not hold for the Puerto Ricans. 

Third, educational attainment data for the 
Hispanic population may be skewed to a 
degree because of a continuing stream of 
young male Mexican immigrants who have 
less education than persons who 
immigrated earlier or who are native bom. 
For example, one study found that 60% of 
immigrants have less than a high school 
diploma, whereas among the native bom the 
percentage of those without a high school 
diploma is less than 50%. (Data on 
Hispanic educational attainment are 
presented in Apj^ndix Table A-17.) 

Researchers have analyzed the 
relationship between increased education 
and income for Hispanic and black male 
workers as compared to non-Hispanic 
whites. Their work^* supports the 
proposition that education pays. (Data for 
blade workers are available as far back as 
1940, but such data go back only to the 1970s 
for Hispanic workers.) The data show that 
in 1940, an additional year of education 
resulted in a five percent increase in income 
for whites over blacks. But as time 
progressed, and as levels of black education 
increased, the rate of return to education for 



Smith, 1990, Table 3.1. 

Georges Vemez and David Ronfeldt, 'The Current Situation in Mexican Immigration/ Science, 
Volume 251, March 1991. 

James P. Smith and Finis Welch, "Black Economic Progress after Myrdal, "in loumal of Economic 
Literature, Volume 27, June 1989; and Smith, 1990. 



ERJ.C 



3'J 

26 



m. Souix^ of Labor Market Difficulties 



blacks increased and exceeded that for 
whites. This trend became most 
pronounced for black workers during the 
1960s. (While there is no debate about the 
value of increased skills resulting from 
education, the sharp increases in black 
earning have triggered discussion of the 
role of the vigorous enforcement of the 
federal civil ri^ts laws during the 1960s.)^ 
The higher rates of return to education for 
blacks does not that blacks earn the 
same or more than whit» with the same 
educational attainment. In fact, in 1980 
bl^k men in various age categori&i earned 
between 65% and 89% of whitemen with the 
same educational attainment, with the 
youngest blacks having the smallest wage 

gap- 
Workers with better levels of educational 
attainmei\t have access to better jo1» (with 
higher status, pay, and benefits), and are 
subject to fewer layoffs. A few numbers 
will iUustrate this point. In 1987, 66% of men 
aiKi 57% of women with foiu" or more years 
of college were employed as managers or 
professionals; only 3.3% of men and 2.2% of 
women with less than four years of high 
school were so employed. Among those 
wi^h less than four years of high school, 32% 
of men and 37% of women were employed 
as operatives and fabricators.^ 



Across all groups and including both men 
and women, those workers with the low^t 
educational attainment have the highest 
unemployment rat^ and those with the 
highest educational attainment have the 
low^t imemployment. Although there is a 
general payoff to education for all groups as 
measured by reduced imemployment, the 
benefits do not fall eqiially to all groups. For 
theyears 1975, 1980,aiKl 1987, black workers 
with one to three years of college have had 
higher rates of imemployment than white 
high school graduates. In 1987, Hispanic 
workers with one to three years college had 
an unemployment rate higher than white 
high school graduates. Only after Hispanic 
and black workers have four or more years 
of coll^ do they have unemployment rat^ 
that consistently are below ttiose for white 
high school graduates. See Table A-18. 

The returns to education for Hispanic 
malesdo not show the same increase relative 
to whit^ as were shown for blacks. One of 
the explanations advanced for this 
difference is that much of the schooling for 
many Hispanics was obtained outside the 
United States. This schooling, especially at 
elementary and secondary levels, was of 
lower quality and was less relevant to the 
US. labor market than education obtained 
here. 



A recent analysis of longitudinal data for the high school class of 1972 found that the rate of return 
to college for this cohort of blacks was 13% for men and 16% for women. See Lewin/ICF. Four 
Years of Investment. A Lifetime of Returns: College as an Investment for Black Youth . Final 
Report prepared for the Commonvirealth Fund, 1991, Washington, DC. 

See Smith and Welch, 1989; see also James J. Heckman, 'The Central Role of the South in 
Accounting for the Economic Progress of Black An^ricans, " in Papers and Proceedings, American 
Economic Assodatioo, Volume 80, Number 2, 1990. 

See Smith and Welch, 1989. 

At least traditionally. In recent mcnths, announcements of layoffs of middle managers and other 
salaried workers have become more frequent. 

U.S. Bureau of the Census, Statistical Abstract 1988, Table 629. Similar patterns were found for 
blacks in a study of the high school dass of 1972 by Lewin/ICF, 1991 . 



ERIC 



31 

27 



A Chang^g Nation • Its Changing Labor Fbrce 



Indians living both on and off reservations 
(although on reservations in particular) 
have low levels of educational attainment 
and few marketable skills. As Ainsworth 
indicates: 

The education and training of 
Indians lag fax bd:Und averages for 
non-Indians. One of the basic 
requirements for economic success, 
English language capability, is 
lacked by many. The lack of 
education has limited them to jobs 
that require little skill or training. 
Moreover, low educational 
attainment has discouraged many 
from leaving the reservation 
because they believe they cannot 
effectively compete for jobs with 
better educated non-Indians.^^ 

The homeless, persons with addiction, and 
persons with disabilities sometimes have 
needs that must be met before employability 
needs can be addressed. There are also 
indications that some membeis of these 
groups also have educational needs. About 
48% of the homeless interviewed in soup 
kitchens and shelters by the Urban Institute 
in 1989 had not completed high school and 
some 9% had 1^ than an eighth grade 
education. 

26 

With respect to persons with disabilities, 
the issue seems to be one of access to 



postsecondary training and education 
rather than completion of secondary 
education. Like any other group, disabled 
individuals need adequate education and 
training in order to possess marketable 
skills. One study has suggrated that while 
public elementary and secondary 
educational opportunities have been greatly 
expanded for disabled students, educational 
opportunities at the college level remain 
much more limited. One survey of college 
and university disabled student programs 
concluded that "most colleges and 
universities today are unpre^red to fully 
serve handicapped students. 

English Language Proficiency 

The ability to communicate well in English 
is a nec^ity in almost all areas of potential 
advancement in American society ~ from 
getting an education, to acquiring 
employment, to advancing in employment 
if a job is fbimd. It is well known that a lack 
of facility in English is a difficulty for some 
Hispanics and Asians primarily because of 
the large numbers of first- and 
second-generation immigrants. Less well 
known is the fact that other groups face 
many of the same difficulties. These groups, 
such as Russian-Jewish immigrants and 
Haitians, are more concentrated in specific 
urban areas, such as New York City and 
Miami. 



Ainsworth, 1989. 

National Commission for Employment Policy (1990). 

Estimates of the numbers of persons with disabilities vary. A figure often used is 43 million. (See 
Burgdorf, 1990. Other writers decline to use a precise figure saying that the number would depend 
upon the definition of disability. A concept of disability based on medical impairment would 
yeild one figure, while one based on a socioeconomic impairment would yield a different and 
higher one. (See Berkowitz and Berkowilz, 1989.) 

Berkowitz and Berkowitz, 1989. 

Marc Leepson, "New Opportunities for the Disabled," America's Needy: Care and Cutbacks, 
Editotial Research Reports, 1984, Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly Inc. 



ERIC 



28 



III. Sources of Labor Market Difficulties 



Lack of language proficiency is a challenge 
not only to the individuals involved but also 
to the institutions responsible for providing 
education and language instruction. The 
Wall Street Journal, for example, had a front 
page note about the Inability of the New 
York City Board of Education to recruit and 
employ in sufficient numbers teachers who 
speak Haitian-Creole. 

New York City, probably the most 
culturally diverse dty in the nation, offers 
further examples. During the 1989-90 
school year, the system had 1 17,381 students 
enrolled in special language instruction. 
Ahnost 95,000 were classified as of limited 
English proBdency; this number induded 
63,000 whose native language was Spanish, 
9,000 who spoke Chinese, almost 6,000 
whose language was Haitian Creole, about 
2,600 who spoke Korean, and more than 
1,000 whose language was Arabic. This 
required almost 4,300 language teachers and 
the cost for language teaching was more 
than $178 million. Despite tiie effort, 4,000 
students still were not in appropriate 
dasses. 

A limited amount of data is available on the 
English language profidency of the Asian 
and Hispanic populations. The infom^tion 
is based on analyses of the 1980 Census. 
There is some limited variation among 
Hispanic subgroups in their English 
speaking ability. About 60% say they either 
"speak English only or sii^k English very 
well," while about 6% report that they do not 
speak any English. See Table A-19. 



There is considerably more variation 
anwng Asian groups. Only about 22% of 
Vietnamese and 32% of Koreans say that 
they speak only English or speak English 
very well About 80% of Japanese and Asian 
Indians, indicate that th^ speak English 
only or "very well" Less than one peit^nt of 
Filipinos, Indians, and Japanese report that 
they speak no English at all. See Tables A-20 
and 21. 

Immigrants arrive in this country with 
differing abilities in Uie English language 
and may experience difficulty in learning 
the new language. This does not, however, 
appear to extend to their offspring bom in 
the United States. Hispanics who are bom 
in the VS. are much more likely to speak 
English than are foreign-bom Hispanics. 
The different subgroups of Hispanics have 
diffo^t likelihoods of speaking English at 
home; Hispanics of Central and South 
American origin are most likely to speak 
English at home,^^ followed by Puerto 
Ricans, then Cubans, and finally, 
Mexkan- Americans. 

The offidal data reported in the Census are 
the best data available, but it may be that 
they are misleading with resped to both 
educational status and language 
profidency. First, the data are based on 
self-reporting by the respondents and a 
potential for bias exists because the 
respondents may not understand the 
questions fuUy or they may wish to portray 
a picture of themselv^ that overstates or 
understates their positions. 



ERIC 



29 
30 
31 

32 



Anna Stem, 1990. 

It should be remembered thai the answers to Census questions are self declarations. 

Alejandro Fortes and Ruben C. Rumbaut, Immigrant America: A Portrait, 1990, Berkeley, CA; 
University of California Press. 

This olwervation alxjut Hispanics of Central and South An«rican origin may change with the 
results of the 1990 Census. 

29 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Second, there may have been a serious 
undeicount of the Fj^c/ Asian population 
in the 1980 Census. The 1980 Census data 
did not provide information that would 
pmnlt analysis of the language profldency 
of south^t^ Asian immigmnts such as 
Cambodians and Laotians. In fact, the 
number of olservations for the Vietnam^ 
was quite smaU - perhaps too small to allow 
full confidence in the data. 

Since that Census, there has been a rapidly 
growing population in New York City's 
Chinatown with immigrants from the 
People's Republic of China (in growing 
numbers since 1979, when official relations 
between the U.S. and that coimtry were 
established). Many of the newer Chinese 
immigrants, from all parts of the country 
were less well educated and proficient 
in English upon arrival than their 
predecessors from Taiwan and Hong Kong. 
Language was a dual problem for some of 
them It has been reported, for example, that 
some of the Cantonese-speaking Chln^ 
have had to learn Mandarin in oider to 
along" in their communities in New York, 
(As an aside, the latter point is an example 
of the many layers of diversity that exist.) 

Further, data are not available that provide 
a basis for ascertaining the English kmguage 
proficiency of foreign-bom blacks. There is 
a genera] awareness from both observation 
and press accounts that sizeable numbers of 
blacks (for whom Ei.^Iish is not their first 
language) reside in eastern American cities. 



Even with the limitations of the data, it is 
possible to dra v some tentative conclusions 
about the inunigrant grou{» coming into the 
labor force. At least through 1980, Asians 
generally have with the most developed 
workplace skills. They come with 
substantial education, prepared to 
participate in the American economy. The 
commitment to education appears to be 
passed to succeeding generations (although 
native-bom Asian Indians do not have the 
same level of educational attainment as 
foreign-bom). Hispanics do not arrive with 
the same high levels of education as the 
Asiai^ and there is great variation in levels 
of educational attainment among the 
various Hispanic subgroups. 

Sodal Psydiolc^ 

Sociology of the Family 

There are differences among the 
race/ethnic groups in terms of important 
family sociological characteristics that aie 
important to their relative success in 
acquiiing human capital and performing in 
the labor market. 

In some of the groups the family is no 
longer fulfilling some of the traditional 
fanUly roles of nurture and support - roles 
that families have played historically."'^ 
This, of course, can lead to future labor 
market difficulties. A recently published 
report of the Department of Education 



Kamikawa, 1990. 
Anna Stem, 1990. 

Although many Asians come to the United States with high levels of educational attainment, a 
significant number of the most recent immigrants had little or no education. It is widely reported, 
for example, that many Hnv>ngs from Laos are illiterate in their own language. 

It is not the intention of this discussion to focus simply on what is perceived by many to be a 
pathology in contemporary American family life. The focus here is on issues that pose problems 
in preparing for, or participating in, the labor market. 



ERIC 



m. Sources of Labor Maritet Difficulties 



examined "at-risk" factois for the studaits. 
At-risk referred to those factors that 
contribute to failure to achieve in school or 
to the likdihood of dipping out before high 
school completion. 

The six "at-risk" factors examined 
included: having a single parent, parents 
who did not have the hi^ school diploma, 
limited English proficiency^ low family 
income Cess than $15X)00 per year), siblings 
who dropped out, and being left home alone 
for extended periods. These at-ri^ factors 
were ascertained after detailed studies of 
educationally disadvantaged children. 
Among the race/ethnk: groups, the highest 
percentages of students with two or more 
risk factors were black and Hispanic 
students at 37% and 41%, respectively. 
Whites and Asian/Pacific I^anders had the 
highest percentages with no risk factors: 
62% and 58%, respectivdy. 

Women and children living in 
single-parent families are likely to be poor, 
and being poor brings with it risks that will 
affect one's ability to acquire skills and 
function successfully in thie labor market. 
The percentage of female-headed families 
has grown in all demographic groups, but 
the growth has been most pronounced 
among blacks. In 1940, some 18% of all black 
femilies were headed by women with 10% 



for whites. By 1983, black fomale-heMled 
families were at 42% of the total, while 12% 
of white families were headed by women. 

A substantial share of Hispankr families are 
headed by women; in 1973, the number was 
ahnost 17%, and by 1983 Ae percentage had 
grown to ahnost 23%. Among HispazUcs, the 
percentage of Puerto Rican families headed 
by women was 44%, approxinmtely the 
same proportion as that of blacks. 

Culture 

Culture, as used here, refers to the way in 
which a group or a sodety lives and the 
formal and informal rules that govern that 
group. Culture is transmitted from one 
goieration to the next through a number of 
means, but important among them is 
language. And within some immigrant 
grou{^ and among some Native Americans, 
especially among the older generations, 
there can be r^istaiK^ to change, to thin^ 
that will upset the established order. 
Sometimes this takes the form of resistance 
to education and the learning of a new 
language for fear that the original culture 
wiUbelost. 

The desire of groups to maintain their 
cultural identity is not a new phenomenon. 
The following was written about Italians 



U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research and Improvement, A Profile of the 
Amerdan Eighth Grader, 1990, Washington, DC The Department Students who were eighth 
graders in 1988 in theoiy will be ready to enter the labor market or postsecondaiy shidy in 1992. 

For other Hispanic sul^oups the figures are: Central /South American, 22%; Mexican American 
19%; and Cut>ans, 16%. Data on white, Wack, and Hispanic families are from VWlliam JuUus 
Wilson and Kathryn M. Nedterman, Toverty and Family Structure: The Widening Gap between 
Evid^Ke and PubUc Policy Issues," in Sheldon Danzigcr and Daniel H. Wdnbeig, Fighting 
Poverty: What Works and What Doesn% 19S6, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. For 
a reexamination and ^interpretation of data on black family formation see Erd Ricketts, 'The 
Origin of Female-headed Black FamiUes," in Focus, VoL 12 No.l, 1989, University of Wisconsin - 
Madison, Institute for Research on Poverty. Figures for Puerto Rican families are from Marta 
Esculia and Margarita Prieto, Hispanics in the Workforce, 1988, Washington, DC National 
Council of La Raza. 



31 



A Changing Nation • Its Otai^ng Labor Force 



living in Boston's West End 30-35 years ago: 

... Parents are suspicious that 
education will estrange the 
children from them, and kom the 
peer group society as well.... 
Although lower-class culture has 
innumerable problems, the basic 
one is occupational. It seems to 
produce people who can work only 
in unskilled jobs.... The 
female-based family seems to raise 
men who find it difficul t to develop 
the skills and the motivations that 
are necessary for obtaining and 
holding the jobs that will be 
available. 

Most immigrants must cope with a change 
in culture in addition to the change in 
language spoken upon arrival to the United 
States. One study of Hispanic assimilation 
suggests that this may result in a "culture 
dash" that occurs along several dimensions: 
between the Hispanic culture and that of 
other American communities, between 
established Hispanic populations and new 
immigrants, and between older Hispanic 
immigrants and assimilating younger 
generations.^ Experiencing a clash 
between one's own cultture and that of 
another can lead to feelings of social 
isolation, frustration/ smd discouragement. 

Traditional American Indian culture and 
values frequently diverge from those of the 
majority society, which can put Indians at a 
disadvantage in looking for employment 



opportunities. "Indian values and work 
habits often conflict vAth the acquisitive, 
competitive methods that the American 
private enterprise system nurtures, creating 
tensions with non-Indian managers. 
Traditional Navajo culture, for example, 
frowns on the accumulat^.on of individual 
wealth and discourages risk-taking 
innovations."*^ 

What some employers might peicdve as a 
lack of motivation or an inability to perform 
a task "correctly" (i.e., according to "white" 
standands) may be the prodixrt of different 
cultural assumptions or backgrounds. 

There are many ways in which cultural 
differences, large and small, can affect 
relationships in the labor market before or 
during employment. The following are 
examples of instances (brought out at 
NCEFs Conference on Training a Diverge 
Population) where cultural differences can 
lead to misunderstandings in the work 
place. 

In some cultures, a sense of 
modesty has been instilled into 
young women to the extent that it 
makes it difficult for them to have 
direct eye contact with 
interviewers, especially male 
interviewers. This does not fit well 
with the general importaiKe that is 
placed on 'look 'em straight in the 
eye" directness in this society. 



Herbert J. Cans, The Urban Villagers, 1962, New York: The Free Press, quoted in Ken Auletta, The 
Underdass, 1983, New York; Vintage Books. 

Jorge Chapa, "Are Chicanos Assimilating?: Longitudinal Trends in Sodo-Economic Attainment 
and Class Differences in Sodal-Structurul Assimilation of Third and Third-Plus Generation 
Chicanos," 1989. Paper presented to the American Sociological Association, San Francisco, CA. 

Tom Arrandale, "American Indian Eamomic Development," in Editorial Research Reports, 
Amarica's Needy: Care and Cutbacks, 1984, Wa^ngton, D.C.: Congressional Quarterly Inc. 



ERIC 



32 



3il 



m. Sources of Labor Market Difficulties 



Another example is concerned with 
the sense of family and family 
closeness: a manager was £aced 
with an employee who wanted to 
take a trip out of the o>uintry to 
attoui the funeral of a cou^ This 
did not meet the employer's 
guiddin^ ^r fimeral leave- The 
company leave policy granted 
leave for funerals of "close" 
relatives such as spouses, children, 
parents, siblings, and 
grandparents. In the culture of the 
employee in question^ a cousin is a 
dose relative and is owed the honor 
of attendance at the fimeraL 

Emotional Ttauma 

Although there is little direct evidence, it 
seems reasonable to expect that emotional 
trauma affects the ability of many persons to 
acquire human capital and to function 
effectively in an employment setting. Both 
immigrants and native-bom members of all 
race/ ethnic groups are subject to 
traumatizing experiences. 

Moving into and becoming part of a new 
culture can have deep psychological effects 
on immigrants, part of Uie "culture clash" 
described earlier. The following describes 
the dimensions of this issue: 

Migration can produce profound 
psychological distress, even among 
the best prepared and most 
motivated and even under the most 
receptive of circumstances. 
Acculturation is not a simple 
solution to the traumas of 



immigration because it can itself be 
a traumatic process. Among lower 
class immigrants, premature 
acculturation may lead to a higher 
incidence of mental illness and 
drug dependence as they lose their 
sense of identity and soc^ controls 
while being exposed to new 
mores.... Countries such as 
America which encourage rapid 
assimilation report higher 
psychiatric hospitalization rates 
than those which accept or 
encourage ties to the original 
culture. 

While the process of assimilating to a new 
cultiue may prcKiuce its own trauma, some 
immigrants arrive with scars that may be 
difficult to erase. For example, a 
psycho-social survey conducted at Bell 
Multicultural High School (Washington, D. 
C.) in 1987 found that 35% of the Central 
American immigrant students were 
"unaccompanied minors;" they had 
immigrated to this country at the age of 15 
or 16, completely on their own. Also, 81 % of 
the youths had been exposed to or had 
witiressed a family member at risk of one of 
the following: violent death, violent attack, 
rape, interrogation, imprisonment, or 
torture. This places the children at high risk 
of having emotional adjustment difficulties, 
resulting in poor performance in school and 
later problems in the labor market.*^ 

Similar experiences of Indochinese 
refugees in San Diego County, California, 
aredetailed in Table 3.1. 



Anna Stem, 1990. 

Maria Tukeva, FrovidinE Education and Training Services to a Diverse Population, paper 
prepared for NCEP Conference on Training a Diverse Population, 1990. 



33 



A7 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Table 3.1. 

Stressful Life Events in the PosM975 Migration of Indochinese Refugees 
Resettled in San Diego County 





(Nb109M%) 


f^ainlifiififlfi 

(Nsl20M«) 


diffieM 


Vifitnameie 
(N«1S7M%I 


Total 

(Na5(»)(«) 


fiCpuiicii VBimi fn 




6SA 


325 


395 


48.6 


rWuwjr MMK*f»V%f in 

prifton 111 homdand 


11.9 


55 


13.6 


42.0 


202 


Fled aloiu^ivillKHit 
immedlAte family 


193 


292 


11.4 


13.4 


18.0 


ImVc DflDCfl 10 exit 






i\J 






AittaltediacKapt 


25.7 


752 


363 


30.6 


29.6 


Feartd would be 
killed dttring ewape 


92,7 


80.7 


73.7 


732 


79.4 


Speitf over 2 )rcan in 


72.6 


75.9 


293 


22.1 


477 


Cannot cosuminlcate 
with fandly left 
bdiind (unknoira 
where^utt) 


18.4 


763 


16.1 


41.0 


265 



Source: P<»tes and Rumbaut, 199(1 



Almost two-thirds of the Hmongs and 
Cambodians had lost family members in the 
events that lead to their leaving. A quarter 
or more of all the groups had been the 
victims of assault during escape. Most 
feared that their lives would be lost in the 
process of escape. And appreciable 
numbers were isolated totally from their 
families (the whereabouts of the families 
were unknown). 

Because of this extremely difficult 
transition pericxl/ many recent immigrants 
suffer from debilitating emotional 
problems. For this reason, the provision of 
mental health services targeted at the 
immigrant population and its specific needs 
would be a very valuable resource in 
helping immigrants become self-sufficient 
intheUS.^ 



Some native-bom Americans are not 
immune to the kind of trauma being 
discussed. Many inner city areas are 
marked by a pervasive violence stemming 
from the presence of drug markets, gangs, 
and groufs of vulnerable, homeless people. 
The images of frightened, protective 
mothers escorting their children to and from 
school tell the story more powerfully than 
can any statistics. The groups most likely to 
live in this type of environment are 
discussed in the next section. 

Geographic Location 

Although growth of diversity within the 
population is a national issue, it is not a 
nationwkie problem that is spread evenly 
around the country. 



44 



For a complete discussion of immigrants and mental health, see Portes and Rumlwut, 1990. 



ERIC 



34 



3S 



ni. Souim of Labor Market Difficulties 



The race/ethnic groups are concentrated in 
a few states and these population groups are 
further concentrated in a small number of 
urban areas. The groups have somewhat 
differing patterns of concentration: 

• About three-fifths of the Hispanics 
are in the states of California and 
Texas. If Florida and New York are 
added, about three quarters of this 
population are accounted for. 

There is some locational variation 
among Hispanic subgroups. About a 
thixd of the Puerto Rican population 
on the mainland is located in New 
York, about 12% in each of the States 
of Florida and New Jersey, and 
almost 11% In California. Almost 
55% of the Cuban population can be 
found in Florida, with 
concentrations of just under 10% in 
California and New Jersey.*^ 

• The Asian population is almost as 
concentrated geographically as 
Hispanics. About 60% of 
Asian/ Pacific Islanders are in five 
states, Alaska, California, Hawaii, 
New York, and Washingtoa The 
largest concentrations of Chinese, 
Hlipinos, Japans, Koreans, and 
Vietnamese are in California. 



Almost 40% Asians lived in that 
state.** 

• American blacks are somewhat 
more dispersed geographically. 
Slightly more than half (about 53%) 
reside in the southern region of the 
U.S. ihe remainder are in the 
Northeast (about 18%), the north 
Central States (about 18%), and, to a 
lesser extent, on the West Coast 
(about 9%). 

Particular groups comprise sizeable 
fractions of total population in some states. 
For example, in Mississippi blacks are atout 
36% of the population, and in Louisiana and 
South Carolina they are around 30%.* 
Hispanics are 38% of the population in New 
Mexico and 26% in California and Texas. 

In addition to the state-regional 
concentrations, the various groups are 
lar^ly concentrated in urban areas. (Native 
Americans living on reservations are an 
obvious exception.) More than half of all 
blacks (about 57%) live in inner cities.*^ 
Ninety-two % of Hispanics arc in urban 
areas; Asians/Pacific Islanders are almost 
totally an urban population. Of the five 
Asian groups for which statistics are 
available, the smallest urban concentration 
is among FUipinos at 93%.^' 



U.S. Bureau of the Census, The Hispanic Population in the United States, Current Population 
Reports, Series P-20, No. 431, 1988. 

Preliminary 1990 U.S. Census data reported in New York Times, March 11, 1991, page 1. 

In the DisUici of Columbia, which is classified with the states in Census listing, blacks are 66% of 
the population. Preliminary 1990 Census data, reported in the New York Times, March 11, 1991 . 

New York Tiimrs, March 1 1 , 1 991 . 

Gerald D. Jaynesand Robin M. Williams (eds.) A Common Destiny. Blacks and American Society, 
1989, Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 

U.S. Bureau of the Census, 1988; see also. National Commission for Employment Policy, Hispanics 
and Jobs: Barriers to Progress Spedal Report No. 14., 1982, Washington, D.C. : The Commission. 

U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, 1988. 



ERIC 



35 3!) 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Additionally, changes in local area 
demographics take place very rapidly - 
often more rapidly than can be recorded by 
the decennial US. Census of Population. 
Such population dmng^ ohen require shifts 
in program strategies aiui redpployment of 
resources. For example, for many years^ the 
Watts area in South Central Los Angeles has 
been a symbol of the black ghetto because of 
the urban riots of the late 1960s. By now, 
however, about half of the population of 
Watts is Hispanic. 

A more dramatic illustration of rapid Ixal 
change is found in ZIP Code 11226 which 
covers most of the Flatbush section of 
Brooklyn, New York, Between 1983 and 
1987, some 17,700 immigrants settled in the 
area. While slightly more than half of the 
new residents were from Haiti and Jamaica, 
the others came from more than 20 other 
cotmtries from around the world. At that 
time, the school district serving Flatbush 
had some 1,5(K) students who needed and 
were entitled to bilingual classes or English 
as a Second Language (ESL) programs. 

The relationship between geographic 
concentration of the race/ethnic groups and 
their economic status is complex. At least 
three of the elements of economic diversity 
discussed in Chapter II and this chapter 
appear related closely to geographic 
location. 

One aspect of the relationship between 
geographic concentration and economic 
success was mentioned earlier in the report. 
A direct labor market effect stems from the 
shift of manufacturing - and manufacturing 
jobs - away from central citi^, specially in 
the Midwest aitd Northeast, the "Ruslbelt," 



to other regions of the nation and other parts 
of the world or have simply disappeared. 
The movement of these jobs away from the 
dti^ has resulted in a loss of employment 
opportunities for persons with relatively 
little education and low skills. This exodus 
of maj^iafacturing jobs has affected blacks 
and Hispanics; the availability of such jobs 
was a major attraction of the Midwestern 
and Northeastern cities for immigrants and 
blacks migrating from the South. Good jobs 
in the service sector (which replaced the 
manufacturing sector as a source of jobs) 
and in restructured manufacturing 
operations have educational requirements 
that put them beyond the reach of many 
inner city blacks, Hispanics, and recent 
immigrants. 

A recently published analysis of data for 
large cities for the period 1970-1981 
contained in the publication County 
Business Patterns (U.S. Department of 
Commerce), showed: 

• a substantial loss of entry level jobs, 
that is, pbs requiring a high school 
diploma or less, 

• a moderate gain in moderate skill 
jote, that is, those jobs requiring high 
school and some postsecondary 
education, and 

• a sizea Je increase in high skill jobs, 
that is, jobs requiring a bachelor's 
degree or higher level of 
education.^"' 

To the extent that the traditional low-skill 
manufacturing and service sector jobs have 
moved abroad or disappeared, appropriate 



Anna Stem, 1 990, and, Michael Spector, "Brooklyn's Accent Takes on Caribbean Lilt," Washington 
Post, January 28,1991. 

Thomas A. Clark, "Urban Schools and the Changing Labor Market ' in The Urban Review, Volume 
21, Number 4, 1989. 



ERIC 



40 

36 



ni. Sources of Labor Market Difficulties 



employment and training poUdes call for 
providing the education and training 
required for the jobs that are available. It has 
been hypothesized that to some extent those 
jobs that remain are inaccessible to 
race/ ethnic groups who live in central cities 
because the appropriate jobs are nov^ 
located in suburban areas. This "spatial 
mismatch hypothesis" has received some 
support in recent studies, but the magnitude 
of the effects is unclear. 

A second and somewhat less direct labor 
market effect of geographic location relates 
to groups' education. As indicated above, 
both blacks and Hispanics have lower 
educational qualificadoits than Asians or 
whites. Blacks on a national basis have 
largely closed the gap between themselves 
and whites in terms of years of education 
attained. However, the dropout rate 
continues to be high for imier dty blacks 
with estimates for the largest dties running 
on the order of 50%. Additionally, by most 
measures blacks consistently perform more 
poorly than whites in mathematics and 
science.^ 

The quality of inner city education has been 
widely criticized by employers, community 
leadei^, parents, and educators themselves. 
Schools that serve poor students in the iimer 
dty frequently have very limited resources. 



One example from the Chicago schools: the 
schools that minority children attended 
were not only racially isolated, but also 
predominately poor. In a chemistry class in 
a predominately black high school, the 
periodic table used (in 1988) was published 
in 1962 aiul thus was missing six elements 
that had been discovered since that date. 
The chemistry lab also was lacking beakers, 
distillation equipment, and other basic 
supplies.^ 

Finally, concentrations of members of 
particular groups in particular locations 
may result in increased discrimination 
against these groups by employers. A 
study of Mexican- American earnings in the 
SouUiwest su^ested that the concentration 
of Mexican-Americans in that region 
supports the basic model of discrimination 
- discrimination that tak^ the form of wage 
disparities between Mexican-Americans 
and non-Hispanic whites. The study also 
noted differences (between Hispanics and 
non-Hispanic whites) in human capital that 
may reflect the presence of a sizeable 
proportion of recent immigrants. Another 
recent study found that the differences in 
unemployment between Mexicans and 
non-Hispanic whites could all be accounted 
for by the lower levels of educational 
attainment among Me7<icans, but that there 



See Harry J. Holzer, 'The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: What Has the Evidence Shown?" Urban 
Studies Volume 28, Number 1, 1991. Holzer condudes that there is reasonable support for the 
spatial mismatch hypothesis but the magnitude of the effects is unknown. In another recent study, 
Ronald ly Amico finds modest support for the spatial mismatch hypothesis, but concludes that 
other factois are more important. See Ronald ly Amico, 1989. 

HiTsch and Jungeblut, 1986. 

Kenneth Wong, Training a Pi\'erse Population in Chicago, prepared for NCEP Conference on 
Training a Diverse Population, 1990. Wong's infontwtion for this was based on reporting in the 
Chicago Tribune . 

Discrimination is discussed in more detail in the next section of this chapter. 

Alberto Davila, "Do Mexican Americans Earn Less in the U.S. Southwest?" Paper prepared for 
Western Economics Asstxaation International Annual Conference, 1990. 



ERIC 



37 ^ 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Fbroe 



is a large unexplained difference for 
blacks.^^ 

The labor market experieives of Native 
Americans are also affected by their 
location. American Indians who Uve in 
metropolitan areas tend to fare letter than 
those who live in rural areas or on 
reservations. On average, Indians in 
non-metropolitan areas earn only 81 % of the 
incomes of their metropolitan 
counterparts.^^ It was observed: 

the combination of a 
better-prepar^ labor force and 
better opportunities in 
metropolitan areas rather than one 
component alone that is most 
important in explaining 
metro-nonmetro earnings 
differentials among Indian 
hou^holders. Conversely, the lack 
of opportunities in non-metro latx)r 
markets along with a labor force 
lacking capital r^ources combine 



to depress the mean earnings of 
nonmetro Indians.^^ 

Discrimination 



Discrimination is recognized as having an 
important impact on labor market outcomes 
for minorities and women. However, 
economists and other social scientists have 
had gr^t difficulty assessing precisely its 
impact on earnings and employment. One 
economic theory assumes that some 
employers, workers, and unions have a 
"taste" for discrimination. If this theory is 
correct, discrimination would diminish over 
time as nondiscriminatory employers 
comf«te successfully in the labor market 
against those who discriminate.^^ ^ 

There have b«en many efforts to estimate 
empirically the impact of race/ ethnic and 
sex discrimination, but there is no 
consensus on how large the effects are. 
Unlike many economic phenomena, the 



See lyAmico, 1989. 

C. Matthew Snipp and Gary Sander, "Earnings of American Indians and Alaskan Natives: The 
Effects of Residence and Migration." Institute for Research on Poverty, University of Wisconsin, 
Madison. Discussion Paper Number 813-86, 1986. 

Snipp and Sandefur, 1986. 

Snipp and Sandefur, 1986. 

See Gary S. Becker, The Economics of Discrimination, 1957, Chicago: The University of Chicago 
Press, and Kenneth Arrow, "Models of Job Discrimination" in A.H. Pascal, ed.. Racial 
Discrinunation in Economic Ufe, 1972, l^xington, MA: Lexington Books. 

One form of discrimination that might persist over time is "statistical discrimination." In this form 
of discrimination, employes discriminate against members of particular groups because they 
believe, correctly or not, that on average nnembers of the group are not as productive. For example, 
employers might believe that women are more likely on average to quit their jobs than men. If 
so, employers might discrimiivite against women or attempt to pay them less to account for this 
added risk. See Dennis J. Aigner and Glen G. Cain, "Statistical Theories of Discrimination in the 
Labor Market." Industrial and Labor Relations Review, Volume 30, 1977. 

For surveys of the literature, see Glen G. Cain, 'The Economic Analysis of Labor Market 
Discrimination: A Survey" in Orley C. Ashenfelter and Richard Layard, eds. Handbook of Labor 
Economics, 1986, New York: North Holland; and F. Ray Marshall, 'The Econonnics of Racial 
Discrimination: A Survey." loumal of Economic Literature, Volume 12, 1974. 



m. Sources of Labor Market Difficulties 



effects of discrimination must be estimated 
indirectly. Analysts estimate 
discrimination statistically through a 
process of eliminatton. Various factors such 
as education, English language proficiency, 
and other forms of human capital are first 
examined. When groups are equal, or 
roughly so, and a disparity remains either in 
the kind of job offered or in wages paid for 
similar jobs, this disparity is attributed to 
"discrimination." The problem with this 
approach is that one rarely if ever can control 
for all the relevant factors that detomine 
earnings. Thus, the range of estimated 
discrimination impacts is quite large A 
recent survey of the literature found that 
black males may earn between 10 and 40% 
less than white males because of 
discrimination.^ 

The U.S. Commission on Civil Rights^^ 
examined the economic and employment 
status of black women as compared with 
white women over the period since 1940. It 
concluded that the gap between black 
women and white women has largely been 
closed in terms of samings and occupational 
distribution. The report did not address the 
question of the income gap between men 
and women. 

Despite the improvement in the labor 
market status of black women workers, they 
- and their families - have not achieved 
economic (or social) parity with wiiite 
women. This is attributed largely to the 
lower status and earning power of black 
men. Black women workers frequently 
either are not married and are raising 
children alone on a single income or are 



n:iarried to men who earn less and have less 
economic stability than they (the women) 
do. 

For Hispanics, one study found that "their 
lower level of education was the single most 
important reason for the lower wages they 
received compared to non-Hispanic whites" 
and that "differences in language fluency, 
time in the United States, work experience, 
race, age, armed forces experience, health, 
and government employment were also 
sources of wage differentials. However, 
the author fbimd that even after controlling 
for all of these factors, a wage gap still 
remained, which is attributed to 
discrimination. 

There is some evidence that discrimination 
is a factor in the earnings level of Hispanics 
in the Southwest Wage levels for that part 
of the nation are somewhat below the 
national average. However, after 
accounting for various factors such as 
somewhat lower living costs, the 
desirability of the area, and the like, the 
wage differences between Anglo and 
Hispanic workers are somewhat higher than 
would be expected despite any differences 
in human capital. This suggests the 
presence of discrimination. 

The extent of discrimination varies 
according to Hispanic origin. Compared 
vrith whites with the same characteristics, 
the wage differentials due to discrimination 
were as follows: Central and South 
American men, 36%; Mexican-American 
men, 6%; Puerto Rican men, 18%. 
Interestingly, Hispanics of Cuban origin 



Cain, 1986. 

U.S. Commission on CivU Rights, 1990. 

Cordelia Reimers, "Labor Market Discrimination Against Hispanic and Black Men, " Review of 
Econonvics and Statistics, Volume 65, 1983. 

Davila, 1990. 



ERIC 



43 

39 



A Changing Nation • Its Changing Labor Force 



fared the best of all subgroups, with the 
discrimination wage gap actually being 6% 
in their fevor. One explanation for this may 
be that "Cubans who immigiated to the VS. 
before 1970 fonned and maintained their 
own economic and institutional structure 

•fn 

within a small geographic area.' 

Other studies have examined wage issues 
in terms of location versus discrimination. 
In the of Hispanics in the Southwest 
and inner city black males^ they conclude 
that part of the wage differences for those 
groups that seem to be the result of location 
could also be one of the remaining effects of 
discrimination. 

Although p£nk)ns with disabilities may 
experience discrimination, little r^^xch 
has been done imdertaken to document its 
extent and nature. Their labor force 
participation and employment may be 
limited not only by prejudices against 
particular kinds of disabilities, but also by 
lack of physical access to placra of work. 
There is a long history of various efforts to 
increase the labor force participation of 
disabled persons. The Americans with 
DisabiUties Act (ADA), passed in 1990, 
addresses the problem dixectly. The ADA 
prohibits discrimination for employers of 15 
or more persons, establishes guidelines for 
qualifications standards and medical 



screening, and requires that new 
commercial buildings be accessible/^ 

Almost all of the race/ethnic groups in the 
diverse population have ex]%rienced some 
degree of discrimination at one time or 
another. The degree to which 
discrimination still plays a role in the labor 
market experience of women and minorities 
continues to be a matter of research activity 
among analysts. The extent to which 
members of the groups are currently paying 
a price (in the labor market) in terms of 
present discrimination or past 
discrimination opens a host of qu^tions that 
can not be answered fully at this time. 

For instance, earlier in this century Asians 
werediscriminated against to the extent that 
their immigration to this country was 
forbidden for a period of time. Japanese 
Americans were interned for a period 
during World War n. Currently, however, 
Asians are considered by many to be a 
"model minority." I iowever, Asians on the 
West Coast pr^ntly are subject to another 
kind of limitation. Ceilings are being 
established for the numbers of Asian 
students that can be admitted to more 
desirable colleges and universities.^ This is 
a type of "different treatment" that could put 
limits on the futures of some of these young 
people. 



Davila, 1990, and Alejandro Fortes and Robert Bach, Latin Tourney, 1985, Berkeley, CA: The 
University of California I^s, for a discussion of how economic enclaves contribute to the 
economic success of Hispanic immigrants. 

See lyAmioo, 1989, and Davila, 1990. 

This history is reviewed in Berkowitz and Berko witz, 1989. 

Buigdorf, 1990. 

In Sq^tember 1990, the NCEP conducted two hearings and made site visits in Rhode Island and 
Vermont on the issue of overoonning employment barriers experienced by individuals with 
disabilities. The witnesses discussed many reasons for the employment difficulties of the 
disabled; prominent among the reasons were ignorance and misunderstanding on the part of 
well-intentioned, but poorly informed employers and workers. 

See Louise Kamikawa, 1990. 

4 4 



40 



III. Sources of Labor Market Difficulties 



One of the most controvexsial issues in the 
literature is whether and to what extent 
discrimination contributes currently to 
black poverty. Authorities do not agree on 
the answer to these questions. One school of 
thought argu^ that race has c^ts^ to be a 
significant factor in the detamination of 
individual success. Racism during and after 
the antebellum years forced blacks into 
disadvantaged sitiiations; however, class is 
the determinant that currently keeps 
impoverished people, black or other, from 
realizing scKrial success. 

Another position, while not disputing the 
existence of discrimination, maintains that it 
is not the sole determinant of the lack of 
success of any given ethnic group. It is 
suggested that, "discrimination has been 
pervasive, but not pervasively effective." 
This position is based on the fact that with 
the same or a greater degree of 
discrimination against them, Italians have 
done better economically than the Irish in 
America; and likewise, the Japanese have 
done much better than Puerto Ricans, 
although experiencing more discrimination. 

At the NCEPs Conference on Training a 
verse Population, one view expressed was 
that in considering this topic, one should 
take an historical perspective. Little 
progress has been made in integrating 
"subjugated and conquered" groups into 
American society. The society has done a 
very good job of absorbing many 
generations of immigrants, but little 
progress had been made in bringing Native 
Americans and blacks into partnership. For 
example, the occupational projections for 
the next 10 years seem to indicate no 
narrowing of the difference between blacks 
and whites. The question suggested by this 



point of view is, "how to deal with those 
groups in our society that we at one time 
declared inferior...howdo we address that?" 

This statement precipitated a great deal of 
discussion at the conference. There was 
agreement that immigrants of European 
descent had managed to become assimilated 
and that immigrants who loJk different 
(ht>m those of European d^ent) had a 
more difficult time thian others. There was 
further agreement that the elimination of 
discrimination had to remain a goal and that 
hard work and getting an education were 
key to the strategies to assimilate these 
groups into the economy. There was one 
caveat, however, and that was that the issue 
should not be framed in such a way as to pit 
native-bom workers against immigrants. 

There are employers who are taking 
explicit steps to incorporate racially and 
culturally diverse workers (including those 
from the "subjugated and conquered" 
groups) into their workforces. In addition to 
hiring workers from the diverse population, 
employers ure designating managers and 
trainers whose principal duties involve 
insuring the full utilization of such workers 
in their companies. Their duties may 
include training activities to increase 
sensitivity about multiracial and 
multicultural workforce. Some example 
were given at the l^ginning of this report. 
Others include national-level companies 
from financial services, health maintenance^ 
and food products and services industries. 

Condtision 



The previous Chapter reviewed the status 
of the various groups in the labor market. 



Thomas So well, The Economics and Politics of Race: An International Perspective, 1983, New 
York: William Morrow and Company. 

NCEP Conference on Training a Diverse Population, 1990. 



41 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



This Chapter has examined the sources of 
the diversity of their experiences; these 
source include human capital sociological 
diversity, discrimination/ and geographic 
location. Among the major finding are the 
following: 

• The groups vary among and within 
themselves as to the human capital 
their member possess, in terms of 
both their educational levels and 
English language proHdency. Lack 
of language proficiency is acute 
among some inunigrant groups. 

• The groups vary among themselves 
along several sociocultural 
dimensions - growth of the 
female-headed single parent fonuly 
is one important dimension. Also, 
some membeis of immigrant groups 
are stressed to the point where they 
might be described as suffering 
trauma, which can affect their ability 
to function in the labor market. 

• The groups' patterns of geographic 
concentration demonstrate that 
while diversity is a national issue, it 
is not a nationwide problem. The 
groups' geographic distribution is 
important because of variations in 



opportunities (for employment) that 
exist in different locations, ^me 
analysts have sugg^ted that there 
may be a spatial mismatch, where 
members of many minority groups 
do not reside close to the jobs for 
which they are qualified. 

• Discrimination in education and 
employment is still a fact of life for 
minorities and women. The degree 
to which discrimination is a 
controlling factor in the labor market 
experiences of the groups is a 
continuing subject of research and 
analysis -- and debate. 

Two important conclusions from this 
discussion concern (1) the facts about their 
"among group" and "within group" 
variations and (2) the partial nature of the 
knowledge available about them. The 1980s 
were a decade of rapid change in the U. S. 
population, and the changes may have 
occurred more rapidly than our institutions 
could understand and respond to them. The 
1990 Ceiwus of Population will provide 
much of the information needed. 

These issues and other policy implications 
are examined in the next Chapter. 



■u; 

42 



IV. POUCY IMPLICATIONS 



This report began with a referents to the 
book. Workforce 2000/ which forecast a 
number of important changes in the labor 
market- That book was kwking ahead to 
change that would occtir during the decade 
of the 1 990s and early in the next century. To 
a large extent, however, events have been 
ahead of the forecasts. It could be said 
without too much exaggeration that the year 
2000 has already arrival. 

The American economy is facing a number 
of challenges. The labor market is changing 
markedly. The supply of workers is 
increasing in its diversity. 

Changes on the labor supply side are 
taking place against a backdrop of rapid 
change on the demand side. Work is l^ing 
performed in ways that differ from the past 
and entrance standards are rising for 
persons seeking employment. Work is 
being reorganized in both the 
goods-producing and service-producing 
sectors so as to place more responsibility in 
the hands of individual work^ and teams 
of workers. The need to be able to respond 
to customer needs and choice makes it 
necessary to move away from the dt^ly 
supervised repetition of routine tasks that 
characterized the workplace of the recent 
past. 

Increasingly, "good jobs" will require 
applicants with educational skills, i.e., a 
reasonable mastery of v^tten and spoken 
English and mathematics. Poss^ion of 
these skills provides the base for the 
development of the competencies necessary 
to perform effectively in the contemporary 
(and expected future) workplace. 



Because of these change, the policy issues 
facing education, employers, program 
service providei^, and governments are 
almost intimidating. Can this changing 
labor supply be absorbed into the changing 
labor market? What are the prospects that 
the exp>ected new entrants will ^d useful, 
satisfying, and rewarding pbs in the new 
worlqjlace that is evolving? 

Taken together, the analyses in the 
previous chapters point to areas of public 
policy and programs (in both the public and 
private sectors) that can assist in absorbing 
meml^rs of the groups into the labor force 
and into American society. The principal 
areas are: increasing human capital, 
expanding opporlimity, helping people to 
adjust to this society, and reducing or 
eliminating discrimination. A critical 
element in the process of assistance is the 
need for more detailed, and more timely, 
information about the dimensions of 
demographic, economic, and sodocultural 
diversity of the nation's population. 

Before discussing policy and 
programmatic implications it is important 
to observe that the United States has become 
a truly multicultural, multiracial nation. 
One writer, to borrow a phrase, has 
described it as the first "universal nation." Ix 
the United States is to function successfully 
as a multiculmral, multiracial itation, the 
people will need to understand and r^pect 
each other, and be sensitive to their 
difference and similarities. 

Increasing understanding and sensitivity 
will help to reduce stereotyping and may 
help in the reduction of discrimination. 
Conscious efforts are needed to educate 
people about one another. Ideally, the 



ERIC 



43 17 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



family provides the first level of such 
education and training. The schools 
provide both the classroom and the 
laboratory for people learning to 
understand and appreciate their difference 
and similarities. Employers will need to 
work with their employees to provide an 
environment where persons of differing 
races and cultures can work together; this 
may require training in working with people 
from difierent backgrounds. Employment 
and training service providers will need to 
insure that their stalEs are soisitive to the 
needs of persons of varying bad^rounds. 
Churchesandothercommunity institutions, 
and the media, can play constmctive roles in 
this process. 

Increasing Human Capital 

The growing importance of human capital, 
including education and English language 
proficiency, is widely recognized. Among 
the race /ethnic groups, blacks and 
Hispanics have been shown to have lower 
leveb of education; Hispanics have higher 
drop-out rates and blacks do more poorly on 
tests of educational competencies. High 
drop-out rates among Hispanics and inner 
city blacks figure prominently in these 
groups' overall staiuUng. Asians generally 
have high levels of educational attainment, 
but infonnation on recent inunigrants is too 
sparse to know whether this general finding 
holds true for them. 

Increasing the amount of education 
Hispanics and inner dty blacks receive is an 
important goal. Drop-out prevention 
programs are useful tools. Training 
programs for economically disadvantaged 



youth, funded under the Job Training 
Partnership Act OTPA), that have dropout 
prevention components are key in this 
regard. Loralities with concentrations of 
{X>or black and Hispanic youth would do 
well to emphasize this type of youth 
program. For some of these youth, the 
programs may need to stress siunmer jobs 
so that the young people are not "forced" by 
financial pressures to leave school eaiiy; for 
other youth, the programs may need to 
stress educational remediation through 
intensive tutoring or other means. 

Improving the quality of education for 
yoimg people is a national issue that must be 
addr^ed at all levels: the local school; the 
local school board; the state boards of 
education; and the U.S. Department of 
Education. While there is evidence that 
steps are being taken, test scores indicate 
that more needs to be done. Be(»use public 
sector budgets are tight, the "more" that is 
done will require great ingenuity and 
creativity. Dedication will also be necessary 
for it is unlikely that there are any "quick 
fixes." 

One aspect of the quality of education issue 
is a need for measure of the competencies 
gained through schooling that are widely 
understood and generally accepted. 
Employers need to know that possession of 
a high school diploma signifies something 
concrete, that it gives a reasoi«ble indication 
of the tasks that a person can accomplish. 
While many states have imposed minimum 
competency standards for high school 
graduation, they vary and do not have 
nationwide acceptance. National measures 
of competencies ultimately may be 
required. 



Proposals are being advanced currently for "certificates of mastery" in both academic and skill 
areas that could be made part of education programs. See, for example, America's C hoice: high 
skills or low wages!. Report of the Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce 
(co-chairedbyformerSecretariesofUbor Bill Brock and Ray Marshall), 1990. The State of Oregon 



IV. Policy Implications 



Upgrading English language proficiency 
of workers, especially immigrants, presents 
a challenge to many institutions including 
education, employment and training, and 
employers. Programs of English as a ^ox^ 
Language and bilingual education will need 
expansion. Funds from several federal 
programs are used for language training, for 
example the JTPA 8% set-aside and Adult 
Basic Education, as well as funds torn state 
and local fouir@. However, because of 
inadequate data collection there is little that 
can be said with confidence about the 
amount being spent, the number of persons 
being served, or the quality of the language 
training being provided. 

Expanding Opportunity 

Many of the obvious conclusions from this 
project apply to the needs of children and 
yoimg people who are still in the proc^ of 
preparing for work. Yet large numbers of 
the diverse population are young adults or 
primeage adults - persons who are beyond 
the normal age for school. These young 
adults and prime-age workers need pbs. 

Some, especially within the black 
community, need the opportimity for work 
exp>erience; others, especially within the 
Hispanic community, need higher pa3dng 
jobs. Since the number of pbs for willing 
workers with "strong backs," but limited 
skills, is diminishing, ingenuity will be 
required if jobs are to be developed for them. 
Some native-bom and foreign-bom workers 
need pbs that provide an opportimity for 
educational remediation. Many immigrants 
need jobs where there is an opportunity to 
increase their ability to communicate in the 
English language. More experimentation 



with innovative uses of on-the-job-training 
under JTPA could provide examples of 
effective ways to provide these 
opportunities. 

Meeting the multiple needs of young 
adults and prime age workers will require 
the skills ami resources of several human 
resource systems in addition to those of the 
employment and training systenn. While 
many need training and jobs, thsy may have 
prior needs si2ch as assistance v^th health 
care or housing and food. This Implies that 
human resource systems must function in a 
flexible, coordinated way. 

The need for coordination discussed here 
underscores the significance of the 
movement toward integrated human 
resource systems that is already underway. 
The concept of the "single point of contact" 
or "one-stop shopping" for human resource 
services is being tried in some states. In the 
Youth Opportunities Unlimited 
demonstration (being funded by the VS. 
Department of Labor) employment 
personnel, educational counselors,, health 
service and other similar activities are in a 
single service center. At the national level, 
an effort is underway to have the State Job 
Training Coordinating Councils 
reconstituted as Human Resource 
Investment Councils. This movement 
toward greater coordination appears to be 
driven in part by cost consid^tions. This 
may be a situation where issues of efficiency 
and effectiveness coincide. The evidence in 
this report about the differing needs of the 
race/ethnic, immigrant and native-bom 
groups reinforces the need for improved 
coordination. 



in 19W enacted l^slation that will revise completely its high school program and will involve 
certification of mastery at various levels. TTie new program is to be implemented fully by the year 
2010. 



ERIC 



45 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Assisting the Adjustment 
Process 

Some, not all, members of the diverse 
population are isolated from their native 
cultures and are isolated from the dominant 
culture in this coimtiy. They include some 
persons who are native bom eatd some who 
are immigrants. While many, if not most, 
members of these grou{» wUl "make it" in 
this society without any kind of special 
assistance, not all will Support (Hnandal 
and otherwise) may be required for 
institutions that provide such assistance 

While the categories of assistance are 
similar (to a greater or lesser extent) across 
all the groups, the groups are not alike. They 
vary in language, culture/ and receptivity to 
dealing with "outsiders" and authority 
figures. Sensitivity to these variations is 
needed in both reaching and serving 
members of the groups. This sensitivity is 
needed in existing public institutions, such 
as schools and load governments aiul in 
established private oiganizations, such as 
churches and local service groups. 

Community-based organizations (CBOs) 
have a spedal role here. Over time they 
have provided services to members of these 
groups. They have also saved an advocacy 
function in calling attention to the needs of 
their constituents at local, state, and national 
levels. 

In the past, governments and 
philanthropic groups have been a principal 
source of funding for CBQs, but their levels 
of commitment have been limited due to 
tight budgetary constraints. Appreciation 
for and sensitivity to the roles CBOs have 
played as service providers and advocates 
shouki be important in future consideration 
of their funding. 



Reducing Disaimination 

Courts and legislative bodies continue to 
wrestle with the issue of discrimination in 
the workpl^e That disaimination based 
on race^ national origin, sex, and disability 
continues to exist is generally recognized 
despite the fact that its precise effects are 
difBcult to measure. Its reduction and 
ultimate elimination must remain a national 
goal. 

Improving Population Data 

During the course of the r^earch on this 
project, one truism proved itself over and 
over. It is dangerous, and probably 
inaccurate, to g^eralize. Just as it would be 
inaccurate to j^rtray all whites and Asians 
as well educated and prosperous, it is 
inaccurate to describe all blacks and 
Hisf^nio as undereducated and poor ~ 
unprepared to participate in the labor 
market of the next decade. Because of the 
ways information about the race/ethnic 
groups has been organized and presented 
traditionally, the data tell only part of the 
groups' stori^. 

For example, in spite of the vast amount of 
data and n>search on the white and black 
populations, relatively little is known about 
the differences between the immigrants and 
the native bom in these groups. 

Changes in the demographic of local areas 
resulting from either immigration or 
internal migration can take place very 
rapidly, placing new and different demands 
on service systems of all types, including 
social services, education, employment and 
training, and law enforcement. For 
policymaking and program planning in 
these areas to be both appropriate for, and 
sensitive to, the needs of a locality, public 
officials must have timely, detailed, and 
reliable information. 



46 



References 



References 



Aigner, Dennis J. and Glen G. Cain, 'Statistical Theories of Discrimination in tl\e Labor Market," 
Industrial and Labor Relations Review. Volume 30, 1977. 

Ainsworth, Robert G., An Overview of the Labor Market Problems of Indians and Native 
Americans (Research Report 89-02), 1989, Washington, DC: National Commission for Employment 
Policy. 

Arrandale, Tom, "American Indian Economic Development," Editorial Research Reports, 
America's Needy: Care and Cutbacks. 1984, Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly, Inc. 

Arrow, Kenneth, "Models of Job Discrimination;' in A. H. Pascal (ed.). Racial Discrimination in 
Economic Life, 1972, Lexington, MA: Lexington Books. 

Auletla, Ken, The Underclass, 1983, New York: Vintage Books. 

Bamow, Burt S. et.al.. Four Years of Investment, A Lifetime of Returns: College as an Investment 
for Black Youth, 1991, Washington, DC: Lewin/ICF. 

Barton, Paul E. and Iiv^dn S. Kirsch, Workplace Competencies: The Need to Improve Literacy and 
Employment Readiness, 1990, Washington, DC: Office of Educational Research and Improvement, 
US. Department of Education 

Becker, Gary S., The Economics of Discrimination, 1957, Chicago, IL: University of Chicago Press. 

Becker, Gary S., Human Capital: A Theoretical Analysis vyith Special Reference to Education, 1 964, 
New York: Columbia University Press/National Bureau of Economic research. 

Belous, Richard, "Contingent Workers and Equal Employment Opportunity," in Proceedings of 
the Fortv-Rrst Annual Meeting of the Industrial Relations Research Association, Madison, WI: 
IRRA, 1988. 

Berko witz, Monroe and Ed waid BerkowiU, "Labor Force Participation Among Disabled Persons " 
in Volume II: Investing in Peop le, background papers for the report of the Col mist'on on 
Workforce Quality and Labor Market Efficiency, 1989, Washington, DC: U.S. Department ot Labor. 

Borjas, George J., Friends or Strangers: The Impact of Immigrants on the U.S. Econo ^.y, 1990, New 
York Basic Books. 

Borjas, George J., "Assimilation, Changes in Cohort Quality, and the Earnings of Immigrants," 
loumal of Labor Economics, Volume 3, 1985. 



ERIC 



51 



47 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Burgdorf, Jr., Robert L., Changes in the Workforce. Changes in the Workplace: Employment Policy 
and People with Pisabliities. 1990, prepared for NCEP Conference on Training a Diverse 
Population. 

Cain, Glenn C, The Economic Analysis of Labor Market Discrimination: A Survey," in Orley 
Ashenfelter and Richard Layard (eds.) Handbook of Labor Economics, 1986, New York: North 
Holland. 

Card, David, "The Impact of the Mariel Boatlift on the Miami Labor Market," in Industrial and 
Labor Relations Review. Volume 43, Number 1, 1990. 

Camivale, Anthony, America and the New Economy, 1991, Alexandria, VA: American Society for 
Training and Development and U S. Department of Labor. 

Chapa, Jorge, Are Chicanos Assimilating?: Longitudinal Trends and Class Differences in Third and 
Third-Plus Generation Chicanos. paper for Annual Meeting of American Sociological Association, 
1989. 

Chiswick, Barry R., "The Effects of Americanization on Foreign-bom Men," loumal of Political 
Economy, Volume 86, 1978. 

Chiswick, Barry R., "Immigrant Earnings Patterns by Sex, Race, and Ethnic Groupings," in Monthly 
Labor Review, Volume 103, 1980, Washington, DC: US. I>epartment of Lab^', 

Chrlstopherson, Susan, Theiny Noyelle and B*th Redfield, Flexible Employment, Contingent 
Work: Implications for Workers' Benefits, 1990, Washington, DC: VS. Department of Labor 
(available through NTIS). 

Qark, Thomas A., 'Urban Schools and the Changing Labor Market," The Urban Review, Volume 
21,Number4.,FaUl989. 

Danziger, Sheldon and Daniel H. Weinberg (eds.), Fighting Poverty: What Works and What 
Doesn't, 1986, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

ly Amico, Ronald, The Extent and Pattern of Toblessness Amon^ Minority Men, 1 989, Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Labor (avaibble through National Technical Information Service [NTISJ. 

Ctevila, Alberto, Do Mexican Americans Earn Less in the U. S. Southwest?, paper prepared for 1990 
International Annual Conference of W^tem Economics Association. 

Dreyfus, Joel, "Get Ready for the New Work Force," Fortune, April 23, 1990. 

Escutia, Marta and Magarita Prieto, Hispanics in the Workforce, 1988, Washington, DC: National 
Council of LaRaza. 

Farley, Reynolds, "Blacks, Hispanics, and White Ethnic groups: Are Blacks Uniquely 
Disadvantaged?" American Economic Association Papers and Proceedings, Volume 80, Number 
2,1990. 



ERIC 



K > 



48 



References 



FuUerton, Jr., Howard N., "New Labor Force Projections, Spanning 1988 to 2000," In US. Bureau 
of Labor Statistics, Monthly Labor Review, Volume 112, No. 11, 1989, Washington, DC: US. 
Department of Labor. 

Cans, Herbert J., The Urban Villagers, 1962, New York: The Free Press. 

Heckman, James J., "The Central Role of the South in Accounting for the Economic Progress of 
Black Americans," in Papers and Proceedings. American Economic Association, Volume 80, 
Number 2, 1990. 

Holzer, Harry J., The Spatial Mismatch Hypothesis: What has the Evidence Shown?," Urban 
Studies, Volume 28, Number 1, Winter 1991. 

Jaynes, Gerald D. and Robin M. Williams (eds.), A Common Dmtinv: Blacks and American Sodetv, 
1989, Committee on the Status of Black Americans, National Research Council, Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press. 

Johnston, WUUam B. and Arnold Packer, Workforce 2000: Workers for the 21st Century, 1987, 
Indianapolis, IN: The Hudson Institute and US. Department of Labor. 

Kamikawa, Louise, The Pacific/ Asian Mvth: Inequity in the Workforce, paper prepared for NCEFs 
Conference on Training a Diverse Population, 1990. 

Kirsch, Irwin S. and Ann Jungeblut, Literacy: Profiles of America's Young Adul^ National 
Assessment of Educational Progress, 1986, Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Lcepson, Marc, "New Opportunities for the Disabled," Editorial Reports, America's Needy: Care 
and Cutbacks. 1984, Washington, DC: Congressional Quarterly, Inc. 

Marshall, Re/, 'The Economics of Racial Discrimination: A Survey," in Toumal of Economic 
Literature, Volume 12, 1974. 

Mincer, Jacob, "Investment in Human Capital and Personal Income Distribution," in Toumal of 
Political Economy, Volume 66, 1958. 

National Center on Education and the Economy, AMERICA'S CHOICE: high skills or low wages! 
- Report of the Commission on the Skills of the American Workforce, 1990, Rochester, NY : The 
National Center. 

National Commission for Employment Policy, Expanding Employment Opportunities for 
Disadvantaged Youth, 1979, Washington, DC: The Commission. 

, Hispanics and Jot»: Barriers to Progess, Report Number 14, 1982. 

, Older Workers: Prospects, Problems, and Policies, 9th Annual Report, 1985. 

, Computers in the Workpbce: Selected Issues, Report No. 19, 1986. 

, U.S. Employment in an International Economy, Rejxjrt Number 24, 1988. 



ERIC 49'^^^ 



A Changing Nation - Its Quu^ng Labor Force 



, Helping the Homeless be Choosers: The Role of ITPA in Improving lob Prospects, Special 

Report No. 28,1990. 

New York Times, March 11, 1991. 

CyHare, William P., Assimilation and Socioeconomic Advancement of Hispanics in the U.S., 1989, 
Washington/ DC: Population Reference Bureau. 

Portes, Alejandro and Robert Bach, Latin Tourney, 1985, Berkeley, CA: University of California 
Press. 

Portes, Alejandro ami Ruben G. Rumbaut, Immigrant America: A Portrait, 1990, Berkeley, CA: 
UiUversity of California Press. 

Rekh, Robert B., The Work of Nations, 1991, New York: Knopf. 

Reimers, Cordelia, "Labor Market Discrimination Against Hispanic and Black Men," Review of 
Economics and Statistics, Volume 65, 1983. 

Ricketts, Erol 'The Origin of Female-headed BUck Fancies," in Focus, Volume 12, No. 1, 1989, 
Madison, HV. University of Wisconsin, Institute for Research on Poverty. 

Rumberger, Russell and Henry Levin, "Schooling for the Modem Workplace," in Investing in 
People, Volume I, Background Papers for the report of the Concunission on Workforce Quality and 
Labor Market Efficiency, 1989, Washington, DC: US. Department of Labor, 

Schultz, Theodore W., The Economic Value of EducaHon, 1963, New YorV- Columbia University 
Press. 

Sehgal, Ellen, "Foreign Bom in the US. Labor Market: The Results of a Special Survey," in Monthly 
Labor Review, Volume 108, Number 7, 1985, Washington, DC: US.Department of Labor. 

Smith, James P. and Finis Welch, "Black Economic Progress Since Myrdal," loumal of Economic 
Literature, Volume 27, June 1989. 

Smith, James P. The Emer^np Hispanic Underclass. 199(^ Washington, DC: US. Department of 
Labor (available through NTIS). 

Snipp, C. Matthew and Gary Sandifer, Earnings of American Indians and Alaska Natives: The 
Effects of Residence and Migration, Discussion Paper 813-86, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 
Institute for Research on Poverty, 1986. 

Sowell. Thomas, The Economicsand Politics of Race: An International Perspective, 1983, New York: 
William Morrow and Company. 

Spector, Michael, 'Brooklyn's Accent Takes on Caribbean Lilt," Washington Post, January 21 , 1 991 . 

Stem, Anna, Immigrants and Refugees: Some Considerations for Training the Workforce of the 
Future, paper prepared for NCEP Conference on Training a EMverse Population, 1990. 



5* 

50 



References 



Tukeva, Maria, Trovidlng Education and Training Services to a Diverse Population/' paper 
prepared for NCEP Conference on Training a Diverse Population, 1990. 

VS. Bureau of the Census, The Hispanic Population of the United States: March 1989, Current 
Population Reports - Population Characteristics, Series P-20, No. 444, Washington, DC: US. 
Department of Conmierce, 1990. 

, The Black Population in the United States: March 1988. Current Population Reports - 

Population Characteristics, Series P-20, No 442, Washington, DC: U.S. I>epartinent of Conunerce, 
1989. 

, Statistical Abstract of the United States: 1988, Washington, DC: U,S. Department of 

Commerce, 1988. 

U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, Em ployment and Earnings, various iK nes, Washington^ DC: US. 
Dqjartment of Labor. 

U.S. Commission on Qvil Rights, The Economic Status of Black Women: An Exploratory 
Investigation, 1990, Washington, DC: The Conunission. 

US. Commission on Civil Rights, The Economic Status of Americans of Asian Descent: An 
Exploratory Investigation, 1988, Washington, DC: The Commission. 

US. Department of Education, A Profile of the American Eighth Grader, 1990, Washington, DC: 
The Department (OERI). 

U.S. Department of Labor, Employment and Training Report of the President, 1982, Washington, 
DC: The Department. 

US. Department of Labor, What Work Requires of Schools ~ Report of the Secretary's Commission 
on Achieving Necessary Skills (SCANS), 1991, Washington, DC: The Department. 

Vemez, Georges and David Ronfeldt, 'The Current Situation in Mexican Immigration, Science, 
Volume 251, March 1991. 

Wilson, William Julius anti KatVa^yn Neckerman, "Poverty and Family Structure: The Widening 
Gap Between Evidence and 'rtiblic Policy Issiies, in Danziger and Weinberg, 1986. 

Wong, Kenneth, Training a Di verae Population in Chicago, paper prepared for NCEP Conference 
on Training a Diverse Population, 1990. 

Wong, Kenneth and Becky Roselius, Finding Work A Pilot Project to Study the Hiring of ITPA 
Participants, (unpublished manuscript), Chicago, IL: University of Chicago, 1990. 



ERJ.C 



5;, 

51 



Appendix A 
SUPPORTING TABLES 



53 



Appendix A 



Table A-1 

Civilian Labor Force Participation Rates of Men, by Race and Ethnicity/ for Selected 

Years, 1970-1988 (actual) and 2000 (Projected) 



Group: 


1970 


1976 


1980 


1988 


2000 


White Men 


80.0 


78.4 


78.2 


76.9 


76.6 


Black Men 


76.5 


69.7 


70.6 


71.0 


71.4 


Hispanic Men 


na 


79.6 


81.4 


81.9 


803 


Asian men 


na 


74.9 


na 


74.4 


74.6 



Source: US. Bureau of the Census Stettetteal Abstract of fee United ftates: 1988. Washington, D.C 1987, and US. Bureau of 
Labor Statistlo^ Bnolovment and Eamlnp . Annual Averages - 1990. Washington. D.C 1991. Howard N. FuUolon, Jr. (1989), 
"New Labor Force fhrojecttoits. Spanning 1^ to 2000, Mrotidv Labor Review. Volume 1 12, ^fo 11, November im. Table 4. 



Table A-2. 

Civilian Labor Force Participation Rates of Women, by Race and Ethnicity, for Selected 
Years, 1970-1988 (ActuaD and 2000 (Projected) 



Group: 


1970 


1976 


1980 


1988 


2000 


White Women 


42.6 


50.0 


512 




6Z9 


Black Women 


49.5 


50.0 


53.2 


58.0 


62.5 


Hispanic Women 


na 




47.4 


53.2 


59.4 


Asian Women 


na 


51.6 


57 5 


56.5 


57.5 



Source: US Bureau of the Censio, Sffftf^ <rf th? United gtate^J 99^, WjsWn^n, D.C 1987, amd US Bureau of 

Labor Statistics, Employment and Eamlnm. Annual Averaws - 1990. Washington, D.C 1991. Howard N. FuUerton, Jr. (1989). 
"New Labor Force Projections, Spanning mS to 200ft Monthly Labtg Review. V<dume 1 12, No 1 1, November 1989, Table 4. 



US. Commission on GvU Ittghts 0990), TTie Economic S tatus of Black Women: An Exploratory Investigation. Washington 
DC: The Commission, Table 1 2. 



ERIC 



57 

55 



A Changing Nation - Ite Changing Labor Force 



Table A-3 

Unemployrment Rates of Persons 16 Yeais and Older by Race/Ethnidty and Sex lor 

Selected Years 





1979 


1982 


1988 


1989 


Whites 


Men 


4.5 


8.8 


4.7 


4.5 


Women 


5.9 


B3 


4.7 


4.5 


Blacks 


Men 


10.4(a) 


18.2(a) 


11.7 


11.5 


Women 


123(a) 


16.4(a) 


11.7 


11.4 


Hispanics 


Men 


7.9 


12.0(b) 


8.1 


7.6 


Women 


9.8 


12.6(b) 


8.3 


8.8 



(a) Data are for lylack and other." 

(b) DatsimfGTpmm»2iy^m^s^9nd6ldsx. 

Sources: Bmptoymgnt and Tftraining Reptgt of the Ptedden 1 19gLBureau of the Census, f^t^ o f to anish Ortpin in the 
Unite<Stat«: Mard^ lg79. Cmmit I\>inilattan Rqxxrtsf, I^jpulation Chawaerislic^, Scries P-Za No. 354. Ctetober 198Q; and 
Employment and Eaining^ January 1M> and 19W. 



Table A«4 

Unemployment Rates for Persons 16 Years of Age and Older By Hispanic Subgroup and 

Sex foi' Selected Years 





1982 


1988 


1989 


1990 


Men 


Mexican-American 


1Z2 


VA 


6.8 


7.0 


Puerto Rican 


15.3 


8.2 


8.5 


8.3 


Cuban-American 


9.4 


4.7 


5.3 


6.6 


Women 


Mexican-American 


1Z5 


83 


8.8 


7.5 


Puerto Rican 


15.8 


6.7 


8.5 


8.5 


Cuban American 


10.9 


5.0 


5.9 


7.4 



Source: Some as Table A-3. 



ER?C 



Appendix A 



Table A'5 

Median Weekly Earnings by Race/Etfmidty and Sex, 1990 





Men 


Women 


White 


$497 


$355 


Black 


$360 


$308 


Hispanic 


$322 


$280 



Source: US. Buraw of Ubor Statistics, finadtgr«^*«"'>BftTttintwi.lamiary 1991. Anntial Avcr^esTaMes. 



Table A-6. 

Black Male Wages as a Percentagfc of White Male Wages, 1940-1980 



Year 


Ratio 


1940 


43.3 


1950 


552 


1960 


575 


1970 


64.4 


1980 


72.6 



Source: James P. Smith and Hnls Weldi, "Sack Economic Progress after Myrdal,'' in journal of Eoonomtc Uteratwe. Voltune 
27Junel989,pp.5l9ff. 



Table A-7 

Black Women^s Wages as a Percentage of White Women's Wages 



Year 


Ratio 


1940 


40.1 


1950 


60.5 


1960 


62.9 


1970 


78.6 


1980 


90.5 


1986 


86.6 



Source: VS. Commission on Qvll Rights (1990), TTie Economic Status of Bladt W omen: An Exploratory Investigatton. 
Washington, D.OThe Commission. „__— 



ERIC 



57 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Table A-8 

ic Maie Wages as a Percent of White Male Wages 





All 






Cuban 


Other 




Hispanic 


Origin 


Ricans 


Origin 


Hispanic 




733 


677 


753 


783 


^.8 


1973-75 


71.6 


68.8 


663 


80.9 


80.0 


1976-78 


74.0 


71.1 


71.9 


78.1 


83.4 


1979-81 


73.1 


70.6 


69.1 


80.5 


80.9 


tm-m 


72.0 


68.6 


69.9 


80.6 


813 


1985-87 


69.2 


64.6 


70.8 


88.4 


75.6 




7Z2 


68.8 


70.6 


81.2 


81.5 



Souroe lamei P. Sam 0990), Tho Emeraintt tfepanlc Underdo. RAND Carpantkai bxVS, Dq^rtment of Ubor, may be 
irfitainedfriBnNTO. 



Table A-9 

Occupational Distribution by Race and Hispanic Origin 1990 and 1983 (percent) 





White 




Black 




Hispanic 






1990 


1983 


1990 


1983 


1990 


1983 


Managoiai & Frofessional 


27 


24 


16 


14 


13 


12 


Technical & Sales 


32 


32 


28 


25 


26 


26 


Fiedsion Ftoducticm & 












15 


Repair 


12 


13 


9 


9 


13 


Services 


12 


13 


23 


24 


20 


18 


Operatives & Laborers 


14 


15 


22 


24 


25 


25 


Farming, Fishing^ Forestry 


3 


3 




3 


5 


5 



* a lew Um one peroenL 

Source: Emriovrntat and Eamtags. January Issues 1991 and 1984. 




Appendix A 



Table A-10 

Occupational Distribution ol Hispanic Populatioiv 1990 and 1983 (percent) 





Tf^ 
Hispanic 


Mexican 
Origin 


Puerto 
Rican Origin 


Cul 

Orij 


>an 
gin 




1990 


1983 


1990 


1983 


1990 


1983 


''?90 


1983 


Manages & Frotessionals 


13 


12 


10 


10 


16 


12 " 


23 


16 


Technicians & Sales 


24 


26 


22 


24 


31 


29 


34 


34 


Services 


20 


18 


19 


16 


18 


21 


14 


16 


Firedse Production & Repair 


13 


15 


14 


16 


13 


12 


11 


10 


Operatives & Laborers 


25 


25 


27 


25 


21 


25 


16 


15 


Fanning, Fishing, & Foiestry 


5 


5 


8 


7 


2 




1 


m 



* s> less than osie percent 

Source: Ennrfovment and Eamlny s. January Issues^ 1991 and 1984. 



Table A-11 

Occupational Distribution of Asian Woricers by Nativity, 1980 (percent) 





Manager 
&Frof 


Tech& 
Sales 


Prec Prod.& 
Repair 


Service 


Oprs& 
Labrs 


Farm Fish 
Forest 


China 














Native 


42.6 


26.5 


12.2 


7.5 


7.6 


1.0 


Foreign 


38.4 


16.8 


7.0 


26.3 


7.5 


• 


Filipin 














Native 


15.6 


18.2 


233 


11.7 


25.1 


3.1 


Foreign 


26.9 


24.2 


1Z2 


13.8 


17.4 


1.5 


India 














Native 


31.1 


21.1 


14.5 


5.7 


16.2 


16 


Foreign 


59.9 


19.0 


6.6 


4.1 


8.2 




Japan 














Native 


31.1 


22.4 


20.1 


5.8 


11.1 


72 


Foreign 


49.3 


19.2 


7.9 


8.9 


.\2 


4.7 


Korea 














Native 


40.0 


17.2 


18.9 


5.6 


12.2 


3.9 


Foreign 


33.9 


23.2 


14.6 


7.0 


17.1 




VietNam 














Native 


18.5 


112 


25.9 


3.7 


333 


0 


Foreign 


14.1 


15.9 


19.9 


9.2 


29.0 


1.4 



* S3 less than one percent 

Source: The Eoonogite Statiis of Amgritsms of Descent: An E>gp1oraitorv InygsttiiaHon. US, Commlfflton m Ctvll Rights, 
Washington, D.C: The CommtssioQ (1^8)! 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Table A-12 
Poverty Rates by Race/Ethnic Group 1980 


Native Americans 


Z5 


It- 

Hispanic 






22 


rueno Kican 


34 


L.UDan 


12 


L/tner nispanic 


16 


gBg">„, 


27 


Asians 




Chinese 


13 


Filipino 


6 


Indian 


8 


Japanese 


5 


Korean 


8 


Vietnamese 


34 


U.S. Total 


11 



(NOTE- Estimates in !he table are based on studies erf 1980 Census data. These data provide infonnatlon on a tn«adcr range 
of race/ethnic groups Oum do data fnan flie Cumnt Popibtlon Surveys J 

Source: Reynolds Fariey (1990), "Blacks, Hlqjanics^ and White Ethnic Groups: Are Blades Uniquely Disadvantagedr in 
PapereandProoeedinmof the AmericmiEconotnig Assodatloi^ ^99QM^fi- 



Table A-13 

Earnings Distribution for White, Black, and Hispanic Men for Selected Years 





1979 1 


1983 1 


1987 


Wliif0 Men 


Poor 


11.0% 


13.9% 


13.1% 


Middle Class 


60.5 


55.1 


55.9 


Affluent 


28.5 


31.0 


31.0 


Blade Men — 


Poor 


20.5 


29.8 


27.1 


Middle Class 


66*6 


58.7 


61.7 


Affluent 


9.4 


11.5 


11.2 


HisoanicMen — 


Poor 


20.5 


243 


27.2 


Middle Class 


69.8 


64.4 


59.6 


Affluent 


7.7 


11.3 


13.2 



Source: James P. Smith, Bia^Sl^fftnp Hispanic Underclass. Table 2.6. 



ERIC 



60 



6'2 



Appendix A 



Table A-14 

Rate of lilidt Drug Use to 1988^ by Race and Hispanic Origin 





Ever Used 


Used Past Year 


Used Past Month 


12tol7Yeaxs 


Total 


24.7% 


16.8% 


9.2% 


White 


26.0 


17.8 


10.0 


Hispanic 


243 


163 


7.8 


Black 


18.7 


IZl 


6.2 


18 to 25 Years 


Total 


58.9 


32.0 


17.8 


White 


62.5 


33.1 


18.0 


Hispanic 


47.6 


28.7 


16.8 


Black 


47.0 


25.9 


16.9 


26to34Yeaz8 


Total 


642 


22.6 


13.0 


White 


67.4 


2Z8 


13.3 


Hispanic 


50.9 


19.8 


11.8 


Black 


58.0 


21.8 


11.2 


35 and Older 


Total 


23.0 


5.8 


2.1 


White 


22.8 


5.7 


1.8 


Hispanic 


17.1 


4.4 


2.2 


Black 


1 27.0 


5.2 


3.3 



SOURCE Nattorol Institute on Drug Abuse - HH5 (1989), National Housdtold&irvev m Drug Abuse: Population Estimates 
1988. TaWes 2 - A-^C-D. 



Table A-15 

Mean Years of Schooling Completed for Native and Foreign-bom Asian and 
Non-Hispan?c White Men, Age 25-64, 1980 



Group 


Native-bom 


Foreign-bom 


Chinese 


14.9 


13.6 


Filipino 


12,4 


13.9 


Indian 


13.4 


16.7 


Japanese 


13.7 


14.9 


Korean 


13.8 


14.9 


Vietnamese 


123 


12.9 


Non-Hispanic White 


12.9 


12.8 



Source: U5. Comml^cn on QvU Ri^ts (1988), The Economic ^ta^ of Americans Asian Desognt; An Exploratory 
Investtgatiqn, Washington, D.C: Th& Commission. 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor I^rce 



Table A-16 

Mean Years of Schooling Completed lor Native and Foreign-bom Asian and 
Non»Hispanic White Women, Age 25-64, 1980 



Group 


Native-bom 


Foreign-bom 


Chinese 


143 


1Z2 


FiUpino 


12.1 


14.7 


Indian 


» 


14.7 


Japanese 


13.2 


13.5 


Korean 




132 


Vietnamese 




112 


Non-Hispanic White 


12.6 


11.2 



* indicates that observations vme too few to support an estimate of ediKational attainment. 
Source: Same as provious table. 



Table A-17 

Educational Attainment of the Hispanic Population of the U.S. 25 years and over, by 

Place of Origin, 1989 





% Completing 
4 yrs High School 


% Cinnpleting 
4 yrs College 


Total Population 


76.9 


21.1 


Total Hispanic 


50.9 


9.9 


Mexican Origin 


42.7 


6.1 


Puerto Rican Orig. 


54.0 


9.8 


Cuban Origin 


63.0 


19.8 


Centra] and SA Origin 


66.0 


17.5 


Other Hispanic Origin 


63.7 


12.9 



Source: Bureau of the Census (1990), Cuiient Populatian RepOTts^ Scries No 444. 



ErJc 62 



Appendix A 



Table A-18 

Unemployment Rates by Educational Attainment by Race and Hispanic Origin, 

1975, 1980, and 1987. 





1975 


1980 


1987 


White 


83 


6.0 


6.1 


1 -3vrsHS. 


14.0 


11.6 


13.1 


4 vrsHS. 


8.4 


5.9 


62 


1 -3 vTsCoU. 


6.6 


4.4 


4.5 


4 ws^ Coll. 


Z$ 


1.9 


23 


Black 


14.7 


13.4 


14.5 


1 -3vrsH.& 


22.0 


Z)3 


23.2 


4vr9H5. 


15.2 


13.1 


143 


l-3vrsCoU. 


10.1 


10.8 


11.6 


4 vrs+ Coll. 


3.9 


4.4 


53 


Hispanic 


118 


9.2 


10.2 


1 -3yrsH.S. 


18.4 


14.3 


14.8 


4vreHS. 


10.5 


7.1 


9.4 


l-3yreColL 


7.9 


5.9 


7.2 


4 yrs+ Coll. 


3.6 


3.7 


2.6 



Souice U.& Bunau of the Census, StaHsMcal Abstract «rf the United States im Op. Qt. Table 634. 



Table A-19 

English Language Ability Among Hispanic Men, by Place of Origin, 1980 (percent) 





AU 
Hispanics 


Mexicans 


Puerto Ricans 
& Cubans 


Other 
Hispanics 


English only 


18.8 


17.0 


10.8 


30.9 


English Very WeU 


37.4 


38.8 


42.9 


303 


English Well 


219 


22.1 


27.7 


21.1 


English Not Well 


14.6 


15.0 


14.7 


13.2 


English None 


63 


73 


3.9 


43 



Source; ]aine» P. Smith (1990X Hlspanfas and the American Pra am: An Analvsto of Hispanic Male Ubor Market WoRps 
1940-1980, RAND Cwparatlcm fw Department of Labor (avalbible Buou^ rflTS). 



erJc 



63 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Table A-20 

English Language Ability Among Asian Males^ by Place of Origin, 1980 (percenO 





Chinese 


FiUpino 


Japanese 


Indian 


Korean 


VietNam 


English Only 


163 


19.1 


57.4 


18.1 


8.9 


Z4 


English Vexy Well 


33.5 


49.4 


20.7 


62.3 


24.7 


193 


English Well 


2S.8 


262 


15.3 


16.5 


385 


413 


English Not Well 


16.6 


4.1 


6.1 


2.7 


25.7 


30.4 


English None 


4.7 


0.4 


0.4 


0.4 


2.2 


6.6 



Source: U A Commisrion on Qvtf Rlg^te (19B8), Amgricaiw of Aglmn^^gi^ 



Table A-21 

English Language Proficiency of Native/Foreign-Bom Asian and Non-Hispanic Men 

1980 (percent) 





Native-bom 


Foreign-bom 


Group 


Very Proficient 


Less Proficieni 


Very Proficient 


Less Proficient 


Chinese 


90.1 


9.9 


X2 


61.8 


FiUpino 


933 


6.7 


64.1 


35.9 


Japanese 


97.6 


2.4 


4Z9 


57.1 


Indian 


90.1 


9.9 


79.9 


20.1 


Korean 


962 


3.8 


29.5 


7D.5 


Vietnamese 


84.4 


15.6 


20.8 


79.9 


NH white 


993 


0.7 


73.5 


26.5 



(NOTE (I D: The categwfe* *Very proficteit'" and Te» wofldcnl" were ctevdoped by combining respcmsei to Census question 
on language pn^itocy. Voy pniiident o English only English vcr^ Less Profident « EngUsh weU ^ EnglUh not wdl 
^EngUlihnc^a^ aU^ 

(NOTE (21): NH white « non-HlKunic White 

Souror. US Commission on Qvi! Rights (1988), Americans of Asian Pgsc qik 




6t 



APPENDIX B 



Attendees at Conference on 
Training a Diverse Population 



July 9-10, 1990 



(.7 

65 



App&tdixB 



Attendees 

Conference on Draining a Diverse Population 

National Commission for Employment Policy 
Wadiington, District of Columbia 

July MO, 1990 



Angela AlvlUar 


Jerri Coen 


Maxicopa County Community College 


Mid-Atlantic Region 


Phoenix, Arizona 


Kaiser Permanente 




Washington, D.C. 


Stephen E Baldwin 


Franlde Coleman* 


Joint Economic Committee 


US. Congress 


Director Columbus-Franklin County 


Washington, D.C. 


Private Industry Council 




Columbus, Ohio 


Henry Beauchamp 




Yakima Valley OIC 


Dannetta Graves 


Yakima, Washington 


Montgomery County Department of 




Htmian Service 


Charles Bowman 


I^yton,Ohio 


Bureau of Labor Statlstkrs 




MS. Department of Labor 


David Gillette 


Washington, D,C. 


New York State Job Training Coordinating 




Coundl 


Robert Buigdorf 


Albany, New York 


District of Columbia College of Law 




Washington, D.C. 


Alex Hurtado 




Utah State Job Trailing Coordirmting 


Christine Bulkley 


CouiKil 


The HOPE Program 


Roy, Utah 


Brooklyn, New York 






Daniel Jackson 


Ray Castro 


Fairfax County Public Schools/Human 


Manager, Compliance and 


Relations 


Affirmative Action 


Springfield, Virginia 


Taco Bell Corporation 




Irvine, California 





Served as a disciisssion leader 



ERIC 



67 



A Changing Nation - Its Changing Labor Force 



Mason Jackson 

Broward (Coimty) Employment and 
Training Administration 
Fort Lauderdale, Florida 

William Joe 
Tribal Coordinator 

Job Training Partnership Administration 
Phoenix, Arizona 

Louise Kamikawa* 

National Pacific Asian 
Resource Center on Aging 
Seattle^ Washington 

Richard A. Lacey* 
Pierce-Kennedy-Hearth 
Chester, Connecticut 

Phyllis Lee 
North Pacific Region 
Kaiser Permanente 
Portland, Oregon 

Gray Lewis 

Consortium for Education 
New York, New York 

William A. Mason 
Aetna Institute 
Hartfoid, Connecticut 

Paul Peterson 
Department of Government 
Harvard University 
Cambridge, Massachusetts 

John W.Porter* 

Superintendent of Schools 
Detroit, Michigan 

Alan Reich 

Natioiuil Organization on Disability 
Washington, D.C. 

Charles Smith 
Rio Grande Valley 
Private Industry Council 
El Paso, Texas 



ERIC 



Jerry Spurlin 

State Department of Education 
Tallahassee, Florida 

David Stier 

Society for Human Resource Management 
Alexandria, Virginia 

Anna Stem 

Federation of Employment and Guidance 
Services 

New York, New York 
Maria Tukeva 

Bell Multicultural Vocational High School 
Washington, D.C. 

Stephen Weinstein 

Department of Psychiatry and Human 

Behavior 

Thomas Jefferson Medical College 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

Sharon WUkin 

VS. Equal Employment Opportimity 

Commission 

Washington, D.C. 

Paul Wolpe 

Etepartment of Psychiatry and Human 
Behavior 

Thomas Jefferson Medical College 
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

Maureen Walsh 

VS. Office of Management and Budget 
Washington, D.C. 

Kenneth Wong 
Department of Education 
UiUversity of Chicago 
Chicago, Illinois 

Alan Zuckemian 

OICs of America 
Washington, D.C. 



68 



Appendix B 



Attendees from the 
National Commission for Employment Policy 



Commissioners 

John C. Gartlandr Chainnan 

IX)nald Jones 

J. Miciiael Levesque 

Frank McDonald 

Jerry J. Naylor 

A. Wayne Roberts 

James Winchester 



Consultants 

Burt Bamow 
Laudan Aaron 
Stacey Anderson 
Chrissy Southard 



Staff 

Barbara C. McQuown, Director 

Carol J. Romero, Deputy Director 

Everett Crawford 

Vincent Geictsi 

Amy Howard 

Kathi Ladner 

John Tiller 



ERIC 



7'J 



69 



