DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 460 796 



RC 021 626 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Roy, Loriene, Comp. 

Cultural Themes. 

1997-00-00 

99p.; In: Pathfinders for Four Directions: An Indigenous 
Educational Model; see RC 021 622. 

Collected Works - General (020) -- Guides - Non-Classroom 

(055) -- Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 

MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

Adolescents; *American Indian Culture; American Indian 
Education; American Indian History; *Boarding Schools; 
♦Drinking; Elementary Secondary Education; Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome; * Information Sources; * Internet; Music; Plants 
(Botany) ; *Search Strategies 
Ethnobotany; *Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 



Part of a larger report on the Four Directions Project, an 
American Indian technology innovation project, this section includes 10 
"pathfinders" to locating information on Native American cultural themes. The 
pathfinders were designed by students in the Graduate School of Library and 
Information Science at the University of Texas at Austin in response to 
specific requests by educators in reservation schools. The pathfinders are 
bibliographic instructional aids that outline methods to locate information 
on topics of interest to a particular client. Each pathfinder includes an 
introduction that describes the nature of the topic, scope of the pathfinder, 
assessment of client needs, and steps taken in identifying and evaluating 
relevant resources; an annotated bibliography of 15-25 resources, including 
print reference works, monographs, indexes, journal titles, electronic 
resources, and organizations; and the pathfinder proper, a guide to locating 
resources on the topic. The pathfinders are: (1) "Cahokia Mounds: A 

Pathfinder for High School Students" (Timothy Bullard) ; (2) "The Native 

American Boarding School Experience" (Lisa Bier) ; (3) "The Native American 

Boarding School Experience: Resources on the Internet. A Pathfinder" (Laura 
Tyner); (4) "Native American Sayings, Phrases and Quotations on the Internet: 
A Pathfinder" (Martin Corrigan); (5) "Native American Music: Information 
Available through the Internet" (Lilia Z. K. Bartoszek) ; (6) "Sweetgrass: A 

Pathfinder" (Patricia Ingram) ; (7) "Alternatives to Drinking for Native 

American Youth: Pathfinder" (Wade E. Osburn) ; (8) "Heavy Drinking: 

Understanding Alcohol Abuse through Literature. A Pathfinder" (Rex Pyle) ; (9) 

"Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: Resources Available on the Internet. A Pathfinder" 
(Arlene Lucio) ; and (10) "A Pathfinder on Medicinal Plants" (Kierstin Child) . 
(SV) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 






Cultural Themes 



In: Pathfinders for Four Directions; An Indigenous Educational Model 



Dr. Loriene Roy (Comp) 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 






HE EDUCATIC 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

Cf This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 




2 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Table of Contents 



Cahokia Mounds (Timothy Bullard) ..... 2 1 5-224 

Native American Boarding School Experience (Lisa Bier) 225-233 

The Native American Boarding School Experience 

(Laura Tyner) 234-245 

Native American Sayings, Phrases, and Quotations on the 

Internet (Martin Corrigan) 246-254 

Native American Music (Lilia Z. K. Bartoszek) 255-263 

Sweetgrass (Patricia Ingram) 264-273 

Alternatives to Drinking for Native American Youth 

(Wade E. Osbum) 274-283 

Heavy Drinking (Rex Pyle) 284-293 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome (Arlene Lucio) 294-303 

A Pathfinder on Medicinal Plants (Kierstin Child) 304-314 




3 



University of Texas at Austin 
Graduate School of Library and Information Science 
LIS 382 L3 

Information Resources in the Social Sciences 



Dr. Loriene Roy 



^ ^ ^ 



Cahokia Mounds: A Pathfinder for High School Students 



Timothy Bullard 



216 



Cahokia Mounds: A Pathfinder for High School Students 

Cahokia is a lost city of the ancient Mississippian culture (approx. 700-1500 AD) 
in present day Collinsville, Illinois. Throughout Cahokia, the Mississippians built more 
than 120 mounds of rammed earth and clay in various shapes and sizes, that served as 
sites for ceremonies, platforms for buildings, location markers and burial tombs for 
important people. The largest of these. Monks Mound, rises more than 100 feet above the 
valley and is the biggest prehistoric earthwork in the Americas. Excavation of numerous 
plazas, ceremonial areas, and ritual spaces reveals artifacts of a rich and complex society, 
including a massive sim calendar to determine the seasons. These sites are protected as 
part of the Cahokia Moimds State Park and Museum. 

This pathfinder is for Tom Warford at the Takini School in Howes, South Dakota. 
Established on the Cheyenne River Sioux Reservation only eight years ago, the Tikini 
School has two computer labs with a variety of equipment. The school’s mission is to 
create “a learning place for the success of all” and “to empower all learners for the 
challenge and changes of the twenty-first century on and off the reservation.” 

To assist the Takini School Library, sources were selected on their 
appropriateness for high school students and their currency of creation or publication. 
Other considerations for selection included format, illustration, clarity of vmting, and the 
perceived ability for students to place the source’s contents in a Native American cultural 
context. 




5 



217 



To find items about the Cahokia Mounds, conduct an online search using the 
subject headings: 

Cahokia Site (East Saint Louis, 111.). 

Indians of North America — Antiquities — Juvenile literature. 

Indians of North America — ^Illinois — ^Antiquities. 

Mississippian culture. 

Mounds — Illinois. 

Mound builders — ^United States. 

Most of the monographs on the Cahokia Mounds found in the library’s online 
catalog (UTCAT) at University of Texas at Austin are advanced scholarly works intended 
for students of archeology; few are appropriate for high school students. Using the search 
term Cahokia Mounds in online anthropological indexes and general periodical indexes 
accessed many records of high quality. Specific subject searches as this one omits all 
general sources. Information on the Cahokia Moimds appears in encyclopedias, 
dictionaries, journals, and other works that feature Native American or archeological 
subjects. 

A World Wide Web search proves more fhiitful for obtaining abimdant 
fundamental information on the subject. Using the search term Cahokia Mounds in the 
search engine HotBot produces over two hundred matches. The top results list web-sites 
from reputable organizations like the Illinois state museums, historical markers, and sites. 
Brief, historical information and photographs of the Cahokia moimds give the reader an 
easy to understand introduction. 




6 



218 



Annotated Bibliography: 



< 1 > 

Ancient Architects of the Mississippi . 

http://www.cr.nps.gov/aad/feature/feature.htm 

The online source for high school students studying ancient Mississippian culture; 
The National Park Service provides comprehensive coverage with marvelous 
illustrations. The sections describe in context daily life along the river, mound building, 
trade, and traveling. This website is highly recommend as an introduction to Native 
American mound builders, it also covers Cahokia . 



< 2 > 

Anthropological Literature: [An Index to Periodical Articles and Essavsi . [Cambridge, 
MA] : President and Fellows of Harvard College, 1984- 
http://eureka.rlg.org/cgi-bin/zgate 

Online version, updated quarterly from Eureka, describes articles and essays on 
anthropology and archaeology, including art history, demography, economics, 
psychology, and religious studies. An advanced search using the keyword terms Cahokia 
and mounds produces three articles. Broadening the geographic area (Illinois, 
Mississippi Valley, or United States) returns more sources for expanded subject research. 
Unfortunately, most articles appear to advanced for high school students. 



<3> 

Brose, David S., James A. Brown, and David W. Penney. Ancient Art of the American 
Woodland Indians . New York: Abrams, 1985. 

E78E2B761985 

A catalog of a traveling exhibition depicts ancient Native American artifacts, 
including objects from the Cahokia Mounds and the Mississippian period. It contains 
insightful essays and detailed color photographs of carved figures, stones, pipes, and 
bottles. 



<4> 

Cahokia Mounds: Ancient Metropolis. Legacy of the Moimd Builders, and More Than 
Bows and Arrows . [Seattle]: Camera One, 1995. 

[Z1035 A49 V.92 1996 no. 13-23 — call number fo r Booklist .1 

Three educational videos on Native Americans and prehistoric North America for 
ages fifteen to adult. Since these videos were not available for viewing, a review by Jeff 




( 



219 



Dick featured in Booklist 92(1 5): 1376, 1996 Apr. 1 proceeds. “ Cahokia Mounds 
explains their variety and construction, along with the daily rituals of Indian Life. Legacy 
offers a visually busy, briskly paced abridgment that highlights the mound builder 
achievements; it lacks the interviews with historians and the greater detail of the first title. 
In addition to architecture. More Than Bows and Arrows considers a broad range of 
Native American contributions, from politics to culture to technology.” 



<5> 

Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site 

http://medicine.wustl.edu/~kellerk/cahokia.html 

The official and most comprehensive website on the Cahokia Mounds offers 
detailed information and links to over forty individual mounds. A vital resource if one is 
planning to visit the center. It contains a calendar of events, visitor information, museum 
and society information, and much more. Helpful to teachers, there is a link to 
educational or archeological indices, journals, field work, organizations, institutes, and 
departments. 



< 6 > 

Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site, Illinois 

http://www.nps.gov/worldheritage/cahokia.htm 

Home page of the Cahokia Mounds World Heritage Site maintained by the 
National Park Service links the mounds to the United Nations. The Cahokia Mounds Site 
is one of the twenty-two areas in the United States deemed by UNESCO of “outstanding 
universal value from the historical, aesthetic, ethnological or anthropological point of 
view.” 



<7> 

Gallant, Roy A. Ancient Indians: The First Americans . Hillside, NJ: Enslow Pub., Inc., 
1989. 

Youth E 77.4 G35 1989 

Describes how the first Native Americans arrived from Asia and how their society 
developed in different parts of North America. This book also discusses the 
archaeologists who attempt to interpret ancient cultures through their findings. Contains 
pages on Cahokia, Mississippians, and mound builders. 



O 

ERIC 



8 



220 



< 8 > 

Hoxie, Frederick E., ed. Encyclopedia of North American Indians . Boston; New York; 
Houghton Mifflin, 1996. 

E76.2E53 1996 

Highly regarded single volume encyclopedia includes contributions by Native 
Americans (many signed articles with bibliographies). Half page entry on Cahokia with 
cross references to Mississippians and mound builders. Includes accounts of French and 
Spanish explorers contact with Native Americans. Excellent thorough coverage with 
explanations or hypothesis of how and why events occurred. 



<9> 

Markowitz, Harvey, ed. American Indians . Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, 1995. 

E76.2 A45 1995 

A three volume reference set chronicles the history and customs of Native 
Americans from European contact to current issues. The Cahokia entry has a half page 
synopsis of the archaeological site including program events held annually at this state 
historic site. Cross-references to subject headings Illinois, mounds, and moimd builders 
offer further insight. 



< 10 > 

Mehrer, Mark W. Cahokia’ s Countryside: Household Archaeology. Settlement Patterns, 
and Social Power . DeKalb, IL: Northern Illinois University Press, 1995. 

E78I3M47 1995 

A comprehensive analysis on household archaeology shedding light on the daily 
lives of the Mississippian people. Focusing on rural residents, Mehrer examines seven 
sites and integrates his findings with new information from the large Cahokia Moimd 
region. Technical coverage of the subject, recommended only for the advanced student. 



< 11 > 

Mighty Cahokia 

http://www.he.net/~archaeol/9605/abstracts/cahokia.html 

Abstract of a featured article in Archeology by William R. Iseminger. Links to 
other featured articles and archeological sites provide access to other topics in 
archeology. Good source if students want other topics in archeology to research. 



O 

ERIC 



9 



221 



< 12 > 

Mound Builders in America 

http://www.sover.net/~barback/mounds/mounds.html 

A report from a series in home schooling, the authors Jesse and Andy Ackemarm 
traveled to the Cahokia Mounds and reported their findings. They also visited a group of 
mounds in Ohio built by Native Americans of the Hopewell Culture, that predates 
Cahokia by approximately a thousand years. Simple wording and nice graphics make 
this website an excellent starting point for children. 



<13> 

Moundresource . 

httD://wbwww.ncook.kl2.il.us/museum/mounds.html 

The Westbrook Elementary School has created a mini pathfinder containing links 
to other sites about moxmd builders on the World Wide Web. The link to the Cahokia 
Mounds includes a small bibliography. 



<14> 

Periodical Abstracts . [New York]: Ovid Technologies, 1986- 
http://db.texshare.edu/utexas/ovidweb.cgi 

This online index covers current affairs, business, industry news, cultural events, 
editorial material and general interest topics in top general and academic periodicals. 
Using the search term Cahokia Mounds produces five entries, several seem promising for 
high school students. 



<15> 

Sattler, Helen Roney. The Earliest Americans . New York: Clarion Books, 1993. 
Youth E61 S28 1993 

The succinct, readable text, supported by detailed drawings or maps (on every 
page), brings together current scientific information about ancient Native Americans to 
form a fascinating account of early civilization in the Americas. Contains data on 
Cahokia, Mississippian culture, and moxmd builders. 




lU 



222 



<16> 

Shaffer, Lynda Norene. Native Americans Before 1492: The Moundbuilding Centers of 
the Eastern Woodlands . Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1992. 

E 78 E2 S46 1992 

Historian Lynda Shaffer writes of the archaic context from which mound building 
emerged to the decline of the culture in the 1700’s. Though part of the series. Sources 
and Studies in World History, this book will be of interest to teachers and students of 
American history. Outstanding chapters include “Cahokia and other Mississippian Period 
Centers, the Third Moundbuilding Period” and “Subregrions, Outposts, and the Decline 
of Cahokia." 



<17> 

Takini School Home Page . 

http:/^usboy.sped.ukans.edu/~challeng/Takini/index.html 

This home page lists information about the Takini School, its educational 
technology, and accomplishments. Part of growing Four Directions community, the 
website provides a link to the Four Directions Home Page. 



<18> 

The Chicago Manual of Style. Thirteenth Edition . Chicago: University of Chicago 
Press, 

1982. 



Chapter sixteen deals with bibliographic forms. 




11 



223 



Cahokia Mounds: A Pathfinder for High School Students 



by Timothy Bullard 
December 1997 



One of the most important archeological sites of the Americas, the giant earthen Cahokia 
Mounds mark the remains of the prehistoric city that once flourished and mysteriously 
died here. What makes Cahokia special is not only its impressive size, but the evident 
complexity of the Indian society that once called it home. 



This pathfinder is a means to help you find information on the Cahokia Mounds. 
Start with encyclopedias, handbooks, or dictionaries for defintions and a broad 
overview. 

Hoxie, Frederick E., ed. Encyclopedia of North American Indians . Boston; New York: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1 996. 

Half page entry on Cahokia with references to Mississippians and mound 
builders. Excellent thorough coverage with explanations or hypothesis of how 
and why events occurred. 

Markowitz, Harvey, ed. American Indians . Pasadena, CA: Salem Press, 1995. 

The Cahokia entry has a half page synopsis of the archaeological site. References 
to subject headings Illinois, mounds, and mound builders offer further insight. 



To find more about who built the mounds and why they were contructed, check 
your library’s online or card catalog. Try using ^mounds” or **mound builders” as 
subjects. Here are a few good books. 

Gallant, Roy A. Ancient Indians: The First Americans . Hillside, NJ: Enslow Pub., Inc., 
1989. 

Describes the arrival of the first Native Americans and how their society 
developed in different parts of North America. This book also discusses the 
archaeologists who attempt to interpret ancient cultures through their findings. 

Sattler, Helen Roney. The Earliest Americans . New York: Clarion Books, 1993. 

Accounts early Native American civilization with detailed drawings and maps. 




12 



224 



For information from the World Wide Web, type “Cahokia Mounds” into a search 
engine. Invistigate these websites. 

Ancient Architects of the Mississippi . 

http://www.cr.nps.gov/aad/feature/feature.htm 

The National Park Service provides comprehensive coverage with marvelous 
illustrations. 

Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site 

http://medicine.wustl.edu/~kellerk/cahokia.html 

The official and most comprehensive website on the Cahokia Mounds offers 
detailed information and links to over forty individual mounds. 

Mound Builders in America 

http://www.sover.net/~barback/mounds/mounds.html 
A good place to start. 

For articles on Cahokia Mounds, use these indexes. 

Anthropological Literature: lAn Index to Periodical Articles and EssavsT [Cambridge, 
MA] : President and Fellows of Harvard College, 1 984- 
http ://eureka.rlg.org/cgi-bin/zgate 

Online version, updated quarterly from Eureka, describes articles and essays on 
anthropology and archaeology. 

Periodical Abstracts . [New York]: Ovid Technologies, 1986- 
http://db.texshare.edu/utexas/ovidweb.cgi 

This online index covers general interest topics in top general and academic 
periodicals. 

To view a video on Cahokia Mounds, ask for these titles. 

Cahokia Mounds: Ancient Metropolis. Legacy of the Mound Builders, and More Than 
Bows and Arrows . [Seattle]: Camera One, 1995. 

Three educational videos on Native Americans and prehistoric North America. 



Where I find more information on mound builders? 

Shaffer, Lynda Norene. Native Americans Before 1492: The Moundbuilding Centers of 
the Eastern Woodlands . Armonk, NY: M.E. Sharpe, 1992. 

The complete story, from the emergence to the decline of the culture. 



FOR MORE INFORMATION - ASK A LIBRARIAN 




13 



Lisa Bier 
LIS 382L.3 
December 3, 1997 
Dr. Loriene Roy 
Pathfinder 2 



The Native American Boarding School Experience 



226 



The Native American Boarding School Experience 
A Pathfinder 



compiled by Lisa Bier 



Introduction 

In the last quarter of the 19th century. United States reformers decided that the best 
way to solve the problems of Native Americans was to assimilate them into American 
culture through education. This need to “civilize” became official United States policy in the 
Assimilationist Act of 1890, which required young Native Americans to attend school. The 
purposes of this education were threefold. In the eyes of the reformers, young Natives 
were being provided with the necessary characteristics of literacy, individuality, and 
Christianity. The ideal finished product would be a person fully acculturated, cleansed of 
so-called ignorant ways, and ready to become a productive American citizen. 

The effects of this poUcy on families were devastating. Often children as young as 
five were forcibly taken from their families and not allowed to visit or return for years. 
Children were returned to families after having been forced to forget the language of their 
parents, or having been told that traditional ways were evU or ignorant. The white school 
administrators and teachers often instilled a sense of shame at the traditional ways while 
teaching Anglo-American habits. Returning students also faced alienation and stress from 
the tribal members who had not been sent away to school. 

It was not until well into the first half of the 20th century that policymakers began to 
realize that Indian education policy was destructive. It was still many years before Native 
American education became self-determined. 




15 



227 



This pathfinder is being prepared for the Four Directions Project. It focuses on print 
sources and is meant to be used in a high school or community college library. Sources 
were selected according to their relevance and accessibility. I selected sources which were 
appropriate to high school and community college reading levels and answered at least one 
of the following questions: 

1) What was life like for these early students of boarding schools? 

2) In what ways did the students hold on to their culture and resist assimilation? 

3) What was it like for the students to return home after being away for so long? 

4) How were the schools detrimental or beneficial to individuals? To Native 
American cultures as a whole? 

5) How have Indian boarding schools changed over the last century? 

Many monographs which focused on the history of one particular school 

answered some or aU of these questions. I included on the final pathfinder only those 
which had excellent bibliographies or discussed specifically the years of self-determination, 
a topic which is not as common in the literature as the earlier years of boarding school 
history. 

I began the search by searching in the online catalog of the University of Texas at 
Austin using the keywords Native American and education. From there I compiled a list of 
books. The indexes, encyclopedias and directories were found by browsing the reference 
department. Materials were selected only if they were appropriate to the expected audience 
of this pathfinder. 




IG 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



INDEXES 

1) Hendon, Julia A., editor. Anthropological Literature: An Index to Periodical Articles and 
Essays. Cambridge, MA: President and Fellows of Harvard College, 1979- . 

This source is available in print or online. Search under keywords like “Indian 
boarding schools”, “cultural assimilation”, or the names of specific boarding schools. 

2) America: History and Life. New York: ABC-Clio CD-ROM, 1982-present. 

This source covers the history of the United States and Canada as written about in 
journals. Search under keywords like “Indian boarding schools” and the names of specific 
schools to find articles. 



ALMANACS AND ENCYCLOPEDIAS 

3) Champange, Duane, ed. The Native North American Almanac. Detroit: Gale, 1994. 

A one volume encyclopedia containing many concise, clear references to boarding 
schools and the Assimilationist Policy of 1890-1934. 

4) Sturtevant, William C. Handbook of North American Indians. Wilcomb and Washburn, 
volume editors. Volume 4, History of Indian-White Relations. Washington: Smithsonian 
Institution, 1988. 

An entire volume of this seventeen volume encyclopedia dedicated to white-Indian 
relations. Contains much information on United States Indian Policy regarding education. 
Use the index to look up articles on schools in specific areas. Contains a bibliography. 

DIRECTORIES 

5) Klein, Barry T. Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian. 8th ed. West Nyack, 
NY: Todd Publications, 1995. 



229 



This is really more of a directory than an encyclopedia. Use this to look up 
organizations and schools if you need additional information. 

BOOKS-GOVERNMENT POLICY RELATING TO INDIAN EDUCATION 

6) Deloria, Vine, Jr. American Indian Policy in the Twentieth Century. Norman, 

University of Oklahoma Press, 1985. 

A study of government policy pertaining to Indians in a historical context. Also puts 
these policies in a light of other U.S. laws such as free speech and water rights, and 
international human rights. 

7) Dippie, Brian. The Vanishing American: White Attitudes and United States Indian 
Policy. Middletown, CT: Wesleyan University Press, 1982. 

A book about white perceptions of Indians and how that view is reflected in official 
government policy. For example, if the Indian is believed to be vanishing, there is no need 
to try to provide him/her with a future. 

8) Prucha, Francis Paul. The Great Father: The United States Government and the 
American Indians. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1984. 

An exhaustive 1300-page history of United States Indian policy. Contains much 
information on assimilationist education and boarding schools. Highly recommended. 

BOOKS- EARLY STUDENT LIFE AT THE SCHOOLS 

9) Adams, David Wallace. Education for Extinction: American Indians and the Boarding 
School Experience, 1875-1928. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1995. 

Chronicles the Native American boarding school movement on a national level. 
Describes different models for the schools, and the treatment students received in various 
schools. 




13 



230 



10) Hyer, Sally. One House, One Voice, One Heart: Native American Education at the 
Santa Fe Indian School, Santa Fe: Museum of New Mexico Press, 1990. 

A monograph based on an oral history project commemorating the 100th 
anniversary of the Santa Fe Indian School. Firsthand accounts of children as young as five 
being taken from their families and sent to the SFIS. Relates the changes in government 
policy from assimilation to self-determination. 

11) Lindsey, Donal F. Indians at Hampton Institute, 1877-1923. Urbana, IL: University of 
Illinois Press, 1995. 

Hampton Institute of Virginia was founded as a normal school for the vocational 
education of African Americans and Native Americans. Explores the interaction of Indians, 
Blacks, and Whites, the history of the program and its effects on the students. 

12) Trennert, Robert A., Jr. The Phoenix Indian School: Forced Assimilation in Phoenix, 
1891-1930. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1988. 

Relates the history of the Phoenix Indian Industrial Boarding School of Arizona. 
Specifically looks at the changing educational policies of the U.S. government and the 
varying effects that it had on the school and its educational emphasis. 



13) Lomawaima, K. Tsianina. They Called It Prairie Light: The Story of the Chilocco 
Indian School. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1994. 

Details life at an off-reservation Indian boarding school in Oklahoma. Describes 
Native resistance to the assimilationist goals of the educational process, as Indians actively 
took efforts to retain their Native characteristics. 

BOOKS - LATER HISTORY OF THE SCHOOLS 

14) Szasz, Margaret. Education and the American Indian: The Road to Self-Determination, 
1928-1973. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1974. 




19 



231 



A comprehensive analysis of American Indian education. Provides historical 
background and focuses on 1928-1969. Uses archival materials and oral history to depict 
the changes in American Indian educational policy and its failures and successes. 

15) Parker, Dorothy L. Phoenix Indian School: The Second Half Century. Tuscon: 
University of Arizona Press, 1996. 

Chronicles the Phoenix Indian School from 1930 to its closure in 1990, and how 
changes in government policy affected the school and its students. Details efforts toward 
Native self-determination after the 1960’s, when the school was eventually run by Native- 
elected school boards that decided matters of curriculum and personnel. 

INTERNET SITES 

16) The Native American Documents Project 
http://coyote.csusm.edu/projects/nadp/nadp.htm 

This site, managed by California State University, is working to make documents 
concerning the history of federal policy concerning Native Americans more readily 
available. An index in available in the “Published Reports” page. 

ORGANIZATIONS 

17) Hampton University Museum, Hampton University, Hampton, VA 23668. 

(804) 727-5308 

Hampton is one of the original Indian boarding schools which has successfully 
embraced its history. The Museum has a vast collection of records and photo archives, has 
created exhibits on the history of the school and its students, and published books on the 
subject. Hampton would be a good place to contact if you are interested in doing indepth 
research. 



CITATION MANUAL 

18) Turabian, Kate L. A Manual for Writers of term Papers, Theses, and Dissertations. 6th 
ed. Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1996. 




20 



232 



THE NATIVE AMERICAN BOARDING SCHOOL EXPERIENCE 



A PATHFINDER 

****************************************** 

Beginning in the 1890’s, Native American children were sent to government boarding 
schools far from home. The U.S. government wanted to change the culture of the Indians 
by essentially teaching them European-American ways. This method often separated 
families and caused the loss of traditional ways. Many of these schools are now Native- 
directed and still serve Native American students. 

He******************************************* 



ALMANACS AND ENCYCLOPEDIAS - Use these to introduce yourself to this 
topic. 

Champange, Duane, ed. The Native North American Almanac. Detroit: Gale, 1994. 

A one volume encyclopedia containing many references to boarding schools and the 
Assimilationist Policy of 1890-1934. Use the index. 

Sturtevant, William C. Handbook of North American Indians. Wilcomb and Washburn, 
volume editors. Volume 4, History of Indian-White Relations. Washington: Smithsonian 
Institution, 1988. 

An entire volume of this seventeen volume encyclopedia is dedicated to white- 
Indian relations, including U.S. Indian education policy. Use the index to look up articles 
on specific areas. Contains a bibliography of other related books and articles. 

INDEXES - Use these indexes to look up articles in journals. 

Hendon, Julia A., editor. Anthropological Literature: An Index to Periodical Articles and 
Essays. Cambridge, MA: President and Fellows of Harvard College, 1979- . 

This source is available in print or online. Search under keywords like “Indian 
boarding schools”, “cultural assimilation”, or the names of specific boarding schools. 

America: History and Life. New York, ABC-Clio CD-ROM, 1982-present. 

This source covers the history of the United States and Canada as written about in 
journals. Search under keywords like “Indian boarding schools” and the names of specific 
schools. 

DIRECTORIES - Contact organizations for further information. 

Klein, Barry T. Reference Encyclopedia of the American Indian. 8th ed. West Nyack, NY: 
Todd Publications, 1995. 

Use this directory to look up names of national and local organizations or schools. 




C\ -S 



d,.l 



233 



BOOKS - Look in your library catalog under keywords like “Indians and education”, 
“Native Americans and boarding schools”, or “cultural assimilation”. Combine these terms. 
The following books are available through inter-library loan if your library does not have 
them. Ask a librarian if you need help. 

Pmcha, Francis Paul. The Great Father: The United States Government and the American 
Indians. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1984. 

A very informative history of United States Indian policy. Contains much 
information on assimilationist education and boarding schools. Highly recommended. 

Adams, David Wallace. Education for Extinction: American Indians and the Boarding 
School Experience, 1875-1928. Lawrence, KS: University Press of Kansas, 1995. 

This book describes the Native American boarding school movement on a national 
level. Describes different schools, and the treatment students received in various schools. 

Hyer, Sally. One House, One Voice, One Heart: Native American Education at the Santa 
Fe Indian School. Santa Fe: Museum of New Mexico Press, 1990. 

This book contains firsthand accounts of students who attended the Santa Fe Indian 
School. Relates the changes at the school as Indians gained more control of their education. 

Szasz, Margaret. Education and the American Indian: The Road to Self-Determination, 
1928-1973. Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press, 1974. 

Provides historical background and focuses on 1928-1969. Uses archival materials 
and oral history to depict the changes in American Indian education and its failures and 
relative successes. 

P^ker, Dorothy L. Phoenix Indian School: The Second Half Century. Tuscon: University 
of Arizona Press, 1996. 

Chronicles the Phoenix Indian School from 1930 to its closure in 1990. Details 
efforts toward Native self-determination after the 1960’s, when the school was eventually 
ran by Native-elected school boards that decided matters of curriculum and personnel. 

ORGANIZATIONS 

Hampton University Museum, Hampton University, Hampton, VA, 23668. 

(804) 727-5308. 

Hampton is one of the original boarding schools which now has an excellent museum 
de tailin g the school’s history. Hampton is a good place to contact if you are interested in 
doing additional research on this topic. 



REMEMBER - ALWAYS ASK A LIBRARIAN IF YOU NEED HELP! 



ERIC 



22 



The Native American Boarding School Experience 
Resources on the Internet 

A Pathfinder 



Laura Tyner 
December 3, 1997 
9:00 A.M. 



235 



The Native American Boarding School Experience 

A Pathfinder 

In the late part of the nineteenth century, hundreds of 
Native American children were taken from their homes and 
families and forced to attend distant boarding schools for 
years at a time. The purpose of this aggressive campaign by 
the United States government was to "civilize" these 
children, to make them less "savage," and to introduce them 
to a "Christian" way of life. The result of their uprooting, 
the Native American boarding school experience, has been 
chronicled in various sources, both printed and online. 

This pathfinder attempts to inform the students at 
Dilcon Boarding School about the experiences of, these 
children. Since the assignment for this pathfinder dictated 
that all of the sources listed be online, each source may be 
viewed via the World Wide Web. The students at Dilcon are 
elementary school children, grades kindergarten through 
eighth, which limits the scope of this project to sources 
appropriate to this age level. For this reason the 
information provided ranges from basic historical 
information about the boarding schools to what life was like 
there to photographs of the students. This pathfinder will 
be available to these children through their school library, 
which has Internet access. 




24 



236 



Many questions will arise when the audience discovers 
that children their age were taken away from their families 
and forced to attend the "white man's school." This 
pathfinder answers queries such as: 

■ Why was the "white man" able to take the children away 
from their mothers and fathers? 

■ What was it like to live in one of these boarding 
schools? 

■ Are there any pictures of these schools or the children 
who lived there? 

■ Are there any schools like that today? 

These questions and many others are answered by the 
sources included on the pathfinder. The criteria for 
selecting sources is based on currency of the website, 
authority, and appropriateness for school age children. Many 
sources are included in the bibliography that are excluded 
from the pathfinder because they contain adult content. 

I began with general Internet searches using the search 
engines AltaVista, Excite, and Lycos. Appropriate keywords, 
such as "native american boarding school" and "american 
Indian schools" were submitted and various results were 
generated. The information that was retrieved and included 
in the pathfinder is found under subject headings such as 
"general Internet sources," "pictorials," "boarding schools 
of the past," and "modern boarding schools." 




25 



237 



Bibliography 



1. Achtert, Walter S. and Joseph Gibaldi . The MLA Style 
Manual. New York: The Modern Language Association of America, 
1985. 



The MLA Manual is my style handbook of choice. I 
find it practical and easy to use. Although the 
1985 edition does not contain information on citing 
websites, I supplemented my bibliography by using 
the Publication Manual of the American 
Psychological Association, 4*^” edition" for this 
purpose . 



2. AltaVista Technology, Inc. (Updated daily) . AltaVista 

Search Engine . Available Internet: http://www.altavista.com 

I find this the most effective search engine 
because it is easy to use and the "hits" are 
usually very accurate. Searches are performed with 
Boolean searching techniques and by using methods 
unio[ue to AltaVista, such as linking words together 
with a colon for more effective search results. 

For example, I entered the search: 
native : american: boarding: school and found twelve 
relevant documents that matched my jguery. In this 
way the search engine eliminates every document 
that has only one of the words in it and retrieves 
only those that contain every keyword. 



3. "American Mosaic Seminar Explores Native American 
Educational Experience." (8 November 1996) . Available 
Internet : 

http://garamond.univpubs.american.edu/scene/pastscenes/ scenel8 
/text/mosaictext . html 

Charles Bear Fighter Red Door, a Native American 
who was taken from his family when he was five 
years old and sent to boarding school, is the focus 
of this website. Although I found this site 
interesting, I opted to exclude it from my 
pathfinder because the infoinnation is o[uite brief. 

For example, "Good Fox recalled that his 
stepfather, who did not understand or speak English 
when he was sent to school, was paddled because he 




26 



238 



spoke the tribal language in class. But, he said, 

'that didn't stop us. Those languages are still 
alive.'" While examples like this are interesting, 
the site does not go into further detail about Red 
Door's experiences at his boarding school. 

4. Boss, Judy. "An Indian Boy's Story. "(1 December 1997). 

Available Internet: 

http: //etext. lib. Virginia. edu/cgibin/browse- 

mixed?id=AhnIndi&tag=public&images=images/modeng&data=/texts/ e 

nglish/modeng/parsed 

A personal account of one man's lifetime. The 
author describes his life before, during, and 
after attending a Government contracted Indian 
Boarding School in Pennsylvania. For instance, he 
recalls his simple life of planting, fishing, and 
gathering herbs to make medicine before the "honey- 
tongued agent of the Government" convinced him to 
leave his family and attend the boarding school. 

This site is intriguing, informative, and 
appropriate for my pathfinder in that it uses 
simple yet detailed vocabulary. Elementary school 
children should have no trouble understanding it . 



5. Dick, R.W. (1993) . "Alcohol Use Among Male and Female 
Native American Adolescents: Patterns and Correlates of 
Student Drinking in a Boarding School." Available Internet: 
http: //www. louisville . edu/groups/ cayscd/pafall93/ dick.htm 

While this source contains interesting data 
regarding Native American alcohol abuse, I excluded 
it from my pathfinder because the authors suggest 
that "the associations among depression, family 
support, stressful life events, and alcohol use in 
this population are likely to be a result of the 
nature of the environment," which is the boarding 
school. While the information is intriguing, it 
does not necessarily pertain directly to my topic. 



6. Eastman, Charles Alexander. (1995) . "Indian Boyhood." 
Available Internet: 

http: //etext . lib . Virginia . edu/ cgibin/browse- 

mixed?id=EasIndi&tag=piiblic&images=images/modeng&data=/lvl/Axc 

hive/eng-parsed 

Originally printed in 1902, this excellent story of 
Native American childhood was published on the 




27 



239 



World Wide Web in 1995 for the enjoyment of 
everyone with Internet access. It is one man's tale 
of his American Indian upbringing, from hunting and 
training as an Indian warrior to feasts, 
celebrations, and life in the woods. Although this 
is an excellent site for anyone interested in the 
Native American way of life during this time 
period, there is no mention of boarding school and 
I opted to exclude it from my pathfinder. 



7. Excite, Inc. (Copyright 1995-96; updated daily), "Excite 
Search Engine." Available Internet: http://www.excite.com 

The search engine Excite is forthright in its 
information presentation. Searching can be done 
through "channels," which are different categories 
of topics. An. accuracy percentage is displayed 
with each hit, which appeals to some searchers. 

There is also the option of selecting terms 
provided by Excite that add to the search, such as 
"reservation" and "traditional" when searching for 
the keywords "indian schools." 



8, "4Directions Community," (25 June 1997), Available 
Internet : http : //challenge . ukans . edu/Commianity/ Community . html 

An excellent website with many links tO helpful 
pages, such as links to 4Directions Schools and 
4Directions Partners. There is also an image map 
with 4Directipns schools listed on it. This allows 
the user to point and click and they will be taken 
directly to that school's webpage. I included this 
in my pathfinder under the subject heading "modern 
boarding schools." 



9, Han, Susie, (May 1997 ) , "Education for Native Americans," 
Available Internet: 

http : //www, duke . edu/~sah4/susie . html#history 

I included this website in iny pathfinder because it 
is well researched and contains many links to other 
issues surrounding the Native American Boarding 
School experience. This site explores the history 
of life at Hampton Institute and includes a 
photograph of and a letter from Tommy Fire Cloud, 
one of the students at the Hampton Institute. 




28 



240 



10. Lifetime Learning Systems. (1996). "Friends of the 
Indian." Available Internet: http://www.pbs.org/plweb- 

cgi/fastweb?getdoc+thewest+thewest+94+l+wAAA+native%26american 
%2 6boarding%2 6s chools 

Unfortunately, this site is a combination of 
interesting facts pertaining to the topic of this 
pathfinder and a number of broken links. The page 
gives a thorough history of the Native American 
boarding school situation with helpful facts such 
as "by century's end, there would be 24 off- 
reservation boarding schools like Carlisle, plus 81 
boarding schools and 147 day schools on the 
reservations themselves, all striving to eradicate 
their students' tribal identities and educate them 
'not as Indians, but as Americans.'" Despite the 
relevant information, this page seems amateurish 
and unfinished due to the broken links and I 
declined to include this source in the pathfinder 
for this reason. 



11. Lindauer, Owen. (1 December 1997). "The Phoenix Indian 

School Project." Available Internet: 

http: //archaeology. la.asu.edu/VM/ iSchool/ index.htm 

This is an interesting site in that it not only 
gives the history of the school, it discusses the 
findings of a recent archaeological dig. There are 
links to pages with photographs of the findings 
which give us insight into life at the schools. I 
included this site in my pathfinder because I think 
the information is basic enough to be understood by 
elementary school children and it gives a glimpse 
of the boarding schools of the past. 



12, Lycos, Inc, (Copyright 1997; Updated daily) , Available 
Internet: http://www.lycos.com 

Accurate search engine with a variety of search 
options, including top 5% reviews about Native 
American boarding schools, as well as pictures and 
homepages that pertain to the topic. Lycos is 
usually my second choice of search engine after 
AltaVista. 




29 



241 



13. "Photographs from Indian Boarding Schools," (1 Decen^er 
1997) Available Internet: 

http: / /hanks vi 1 le .phast .umass . edu: 8000/ cultprop/ intellect/ gof . 
html 

A treasure of a website, this site contains 
numerous photographs from. Native Am.erican boarding 
schools. It is "a gallery of photographs of Indian 
boarding schools and their students" from the early 
190Qs, The image at the top of the page is 
especially appealing, for it shows Tom Torlino, a 
Navajo, before and after he attended Carlisle 
Boarding School. All of the photographs are from 
the National Archives and are exhibited on the 
Gallery of the Open Frontier homepage. It gives me 
pleasure to include this website on my pathfinder! 



14, Riddle/ Pax, "The Boarding School," (i December 19?7.) 
Available Internet: 

http://thuntek.net/~mathew/pulse/stories/ school.html 

The story of Ruby Loonfoot/ a Native child in an 
unnamed boarding school. The opening paragraph 
describes her wretched treatment at the school and 
is not appropriate for young children. Although it 
is a powerful story, I did not include it in my 
pathfinder due to the disturbing content. 



15, "Seba Palkai Boarding school," (1 Deceinber 1997) , 
Available Internet: 

http://challenge.ukans.edu/SebaDalkai/ index.html 

This website is an excellent example of a present- 
day Native American boarding school. There are 
links to information about the school, its 
students, faculty/ and programs. It invokes a very 
positive view of life at Native boarding schools 
today and was included in the pathfinder for this 
reason. 



16, "The Shame of Public School Education; A Photo Essay," 
(1997) . Available Internet: 

http: //www. iwchildren.org/genocide/ shame6.htm 

This is a grisly site that displays photographs of 
Jewish and Native American children who were 




30 



242 



mistreated in various ways, ^though it is 
relevant to this pathfinder in that it contains 
photographs of Native American boarding school 
students/ the material is not suitable for 
children. I did not include this website on the 
pathfinder and I would not recommend this site to 
anyone . 



17. "Stewart Indian School." (Copyright 1995) . Available 
Internet: 

http://thecity.sfsu.edu/~mandell/stewart/stewart.html 

This is an excellent website that gives both 
historical and current information about the 
Stewart Indian School. A photograph of the school 
is included, the information is simple yet 
informative, and the page layout is pleasing. I 
elected to include this site on my pathfinder for 
these aforementioned reasons. 



18, Styron./ Elizabeth Hope, (May 1997) , "Native American 
Education: Documents from the 19*^^ Century." Available 
Internet: http: //www.duke . edu/~ehsl/education/ 

The informatiph provided by this website is 
elementary, making it ideal for my pathfinder. The 
page was created by a student at Duke University 
and the author was thorough in her research 
pertaining to the boarding schools. Besides the 
brief historical introduction, she included several 
useful links to other pages on this tbpic, many of 
them containing photographs that are part of Duke 
University's Special Collections Library. The 
photographs show the students and their schools and 
I feel the audience of this pathfinder will find it 
most interesting. 



19. "Theodore Roosevelt School." (1 December 1997), Available 
Internet : http: //www. wmonline . com/attract/ ftapache/ apll8 .htm 

This webpage gives a short summary of the Theodore 
Roosevelt School and includes a photograph circa 
1932. I included it in my pathfinder as a short and 
simple site on a Native American boarding school. 




r\ < 



61 



243 



20. "They Sacrificed for Our Survival: the Indian Boarding 
School Experience. " (29 July 1997). Available Internet: 
http://www.tincan.org/~ccm/tibse.shtml 

The information contained in this website is scant 
but informative. It includes a photograph of the 
Fort Spokane Boarding School circa 1906. The 
website gives a btief explanation of what happened 
to the Native American children that attended this 
school and was included in the pathfinder for this 
reason. 



21, "This Path We Travel: Celebrations of Contemporary Native 
American Creativity." (1 December 1997). Available Internet: 
http://www.si.edu/nmai/archive/schqtvr.htm 

This site has a Netscape Navigator alert that warns 
me not to download anything. It gives a short 
explanation of life at a Native American boarding 
school and contains two photographs . I did not 
include this site in my pathfinder because of the 
danger of crashing my hard drive. 



22. Zitkala-Sa. (1994) . "Impressions of an Indian Childhood/' 
Available Internet: 

http : //etext . lib . Virginia . edu/cgibin/browse- 

mixed?id=ZitImpr&tag=public&images=images/modeng&data=/lvl/Arc 
hive/ eng-parsed 

First published in Atlantic Monthly in 1900, this 
is one woman' s accoiant of her Native American 
childhood in Missouri. She recounts how she lived a 
peaceful, content life lantil the white missionaries 
tricked her into heading East on "the great iron 
horse." While this is an interesting story, I did 
not include this site in my pathfinder. The 
majority of the information pertained to her life 
before she entered the boarding school rather than 
after. 




32 



244 



The Native American Boarding School Experience 

A Pathfinder 



During the 1890s, many Native American children were taken 
from their homes and families and forced to attend 
"Christian" boarding schools against their will. Today, 
there are several accounts of these boarding school 
experiences available on the Internet. This pathfinder is, 
intended to aid students in their online search for more 
information about this tragic event in Native American 
history. 



• How do I begin my search on the Internet? 

Start by becoming familiar with several search engines. A 
search engine is a World Wide Web tool that lets you search 
for information on the Internet. You can type in words or 
phrases such as "native american boarding school" or "Indian 
schools" and the search engine will find related documents 
on the Web. Three useful search engines are: 

* AltaVista 

http: //www. altavista.com 

* Lycos 

http: //www. lycos . com 

* Excite 

http: //www. excite . com 



• Are there any general sources with background information 
that will help me get a better idea of these boarding 
schools? 

Several websites give historical information about life at 
the boarding schools. 

* They Sacrificed for Our Survival: the Indian Boarding 

School Experience 

http : //www. tincan.org/~ccm/tibse . shtml 

* Stewart Indian School 

http : //thecity . sf su. edu/~mandell/stewart/stewart . html 

* Theodore Roosevelt School 
http: //www. wmonline . com/attract/f tapache/apll8 .htm 




33 



245 



* Children or of the boarding 

Twrf ^ published on the World Wide Web’ 

Two excellent sites with many links to photographs from 

various boarding schools can be found at these locations: 

* Photographs From Indian Boarding Schools 

http://hanksville.phast.umass.edu:8000/cultprop/intelle 

ct/gof.html 

* Native American Education: Documents for the 19** 

Century 

ht tp : //WWW . duke . edu/* *-ehs 1 / education/ index . html 



• What were the boarding schools like back then’ 

* An Indian Boy' s Story 

mixed’id=AhnTnHf^^^^^^ • edu/cgibin/browse- 

di&tag Public&images=images/modeng&data=/texts 
/ english/modeng/parsed 

/ /* House for Indian Children 

http://coyote.csusm.edU/projects/nadp/d54.htm#202 



' 

Several websites contain information pertaining to todav' s 
boarding schools for Native American children ^ 

* Seba Dalkai Boarding School 
ttp . //challenge . ukans . edu/ SebaDalkai/ index . html 

* Native Americans: Hampton Institute 

http. //WWW. duke. edu/~sah 4 /susie.html#history 

* 4 Directions Community 

http : //challenge .ukans . edu/Community/Community . html 



• If you need more help, ask your friendly school 
librarian? 

Last updated by Laura Tyner on 30 November 1997. 




34 



246 



Native American Sayings, Phrases 
and Quotations on the Internet 

A Pathfinder 



Prepared by Martin Corrigan 
LIS382L.13 
Dr. Roy 
Fall 1997 



Citation Manual Used: Gibaldi, Joseph. Ed. MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. 

4th ed. New York: MLA, 1995. 




35 



247 



Many of a culture’s values, ethics and even sense of place in the universe can be discerned 
in that culture’s sayings. When we study a new language and learn that the language also has a 
certain proverb or expression that is equivalent to a phrase in our native language, there is a 
pleasant sense of recognition, and a realization that speakers of the new language interpret reality 
in a similar way. A nation also expresses itself through the words of its leaders. Famous speeches 
and quotes are learned by schoolchildren or new immigrants as part of the acculturation process in 
a nation. 

All of these apply to the original cultures and nations of the United States, as well. 
Unfortunately, many of these cultures possessed an oral rather then a written tradition for passing 
on cultural knowledge. And as more Native Americans forgot their native languages, they also 
began to forget much of this cultural knowledge as well. Many Native Americans have been 
preserving and reviving these earlier languages. They have also taken advantage of electronic 
technology in making this information available to a larger audience. 

This pathfinder was designed for the Fond du Lac Education Division. It is intended for 
students and teachers who have access to the Internet. URLs are provided for all sites listed so 
the user can go directly to the sites. The original scope was “Native Airierican Sayings on the 
Internet,” but I have expanded it to include quotes by Native Americans as well. The sites listed 
will provide answers to such questions as; “What everyday expressions occur in different Native 
American languages?” “What are some sayings that express how certain Native Americans view 
life?” “Where can I find a good quote by a famous Native American on the subject of 

I began searching the Internet using the standard search engines Yahoo, Alta Vista and 
Lycos. I used the following words and phrases with all three search engines; “sayings”, 

“quotes”, “quotations”, “proverbs”, “Native American” and “American Indian.” These searches 
resulted in too many selections, although the Alta Vista search engine was more effective than the 
other two, because I was able to use its “refined search” to first look for sites featuring 
quotations, and then limit these by specifying “Native American” sites. It seemed easier to start 



O 




36 



248 



with sites dealing with Native Americans and then to search within them for sites concentrating on 
saying, phrases and quotations. 

At Dr. Roy’s suggestion 1 began with Lisa Mitten’s Native American Home Pages and 
Native T.ang iia ge.s Pag e. Both of these contain numerous links to other sites for individual 
languages, including the Index of Native American Resources on the Internet and The LINGUIST 
List: Language and Language Family Information . 

The sites I have selected are grouped into three general categories: Native American 
sayings and phrases in English, Native American sayings and phrases in English and the original 
language, and quotations of Native Americans 




37 



249 



ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 

This site provides a comprehensive listing of sites dealing with individual Native American 
languages. This should be a first stop for anyone searching the WWW for sites dealing 
with Native American languages: 

(1) Mitten, Lisa. Native American Home Pages . 9 Oct. 1997. Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 

1997. 

The following WWW sites feature Native American sayings and phrases in English only: 

(2) American Indian Culture Research Center. Short Bibliography on Indians . 22 Sep. 1997. 

Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 

This is a limited list of books available in print dealing with Native American culture and history. 
Although this page features printed works, the page itself is illustrated with a couple of quotes 
from Native American leaders Chief Joseph and Spotted Tail. 



(3) Cole, David, et al. Poetry from Indigenous People on Cultural Property Issues . 4 June 

1997. Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 

Several managers of major WWW sites dealing with Native American issues have gathered this 
selection of modem poetry written by Native Americans. Much of this poetry includes traditional 
folk sayings. This site is interesting in that it shows the versatility of these ancient phrases in 
dealing with a current situation. 

(4) Mohawk Nation Council of Chiefs. Iroquois Thanksgiving Address . Online. Internet. 

13 Oct. 1997. 

This traditional prayer is recited before all official gatherings of the Mohawk Nation. The prayer 
addresses all of the various elements of nature and thanks them for the benefits they have 
extended to humanity. This site also has a link to the Awkwesasne Freedom School, a school for 
Mohawk students that integrates a modem curriculum with a program of traditional native 
culture. The principles expressed in this “thanksgiving address” form the basis of the school’s 
programs. This is another example of traditional expressions being applied to current situations. 




r\ 



JO 



250 



(5) Zeilinger, Ron. Mitakuye Owasin-”All My Relatives” Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 

This provides the best example of how a single phrase can be used to express many concepts 
simultaneously. The author explains the literal meaning of this phrase from the Dakota language, 
and then elaborates on how native speakers use the phrase in several different contexts. 

The following WWW sites feature Native American sayings and phrases in the original 
languages with English translations: 

(6) Hirshfelder, Arlene and Martha Kreipe de Montano. The Native American Almanac— A 

Portrait of Native America Today . Prentice Hall General Reference, 1993. 

Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 

This site contams an online version of an historical account of the Native Americans who worked 
as code-makers for the U.S. government during World Wars I and II. Native speakers of Navajo, 
Comanche and Choctaw used these languages to encrypt sensitive messages, and because the 
Europeans were unfamiliar with these languages, the messages were never deciphered. This site 
includes a list of phrases and words which the code-makers were forced to invent in their native 
languages (i.e., “bombing run”, “bomber”). 

(7) BCahon.wes. Kanienkehaka Language Home Page . 26 June 1997. Online. Internet. 

13 Oct. 1997. 

Several links can be found here which cover all aspects of the native language of the Mohawk. 
There are various pages covering spelling, pronunciation, grammar and syntax. Other links from 
this site provide information on everyday expressions, as well as traditional sayings. One very 
interesting link lists several traditional songs and prayers and even includes a Mohawk translation 
of “Mary Had a Little Lamb.” 

(8) Leman, Wayne. Cheyeime Language Web Site . 29 Sep. 1997. Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 

1997. 

Leman Wayne is a linguist who designed this site in order to preserve the Cheyenne language. 
This site provides an introduction to the language, as well as more detailed lessons grammar and 
syntax. Many examples are provided of words and expressions used by native speakers, such as 
the single word “naohkesaa’one’seomepehevetsehesto’anehe,” which means “I truly do not 
pronounce Cheyeime well”! 




39 



251 



(9) Neufeld, Grant, Rick Harp and Erin Mcdermott. Cree Language Homepage. Online. 
Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 

This is the online version of a course on the Cree language begun at Brandon University in 
Manitoba, Canada. The course begins with an introduction to the orthography used in Cree, and 
continues with a very thorough plan of instruction, which includes numbers, parts of the body, the 
weather and everyday expressions. There is also a short story in Cree with an English translation. 



(10) Vogt, Nancy. Ojibwe Language and Culture: Language . Nov. 1995. Online. Internet. 

13 Oct. 1997. 

This site provides a description of the language spoken by the Ojibwa (also known as Chippewa) 
people. Although no comprehensive grammar is provided, Vogt does include translations of 
everyday words and expressions. 

The following WWW sites provide audio samples of Native American languages (NOTE: 
you must have a sound card attached to your computer to take advantage of the audio): 

(11) The Culture Preservation Committee of the Delaware (Lenape) Tribe. Common Words 

and Phra.ses in Lenape. Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 

This site consists of two pages of everyday words and expressions used in the Lenape language. 

By clicking on the Lenape words, the student can hear what the words sound like. This is a great 
interactive learning tool, provided one has the necessary hM'dware! 

(12) Green, Jim. Lakota Language: The Silent Way . Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 1997 

This unique site uses recordings of the Dakota language. Using the pedagogical technique known 
as the “Silent Way,” the student is taught to recognize individual colored designs with specific 
sounds in the language. Once this correspondence has been established, the student is then taught 
expressions. 

The Following WWW sites contain quotations of Native Americans: 

(13) American Indian Culture Research Center. Dakota Quotes . 3 Oct. 1997. Online. 

Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 

A great collection of quotes from members of the Dakota and Lakota Nations. Includes quotes of 
current and historical leaders, political activists and just plain folks. Speakers of quotes are 
identified by name only, so more research may be required in order to identify them. 




40 



252 



(14) Cherokees of California, Inc. Words of Wisdom . Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 

This is one of several linked to the home page of the Cherokees of California, Inc. This particular 
site includes several quotes by Native Americans, not all of whom are Cherokee. There is no 
apparent order to the quotes, one must scroll through all of them. 

(15) Native Peoples Defense Fund. Iktomini’s Quotes Pag e. 2 Oct. 1996. Online. Internet. 

13 Oct. 1997. 

Quotes on this page are taken from Native American as well as non-Native American political 
leaders 

(16) Snowder, Brad. Cosmological Quotations . 15 Sep. 1997. Online. Internet. 

13 Oct. 1997. 

This is a compilation of quotes pertaining to the creation of, and humanity’s relation to the 
universe. Snowder has collected quotes from many individuals, including some Native 
Americans. Also included are some folk sayings attributed to Native American tribes. 




41 



How to Find Native American Sayings, Phrase s 
and Quotations on the Internet 

A Pathfinder Prepared by Martin Corrigan 



253 



A culture expresses many of its beliefs and concepts through proverbs and sayings. 

Today, many Native Americans are interested in recovering and preserving their traditional folk 
sayings, and the Internet provides an effective tool with which to collect this information. 

There are several World Wide Web (WWW) sites featuring Native American sayings, 
phrases and quotes. Currently there is no single site at which this information has been gathered 
and presented, but this pathfinder will show you the kinds of sjtes where such information can be 
found. Once you know what kind of sites to look for, you can customize your ovm search (by 
concentrating on a particular Native American language, for example). 

You can access any one of the following sites by entering the URL address in the 
“Location” box of your Web browser. 



Start your search with this site that includes a comprehensive listing of other sites related 
to Native Americans: 

• Mitten, Lisa. Native American Home Pag es. 3 Oct. 1997. Online. Internet. 5 Oct. 

1997. URL: http://www.pitt.edu/~lmittenfindians.html 

Look for the following sites to find Native American sayings, phrases and quotes in English 
only: 

• American Indian Culture Research Center. Dakota Quotes . 6 Oct. 1997. Online. Internet. 

13 Oct. 1997. URL: http://www.bluecloud.org/25.html 

• American Indian Culture Research Center. Short Bibliography on Indians . 22 Sep. 1997. 

Online. Internet. 29 Sep. 1997. URL: http://www.bluecloud.org/25.html 

• Cherokees of CaUfomia, Inc. Cherokee Words of Wisdom . Online. Internet. 29 Sep. 1997. 

URL: http://www.Powersource.com/cocinc/articles/wisdom.htm 

• Cole, David, et al. Poetry from Indigenous People on Cultural Property Issues . 4 June 1997. 

Online. Internet. 29 Sep. 1997. 

URL: http://hanksville.phast.umass.edu:8000/cultprop/response/poetry.html 

• Mohawk Nation Council of Chiefs. Iroquois Thanksgiving Address . Online. Internet. 

29 Sep. 1997. URL: http://www.slic.com/~mohawkna/thankgv.htm 

• Native Peoples Defense Fund. Iktomini’s Quotes Page . 2 Oct. 1996. Online. Internet. 

29 Sep. 1997. URL: http://odin.cc.pdx.edu/~psu05663/quotes.html 




•y 



254 



• Snowder, Brad. Cosmological Quotations . 15 Sep. 1997. Online. Internet. 29 Sep. 1997. 

URL: http://www.wwu.edu/~skywise/cosmo.html 

• Zeilinger, Ron. Mitakuye Qwasin-’All My Relatives” . Online. Internet. 29 Sep. 1997. 

URL: http://daknet.com/~indian/quote.html 

Search these sites to find Native American sayings and phrases in the original languages 
with English translations: 

• Hirshfelder, Arlene and Martha Kreipe de Montano. The Nativ e American Almanac— A 

Portrait of Native America Today. Prentice Hall General Reference, 1993. Online. 
Internet. 29 Sep. 1997. URL: http;//www.codetalk.fed.us/codetalk.html 

• Kahon:wes. Kanienkehaka Language Home Page . 26 June 1997. Online. Internet. 29 Sep. 

1997. URL: http://www.axess.com/mohawk/kanienkehaka.html 

• Leman, Wayne. Cheyenne Language Web Site . 29 Sep. 1997. Online. Internet. 29 Sep. 

1997. URL; http://www.mcn.net/~wleman/cheyenne.htm 

• Neufeld, Grant, Rick Harp and Erin Mcdermott. Cree Language Homepage . Online. 

Internet. 29 Sep. 1997. URL; http://arpp.carleton.ca/cree/ 

• Vogt, Nancy. Ojibwe Lang ua ge and Culture: Language . Nov. 1995. Online. Internet. 

29 Sep. 1997. URL: http;//hanksville.phast.umass.edu/misc/ojibwe/o_languageintro.html 

Search for these sites that provide audio samples of Native American languages (NOTE: 
you must have a sound card attached to your computer in order to hear the audio): 

• The Culture Preservation Committee of the Delaware (Lenape) Tribe. Common Words and 

Phra.ses in I^enape. Online. Internet. 29 Sep. 1997. 

URL: http://www.cowboy.net/native/lenape/language.html 

• Green, Jim. Lakota Language: The Silent Way . Online. Internet. 29 Sep. 1997. 

URL; http;//www.geocities.com/Paris/9463/daklangl .html 



Final Note: Remember that no single site on the Internet contains all of the information available 
on Native American sayings and phrases. These sites provide effective starting points in your 
search since they have links to other pertinent sites. Start with the sites in this pathfinder, and 
v^dth perseverance and patience your search will pay off. 




43 



255 



Native American Music: 
Information Available through the Internet 



Lilia Z. K. Bartoszek 

Dr. Loriene Roy 
October 14, 1997 




44 



256 



The client for this Pathfinder is the Fond du Lac Education Division, Cloquet, 
Miruiesota, part of the 4Directions Project. The 4Directions Project is a response to a 
challenge by the United States Department of Education and the President of the United 
States to find ways to improve people’s lives and education by using the “information 
superhighway.” The 4Directions goal is to help Native American students become 
successful in a technological society, while keeping sight of their own Native American 
culture. 

Schools mentioned on the Fond du Lac Education Division homepage are Little 
Black Bear Elementary School, grades K-5, Fond du Lac Ojibwe School, grades 6-12, 
and Fond du Lac Community College. The audience for this pathfinder is primarily 
middle-school students through adults who have at least some experience using an 
internet browser such as Netscape. 

I started by using “Native American Music” and “American Indian Music” as my 
keywords on search engines such as Alta Vista, Lycos, Yahoo, and WebCrawler. I also 
tried using keywords such as “name of tribe + music” or “Native American + flute” but 
these weren’t as successful as the broader keywords. 

I found that I needed dig in and look at as many sites as possible before I could 
decide what I wanted to include in my Pathfinder. There are countless sites which refer to 
Native American music and each site usually has links to other sites, some have dozens 
of links. Since there are so many links and webpages available, I found that there was a 
problem with redundancy— some links are very popular and are used by many people. 
Even though I tried to be orderly and go a few links at a time and then backtrack, I would 
still get lost or the same pages would keep turning up. I decided that it would be most 




45 



257 



helpful I thought of the Pathfinder as a webpage. I should find major categories, and list a 
good place or two to start for each category. The user of the Pathfinder could then go to 
an address, maybe try some of the links, and then come back to the Pathfinder for more 
sites to try. 

I asked myself what I would like to read iff were new at internet searching and 
trying to find some information about Native American music. I looked for information 
that seemed as though it was accurate or “authentic,” or historical. I also looked for 
sources that had many links, so that the user could branch out and find many other 
directions to go in. I also included a couple of sites which are idiosyncratic and give a 
feeling about the person who created the site, showing how they think about their culture 
and music. 

Many of the web pages about music have audio links of various sorts, and some even 
have QuickTime movies. I have heard very little Native American music in my life, and I 
wanted to hear some. I was very disappointed, therefore, because our home computer 
doesn’t have the equipment needed to take advantage of most of these sound clips. Even 
with our limited equipment, though, I was able to listen to a few of the audio samplings, 
and it was wonderful. 




m r'i 






258 



ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 

1. Amazon.com. “Welcome to Amazon.com.” October 12, 1997. 

httD://vvww.amazon.com/exec/obidos/subst/home/home.html/831S’3644388-028167 (October 12, 
1997) People who are interested in a subject will want to find books to read, and this is the best 
online bookstore to go to, with a stock of 2.5 million titles. Author, title, and subject searches are 
available. There is also a Subject Browser and a Recommendation Center to match the customer 
with the book. A keyword search for Native American Music gets 34 hits, and a search for 
American Indian Music gets 28 hits. 

2. Berryhill, Peggy. “Native Stations Map” “Native Media Resource Center.” September 25, 1997. 

http://www.wco.com/-berrvhp/stations.html (October 12, 1997) Native American radio stations 
feature music of and by Native performers. This site has a map of 19 radio stations in the lower 48 
states and a list of Alaskan Native Stations. Each radio’s call numbers, addresses and phone 
numbers are shown. The map also has symbols which denote whether the station is a public or a 
commercial radio station. 

3. “Canyon RecnrH<t American Indian Recordings” http://www.thememall.eom/Canvon.htm 

(October 12, 1997) This page describes recordings by Carlos Nakai and William Eaton. It also lists 
recordings of Chicken Scratch music and Christmas music, along with 30-second sound recordings 
you can listen to. 

4. “Canyon Records Catalog Index” http://www.thememall.com/canvon/catalog.htm (October 12, 1997) 

The catalog is extensive and the categories listed include: Apache Sounds, Flute/New Age Music, 
The flute of R. Carlos Nakai, Indian House Recordings, Navajo Songs & Dances, Pueblo, Hopi, & 
Zuni Songs & Dances, and Sioux music. The Carlos Nakai link has 30-second sound excerpts fi-om 
his recordings. 

5. Dashner, Mike. “GLRAIN's Listing of Drum Groups.” September 1 1, 1997. 

http://glrain.cic.net/drum-grp.htm (October 12, 1997) 

This is the site of the Great Lakes Regional American Indian Network. It contains a listing of drum 
and singing groups from Canada and the United States. Included on the list are 5 World 
Championship singing contest winners, 9 Champion Southern Style drum groups, 21 Champion 




47 



259 



Northern Style drum groups, plus 14 other drum groups. Many of these groups have webpage links 
ore-mail links. 

6. Gibaldi, Joseph, and Walter S. Achtert MLA Handbook for Writers of Research PaperS:, New York: 

The Modem Language Association of America, 1988. This is the style manual I used for writing 
this paper. 

7. Henkle, Douglas H. “The FolkBook Index - Native Artists.” October 5, 1997 

http://www.execDC.com/-henkle/fbindex/native.html (October 12, 1997) Native Americans will 
want to find out about contemporary Native American musicians, and this is a fantastic page to start 
from. It has 20 links to various music indexes and sites, plus a list and index to approximately 100 
recording artists. 

8. Keenlyside, David (CMC), Editor, et a/. The Canadian Museum of Civilization . “Musical Instruments.” 

“Stones Unturned.” 1996. http://www.schoolnet,ca/collections/stones/ (October 12, 1997) 

“Stones Unturned” is an exhibit produced by the Canadian Museum of Civilization that shows 
Native musical instruments, articles of clothing, and games and toys from its collection. The 
“Musical Instruments” site features music and noisemakers. There are sections about bullroarers, 
drums, calls, and rattles. By clicking on various elements, you can learn about musicals instruments 
and the tribes that used them. 

9. Lang, Gail. “Pow-Wow.” “Native American Indian Sites.” April 15, 1996. 

http://www.pride-net.com/native indians/pow-wow.html (October 12, 1997) People interested in 
Native American music will find pow-wows to be good places to experience ethnic singing and 
dancing. This site contains information about what a powwow is, and has links about songs ^d 
dance, pow-wow etiquette, drums, and a calendar with dates and places pow-wows will be held. It 
describes Indian war dances, round dances, snake dances, and music such as “honor songs. This site 
also has photographs from pow-wows. 

10. Library of Congress. “Willard Rhodes Collection.” January 18, 1996. 

http://lcweb.loc.gov/spcoll/198.html 

(October 12, 1997) This is a site about Willard Rhodes, an ethnomusicologist who made 




48 



260 



field recordings of North American Indian music from 1940-1952. Rhodes visited and recorded an 
impressive list of fifty tribes. The Willard Rhodes Collection consists of more than 270 discs and 50 
tapes collected by Rhodes, some of which have been put on LP recordings by the Library of 
Congress.. 

1 1. Neskahi, Arlie. “Arlie’s tips on buying authentic Native recordings.” 

http://www.teleDort.com/~mbowlkr/tips.htm (October 12, 1997) 

Based on his experiences as a Native American musician, educator, and online music store owner, 
Arlie Neskahi talks about what to look for when purchasing items that claim to be authentic Native 
American. He recommends that the name of the Tribe/Nation of the artist should be given, and also 
warns that customers should beware of cover titles that have “crystal” or “shaman” on them (“each 
tribe has their (sic) own terms to describe their spiritual leaders”). This site also gives a list of 
native-owned recording labels. 

12. Neskahi, Arlie. “Native American Music Radio Programming” 

http://www.teleport.com/~mbowlkr/naradio.html (October 12, 1997) For people who want to listen 
to Native American music, this Rainbow Walker production lists 19 radio stations as distant as New 
Brunswick, New Mexico, and Alaska. Besides giving each station’s call letters, there is a discussion 
of the types of programming offered. Music seems to be an important part of the programming. 
There is also a short history of Native American radio programming 

13. Neskahi, Arlie. “Rainbow Walker Traditional Music and Dance Information Page.” 

http://www.teleport.com/~mbowlkr/info.html (October 12, 1997) Arlie Neskahi first created his 
Native American web pages in 1994/95, which probably makes him one of the originals of ^e 
genre. This site will be of interest to people who would like to hear the thoughts of someone who 
has been involved in Native American music since 1974. Links on this site contain reflections on 
singing in relation to the death of his mother, healing and music, traditional music of flute and 
whistle. There is also a list of musicians who are not Native Americans but who Arlie thinks should 
be called “Native Inspired or Influenced Musicians.” 

14. Skyhawk. “Music and Dance.” May 05, 1997. http://www.gbso.net/Skvhawk/music~da.htm 



O 

ERIC 



49 



261 



(October 12, 1997) A good description of what Native American music and dance consists of, this 
site talks about the components of this music: melodic lines, rhythms, musical accompaniments to 
singing, dance, and the spread of the influence of Native American music to the world. 

15. Smith, Stephen. ” Frances Densmore: Song Catcher.” 1997. 

http://news.mpr.org/features/97Q2 densmore/docs/index.shtml (October 12, 1997) 

This exhibit produced by Minnesota Public Radio is a very interesting site about an 
ethnomusicologist who spent most of her life, from her mid 20s until she was 87, recording and then 
trying to preserve her recordings of Native American music . One part of the site is done as a magic 
lantern show that you can watch if your computer has QuickTime movie capabilities, and there are 
also audio links to listen to. 

16. Smithsonian Institution. “Smithsonian Folksways Recordings.” May 6, 1997. 

http://www.si.edu/foikways/ (October 13, 1997) This webpage contains a searchable database of 
about 35,000 recordings obtainable through the Smithsonian Institution. There are online catalogs 
and mail order forms. In addition to recent releases that have audio samples, there are links to the 
Smithsonian Archives, other Smithsonian webpages, and the Folkways Web Magazine. 

17. Smithsonian Institution. “Smithsonian Folkways - American Indian.” May 30, 1997. 

httD://www.si.edu/folkwavs/indian.htm (October 13, 1997) This site has details five compilations of 
Native American music, including First Nations Women, Music of New Mexico, Navajo Songs, 
Plains Chippewa and Metis music. Also on this page are audio samples from each CD or cassette. 

1 8. Smithsonian Institution. “Film and Video Center..” “The National Museum of the American Indian.” 

1 997. http://www.si.edu/organiza/museums/amerind/pub/index.htm (Ocober 12, 1997) The web 
page of the National Museum of the American Indian’s Film and Video Center lists movies 
produced about Indians of the Americas, some of which have music or musicians as an underlying 
theme. 

19. Strom, Karen M. “Native American Related Museums on the Internet.” October 3, 1997. 

http://hanksville.phast.umass.edu/misc/NAmuseums.html (October 12, 1997) This site has 




50 



262 



links to museums in the United States, Canada, the Caribbean, and Latin America. Many of these 
museums (for example, the Peabody Museum of Archaeology and Ethnology) should have 
references to Native American ceremonies and the part music and dance play in them. 

20. Strom, Karen M. “Native American Music Resources on the Internet.” October 9, 1997. 

http://hanksville.phast.umass.edu/misc/NAmusic.html (October 12, 1997) This website 
has a very long listing of individual musicians and bands, with links to each. 

Some other headings are at this site are: “Music Sources” (13 links to record sellers and companies), 
“Music Organizations” (3 links),”Music Reviews and Articles,” and “Musical Instruments.” 

21. Walker, Janice R “MLA- Style Citations of Electronic Sources.” August 2, 1996. 

http://slis6000.slis.uwo.ca/-tgale/bibs/walker.htm (October 12, 1997) This is the style sheet I used 
for internet citations. 




51 



263 



woTive ocoeRicow coosiC: 

IWPORCOOTIOW OVOlLOece through THG IWTGRWeT 

A Pathfinder prepared by Lilia Z. K. Bartoszek 

Native American sites abound on the Internet, and many of them refer to Native American music. 
These sites usually contain links to other sites. Indeed, some of them have dozens of links, and 
you can find yourself spending hours looking through them. Often, they will have links you can 
click on to hear samples of music (if your computer has the right equipment) or e-mail links so 
you can contact people. 

This Pathfinder will answer some questions about how to start looking for information about 
Native American Music on the Internet. It will also give you categories of music information you 
can find and some addresses to use as starting points. 

How do I start looking for information about Native American Music on the Internet? 

You can use any search engine, such as AltaVista, Lycos, Yahoo, WebCrawler. There are 
differences between them, but they will all work well. If you want to compare different ones, a 
good website to use is PC(USA) Search Page at http:wwwpcusa80.pcusa.org/pcnet/ 

The first page has a chart with the names of 79 different search engines. When you click on one 
of these names you will be connected with that site. 

Which keywords work best? 

This is a case where the most obvious keywords work best: “Native American music” and 
“American Indian music.” If you try terms like “tribal music” or “Native American flute music” 
you will get some results, but not many. If you narrow your search even further and use a tribal 
name + music, you may not get any results. 

WHGRe cow 1 PIWO: 

O OeSCRlRTlOW OP WOTlVe OMCRICOW MUSIC 

Skyhawk. “Music and Dance.” May 05, 1 997. http://\vww.gbso.net/Skvhawk/music~da.htm 

SITCS OeOUT WOTlVe omcricow music 

Henkle, Douglas H. “The FolkBook Index - Native Artists.” October 5, 1997. 
http://vmw.execpc.com/~henkle/fbindex/native.html 

Neskahi, Arlie. “Rainbow Walker Traditional Music and Dance Information Page.” 
http://www.teleport.com/~rnbowlkr/info.html 

Strom, Karen M. “Native American Music Resources on the Internet.” October 9, 1997. 
http://hanksville.phast.umass.edu/misc/NAmusic.html 

eooRs owo eooR storcs 

Amazon.com. “Welcome to Amazon.com.” October 12, 1997. 

http://wvm.amazon.com/exec/obidos/subst/home/home.html/83 1 5-36443 88-028 1 67 

DRUM GROUPS 

Dashner, Mike. “GLRAIN's Listing of Drum Groups.” September 11, 1997. 
http://glrain.cic.net/drum-grp.htm 




52 



SWEETGRASS 
A Pathfinder 
LIS 382L.13 
Patricia Ingram 
13 October 1997 




53 



265 



Sweetgrass 

Introduction 

Sweetgrass {Hierochloe odorata), also known as vanilla grass or holy grass, is a 
fragrant perennial grass growing in wet lowlands and along streams in the Northeastern 
United States, South Dakota, New Mexico, California and Canada. The grass is 
considered sacred by Native American peoples who use it as a purifying smudge in 
ceremonial ritual and its smoke as a pathway for prayers. It has been used in Native 
medicine and as personal adornment. Certain tribes use it for coiled basketry either as a 
main material or as decoration. These sweetgrass baskets were special and were given as 
gifts. Understandingthe significance of sweetgrass in Native American culture requires 
some understanding of its philosophy and religion, particularly as it pertains to the 
relationship of the natural world to the spiritual world. This relationship can be glimpsed 
through the words, lives and artwork of Native American elders and artists, particularly 
basketweavers. 

Since my pathfinder was for a small Native American school, I assumed that online 
resources would be much more available than print resources. This assumption was 
supported by the wealth of information related to Native Americans which I was 
discovering on the Internet. I therefore decided to limit my pathfinder to Internet sources 
even though I had little experience of using the Internet. 

I began my search using sweetgrass as a keyword and the search engine HotBot. 
This search resulted in over a thousand matches and since I knew of no way to refine my 
search, I began to sift through those sources. Fairly quickly I began to be able to reject 
repetitive unfruitful matches. While this method was yielding a slow, but steady supply of 
isolated resources, I also began to mine the more extensive sites beginning with Lisa 
Mitten’s Home Page as suggested by Dr. Roy. I’m afraid I spent quite a lot of time 
wandering from link to link, but gradually I was forming ideas about what a teacher of an 




54 



266 



Indian school might want for her students. I was also beginning to be able to evaluate 
sources, finding out where links came from and separating, for instance, educational 
sources from commercial ones. Early in my search 1 thought maybe sources for sweetgrass 
smudges and braids might be desirable, but as I read the words of members of the tribes I 
began to see that the general cultural significance would be much more important to such a 
teacher. I began to see basketmaking as almost a metaphor for the relationship of these 
peoples to the natural world and studying sweetgrass as an avenue to understanding their 
philosophy and religion and my choices of sources reflected this change in my perspective. 
Late in my search I stumbled on a link to the Lycos search engine which worked much 
better for me than HotBot. 

Patricia Ingram 




55 



267 



Sweetgrass 

Bibliography 

Note: Subheadings in bold indicate particularly good resources. Successive links are indicated by 
indentions. 

1. AboriginalNet 22 June 1997. Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://www.aboriginalnet.com/tourism/html/cultural_experience.html> Description of 
ceremonial use of sweetgrass. Information researched and provided by Native Counselling 
Services of Alberta. 

• Sweetgrass 

• Ancient Pipe Ceremony 

2. Bookstore Information: Amazon.com. Online. Internet. 9 Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://indy4.fdl.cc.mn.us/~isk/books/amazonlinks/bookstore.html> An online bookstore 
with information on current books and a large section on Native American topics including: 

• Ethnobotany. Native Plant Knowledge. Books on the cultural significance of plants to 
Native cultures with specific botanical information. This section includes: 

• Native plant/medical database. Casual references to medicinal use of 
sweetgrass listed by tribe. 

• Current listings of relevant books include: 

« Keepers of Life: Discovering Plants Through Native American Stories and Earth 
Activities for Children by Michael J. Caduto and Joseph Bruchac. Fulcrum Pub. 
Aug. 1997. 

• Porno Basketmaking: A Supreme Art for the Weaver by Elsie Allen. 

• Indian Uses of Native Plants by Edith Van Allen Murphy. Meyerbooks. 1 996. 

• Song of the Seven Herbs by Walking Night Bear, et al. Book Pub Co. 1987. A 
collection of original stories for children and adults, based on North American 
Indian lore tell how the Creator gave us seven common herbs. Spiritual allegories 
are used to teach us to be caretakers of Mother Earth. 

3. Dremann, Craig and Dremann, Sue. Sweetgrass (Hierochloe odoratal growing and 
ordering information. 1992. Online. Internet. 12 Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://www.batnet.com/rwc-seed/sweetgrass.html> Good information on recognizing and 
cultivating sweetgrass. Grass plugs for sale. Address and phone number given. 

4. Espinosa, Roger. March 8. Brown Sister . 25 Sept. 1994. Online. Internet. 12 Oct. 19971 
URL: .<http://ics.soe.umich.edu/JoumeyNorth/Bites/March8.html> A short poem using image of 
sweetgrass by Emma Larocque, Winnipeg, July 1990. This page is a link from The Journey 
North , an experiment in electronic experiential education of U of Mich. A good single item to 
use for enrichment of classroom environment. 

5. Giese, Paula. Basketry (Main Menul: Native American Art 8 Nov. 1996. Online. Internet. 
12 Oct. 1997. URL: <http://indy4.fdl.cc.mn.us/~isk/art/basket/baskmenu.html> This is an 
especially good listing of basketry links including: 

• Native Philosophy and Environment. This wonderful section is good for exploring 
the idea that basketmaking as an artistic discipline is inseparable from the traditions, 
customs, and religion of the various tribes that developed and practiced it. 

• Honoring Elsie Allen (1898-1990), Porno elder, basketmaker, teacher. The histories 




56 



268 



of individual basketmakers are very inspiring and their teachings are direct sources for 
better understanding the cultural significance of natural materials such as sweetgrass. 

She describes basketmaking as a spiritual path, “I feel I have made connections with 
something very ancient within myself and from my people.” 

• Gallery of Baskets for Utility has one picture of a traditional sweetgrass basket and a 
nice description of sweetgrass basket technique. 

• Bibliography 

• Links include: 

• Native Tech basketry. 

• Hudson Museum. 

• Vermont Museum Abenaki basketry. 

• Migrations Gallery Basket Page has one good picture of a beautiful 
contemporary sweetgrass basket for sale. 

6. Giese, Paula. Native American Indian Plentvstuff. 1 1 June 1997. Online. Internet. 1 1 Oct. 
1997. URL: <http://indy4.fdl.cc.mn.us/~isk/mainmenu.html> This is an extensive and well- 
organized site with well-annotated listings. E-mail address is given. 

• Aadizookaanag Idash Dibaajimowinan: Stories Menu. True stories, traditional 
myths and legends and picture stories. Sources for general cultural information. Possible 
source for sweetgrass myths and legends. 

• Baskets. See above, source 5. 

7. Gilbaldi, Joseph. MT.A Handbook for Writers of Research Papers. 4th ed. New York: 

The Modem Language Association of America, 1995. 

8. Indian Art and Craft of North America; Prince Edward Island. Online. Internet. 12 Oct. 
1997. URL: <http://www.peisland.com/micmac/crafts.htm> E-mail address and telephone 
number given. 

• Sweetgrass/ash splint basket. One picture of traditional Micmac basket, artist unknown. 

9. Mitten, Lisa. Native American Home Pages. 3 Oct. 1997. Online. Internet. 7 Oct. 1997. 
URL: <http://www.pitt.edu/~lmitten/indians.html> Lisa Mitten is a social sciences bibliographer 
at the Hillman Library, University of Pittsburgh. This site has won numerous awards including: 
Native American Who’s Hot Award, The Dreamcatcher Award, and Alive! Excellence in 
Education. 

• Native American Home Pages General 

• American Indian Ethnobotany Database. Searchable by keyword. Sweetgrass 
brings 10 matches describing medical use. 

•. Native American Culture. Has bulletin board and chat room. Perhaps a good 
place to ask questions about the significance of sweetgrass in the Native culture. 
The database at this link produced no matches using sweetgrass as a keyword. 

10. Native American Baskets of Brown Ash and Sweeterass . 30 Mar. 97. Online. Internet. 
URL: <http://home.topchoice.com/~pathway/lpathway/> Good pictures of beautiful Penobscot 
Fancy Baskets for sale. Artist bio. Artist’s address, phone number and e-mail address given. 

11. Native American Featherwork: Single Wrapped Feathers. 1996. Online. Internet. 12 Oct. 
1997. URL: <http://www.lib.uconn.edu/NativeTech/feather/wrap/fethwrap.html> One of 
NativeTech’s 300 pages. Good general description of cultural significance of feathers including 




57 



269 



mention of use of sweetgrass and feathers in purification ritual. A good item to help build 
understanding of relationship between natural and spiritual worlds in Native philosophy and 
religion. 

12. Our Elders: Interviews with Saskatchewan Elders. June 1997. Online. Internet. 12 Oct. 

1997. URL: <http://www.lights.com/sicc/tofc.html> A database, searchable by keyword or 
subject, of interviews with Saskatchewan elders. A project of the Saskatchewan Indian Cultural 
Centre. An excellent site for original source material on Native American culture. Address, phone 
and fax numbers and e-mail address are given. A keyword search for sweetgrass produced 
twelve matches. 

13. Penobscot Primer Project. Online. Internet. 11 Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://www.ume.maine.edu/~hudsonm/Penobscot.html> The Penobscot Primer Project is 
a computerized Native American language resource created by the Hudson Museum of 
Anthropology. The primer uses the words and descriptions of the late Madeline Shay, the last 
Penobscot native speaker. This is a good original source for knowledge about the Penobscot 
culture. Ms. Shay was a maker of brown ash and sweetgrass baskets and this page mentions an 
exhibit of these baskets at the Hudson Museum. This site is a link from the Exhibits at the 
Hudson Museum page which was last updated 22 Sept. 1997. E-mail addresses are given for both 
pages. 

14. Prindle, Tara . Native Tech . 27 Sept. 1997. Online. Internet. 12 Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://www.lib.uconn.edu/NativeTech/> Over 300 pages of information searchable by 
keyword. “Dedicated to disconnecting the term ‘primitive’ from perceptions of Native American 
technology and art”. E-mail address is given. Helpful interior links include; 

• Plants &. Trees 

• Indigeneous Plants 

• Bibliography of References for Native American Uses of Indigeneous 

Plants 

• Birchbark 

• Canoes 

• Making a Miniature Birch Paper Canoe edged with 
Sweetgrass. A craft project for children. 

URL; <http://www.lib.uconn.edu/NativeTech/brchbark/cansweet.htm> 

• Weaving «& Cordage 

• Basketry 

• Coil Basketry. Good description of coil basketry. One picture of a 
sweetgrass basket. Basketry bibliography. 

• Cordage from Plant and Animal Materials. No mention of sweetgrass, but a 
good essay on making cordage which was the technique often used in sweetgrass 
baskets. 

• Message Board. Online Discussion about Native American Technology and Art. This 
might be a good place to ask questions about sweetgrass baskets. 

• Source list for craft supplies. 

• Search NativeTech for keywords 

15. Prindle, Tara. NativeTech: Native American Porcupine Quill Enbroidery. 1996. Online. 
Internet. 12 Oct. 1997. URL; <http://spirit.lib.uconn.edu/NativeTech/quill/quill.html> Brief 
history of quill embroidery. Mentions rise in popularity of birch and sweetgrass basketry. Source 




58 



270 



for understanding role of basketmaking in Native culture. One of NativeTech’s 300 pages. E-mail 
address given. 

16. Saint-Marie, Buffy. Staryyalker. Online. Internet. 10. Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://hookomo.aloha.net/-bsm/starlyr.htm> Words to the inspirational song by Buffy 
Saint-Marie includes reference to burning sweetgrass. A good single item to use for enrichment 
of the classroom environment. 

17. Selene Communications and Sheridan, Jenn. Visual Arts: First Nations. 1995. Online. 
Internet. 12 Oct. 1997. URL: <http://www.niagara.com/-artists/Visual/first.html> Site belonging 
to Niagara Artists’ Company, an artists’ co-operative in the Niagara Peninsula, Canada. 

Pictures of modern artwork using sweetgrass. Artist’s bio and statement. Good source for cultural 
significance of sweetgrass. E-mail address given. 

• Rebecca Baird. 

18. Smith, Sara. Mother Earth, heritage hurt bv development of sacred lands . 1995. Online. 
Internet. 12 Oct. 1997. URL: <http://www.spub.ksu.edu/ISSUES/v099B/SP/nl29/cam-Mann- 
Smith.html> This document belongs to Student Publications Inc., Kansas State University. It is 
the text of a speech in Union Little Theatre by Henrietta Mann, professor in Indian studies at 
Haskell Indian Nations University. A plea for stewardship of the earth refers to sweetgrass as 
being, according to Cheyenne legend, one of the four substances of which the earth was made 
and the source of all vegetation. This idea could be further researched using Native creation 
myths either in general or by tribe or region using any search engine. 

19. Smith, Shelley M. Reminiscences: Poems and Stories bv Shelly Smith. 1996. Online. 
Internet. 12 Oct. 1997. URL: <http://www.lib.uconn.edu/NativeTech/shelley/reminis.html> 

Poem in the form of a reminiscence beginning with a memory of sweetgrass. Shelley Smith is an 
anthropologh student at U of Conn. This page is one of NativeTech’s 300 pages. E-mail address 
given. A good single item to use for enrichment of classroom environment. 

20. Strom, Karen. Hanksville Index of American Indian Resources on the Internet 6 Oct. 
1997. Online. Internet. 12 Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://hanksville.phast.umass.edu/misc/NAresources.html> An extensive and well 
organized site. Top Ten Award from World Wide Web Associates. NetGuide Gold Site. 

Magellan 4 Stars. E-mail address given. 

• Culture 

• American Indian Ethnobotany by Daniel E. Moerman, U of Michigan- 
Dearbom. Includes a online database searchable by keyword. Sweetgrass 
produces 10 matches describing medicinal usage. 

• Indigeneous Knowledge 

• Indigenous Use of Herbs. Tim Johnson. A personal listing of 
herbs used by different tribes. 

• Video. Native American Video Resources on the Internet. Possible source. Not 
searched. 

21. Sweetgrass . 26 Sept. 1996. Online. Internet. 12 Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://www.execpc.com/~garrett/> Two page personal website advertising sweetgrass 
products as well as briefly discussing sweetgrass and its Native uses. Includes a nice color 
picture of sweetgrass. An e-mail address is given. 




59 



271 



22. Tafalski, Mark. Basketpatterns.com. 25 May 1997. Online. Iniernei. 12 Oci. 1997. 

URL: <http://www.basketpatterns.com/index.html> A commercial site selling modern baskets, 
basketry patterns by modern basketmakers, books, tools and supplies. Includes many names of 
contemporary basketmakers and pictures of modern sweetgrass baskets. 

23. Tree and Tradition: Brown Ash and Main Native American Basketmakers. Online. 
Internet. 12 Oct. 1997. URL: <http://www.ume.maine.edu/~hudsonm/TemporaryExhibit.html> 

A traveling exhibit at the Hudson Museum of Anthropology, at the Nylander Museum, Caribou, 
Maine, May 26, 1997 to December 7, 1997. Short history of basketmaking by four tribes in Main: 
Penobscot, Passamaquoddy, Maliseet and Micmac. Several traditional basketmakers are cited. E- 
mail address is given. Source for understanding role of basketmaking in Native culture. 

24. Western Wetland Flora . Online. Internet. 8 Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://www.npsc.nbs.gOv/resource/othrdata/westflor/species/2/liierodor.htm> This site is 
one item in an online database maintained by the Northern Prarie Wildlife Research Center, 
Jamestown, North Dakota. Beautiful color picture and black and white drawing of sweetgrass 
Map of US showing where sweetgrass grows. Structural botanical description of sweetgrass or 
"holy grass". 

25. NativeNet: mailing lists. Online. Internet. 8 Oct. 1997. 

URL: <http://www.fdl.cc.mn.us/natnet/mlist.html> A resource of Fond du Lac Tribal and 
Community College, Cloquet, Minnesota. NativeNet provides a set of electronic mailing lists and 
archives. Native-L is one of those lists and its archive is searchable by author, subject and thread. 
Five authors who have written on sweetgrass are: 

• Louis Annance 

• Mary Ritchie 

• Lyn Dearborn 

• Tristine Lee Smart 

• Capucine Plourde 




60 



SWEETGRASS 

A Pathfinder for information on the Internet 



272 



Sweetgrass {Hierochloe odorata) is a perennial grass growing in wet meadows, 
marshes or along streams. It is found in the Northeastern United States, South Dakota, 
New Mexico, California and Canada. It has a sweet, vanilla-like fragrance and is 
considered sacred by Native American peoples who use it in ceremonial ritual. Native 
medicine and decorative arts, particularly basketmaking. This pathfinder is a guide to 
locating information about sweetgrass on the Internet for teachers of students from 
kindergarten through 12th grade and could be used by the older students as well. It was 
prepared for Indian Island School, Old Town, Maine. 



How can I identify sweetgrass in the wild? Can it be cultivated? 

Western Wetland Flora . 

<http://www.npsc.nbs.gOv/resource/othrdata/westflor/species/2/hierodor.htm> 
Dremann, Craig and Dremann, Sue. Sweetgrass (Hierochloe odoratal growing and 
ordering information, <http://www.batnet.com/rwc-seed/sweetgrass.html> 



Where can I find a picture of sweetgrass on the web? 

Sweetgrass . <http://www.execpc.com/~garrett/> 



Where can I find information on the medicinal use of sweetgrass? 

Bookstore Information; Amazon.com. 

<http://indy4.fdl.cc.mn.us/~isk/books/amazonlinks/bookstore.html> In the Ethnobotany 
section click on Native plant/medical database. 

Mitten, Lisa. Native American Home Pages. 

<http://www.pitt.edu/~lmitten/indians.html> Under Native American Home Pages 
General click on American Indian Ethnobotany Database and search using sweetgrass as 
keyword. 

Can I find pictures of sweetgrass baskets on the web? 

Indian Art and Craft of North America: Prince Edward Island. 
<http://www.peisland.com/micmac/crafts.htm> 

Native American Baskets of Brown Ash and Sweetgrass . 
<http://home.topchoice.com/~pathway/Ipathway/> 

Tafalski, Mark. Basketpattems.com. 

<http://www.basketpattems.com/index.html> 



What cultural meaning does basketry carry in traditional Native American 

life? 

Giese, Paula. Basketry fMain Menu): Native American Art. 

<http://indy4.fdl.cc.mn.us/~isk/art/basket/baskmenu.html> Click on Native Philosophy and 

er|c 



61 



273 



Environment, also on Honoring Elsie Allen. 

Penobscot Primer Project. 

<http;//www. ume.maine.edu/~hudsonm/Penobscot.html> 

Prindle, Tara. NativeTech: Native American Porcupine Quill Enbroidery. 
<http://spirit.lib.uconn.edu/NativeTech/quill/quill.html> 

Selene Communications and Sheridan, Jenn. Visual Arts: First Nations. 
<http://www.niagara.com/~artists/Visual/first.html> 

Tree and Tradition: Brown Ash and Main Native American Basketmakers 
<http://www.ume.maine.edu/~hudsonm/TemporaryExhibit.html> 



Are there any recent books which would, help my students understand the 
spiritual significance of the natural world in Native culture? 

Bookstore Information: Amazon.com. 

<http://indy4.fdl.cc.mn.us/~isk/books/amazonlinks/bookstore.html> 



I would like to use native poetry or writings referring to the use of 
sweetgrass to enrich the classroom environment Where could I find 

examples on the web? 

Espinosa, Roger. March 8. Brown Sister . 
<http://ics.soe.umich.edu/JourneyNorth^ites/March8.html> 

Our Elders: Interviews with Saskatchewan Elders. 

<http://w w w . 1 ights.com/sicc/tofc .html > 

Saint-Marie, Buffy. Starwalker 
<http://hookomo.aloha.net/~bsm/starlyr.htm> 

Smith, Shelley M. Reminiscences: Poems and Stories by Shelly Smith. 
<http://www.lib.uconn.edu/NativeTech/shelley/reminis.html> 



I would like to correspond with other interested parties about various 
aspects of sweetgrass. How could I do this? 

NativeNet: mailing lists. 

<http://www.fdl.cc.mn.us/natnet/mlist.html> Signing up for one of these lists would put 
you in contact with possible sources. Begin with the archives listings of authors who have 
written on sweetgrass. 

Information on the Internet is constantly being updated and added to. For more information 
do a keyword search using a web search engine. Lycos is a particularly good one. Possible 
confusions resulting from a keyword search are: 

• References to a different sweetgrass, (Muhlenbergia filipes), which is also used in 
basketmaking and grows in coastal dunes extending from North Carolina to Texas. 

• Alberta Sweetgrass an Aboriginal Newspaper. 

• Sweetgrass, Montana 

If you need help, ask a librarian. 



ERIC 



GOOD LUCK ON YOUR PATH! 

Patricia Ingram e-mail to p.ingram@mail.utexas.edu 

62 



274 



PATHFINDER 

"Alternatives to Drinking for Native American Youth" 



prepare 

by 



Wade E. Osbum 



US 382L3 



October 8, 1997 



o 

ERIC 



63 



275 



PATHFINDER PREFACE 

The topic "Alternatives to Drinking for Native American Youth" is an 
important one for not only Native American youth, but for all adolescents. It is 
not uncommon for a young person to begin drinking due to societal pressures. 
Still, drinking is just one of many ways to deal with stress. Perhaps boredom 
and inactivity lead some to experiment with alcohol. As with stress, turning to 
alcohol is but one of a number of ways to respond to idleness and boredom. 

This project has been created for Native American elementary and 
secondary students of schools participating in the federally funded Four 
Directions Project, specifically the Fond du Lac Education Division. \^th this 
group in mind, the underlying assumption of the project is that Native 
American youth who have turned to alcohol to "pass the time" or deal with 
stress will choose a more responsible, healthy way to live if the alternatives are 
presented to them. A related topic to this is the reason why young people 
abuse alcohol. Once the reasons are evident to the young drinker, their next 
step may be to seek professional help. The step after that will involve altering 
their lifestyle. 

There are many Native American youth who do not presently struggle 
with the temptation to drink. This particular pathfinder is not specifically 
created with them in mind. Of course they could stiU benefit from the 
concluding section of the pathfinder (What to do instead of drink?). For the 
adolescent abuser of alcohol this pathfinder serves three purposes: to convince 
him or her that drinking is harmful, that alcohol abuse can be overcome, and 
that there are alternatives to a lifestyle of drinking. 

The sources listed in the pathfinder were located using several competent 
search engines to scan the World Wide Web for sites that fit my topic: 



ERIC 



64 



277 



Bibliography 

Adolescent Substance Abuse and Recovery Resources , (accessed 06 October 
1997); available from htQ)://www. wintemet.com/~webpage/ 
adolrecovery.html; Internet 

This site contains infoimation helpful to the adolescent who is abusing 
drugs or alcohol and does not know where to go for help. Listed on this site are 
numerous links exploring topics, such as myths about alcohol and sobriety and 
recovery resources. Also found here is a liiik to teen advice counselors who can 
provide long-distance help for the adolescent 

Alta Vista , (accessed 06 October 1997); available from 
http://altavista.digital.com; Internet 

Functioning as an online search engine, this site scans the World Wide 
Web using key words. With this search engine one can look for exact phrases 
used in internet websites. 

Ask the Question.. .And Shellv Answers , (accessed 06 October 1997); available 
from http://www.erols.com/daybyday/askJitm; Internet 

Shelly does not claim to be a counselor. She is a fellow struggler. A 
recovering alcoholic. Shelly will take questions via e-mail from those seeking to 
break free from alcohol or drug dependence. A specified topic that SheUy is 
willing to explore with people is "young people and addiction recovery." 

BOLD (Bjiilding Our Lives Dmg-free) of Nashua. NH . (accessed 06 October 
1997); available from htq>://chopin.£xbbs.com/bold/; Internet 

BOLD is a youth initiated (7th through 12th graders), youth focused 
organization of those wanting to live their lives drug-free. Its purpose is to 
"seek ways to provide positive alternatives to drinking and drugging." The site 
provides information about the organization and gives a contact email address. 

Brown, Joan M. Just Sav No: An Alcohol Awareness Website for Grades 6-12 
(accessed 06 October 1997); available from http: www- 
personal.umd.umich.edu/~jobrown^ustsaynoJitml; Internet. 

This site is an informative site, dealing specifically with the issue of 
adolescents and dmg use. The content includes facts about teenage drinking in 



O 

ERIC 



65 



279 



Hotbot . (accessed 06 October 1997); available from http://vmw.hotbotcom/; 
Internet. 

Hotbot is an internet search engine which uses keywords to locate 
websites on the World Wide Web that contain information about iimumerable 
topics. 

Infoseek . (accessed 06 October 1997); available from http://www.infoseek.com 
/Home; Internet. 

Infoseek is an internet search engine which uses keywords to locate 
websites on the World Wide Web that contain information about iimumerable 
topics. 

The Internet's Fitness Resource , (accessed 06 October 1997); available from 
http://rampages.onramp.net/~chaz/; Internet 

This website contains mfoimation for the person who is interested in 
learning more about the basics of wellness, fitness, and nutrition. It includes 
information about "kids and fitness" which would be helpful to the adolescent 
seeking to learn more. Sports specific sites can also be accessed through this 
page, including sports such as aerobics, cycling, climbing, running^ogging, 
tennis, and weight lifting. 

Lifestyle: Youth Fitness Program Design , (accessed 06 October 1997); available 
from htQ)://www.afaa.com/your_body/lifestyle4.html; Internet 

This site contains exercise prescriptions for a variety of age groups from 
age 2 to 18. The information is helpful for the one wanting to begin an exercise 
program and does not know how to start A section on "injury prevention" is 
also included. 

Lycos , (accessed 06 October 1997); available from http://lycos.cs.cmu.edu/; 
Internet. 

Lycos is an internet search engine which uses keywords to locate 
websites on the World Wide Web containing information on a variety of 
subjects. Through this site one can locate exact phrases existing in the content 
of a website. 

MMMarvelnns Mocktails . (accessed 06 October 1997); available from 
htQ>://www.ualberta.ca/~jhancock/mocktail.html; Internet 




66 



280 



This site contains over twenty five recipes for non-alcoholic beverages. 

These alcoholic alternatives include punches, "great pretenders", old fashioned 
drinks, and "festive favorites." 

Morris, Joe W. Self Scoring Alcohol Check-up . (accessed 06 October 1997); 
available from http://www.cts.com/crash/habtsmrt/chkup.html; 

Internet. 

This is a quick "self-scoring" quiz that can help someone determine 
whether or not they have a drinking problem. Several aspects of one's 
drinking habits are explored through this quiz, such as the amount a person 
drinks, in what situations does one drink, and other patterns of drinking. Once 
the quiz is completed, it is emailed to the site's supervisor and the results are 
emailed back. 

6205's PARR to Know Quiz (Quiz #1) . (accessed 06 October 1997); avadable 
from http://www.dareing.com/dare/darequiz.html; Internet 

This quiz consists of ten questions, geared to the adolescent which deal 
with drug abuse. The purpose of the site is to explore the causes of drug abuse 
and increase the quiz taker's knowledge of dmg use. The answers to the quiz 
^e emailed to the facilitator and the results are emailed back to the 
participant 

6205'.s DARE to Know Quiz (Quiz #21 . (accessed 06 October 1997); avadablfr 
from http://www.dareing.com/dare/darequiz2.html; Internet 

The quiz is a follow-up to the DARE to Know Quiz #1 . This quiz consists of 
ten questions, geared to the adolescent which deal with drug abuse. The 
purpose of the site is to explore the causes of drug abuse and increase the quiz 
taker's knowledge of drug use. The answers to the quiz are emailed to the 
facilitator and the results are emailed back to the participant 

Sobriety and Recovery Resources , (accessed 06 October 1997); available from 
http://www. wintemetcom/~terrym/ sobriety.html; Internet 

This website contains "quick links" to a variety of sites which deal with 
alchol abuse and recovery from it Among the specific topics included are 
personal stories by recovering alcoholics, adolescents and substance abuse; and 
miscellaneous recovery links and articles. 




67 



282 



Alternatives to Drinking: 

A Pathfinder 

As a Native American young person, alcohol may or may not be a 
part of your day-to-day life. For those of you \riio are involved with 
alcohol and ^ looking for alternatives to a life of drinking, this list 
of resources is for you. This pathfinder consists of a variety of 
internet websites that deal with the dangers of drinking and the 
things that a young person, like yourself, can do instead of using 
alcohol. What you leam may surprise you. 

*How can you find out more about drinking and its causes? 

6205's PARE to know Ouir. (#1 and #2^ 

http://www.dareing.com/daie/darequiz.htnil 

http://www.dercmg.coni/dare/darequbs2.htinl 

-These arc fim and educational qui 2 zes...ten questions each 
that can help you explore the causes of drug abuse 
(Yes.>.^cohol is a drug). All you do is answer the questions 
and you will be sent your results. 

Self Scoring Alcoho l Check-up 

http://www.cts.com/crash/habtsinit/chkup.html 

-When, Where, and How much do you drink? Have you 
. thought about it lately? 

♦What do you need to do to say "No." to alcohol? 

lust Sav No - An Alcohol Awa rcness Website (for grades 
bttpi//vfvfvf jieisonal .mud inTnich.edu/~jobrowni^nstsayno-li fTnl 
-Why do young people drink? What can be done to 
prevent alcohol abuse? These arc two of the questions 

that this site tries to answ^ by providing a list of links 

to related sites that include subjects such as alcohol and 
one s health, sobriety (staying sober), and legal issues of 
teenage drinking. 

Adolescent Substance A buse and Recovery 

htq)://www.wmtemetcon]/~wehpage/adolrecovexy.html 

-If you have a problem with alcohol abuse, you will find 
the infonnatiori bn diis page hdpfuL Tttts ate contains 

Imks to other ^tes dealing with rccoveiy and siqiport. 





68 




283 



Ask the Question.. .And Shelly Answers 
http://www.eroIs.com/daybyday/ask.htni 

-If you would like to asV someone a question about 
drinking, the answer is just an e-mail away. 

♦Are you wondering what to do instead of drink? 

Lifestyle: Youth Fitness Program Design 
http://wvvw.afaa.com/your_body/lifestyle4.html 

-Get fit! That is the message that this site will provide 
you.,.along with advice about getting started. 

HobbvWorld Home Pag e 
http://www.hobbyworld.com 

-Pick a hobby.~any hobby. From aerobics to woodworking you 
can get started doing something usefiil and fun that does not 
involve alcohol. 

MMMarvelous Mocktails 
ht^://www.ualberta.ca/~jhan<x)dr/mocktaiLht[nl 

-If you would like to try some tasty drinks (alcohol not 
included), take a look at these recipes for over 20 unique non- 
alcoholic beverages, 

The Internet's Fitness Resource 
http://rampages.oiuamp4ict/~chaz/ 

-Instead of getting drunk...get in shape. Don't know how? 
Check out this site fcM* some adyice. 



As you can see, drinking is not die only way to have fiiiL By having 
fun in other ways (flaying sports, reading, getting a hobby) you can . 
stay healthier, happier, and safer. 







f^pared by Wade E. Osbum 



284 



HEAVY DRINKING; UNDERSTANDING ALCOHOL ABUSE THROUGH LITERATURE 

A Pathfinder Designed by Rex Pyle 

As young people make their way through high school, they are faced with a 
barrage of new experiences, new temptations, and new problems. One of these 
new pressures is the temptation to try alcohol at parties or other such social 
gatherings. While this may also be experienced at younger ages, it is in high 
school where the pressure to drink becomes severe. In addition to this peer 
pressure, young people may have to cope with heavy drinking in the home, 
whether it be an alcoholic mother, father, sibling, or other relative. While there are 
many ways to learn about the problems associated with alcohol abuse, one of the 
most effective and available is through literature, This technique, known as 
bibliotherapy, allow's students to read stories about characters that they can identify 
with, and thus learn about problems such as alcohol abuse in a safe and private 
environment. 

This pathfinder was developed for use by high school teachers in the Fond du 
Lac Education Division in Cloquet, Minnesota. It is intended to serve as a reader's 
advisory guide for teachers to use with their students who may be feiced with the 
problem of alcohol abuse. I attempted to select a variety of sources (alcoholic 
. mother/father, alcoholic teen, male/female main character, etc.), and I also included 
several nonfiction books geared to young adults about alcohol abuse. While the 

er|c 



70 



285 



nature of my topic limited my primary focus to print sources, I did include two 
internet sites about bibliotherapy, which I thought would be of interest to the 
teachers at the school. Some questions that I tried to answer with my pathfinder 
were, "What is bibliotherapy?", "What are some nonfiction books about alcohol 
abuse which are suitable for high school students?", "Are there some books in 
which a teenager must face an alcoholic parent?", and "What are some books in 
which the main character is a teenager with a drinking problem?" 

I began my search for sources at the central branch of Austin Public Library. 
There, I consulted Subject Guide to Children's Books in Print . Next, I asked my 
wife, an elementary school librarian, for advice on where to look. She 
recommended an essential source. The Bookfinder. which I located at the 
Perry-Castaneda Library at the University of Texas at Austin. The Bookfinder led 
me to many good books on the subject of alcoholism, both at the University of 
Texas and at Austin Public Library. Finally, I searched AltaVista and Yahoo for 
internet sites devoted to bibliotherapy, using the search, terms "bibliotherap/ and 
"alcohol abuse" or "alcoholism." This search yielded a number of hits, but only two 
sites that I felt were general enough yet informative enough to be of great use to 
teachers. 

Again, I hope that this pathfinder helps teachers recommend books that will 
help students to cope with the problems associated with heavy drinking. 




286 



ANNOTATED BIBLIOGRAPHY 

In citing my sources, I have chosen to use the format provided by 

Gibaldi, Joseph. MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers . New York: 
MLA, 1995. 

Internet Sources 

1. Aiex, Nola Kortner. "What is Bibliotherapy?" Online. Internet, http://inet.ed. 

gov/databases/ERIC_Digests/ed357333.html. October 13, 1997. 

This internet site provides the answers to questions such as "What is 
bibliotherapy?", "Does it work?", "When should it be used?", and "How should it be 
used?" This clearly written electronic document is on of the ERIC digests, which 
lends to it a certain amount of authority. I also has a useful listing of print sources 
on bibliotherapy. 

2. Myracle, Lauren. "Molding the Minds of the Young: The History of 

Bibliotherapy as Applied to Children and Adolescents." Online. Internet. 
http://vega.lib,vt.edu/ejoumals/ALAN/winter95/Myracle.html. October 
13, 1995. 

This internet site, written by a graduate student of library and information 
science, provides an excellent summary of the history of bibliotherapy form the 
1920's to the present. The article traces the transition bibliotherapeutic works form 
didacticism to sentimentality and finally to realism. This site also provides links to 

o 

ERIC 



72 



287 



many other related sites. 

Bibliographies 

3. Dreyer, Sharon Spredemann. The Bookfinder: A Guide to Children's 

Literature About the Needs and Problems of Youth Aged 2 and Up . 
Circle Pines: American Guidance Service, 1989. 

This essential reference work provides lengthy plot summaries and evaluations 
of hundreds of books that are written for children and address problems 
encountered by children. Access is provided via subject, author, and title indexes. 
Unfortunately, it has not been revised since 1989. 

3. Ott, Helen Keating. Helping Children Through Books: A Selected Booklist . 
Bryn Mawn Church and Synagogue Library Association, 1979. 

Though a bit outdated, this book (little more than a pamphlet) provides listings 
of books, both fiction and nonfiction, which treat various subjects relevant to 
children. Though not even close to as comprehensive as The Bookfinder . this is a 
good place to start for the teacher or librarian who cannot afford that expensive 
resource. The entries are not annotated. 

5. Subject Guide to Children's Books in Print . New Providence: R. R. Bowker, 
1997. 

This excellent resource cross-indexes and arranges by subject the 1 15,430 
children's books listed in Children's Books in Print . Though it doesn't offer 

Er|c 73 



288 



evaluations of the listed books, it is still quite helpful in locating books involving 
specific subjects such as alcoholism. 

Nonfiction Sources 

6. Dolmetsch, Paul and Gail Mauricette, eds. Teens Talk About Alcohol and 

Alcoholism . Garden City: Doubleday, 1987. 

This excellent book was actually written by middle school students. It provides 
honest discussions on issues such as living with an alcoholic, overcoming peer 
pressure, and recognizing the signs of alcoholism. At the end of the book is a list 
of fictional books dealing with alcohol abuse, each of which is reviewed by one of 
the student authors. 

7. Ryan, Elizabeth. Straight Talk About Drugs and Alcohol . New York: Facts on 

File, 1989. 

This book does exactly what its title says: It provides straight talk on these 
subjects. The author provides comprehensive information on alcohol abuse so that 
her readers can make informed decisions. At the end of the book is a 55-page 
appendix of places vyhere teens can find help, complete with addresses and 
telephone numbers. 

Fiction Sources 

8. Butterworth, W. E. Under the Influence . New York: Four Winds Press, 1979. 

This realistic book is about a boy whose friend abuses alcohol, In 



o 

ERIC 



74 



289 



addition to exposing the problems associated with alcoholism, the book also raises 
the issue of drunk driving. The novel's bleak ending will certainly provoke thoughts 
about the consequences of heavy drinking. 

9. Carbone, Elisa Lynn. My Dad's Definitely Not a Drunk! . Burlington; 

Waterfront Books, 1992. 

This book is about two girjs who share a secret; They have alcoholic parents: 
It's inclusion of intervention techniques and Alcoholics Anonymous provide the 
reader with ways to deal with alcoholism within the family. The book's ending 
sends out a clear message; No one is immune to the problems associated with 
alcoholism. 

10. Cart, Michael. Mv Father's Scar . New York: Simon & Schuster, 1996. ; 

This beautifully vyritten and often heartbreaking novel actually takes on two 

difficult topics: alcoholism and homosexuality. Andy, the main character, is a 
freshman in college who has endured a life of emotional and physical abuse from 
his alcoholic father. His survival against all odds is an proof to young people that 
anyone can make it through the most difficult of situations. 

11. Covington, Dennis. Lasso the Moon . New York: Delacorte, 1995. 

Laura is a girl who lives with her father, a recovering alcoholic who has lost 
most of his medical practice because of his addiction. Through her eyes, readers 
see the horrible effects of alcoholism. The novel's element of romance will 

I:r|c 75 



290 



particularly appeal to teenaged girls. 

12. Due, LinneaA. High and Outside . San Francisco: Spinsters, 1980. 

Niki, a talented high school athlete and scholar, is a girl who has taken to 

drinking socially. Her parents, both of whom are alcoholics, are not concerned with 
their daughter's drinking habits. Readers follow Niki down a road of despair and 
loneliness as her social drinking turns to nightly binges. The novel ends hopefully, 
however, as Niki attends Alcoholics Anonymous. 

13. Fox, Paula. The Mooniiaht Man . New York: Bradbury Press, 1986. 

Catherine, the novel's main character, spends a month with her divorced 

father. Much of this time she ends up taking care of him due to his alcoholism. 
Though this isn't what she planned on, she learns to love her father despite his 
problems. Though Catherine's father does not defeat his addiction, readers can 
still learn that alcoholism does not negate love. 

14. Howe, Fanny. Taking Care . New York: Avon, 1985. 

Pamela, whose parents are both alcoholics, turns to rebellion and drinking to 
solve her problems. Early in the novel, she begins going to church with her 
boyfriend and his femily. Through the church, she begins volunteering at a 
hospital, and it is here that she learns that alcohol will not solve her problems, but 
that love and caring might. 

15. Lynch, Chris. Mick . New York: Harper Collins, 1 996. 




76 



The first in a trilogy of novels, this book follows Mick as he grows up in an Irish 
Catholic neighborhood. While his friends and family are all heavy drinkers, he is 
beginning to question the role of alcohol in his own life. As he begins to refuse to 
drink, readers become acquainted with a positive role model their own age and to 
see that sometimes not drinking is what makes someone cool. 

16. Rodowsky, Colby. Hannah In Between . New York; Farrar Straus Giroux, 

1994. 

Hannah's mother is an alcoholic, but her family denies it. Hannah, however, is 
determined to face the truth and to help her mother face her condition. The novel 
ends on a hopeful note as Hannah convinces her family of the severity of her 
mothers drinking problem, and they convince her to attend Alcoholics Anonymous. 
Teenagers reading this novel can learn that anybody, regardle^ of age, earn help 
an alcoholic rehabilitate. 

17. Tapp, Kathy Kennedy. Smoke From the Chimney . New York; Aetheneum, 

1986. 

This novel begins as Erin observes her father, a recovering alcoholic, entering 
a neighborhood bar. She is understandably upset that her father has begun 
drinking again, yet she tries to remain detached from the situation. Eventually, she 
realizes that she must work with her family in helping her father overcome his 
problem. Readers learn form this novel that denial never solves anything. 

Er|c 77 



292 



HEAVY DRINKING; UNDERSTANDING ALCOHOL ABUSE 
THROUGH LITERATURE: 

A Pathfinder Designed by Rex Pyle 



This pathfinder is intended to aid high school teachers in selecting books for 
their students to read for the purpose of understanding the problems associated 
with alcohol abuse. 

To learn about how books can be used for growth and healing, look at these 
Internet sites: 

"What is Bibliotherapy?" 

http://inet.ed.gov/databases/ERIC_Digests/ed357333.html 
"Molding the Minds of the Young: The History of Bibliotherapy as Applied to 
Children and Adolescents" 

http://vega.lib.vt.edu/ejourhals/ALAN/winter95/Myracle.html 

To find lists of books about alcoholism, look at these sources: 

The Bookfinder A Guide to Children's Literature About the Needs and 
Problems of Youth Aged 2 and Up by Sharon Spredemann Dreyer 
Subject Guide to Children's Books in Print published bv R. R. Bowker 

These are some good nonfiction books about alcoholism that are geared to 
teenagers: 

Teens Talk About Alcohol and Alcoholism by Paul Dolmetsch and Gail 
Mauricette 

Yb 



293 



Straight Talk About Drugs and Alcohol by Elizabeth A. Ryan 

This novel is about a teenaged girl with a drinking problem: 

High and Outside by Linnea A. Due 

This novel is about a teenaged boy with a drinking problem: 

Under the Influence by W. E. Butterworth 

A 

These are novels about teens with alcoholics in their families: 

Mv Dad's Definitelv Not a Drunk! by Elisa Lynn Carbone 
Mv Father's Scar by Michael Cart 
Hannah In Between by Colby Rodowsky 

I hope that this pathfinder provides a good start in choosing books to help 
teenagers understand the problems resulting from alcoholism. Teenagers need to 
learn that they are not alone and that alcohol abuse can happen anywhere. Finally, 
please remember that this pathfinder is only a starting point and that many more 
books dealing with this tough topic are out there waiting to be found and read. 




79 



University of Texas at Austin 



Grraduate School of Library and Information Science 



Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: Resources Available on the Internet 

A Pathfinder 



LIS 382L.3 

Information Resources in the Social Sciences 
Dr. Loriene Roy 



By 

Arlene Lucio 



Austin, Texas 
December, 1997. 



296 



• Currency : I had to consider if the information was too dated to be relevant 
as cunent research infonnation the client would want. I set the limit at five 
years. Any sites that had citations to much older information was considered 
outdated and possibly inaccurate. 

• Purpose and scope : Some sites were pages of FAS facts. I was able to find 
other pages that gave the same facts, more information, and links to related 
sites. Therefore, I had to decipher which sites supplied, not only the best 
information, but access to additional appropriate resources. 

• Authority : Many of the sites came from national organizations, while others 
came from smaller organizations and associations. Many sites provided 
contact with the agency/organization/association either by mail or e-mail. 

• Workability : The question posed here was whether or not the site was 
consistently accessible. If I couldn’t get a connection quickly, at least thirty 
seconds, and consistently, at least two out of three times, then the site was 
not included. Another consideration was how user-friendly the site proved 
to be. Also, was the information arranged logically? 

In looking for information through the Internet, I used a multi-search engine 

tool, Dogpile at www.dogpile.com. I typed in “Fetal Alcohol Syndrom e”and got a 
number of hits. But to help focus the results, I added “—and government”, “—and 
organization*”, “—and publication*”. I used the asterisk to capture plurals of the 
root words. Since the print sources had no entry specific to FAS, I used the search 
term “alcohol” and “alcoholism”. 




81 



297 



Tl Annota fpH RihliographY 
Style Manuals: 

Gibaldi, Joseph, mi A Haodhook for Wri ters of Research Pap as. New York; Modem 

Language Association of America, 1995. 

Li, Xia and Nancy B. Crane. Electronic Styles; A Handbook for Citing Electron ic. 
Information . New Jersey; Information Today, Inc., 1996. 



Internet Search Engines: 



1. “Dogpile” 

<5ittp;//www.dogpile.com/> 
(November 1997) 



This multi-seaich engine tool allows a user to search a number of search engmes at once. 
Using the search term “fetal alcohol syndrome”. 1 was able to find many us^l sites. I 

helped narrow the results by adding “and publication*”, “and organization* .and and 

gove rnm ent” to “fetal alcohol syndrome . 



2. “InfoSeek” 

<http ; //www. info seek. com/> 
(November 1997) 



Allows free and fee-based searches. Results displayed by ranked relevancy. Displays 
tH^Wta cortext. There are 12 browsable subject hees. UseM if lookmg for broader 
topics or terms likely to produce many hits. I searched usmg the search term fetal 

alcohol syndrome”. 



3. “Yahoo!” 

<http ;//yahoo . com/> 
(November 1997) 



Yahoo stands for Yet Another Hierarchical Officious Oracle. This search engme has 
good response time. It is searchable by field and includes links to other search engines^ 
It also has browsable subject trees of 14 broad categories. 1 also was able to scare 
search engine using the search term “fetal alcohol syndrome . 




«9 






298 



Indexes: 

4. The Video Source Book . 19th ed. Detroit: Gale Research, 1997-1998. 

This source is a directory of video products on more that 125,000 subjects including 
business, entertainment, the arts, health, and education. Title entries are arranged 
alphabetically by title. Three indexes provide access to titles by subject, credits, and 
format indexes. Looking under “Alcoholism” in volume two’s subject index, I found a 
number of pertinent titles, including “Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Series” and “FAS/FAE 
Series”. Many entries include information like description of the program, audience, 
level, format, and ordering information keyed to a list of publisher addresses located at 
the back of the second volume. The client could get in contact with the publisher to 
attain a copy of any videos needed. 

5. “AskERIC” 

<http ://ericir . syr. edu/> 

(November 1997) 

The ERIC database is a government-compiled database containing educational related 
documents. In searching AskERIC using the subject headings “Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome”, I located a number of documents that would be of interest to various types of 
audiences interested in fetal alcohol syndrome, including subject overviews and teaching 
children with FAS. 

6. Books in Print Plus (CD-ROM). R.R. Bowker. Series v6.25 1196. 

BIP Plus allows access to millions of titles in print and soon-to-be-in print. I consulted 
this source to get some titles of books that a patron might like to see, but their library 
would not have a copy of The title could always be ordered through Interlibrary Loan. 
BIP Plus has the capability of searching by title keyword, subject, author, publisher, 
ISBN, etc. In this case, I used the subject (su=) search mode. I used the search term 
“fetal alcohol syndrome” and got about 25 hits. A well known publication is “The 
Broken Cord”. 

7. “Catalog of United States Government Publications (MOCAT)” 
<http://www.access.gpo.gov/su-doc/dpos/> 

(November 1997) 

This electronic version of the popular print government publication was helpful in 
attaining helpful government publications concerning fetal alcohol syndrome. The 
database, like its print counterpart, is a catalog of publications put out by the government 
according by subject. The search was simple through keyword search— ’’fetal alcohol 










299 



syndrome”. Once I got a list of publications, 1 had the option to view the full text. 

8. “CSAP’s State Needs Assessment Profiles Database (SNAP)” 
<http;//www.health.org/factoids.index.htm> 

(November 1997) 

Center for Substance Abuse Prevention (CSAP) is another organization dedicated to the 
prevention of FAS through dissemination of information. The index allows the user to 
tailor the organization needed by state, facility function (Substance abuse treatment), 
specialized programs (pregnant women, Hispamcs). The information is as current as 
March 1997. 

9. “Directory of Drug Abuse and Alcoholism Treatment and Prevention Programs” 
<http://www.health. org/ daatpp.htm> 

(November 1997) 

This database would be a handy way locate a variety of facilities in the United States. 

The client would be able to search specifically to their area. The organizations in their 
vicinity would be listed along with contact information. I was able to choose the criteria 
I wanted searched. This would be a great way to make referrals outside the area of the 
referring agency. 

10. “NCADI’s IDA Database” 

<http://sunspot.health.org/cgi-bin/utility.cgi> 

(November 1997) 

NCADI’s database is a compilation of research documents studying various issues in 
health care. I was able to search this database’s titles by using the search term “fetal 
alcohol syndrome”. I came up with a list of over 75 electronic documents that included 
the title and date, starting with the oldest and ending with the most current. One such 
document was “New Directions in Fetal Alcohol syndrome Research”. I was able to 
open the document and read the full text. 

11. “Federal Register & United Agenda” 

<htpp ;//£rwebg ate2 . acce s s . gpo . go v/> 

(November 1997) 

This electronic version of the print government publication, which serves like a catalog 
of government publications, proved helpful in searching for documents published dealing 
with fetal alcohol syndrome. By simply typing the search term “fetal alcohol syndrome”, 
I was able to get a listing of government publications printed in reference to the topic. 

a 

ERIC 



300 



This index allowed me to limit my search to a specified range of dates, in which 1 chose 
the last five years. Of the documents located, the client has access to the full text article. 

Internet sites: 

12. “The Arc’s Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Resource and Materials Guide” 
<http://thearc. 0 rg/misc/faslist.html#research/> 

(November 1997) 

Although some of the information first appeared dated, upon further examination I found 
information that could prove very useful to a user. There were lists of books and videos 
along with ordering information, including a few that are free upon request. What I 
found most useful was the list of publications/newsletters on alcoholism, prevention 
materials, and a list of national organizations and their contact information. 

13. “The National Organization on Fetal Alcohol Syndrome” 

<http://www.nofas.org/> 

(November 1997) 

Although this site is currently under construction, it still had a good amount of 
information. The scope of it’s information ranged from what FAS is, what the National 
Organization on FAS is, how to work with children affected with FAS, and links to 
national FAS resources and materials. The resources include newsletters, videos, books, 
pamphlet publications. 

14. “What CDC is Doing to Prevent Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and Other 
Alcohol-Related Developmental Disabilities” 

<http://www.cdc.gov/nceh/programs/infants/brthdfct/prevent/fas-prev.htm> 
(November 1997) 

The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention is one of the most authoritative agencies 
in biomedical research. It’s Division of Birth Defects and Developmental Disabilities of 
the National Center for Environmental Health is committed to the prevention of FAS. It 
recognizes tha t FAS has a higher rate of occurrence in Native and African Americans, but 
is, nonetheless, dedicated to informing all women about the risks of fetal exposure to 
alcohol. 

15. “Alcoholics Anonymous” 

<http ://www. alcoholics-anonymous.org/> 

(November 1997) 




85 



301 



The AA site provides information in English, Spanish, or French. The cite provides 
factual information about alcoholism and their organization. The organization is known 
for helping alcoholics overcome their substance abuse. It does this through information 
and counseling. 

16. “PREVLINE: Prevention Online” 

<http ://ww. health. org/> 

(November 1997) 

Prevline is an organization dedicated to promoting preventing FAS through informing 
educators, health workers, and the general public. I particularly like this site because it 
offered several useful parts to it. The most useful feature, was the link to “Searchable 
Databases”. I was able to search a number of other health, alcohol, and medical-related 
indexes, many of which I included in my pathfinder. It also provided links to other 
“Related Internet Links” and “Publications/Catalogs”. 

17. “Amazon Books Online” 

<http ://www. amazon. com/> 

(November 1997) 

Amazon is an bookstore online. The client would be able to search for books then order 
them via the Internet. Although a user can locate a number of bookstores online just by 
using the search term “bookstore* and online”, I chose to list Amazon simply because it 
is one of the better known resources online. The cite allows a user to search by author, 
title, and subject: I searched using a subject search with the terms “fetal alcohol 
syndrome”. I got a list of books about the topic along with convenient ordering option. 

18. “BC EST“Teaching Students with Fetal Alcohol Syndrome/Effects” 
<http://www.educ.gov.bc.ca/specialed/fas/> 

(November 1997) 

I included this site to assist teachers in getting information on teaching and meeting the 
needs of FAS/FAE affected children. Since these children are affected mentally and 
physically, there is information specifically aimed at skills a child may need help in. The 
teacher may then see how to assist the child in developing to their fullest capacity those 
areas lacking. Another useful part of the site is the various checklists for the teacher to 
assess a child’s various skills--math, memory, motor, science, etc. 




86 



302 



Prepared by Arlene Lucio 

Fetal Alcohol Syndrome: Resources Available on the Internet 



Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, FAS, is the direct result of a woman’s drinking alcohol 
during pregnancy. FAS is the name given to the group of physical and mental birth 
defects that include mental retardation, growth deficiencies, central nervous system 
dysfunction, craniofacial abnormalities, and behavioral maladjustments. This 
pathfinder will assist the client in researching FAS on the Internet. 



1. Online Indexes: To locate research information, search the following indexes using 

the subject search term “fetal alcohol syndrome”. The indexes 
will provide current research pertaining to the topic. The indexes 
provided in this pathfinder provide access to full text documents 
that may be viewed on the Internet. 

“NCADI’s IDA Database” 

<http :// sunspot, health, org/cgi-bin/utility. cgi> 

(November 1997) 

“AskERIC” 

<http://ericir. syr. edu/> 

(November 1997) 

“CSAP’s State Needs Assessment Profiles Database (SNAP)” 
<http://www.health.org/factoids.index.htm> 

(November 1997) 

“Catalog of United States Government Publications (MOCAT)” 
<http://www.access.gpo.gov/su-doc/dpos/> 

(November 1997) 

“Federal Register & United Agenda” 

<http://fiwebgate2.access.gpo.gov/> 

(November 1997) 




n n 



O ( 



303 



2. FAS Media: In the following suggested sources I was able to locate books, 

publications, and videos using the subject keywords “fetal alcohol 
syndrome”,”alcohor’, or “alcoholism”. Books and videos can be 
ordered either online or by getting in contact with the publisher. 

Books in Print Plus (CD-ROMY R.R. Bowker. Series v6.25 1 196. 

The Video Source Book . 19th ed. Detroit: Gale Research, 1997/98. 

“Amazon Books Online” 

<http://www.amazon.com/> 

(November 1997) 

3. Organizations/ Agencies: Users can make use of th valuable materials and 

information these organizations disseminate. Many 
Internet sites include a list of related organizations 
and/or agencies. Search using “fetal alcohol syndrome” 
or “alcoholism”. 

“Directory of Drug Abuse and Alcoholism Treatment and Prevention Programs” 
<http://www.health.org/daatpp.htm> 

(November 1997) 

“The Arc’s Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Resource and Materials Guide” 
<http://d 1 earc. 0 rg/misc/faslist.html#research/> 

(November 1997) 

“National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism” 

<http://www. niaaa.nih.gov/> 

(November 1997) 

“Alcoholics Anonymous” 

<http://www.alcoholics-anonymous.org/> 

(November 1997) 



If you have any further questions, ask your school librarian for help 




88 



304 



A Pathfinder on 

Medicinal Plants 



By 

Kierstin Child 



Dr. Roy 
US 382L.13 
October 14, 1997 




o a 



oo 



305 



A Pathfinder on Medicinal Plants 

Since the beginning of history, man has used plants and herbs for remedying illnesses, 
curing diseases, and treating wounds and other ailments. Examples of herbal remedies and the 
folklore surrounding them are abundant. Consequently, it is not uncommon for patrons to want 
more information on a medicinal plant or herb of which they have heard. That some plants have 
medicinal properties is not a new idea. Indeed, many of the drugs in use today have their origins 
in plant substances or are modeled after active constituents found in plants. Modem research 
continues to search for scientific evidence of the pharmaceutical properties of plants. 

This pathfinder seeks to introduce new researchers, university students, and the educated 
public to general background information on the pharmaceutical aspects and health benefits of 
plants and herbs as well as the primary literature about the pharmacology of those species. It 
was written for Nancy Elder, the head librarian at the Life Science Library on the University of 
Texas at Austin campus, for use in reference services at the named library. Because the amount 
of information on this topic is vast, neither biotechnology of medicinal plants nor the economical 
and business aspects of medicinal plants was included. 

Sources were selected based on several criteria. The first was the generality of their 
coverage of medicinal plants. Many sources were specific to plants of a given country; these 
were not included in the bibliography. A second selection criterion was the type of information 
given. Presentation and accessibility of the information were also used as criteria. 

The patron will likely want to know the following; 

1 . What does the plant look like and where and how is it grown? 

2. What are the active constituents of the plant? 

3. What medicinal purpose does it serve, and what dosages? 




90 



4. What research has confirmed these statements and how extensive is the research? 

I began my search for sources with H. Robert Malinowsky’s Reference Sourc es in Science, 
Engineering. Medicine, and Agriculture* , under the headings of Biology, Botany, General 
Medicine, and Pharmacy and Pharmacology. I then turned to UTCAT PLUS, the online public 
catalog for the General Libraries at the University of Texas at Austin, and did a subject search 
using “medicinal plants.” I then browsed the numerous subheadings accompanying that heading, 
including ^“Medicinal Plants - Bibliography” and “Medicinal Plants - Encyclopedias.” I turned 
next to the sources I had found so far and browsed their individual bibliographies as well as the 
items located nearby. To locate organizations I used the Encyclopedia of A ssociations^. I also 
explored the coverage of several online databases and ran the keyword search “medicinal plants” 
on several World Wide Web search engines, including HotBot, Yahoo, and AltaVista. 



* H. Robert Malinowsky, Reference Sources in Science. Engineering. Medicine, and Agriculture (Phoenix: Oryx, 
1994). 

^ Enc\'clopedia of Associations . 1997 ed. (Detroit: Gale Research, 1961-). 



307 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Encyclopedias 

1. Brown, Deni. Encyclopedia of Herbs and Their Uses . New York: Dorling Kindersley, 1995. 
SB 351 H5 B645 1995 PCL REF 

This reference book highlights properties of individual heibs including growth and harvest 
information, varieties, as well as parts used and tor what they are used. While this text is not 
limited to only medicinal plants, it does include them and provides nice color photographs. 
Consult the Herb Dictionary section of this volume for more particular information on medicinal 
uses of the herbs. Information on an herb can be accessed through the index. 

2. Chevallier, Andrew. The Encyclopedia of Medicinal Plants: A Practical Re ference Guide to 

More Than 550 Kev Medicinal Plants and Their Uses . New York. Dorling Kindersley, 
1996. 

RS 164 C4437 1996 LIFE SCI REF 

This is a beautiful source that discusses each plant’s history, traditions, folklore, active 
constituents, and potential uses. Written for the lay person, this volume contains one section 
entitled “Key Medicinal Plants,” which includes 100 of the best known medicinal pl^ts in 
alphabetical arrangement by Latin name. One page is dedicated to each plant including 
information on habitat and cultivation, related species, research, traditional and current uses, and 
key preparations, accompanied by color illustrations. A separate section includes 450 additional 
medicinal plants with similar information but less detail. A general index incorporating both 
common and Latin names provides access to information on a given plant. 

3. Kowalchik, Claire, and William H. Hylton, eds. Rodale’s Illustrated Enc yclopedia of Herbs. 

Emmaus, Penn.; Rodale Press, 1987. 

SB 351 H5 R58 1987 PCL REF 

A simply written encyclopedia, this source is arranged alphabetically by common name of the 
herb. Approximately two pages are dedicated to each herb including Latin name, physical 
description, growing conditions, medicinal uses, and cultivation. Both color and black and white 
illustrations are included. An index provides additional access points. 



Handbooks 



4. Duke James A. Handbook of Medicinal Herbs . Boca Raton: CRC Press, 1985. 

QK 99 A1 D83 1985 LIFE SCI 

This reference book gives detailed information on 365 medicinal species. The articles are 
scientifically written and range from one to three pages in length. Medicinal uses and chemical 
constitution of the plants are heavily covered. Information on toxicity levels of the species is 




92 



308 



also given. Arrangement is alphabetical by scientific name, and a comprehensive index offers 
additional access points. 



Bibliographies 

5. Andrews, Theodora. A Bibliogranhv on Herbs. Herbal Medicine. “Natural” Fo ods, arid 

Unconventional Medical Treatment . Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1982. 

RM 666 H33 A52 LIFE SCI 

A very comprehensive bibliography on the subject of herbs and herbal medicine consisting of 
339 pages, it provides a usefiil entry into the literature. This volume lists handbooks, 
encyclopeciias, manuals, directories, and monographs relating to herbal medicine wdth two to 
three paragraph annotations. Particularly useful is the chapter dedicated to “Medicinal Plants 
and Their Constituents.” It includes an appendix of organizations and associations and 
author/title and subject indexes. 

6. Simon, James E., Alena F. Chadwick, and Lyle E. Craker. Herbs: An Indexed Bibl io g raphy 

1971-1980 . Hamden, Corm.: Archon Books, 1984. 

SB 3 5 1 H5 S56 1 984 LIFE SCI 

A bibliography to scientific journals and research reports on commercially significant herbs and 
medicinal plants, this volume is written for scientists, pharmacologists, and students. T^e first 
part of the work gives a brief summary of information about the herb or plant with bibliographic 
references following. The organization is alphabetical by common name. The second part of the 
work contains the complete bibliographic references organized by subject cl^sification, 
including Pharmacology - Medicinal Plants. Author and subject indices are included for further 

access. 



Government Documents 



7. McCarthy, Susan A. Ethnobotanv and Medicinal Plants: January 1990-June 199 1- Quick 
Bibliography Series. Beltsville, Md.: National Agricultural Library, 1992. 

DOCS A 17. 18/4 ; 92-66 LIFE SCI 

This government publication produced by the National Agricultural Library consists of 591 
citations fi-om the AGRICOLA database that are each related to medicinal pl^ts. The articles 
cited are scientific and technically oriented. Use the subject index to locate citations on a 
particular plant. 




93 



309 



Books 



8. Bianchini, Francesco, and Francesco Corbetta. Health P lants of the World: Atlas o f 

Medicinal Plants . New York; Newsweek Books, 1977. 

QK 99 A1 B53 LIFE SCI 

This beautiful volume was written for the layperson that loves plants and is organized by the 
plant’s medicinal area of operation within the body (i.e. digestive system, nervous system). One 
to two large paragraphs are given to each plant covering history, location, and especially 
medicinal use. Color drawings accompany the text. An appendix at the end of the volume gives 
more scientific information about selected plants. A glossary and index are also included. 

9. Grieve, Mrs. M. A Modem Herbal: The Medicinal. Culinary, Cosmetic and Economi g 

Properties. Cultivation and Folklore of Herbs. Grasses. Fun g i. Shrubs and Trees with all 
Their Modem Scientific Uses . New York: Hafner Press, 1974. 

QK 99 G84 1974 LIFE SCI 

This source is a reprint of the original, which was first published in 1931. Despite being older, it 
is noted for being a very comprehensive and inclusive work. It is organized in a dictionary style 
by most common name of the plant. Entries include physical description, cultivation, medicinal 
action, uses, and others. Some entries are quite lengthy. Two indexes aid in accessing the 
information in this volume that is over 900 pages - an Index of Country Names and an Index of 
Latin names. 

10. Lust, John B. The Herb Book . New York: Bantam Books, 1974. 

QK 99 A1 L86 1974 LIFE SCI 

This small paperback is primarily useful for general reference information and backgrounds of 
the various herbs. Entries for 514 plants are relatively brief including botanical name, medicinal 
part, physical description, preparation and dosage. Arrangement is alphabetical by common 
name. A general index and Latin name index is included. 

11. Morton, Julia F. Major Medicinal Plants: Botany, Culture and Uses . Springfield, 111.: 

Charles C. Thomas, 1977. 

QK 99 A1 M67 LIFE SCI 

This book is scholarly and written for use by pharmacologists and pharmacy related research. It 
offers very detailed articles on the major medicinal plants, with several pages devoted to one 
plant. Articles provide common and botanical names, origin and distribution, chemical 
constituents, medicinal uses, and toxicity. Organization is by plant family n^e. Includes two 
appendices, a bibliography, and an index to provide additional access to the information. 

12. Weiner, Michael A. Weiner’s Herbal: The Guide to Herb Medicine . Mill Valley, Calif.; 

Quantum Books, 1990. 

RM 666 H33 W44 1990 PCL REF 




94 



310 



A great overall reference item, this book offers information exclusively on plants with medicinal 
value. It is organized into various sections, two of which are particularly informative. The 
“Medicinal Plants of the World” section gives a botanical description of the plant and its 
medicinal uses. The “Medicinal Plants Expanded” section offers additional scientific 
information. The organization within these sections is alphabetical by common name, and 
indexes for Latin name, common name, and medicinal use are provided also. 



Journals 

13. HerbalGram: The Journal of the American Botanical Council and the Herb Research 

Foundation. Austin, Tex.; Herb News, 1983 - (quarterly) 

SB 351 H472 LIFE SCI 

Current issues shelved alphabetically by title 

HerbalGram is a peer reviewed scientific journal published quarterly as an educational project by 
the American Botanical Council and the Herb Research Foundation. Regular sections include 
research reviews, book reviews, and feature articles. All issues are beautifully illustrated. The 
journal strives to keep members of these organizations informed of the latest facts on herbs in 
science, legislation, and business. Since many herbs are used far medicinal purposes, this 
journal provides a wealth of information on medicinal plants. 

14. Journal of Ethnopharmacology . Lausanne. Elsevier Sequoia, 1979 - (monthly) 

RS 160 J68 LIFE SCI 

Current issues shelved alphabetically by title 

The Journal of Ethnopharmacology is an “interdisciplinary journal devoted to bioscientific 
research on indigenous drugs” (subtitle). It publishes original articles on the biological activities 
of plant and animal substances. Its intended audience includes medicinal chemists, 
pharmacologists, and botanists. Highly technical and scientific articles concerning medicinal 
plants can be found in this journal. 



Indexes 



15. Biological Abstracts on CD . Philadelphia; BIOSIS, 1980- 
UTLOL Indexes and Abstracts 

Biological Abstracts on CD is a prominent source of obtaining bibliographic citations to the life 
science journal literature. The CD-ROM version is updated quarterly. Among other disciplines, 
it covers agriculture, biomedicine, botany, and pharmacology. Many of the records include 
abstracts. It is possible to search by keyword with the name of the medicinal plant of interest. 
The searcher may wish to use the concept code “54000 Pharmacognosy and Pharmaceutical 
Botany” or “22002 Pharmacology-General” to further limit the search. 



311 



16. International Pharmaceutical Abstracts Database . Bethesda, MD; American Society of 
Health-System Pharmacists, 1 970 - 
UTLOL Indexes and Abstracts 

International Pharmaceutical Abstracts Database provides coverage of the pharmaceutical 
sciences and health related literature. It is updated monthly. Abstracts are included with most 
records. Comprehensive information on drug therapy and biopharmaceuticals is available 
through this database. Try a keyword search with the name of the medicinal plant of interest. 



WWW Resources 



17. Raintree Group, Inc. Raintree Marketing Homepage . Online. Internet. 13 Oct. 1997. 
URL; http://rain-tree.com/ 

This website provides information about a number of medicinal plants found in the rainforest. 
Access is an alphabetical listing by common or botanical name. Each entry includes several 
forms of the plant name, description, where found, what used for, and clinical references from 
journal literature. 



Organizations 

18. American Herb Association 
P.O. Box 1673 

Nevada City, CA 95959 
(916)265-9552 
Kathi Keville, Director 

The American Herb Association was founded in 1981 and now has 1000 members. Its members 
are enthusiasts and specialists of medicinal herbs and herbal products. Its function is to increase 
knowledge of medicinal herbs and to provide current scientific information on herbs. 

19. Herb Research Foundation 
1007 Pearl St. Suite 200 
Boulder, CO 80302 
(303)449-2265 

Rob McCaleb, President 

The Herb Research Foundation (HRF) seeks to improve world health and well being through 
herbs. It is a nonprofit research and education organization that provides information to the 
public and professionals on the health benefits of herbs. The HRF publishes HerbalGr^, a peer 
reviewed scientific journal, jointly with the American Botanical Council in Austin, TX. HRF 
also serves as a special library for herbal medicine with files consisting of over 150,000 scientific 
articles. Material is available to the public at a small recovery cost. 




96 



312 



Sources cited using the following style manual. 

Gibaldi, Joseph. MLA Handbook for Writers of Research Papers . 4"* ed. New York: Modern 
Language Association of America, 1995. 




97 



313 



Medicinal Plants 

A pathfinder prepared by Kierstin Child 



Since the beginning of history, man has used plants and herbs for remedying illness, curing 
diseases, and treating wounds and other ailments. While there is much folklore surrounding the 
medicinal properties of plants, modem research continues to search for scientific evidence of the 
pharmaceutical properties of plants around the world. It is not uncommon to hear of a promising 
plant with great health benefits. Often specifics on the plant are not given and more information 
is desired. This document is designed to provide an entry into the vast, but often hard-to-locate, 
world of information on medicinal plants. 



Encyclopedias 

Whether you know a Latin name for the plant or just a simple common name, encyclopedias are 
usually a good place to start to get general background information on the plant of interest. 
Browse nearby shelves in the reference room for additional texts. 

Chevallier, Andrew. The Encyclopedia of Medicinal Plants: A Practical Reference Guide to 
More Than 550 Key Medicinal Plants and Their Uses . New York: Dorling Kindersley, 
1996. 

RS 164 C4437 1996 LIFE SCI REF 

A beautifially illustrated volume that discusses each plant’s history, traditions, folklore, active 
constituents, and potential uses. 

Kowalchik, Claire, and William H. Hylton, eds. Rodale’s Illustrated Encyclopedia of Herbs . 

Emmaus, Perm.: Rodale Press, 1987. 

SB 351 H5 R58 1987 PCL REF 

A simply written encyclopedia giving general background information on herbs, including 
physical description and medicinal uses. 



Bibliographies 

Bibliographies are listings of sources on a given topic. They provide an excellent way of finding 
your way into the literature on a particular plant. Try a subject search on UTCAT using the 
terms NDEDICINAL PLANTS - BIBLIOGRAPHY to find additional bibliogrq)hies. 

Andrews, Theodora. A Bibliography on Herbs. Herbal Medicine. “Natural” Foods, and 
Unconventional Medical Treatment . Littleton, Colo.: Libraries Unlimited, 1982. 

RM 666 H33 A52 LIFE SCI 

Lists handbooks, encyclopedias, manuals, directories, and monographs relating to herbal 
medicine with two to three paragraph armotations. 




r> n 



:30 



314 



Books 

Books on medicinal plants will compile lots of information for you into a single work. Locate 
books on medicinal plants by doing a subject search in UTCAT with MEDICINAL PLANTS. 
Select from the list of subheadings available to match your particular interests. 

Grieve, Mrs. M. A Modem Herbal: The Medicinal. Culinary, Cosmetic and Economic 

Properties, Cultivation and Folklore of Herbs. Grasses. Fungi, Shmbs and Trees with all 
Their Modem Scientific Uses . New York: Hafher Press, 1974. 

QK 99 G84 1 974 LIFE SCI 

A very comprehensive and inclusive work of over 900 pages organized in dictionary style by 
most common name of the plant. 

Weiner, Michael A. Weiner’s Herbal: The Guide to Herb Medicine . Mill Valley, Calif : 
Quantum Books, 1990. 

RM 666 H33 W44 1990 PCL REF 

A great overall reference item offering information exclusively on plants with medicinal value. 

Journal Indexes 

To get more scientific and often in-depth information on specific aspects of the medicinal plant it 
is necessary to access the primary journal literature. This is done by searching indexes designed 
for this purpose. A list of “Indexes and Abstracts” offered by UT is available through UTLOL 
workstations in campus libraries. 

Biological Abstracts on CD . Philadelphia: BIOSIS, 1980- 
UTLOL Indexes and Abstracts 

Search by ke)rword with the name of the medicinal plant of interest and use the concept code 
“54000 Pharmacognosy and Pharmaceutical Botany” or “22002 Pharmacology-General” to get 
started. 



Organizations 

Organizations can often provide detailed information on a medicinal plant and are an especially 
good resource when all else fails. 

Herb Research Foundation 
1007 Pearl St. Suite 200 
Boulder, CO 80302 
(303) 449-2265 



American Herb Association 
P.O. Box 1673 
Nevada City, CA 95959 
(916) 265-9552 



❖ For further help, don’t hesitate to contact Nancy Elder, head librarian at the Life Science 
Library (MAI 220), 495-4635. 



O 

ERIC 



9,9 



TO: io* voaftiiit* .cc.ui*xa* .e=y 
Sub)occ: Pathfinder* fCT Fajr ?i?ecc 2 cr.i 



Dear Lorler.e Roy; ^ ^ ^ 

The CR:C Central Processing rac*l:ty aer.t. :r.e atove docxT.er.: .o us. ..n* 
ERIC Clearinohocaa cn Rural Ecuettien anS Sinall Schocla asiC/CRSSSi . Ac I 
vas preparing the document for ptccoisinj, I r.c:icac :hat yoc T.ad ret-jrr.ad 
an outda:ed reproduction release. Tr.-e rs parcicjlarly pertr.rer.t 

because ycj checked Uvai 2. ar.d cn :he r.ew releace ferrs. Leval 2 haa hear, 
aplic in*.o Levale 2k and 12. . . ^ 

Level 2h cermica ’reprcSccticn ar.d diss amine tier, in n.icrcl»cha and m 




Thank you for y^ur cocperaricn. 1: yoj have any guasricns. call rfe at 
l-BOO-624-9120. 



Susan vcalkel 
Processing Cocrdlnntcr 
ERIC /CRESS 
P.O. Sox 1343 
Charles ton. kv 25325 
fax; 304-317-0487 



U.S. Department of Ecucaticn 

Office of Educational Rasaarch and Imprcver.er.t JCERIJ 
ERIC REPRCDUC7ICN RSLERSS 

1. Documant Idantificaticn: 

Title: Pathfinders for rocr Direc'.ionc: An I.ndipanouc Cdjcacicnal Mode. 

Author: Loriene Roy, editcr 

Corporate Source; 

Publication Cate: 19;8 



JI. Reproduction Release: (check one* 

In order to disseminato ai vfideiy as possible tir.ely and signilicent 
natcrialt of interest tc the educaticral comnnur. icy. docu.T.an:s anrounrec in 
the wcnthly abstract journal of the ERIC fyater., .Raaourras in Edacation 
(RIE) . are usually irado availabla tc users tr. r.icrofiche. repteduesd piper 
copy, snd electronic r.edia, ar.d sold through the CRXC Pocu.T.en: .Reprodutticr. 
Service (EDRS) . Credit is g-ven to the icjrca cf aech dccumqr.c . 



If per«is 9 ion ia granted to roprcduca tn.i dcssaainata t.".a cae.'.tifiad 
dccvment. pleaaa check era of cha following thraa cgticna and »'.gn the 
I ( 1 1«II r m “ 

^ Leval I - Fernizurr.S reproduction ard oisseni.Taticr. in micicficha or \ 
other ERIC archival madia (e.g. eUctror.;.:) end in paper copy. J 

^ UVtJl M - r'tJflalinnrVepTSuTtTcn a.nd dissemiraricn ir. microfiche a.-.d 

in electronic media for tXlZ crctivol collection sjbscribers or.ly. 



y 



Level 28 - Pemittir^ reproduction and dissejBir.atron ir. .Titroficr.c only. 



Sign Kara; ’I hereby grant to the Ecucstionai P.eacurces In.or»t*or. Center 
(ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reprcduca and disieninate this document a* 
indicated absva. Reproduction Iron the ERIC microfiche cr electronic madia 
by parsons other than ERIC srplcyaaa and, ite aysten* ccr.trsctors reguiras 
perfltiaaion from the copyright holder > Exception is .*:.ede for r.cr-profit 
riMVoduction by libraries and other service ageroies to satisfy inforrarion 
needs of efutetors in reapense to discrete in<^iriei. * 



SigTvature: 

?ri St ad Name; 

Lo/zie/nB 

Addraaa : 

S’2n5 

AU5V/^ T^X/^d" 

III. Document Availability Infornxation ( frtm Kcr.-ERi: 




Orgar.l raticr. 



Pr-iyp2^ixuy- 

‘Telapr.o.ne Nc : ^ / -n ; ^ ^ * 

5"5> 

ca ) : / 



Cocplsie if paraiaiion to reproduce io not granted tc ERIC, cr if you van; 
ERIC to cite availability of this cccurer.c from, a.ncther source. 



Publisher /Distributor: 



Addrese: 



Price pec cepy: Cuantity* price; 

IV. Referral of ERIC to Copyright* Reproduction Rights Holder: 

If the right to gra.nt reproduccicr. release is held by aomecr.e ether than the 
addressee, please cargleta the fcllc>ir.g: 



Nanc : 



Address : 



V. Attach tr.ia feem ;c the document being su'etitted and eer.d both 

BEFAtA LAIIHX.Y. CGCREINATOR CF SERVICES AtvX ACQL’ISITIOKS 

ERIC Clearinghouse cr. Rural Educcticr. a.nc Srali Schocls 

F.O. Box 1343 

1031 Ouairler secaet 

Charleston. W 25315-1345 



0 2 1 S 2 6 



rhsna ar-d alert rani c rail r.*u.roers; 

30&/$24-5120 (Clear i.~.cr.ou4e toll-free r.-jmbsr) 
304/347-0437 (Ciearingheuse "AX .nxiben 
’j56eldwvnvm.'»-!/net .atu (aerma Lanha.T. cr. the Ir.terr.at* 




