DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 445 339 



CS 217 250 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

ISBN 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Spurlin, William J., Ed. 

Lesbian and Gay Studies and the Teaching of English: 
Positions, Pedagogies, and Cultural Politics. 

National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana, IL. 
ISBN-0-8141-2794-0 
2000 - 00-00 
357p. 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 W. Kenyon 
Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096 (Stock No. 27940-3050: $27.95 
members, $33.95 honmembers) . Tel. No. 1-800-369-6283; 
website http://www.ncte.org. 

Books (010) -- Collected Works - General (020) 

MF01/PC15 Plus Postage. 

Classroom Techniques; *Cultural Context; Elementary 
Secondary Education; *English Curriculum; *English 
Instruction; Higher Education; Homophobia; *Homosexuality; 
Political Issues; *Sexual Identity; *Writing Instruction 
*Gay and Lesbian Studies; Homosexual Literature; Lesbian 
Literature; Queer Theory; Shakespeare (William) 



ABSTRACT 



This international collection of essays presents a 
contemporary overview of issues of sexual identity as they relate to teaching 
and learning in English from elementary through university levels. Coming 
from teachers in classrooms in India to North America to South Africa to 
Europe, the essays theorize lesbian, gay, and transgendered positions in the 
classroom, offer pedagogical strategies for teaching lesbian and gay studies, 
and examine the broader social and political contexts that shape classroom 
discourse and practices. Following the introduction by the editor, the 16 
essays are: (1) "Cruising the Libraries" (Lee Lynch); (2) "When the Cave Is a 

Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed" (Edward J. Ingebretsen, S.J.); (3) 

"Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and Pedagogical Praxis in the 
Lesbian and Gay Studies Classroom" (Jay Kent Lorenz); (4) "On Not Coming Out: 
or. Reimagining Limits" (Susan Talburt) ; (5) " (Trans) Gendering English 

Studies" (Jody Norton) ; (6) "The Uses of History" (Lillian Faderman) ; (7) 

"'What's Out There?' Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young 
Adults" (Claudia Mitchell) ; (8) "Creating a Place for Lesbian and Gay 

Readings in Secondary English Classrooms" (Jim Reese); (9) "Shakespeare's 
Sexuality: Who Needs It?" (Mario DiGangi) ; (10) "Coming Out and Creating 

Queer Awareness in the Classroom: An Approach from the U.S. -Mexican Border" 
(tatiana de la tierra) ; (11) "'Swimming Upstream': Recovering the Lesbian in 

Native American Literature" (Karen Lee Osborne) ; (12) "Reading Gender, 

Reading Sexualities: Children and the Negotiation of Meaning in 'Alternative' 
Texts" (Debbie Epstein); (13) "Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing 
Homophobic Student Writing" (Richard E. Miller); (14) "Queer Pedagogy and 
Social Change: Teaching and Lesbian Identity in South Africa" (Ann Smith); 

(15) "The Straight Path to Postcolonial Salvation: Heterosexism and the 
Teaching of English in India Today" (Ruth Vanita) ; and (16) "Rememorating: 
Quilt Readings" (Marcia Blumberg) . (NKA) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 445 339 




and the 



Teaching 



of 



EngUsli 



I 



Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Positions, Pedagogies, and Cultural Polities 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 




edited by WILLIAM J. SPURLIN 







Lesbian and Gay Studies 
AND THE Teaching of English 




u 



3 



Editorial Board: Jacqueline Bryant, Kermit Campbell, Xin Liu Gale, 
Sarah Hudelson, Gerald R. Oglan, Helen Poole, Jackie Swensson, Gail 
Wood, Faith Z. Schullstrom, Chair, ex officio, Michael Greer and Zarina 
Hock, ex officio 




Lesbian and Gay Studies 
and the Teaching of English 

Positions, Pedagogies, and Cultural Politics 



Edited by 



William J. Spurlin 

Cardiff University, Wales, United Kingdom 



National Council of Teachers of English 
1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 




5 



Staff Editor: Bonny Graham 
Interior Design: Jenny Jensen Greenleaf 
Cover Design: Evelyn C. Shapiro 

NCTE Stock Number: 27940-3050 

©2000 by the National Council of Teachers of English. All rights reserved. 

No part of this publication may be reproduced or transmitted in any form or 
by any means, electronic or mechanical, including photocopy, or any infor- 
mation storage and retrieval system, without permission from the publisher. 
Printed in the United States of America. 



It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a 
forum for the open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the teach- 
ing of English and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any particular 
point of view does not imply endorsement by the Executive Committee, the 
Board of Directors, or the membership at large, except in announcements 
of policy, where such endorsement is clearly specified. 



Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 

Lesbian and gay studies and the teaching of English: positions, pedagogies, 
and cultural politics/edited by William J. Spurlin. 
p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references and index. 

ISBN 0-8141-2794-0 (pbk.) 

1. English philology — Study and teaching. 2. English philology — 
Study and teaching — Political aspects. 3. Homosexuality and 
literature — Study and teaching. 4. Gays’ writings — Study and 
teaching. 5. Homosexuality — Study and teaching. 6. Gay and 
lesbian studies. 7. Lesbians in literature. 8. Gay men in literature. 

I. Spurlin, William J., 1954- 

PE66.L45 2000 
420'.71— dc21 

00-030567 



O 



6 



For David, 
again 



<d 

ERLC 

MfliyiiiffrifffifaiJ 



7 



Contents 



Acknowledgments ix 

Permissions xi 

Introduction: Queer Studies/English Studies xiii 

William J. Spurlin 



I Positions 

1 Cruising the Libraries 

Lee Lynch 3 

2 When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the 
(Re)Pressed 

Edward J. Ingebretsen, S J 14 

3 Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and 
Pedagogical Praxis in the Lesbian and Gay Studies 
Classroom 

Jay Kent Lorenz 36 

4 On Not Coming Out: or. Reimagining Limits 

Susan Talburt 54 

5 (Trans) Gendering English Studies 

Jody Norton 

n Pedagogies 



6 The Uses of History 

Lillian Faderman 109 

7 ''WhaPs Out ThereV' Gay and Lesbian Literature 
for Children and Young Adults 

Claudia Mitchell 112 

8 Creating a Place for Lesbian and Gay Readings in 
Secondary English Classrooms 

Jim Reese 131 



er|c 



— Vll 






6 ' 



Contents 



9 Shakespeare's Sexuality: Who Needs It? 

Mario DiGangi I 47 

10 Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the 



Classroom: An Approach from the US -Mexican 
Border 

tatiana de la tierra 168 

11 'Swimming Upstream”: Recovering the Lesbian in 
Native American Literature 

Karen Lee Osborne 191 



in The Politics of Culture 

12 Reading Gender, Reading Sexualities: Children and 
the Negotiation of Meaning in "Alternative” Texts 



Debbie Epstein 213 

13 Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing 
Homophobic Student Writing 

Richard E. Miller 234 

14 Queer Pedagogy and Social Change: Teaching and 
Lesbian Identity in South Africa 

Ann Smith 253 

15 The Straight Path to Post colonial Salvation: 



Heterosexism and the Teaching of English in India 



Today 

Ruth Vanita 272 

16 Rememorating: Quilt Readings 

Marcia Blumberg 288 

Index 3II 

Editor 32 i 

Contributors 323 







Acknowledgments 



I would like to express my deepest gratitude to those without 
whom the successful completion of this book would not have 
been possible. I am most grateful for the wonderful support of 
the National Council of Teachers of English for soliciting this 
project and for encouraging its completion. The contributors of 
this volume and I are most honored to be part of NCTE’s first 
lesbian and gay studies book title. I would like to also express 
heartfelt thanks and appreciation to those members of the NCTE 
Executive Committee who have vigilantly supported and con- 
tinue to espouse the greater visibility and awareness of lesbian 
and gay studies within the teaching of English across the levels of 
instruction. These individuals include NCTE Executive Director 
Faith Schullstrom; past, present, and future NCTE Presidents 
Carol Avery, Joan Naomi Steiner, Jerome C. Harste, Anne Ruggles 
Gere, and Leila Christenbury; and other members of the current 
Executive Committee, especially Nancy McCracken, Charleen 
Silva Delfino, Victor Villanueva, Jr., Kathy Egawa, and Dale 
Allender. I have been encouraged, both in my work in lesbian 
and gay studies and in putting together this collection, by the 
time spent with each of them in thoughtful conversation and in 
endless e-mail and written correspondence. 

This book would not be possible without the creation of a 
new forum at NCTE, the Gay and Straight Educators Assembly 
(GSEA, formerly AGLAIA), for which I served as program chair 
from 1994 to 1999. Several of the essays that appear here began 
as papers presented at GSEA sessions at NCTE’s Annual Con- 
vention and were subsequently revised for publication in this col- 
lection. I mention this because I did not want to lose the important 
connection to those early sessions at NCTE conventions that pro- 
vided a space in which to seriously address and theorize same- 
sex desire, queer difference(s), the teaching of lesbian and gay 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 



10 ' 



Acknowledgments 



authors, homophobic student writing, lesbian and gay narratives 
of the Holocaust, the psychic violences directed toward gender- 
atypical children, and other related queer issues and struggles in 
relation to the teaching of English, not only in the United States 
but in non-Euramerican locations, and not only in university class- 
rooms but in elementary language arts and secondary English 
classrooms as well. I would like to give special thanks to my 
wonderful colleagues in GSEA, including Roxanne Henkin, with 
whom I now co-chair the NCTE Advisory Committee on Les- 
bian, Gay, and Bisexual Issues, Debra Goodman, Mary Bixby, 
Rose Casement, Jim Sullivan, Marcy Rayher, and Hannah Fur- 
row. Early versions of the essays written by Marcia Blumberg, 
Claudia Mitchell, Karen Lee Osborne, Jim Reese, and Ann Smith 
were originally given as papers at GSEA sessions, and I am most 
grateful for their contributions in helping to open up lesbian and 
gay studies as a viable site of inquiry at NCTE. 

Some of the essays collected here were not originally pub- 
lished for this volume; permission acknowledgments to reprint 
this material appear on the copyright page.The invaluable assis- 
tance and outstanding contribution of the NCTE editorial staff 
and those intimately connected to the reading of the manuscript 
and to book production warrant my personal thanks. They are 
an author’s absolute dream! I am grateful to Michael Greer for 
soliciting this book on behalf of NCTE and for the lunches and 
dinners with which he bribed me at the 1996 and 1997 NCTE 
and MLA annual conventions! Equally important, I appreciate 
the help and dedication of NCTE Senior Editor Zarina Hock, 
especially when things got bumpy along the way. I am thankful 
to the Editorial Board for its insightful comments and to the pro- 
duction staff, especially Kurt Austin for his superb technical ex- 
pertise and Bonny Graham for her careful copyediting and 
proofing. 

I would like to thank sincerely the authors collected herein 
for their fine contribution to this project and for their remark- 
able patience during the writing, editing, evaluation, and pro- 
duction processes. It is their contribution that has truly made 
editing this collection worthwhile. Lastly, I would like to thank 
my partner, David A. Smith, for his abundant love and support, 
which continue to remain a source of inspiration. 





— x ^ 



Permissions 



Lee Lynch’s “Cruising the Libraries” originally appeared in Lesbian Texts 
and Contexts: Radical Revisions, eds. Karla Jay and Joanne Glasgow (New 
York: New York University Press, 1990), pp. 39—48. Copyright © 1990 by 
Lee Lynch. 

Lillian Faderman’s “The Uses of History” was first published in a slightly 
different version as “History in the Making” in The Advocate on 28 May 
1996: p. 80. Copyright © 1996 by Liberation Publications Incorporated. 
Reprinted with permission of The Advocate. 

Debbie Epstein’s “Reading Gender, Reading Sexualities: Children and the 
Negotiation of Meaning in ‘Alternative’ Texts” first appeared in a slightly 
different version as “Sex Play: Romantic Significations, Sexism and Silences 
in the Schoolyard” in A Dangerous Knowing: Sexuality, Pedagogy and Popu- 
lar Culture, eds. Debbie Epstein and James T. Sears (London: Cassell, 1999), 
pp. 25-42. Copyright © 1999 by Debbie Epstein, James T. Sears, and the 
contributors. Essay reprinted by permission of Cassell, Wellington House, 
125 Strand, London, England. The author is especially thankful to Cassell 
for giving permission to reprint this chapter so soon after its first publica- 
tion. 

Photograph in Chapter 12 by Brenda Prince/ Format Photographers. 

Richard E. Miller’s “Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homopho- 
bic Student Writing” originally appeared as “Fault Lines in the Contact 
Zone” in College English 56 (April 1994): 389-408. Copyright © 1994 by 
NCTE. 



o 

ERIC 

MjMlMiiTifaiJ 



— XI ^ 



1 



o 

C 




Introduction: 

Queer Studies/English Studies 



I magine, if you will, a rather naive American teacher of Sixth 
Form English literature in Southeast Asia. Because his class in 
Singapore has just finished reading Shakespeare’s King Lear, a 
“set” text on the syllabus that would appear on that year’s Cam- 
bridge General Certificate of Education A-Level Examination, 
students are given a choice of essay topics on the play and asked 
to write on one of them. One student has written an essay on 
Cordelia, arguing against the more conventional interpretation 
(and the one already discussed at length in class) that she is the 
source of Lear’s tragic downfall and subsequent regeneration. 
Influenced by her Singaporean Chinese background, the student 
reads irony and subtle deception on Cordelia’s part early in the 
play; in response to her father’s pleas that she speak of her love 
for him “more opulent than your sisters” (1.1.85), Cordelia re- 
plies: 

... I love your Majesty 

According to my bond; no more nor less. . . . 

You have begot me, bred me, lov’d me: I 
Return those duties back as are right fit. 

Obey you, love you, and most honour you. (1.1.91-92, 95-97) 

According to this student, when Cordelia tells Lear she loves 
him “according to my bond,” she is asserting that she loves him 
as her filial obligation dictates. And if she truly followed through 
on her filial duties, Cordelia, the student continues in her essay, 
should have told her father more or less what he wanted to hear. 



William J. Spurlin 

Cardiff University, Wales, United Kingdom 



— xiii — 



ERIC 




INTRODUCTION 



which, we realize later in the play, was her genuine love for him 
as opposed to the flattering accolades produced by her sisters. 
The student supports her position not only from the text but also 
from the context in which she has read and interpreted it; she 
argues that in Eastern cultures, a high value is placed on piety 
toward the parent, in contrast to the emphasis that Western cul- 
ture places on the individual often at the expense of social and 
familial obligations. The young teacher is stunned by this student’s 
essay, mostly because it is so eloquently argued and makes such 
perfect sense when Shakespeare is being read and studied in 
Singapore, something he had not even considered, and also be- 
cause the stringent examination system in Singapore, and the kinds 
of teaching practices it imposes, generally do not encourage stu- 
dents to take that kind of risk. The teacher shares his student’s 
response with a British colleague who seems quite knowledge- 
able about Shakespeare; yet when told of the student’s argument, 
the colleague lets out an exasperated sigh and remarks that if one 
were to logically follow that ridiculous interpretation, “there 
wouldn’t be much of a plot left, now would there?” 

The next day the teacher asks the student if she would like to 
read her essay to the class; she agrees, and the teacher, still not 
knowing what to do with this interpretation and wondering if 
he, like Lear, is abdicating responsibility, asks the class to re- 
spond to the essay. At first, silence. . . . Some students shake their 
heads, others look puzzled, waiting for the teacher to respond. 
Gradually, a lively discussion follows in which others in the class 
begin to reread the play from an altogether different trajectory 
by imagining what might have happened if Cordelia had actually 
given her father the declaration of love he had hoped to hear. In 
class the following day, another student theorizes Cordelia as the 
villain of the play, while others argue for the more conventional 
interpretation of her pivotal role in Lear’s renewal. Another stu- 
dent asks about the possibility of reading Cordelia as the tragic 
heroine of the play, arguing that she should have had the title 
role rather than Lear since she was stronger and more dignified 
than him and the other characters. The teacher, now visibly dis- 
traught, begins to worry that something vital is absent from his 
academic preparation. For the first time in three years of teach- 
ing English literature in Singapore, he wonders about his posi- 




Queer Studies/English Studies 



tion as an American teaching Lear from a Western humanist per- 
spective, and he begins to seriously doubt his own authority in 
the classroom. What, he ponders, if the student had written her 
interpretation of Cordelia in response to a question on the A- 
level examination? Would or could she pass the Shakespeare pa- 
per? This entire incident is something for which the teacher is 
not prepared, and when his contract in Singapore expires at the 
end of the academic year, he does not renew it; in fact, he is so 
troubled and confused that he flees Singapore and is not heard 
from again. . . . 



Well, . . . not quite! I merely fled to New York, to graduate school, 
where, from the mid- to late 1980s, I studied critical theory, which 
in turn generated more questions rather than giving me the sim- 
plistic, straightforward solutions I had hoped to find. In Singapore, 
while I was not yet familiar with the discourse of theory and the 
possibilities for critique it opens, and therefore was unable to 
deal with my sense of pedagogical (dis)location at the time, I did 
know that the classroom discussions I had with my Singaporean 
students on Shakespeare’s text were the most impassionedy the 
most productive, indeed, the most genuine and engaging I had 
ever experienced. More important, this epistemological crisis was 
a turning point because it radically politicized my teaching; my 
student’s (re)reading of Lear enabled me to interrogate more fully 
the relationship between the text and the cultural context in which 
it is read and interpreted, to examine the ways in which my own 
certitudes about how and what I teach could be rooted in the 
perpetuation of normative ideologies, and to see critical reading 
as a struggle to (re)write the text against, indeed transgress, the 
grain of dominant discourses, hegemonic images, and received 
knowledge. 

Such contentious practices of reading and writing are central 
to investigations of cultural difference. As Paulo Freire reminds 
us, “A pedagogy will be that much more critical and radical the 
more investigative and less certain of ‘certainties’ it is. The more 
‘unquiet’ a pedagogy, the more critical it will become. . . . This 





— ‘ XV ^ 



INTRODUCTION 



pedagogy is thus much more a pedagogy of question than a peda- 
gogy of answer” (Freire and Macedo 54; emphasis added). But 
have the contemporary cultural debates helped to truly trans- 
form our classrooms, to unsettle our pedagogies? Rather than 
simply subordinating differences according to race, gender, and 
class (and sexuality when it is credibly addressed in the class- 
room) under normative teaching practices that still value the au- 
thority of text and teacher (thereby neutralizing any subversive 
modes of inquiry into language, literature, culture, and teaching 
itself), investigations of culture can become more critical if, fol- 
lowing the implications of Freire, we do not see difference as a 
solution to a problem (e.g., adding a more diverse representation 
of writers to the literary canon) but as an ongoing site of inquiry. 
Susan Stewart speaks of multicultural pedagogy as the practice 
of an interpretive strategy that demands a radical reconsidera- 
tion and rethinking of our grounds of judgment and “an ethical 
imperative to examine the relation of forms of knowledge to the 
democratization of expression, articulation, and access” (13). This 
involves continual questioning, not the mere substitution of a 
new set of teaching practices as a simple solution. A question 
that should be raised again and again, in and out of the class- 
room, is whether the culture, as it exists at any particular mo- 
ment, is legitimate in the eyes of all of its participants. Despite 
the transformative potential of this question, and despite inno- 
vative work in lesbian and gay studies and academic queer theory, 
much scholarship in English and language arts pedagogy orga- 
nized around the rubric of cultural difference has woefully 
undertheorized same-sex desire as a viable position from which 
to speak, read, write, and locate oneself in the world. Likewise, it 
has failed to ask the ways in which heterosexism and homopho- 
bia also shape the world of hegemonic power and the extent to 
which other vectors of domination, as well as new possibilities 
for cultural production, are obscured in the absence of same-sex 
desire as a significant axis of pedagogical inquiry. 

Indeed, our queer “tinkerings” with texts, similar to my 
colleague’s response to my student’s (re)reading of Shakespeare’s 
text in Singapore, are thought to produce no plot at all, and any 
kind of queer inquiry in English studies and English language 
arts classrooms is often similarly dismissed as having little or no 




— xvi — 



1 ft 






Queer StudiesfEnglish Studies 



intellectual or pedagogical significance. We see this especially re- 
flected in the current backlash against cultural diversity and dif- 
ference in general, in the hostility particularly directed toward 
lesbians and gay men among political leaders, and in more or 
less conservative proposals for educational “reform.” Looking 
back over the 1990s, a decade which also marked the centennial 
anniversary of the Oscar Wilde trials (and similarly fed off and 
(re)produced social phobias about homosexuality), we have wit- 
nessed the tirades of William J. Bennett, Dinesh D’Souza, Roger 
Kimball, Harold Bloom, and others who lament that intellectual 
and aesthetic standards are being abdicated in the humanities in 
the name of social justice and identity politics, a position which 
speaks in the name of depoliticizing humanities teaching. Yet, 
hypocritically, appeals to traditional “standards” and to more 
traditional English and language arts curricula operate as obvi- 
ous political attempts to keep issues of race, gender, popular cul- 
ture, and especially sexual identity safely out of the classroom. 
The backlash against the teaching of lesbian and gay studies in 
particular has been especially fierce in primary and secondary 
schooling, ranging from heterosexism — insofar as schools gener- 
ally tend to acculturate students toward the heterosexual impera- 
tive, often through the enforcement of gender norms — to more 
blatant forms of homophobia. The enforcement of gender norms, 
however, is not as innocent as it seems; nor is it entirely separate 
from homophobia — Judith Butler has argued for maintaining a 
theoretical apparatus that accounts for how “sexuality is regu- 
lated through the policing and the shaming of gender” (238; 
emphasis added). Butler’s point is particularly telling in the con- 
text of elementary and secondary schooling given the relentless 
pressures placed on gender-atypical children from teachers, peers, 
and their families to conform to prescribed gender expectations. 
We must be especially skeptical of the methods and justifications 
for ensuring gender conformity, including, as I have pointed out 
elsewhere, “counseling” and therapeutic intervention (especially 
for feminine boys), self-righteously performed in the name of the 
“best interest” of the gender-atypical child but specifically tied to 
adult anxieties about the possibility that a child may become gay 
or lesbian (Spurlin 83). 

Of course, one cannot ignore the more obvious forms of ho- 




— xvii ^ 



17 



INTRODUCTION 



mophobia in schools, where, Eve Sedgwick and others remind 
us, in addition to the psychic and physical assaults on gender- 
atypical children and young people who identify as lesbian or 
gay, teachers are subject to being harassed, censured, and possi- 
bly fired, not only for being visibly gay, but — whatever their sexw 
ality — for providing any intimation that homosexual desires, 
identities, cultures, children, or adolescents have a right to ex- 
pression or existence (Sedgwick, “Queer and Now” 2). Speaking 
more specifically on the institutionalization of homophobia and 
the socially sanctioned violence that often accompanies it, 
Sedgwick writes: 

[T]he scope of institutions whose programmatic undertaking 
is to prevent the development of gay people is unimaginably 
large. There is no major institutionalized discourse that offers 
a firm resistance to that undertaking: in the United States, at 
any rate, most sites of the state, the military, education, law, 
penal institutions, the church, medicine, and mass culture en- 
force it all but unquestioningly, and with little hesitation at 
even the recourse to invasive violence. (“How to Bring Your 
Kids Up Gay” 161; emphasis added) 

At the college level, despite common yet highly questionable per- 
ceptions of a more liberal or progressive stance toward variant 
sexual identities, many English faculty, despite a wealth of new 
scholarship in queer studies, often downplay the homosexuality 
of canonical authors, remain unfamiliar with contemporary gay 
and lesbian authors, do not create adequate spaces in classroom 
discussion for lesbian or gay readings of texts to emerge, and do 
not adequately sustain classroom discussion on the politics of 
sexuality as it comes up in student writing. As long as 
heteronormative thinking insists that “humanity and heterosexu- 
ality are synonymous” (Warner xxiii), and as long as such think- 
ing is carried over and left unexamined in the classroom, we fail 
to acknowledge the various forms of expression and lived expe- 
riences of lesbians, gay men, and other sexual minorities that 
name, and possibly transform, the world. 

In an effort to question further pedagogical certitudes that 
foreclose other possibilities of inquiry and mask the ways in which 
teaching practices can serve the interests of dominant social 



XVlll 



ERIC 




Queer Studies/English Studies 



groups, and in an effort to speak to many of the problematic 
assumptions of the current debates about culture, Lesbian and 
Gay Studies and the Teaching of English: Positions, Pedagogies, 
and Cultural Politics provides a critical forum within the profes- 
sion of English teaching across the teaching levels in order to 
engage sexual difference as a site of pedagogical inquiry, while at 
the same time keeping in mind that merely including lesbian and 
gay teachers, students, texts, and subject positions in a theory of 
teaching that remains otherwise unaltered is highly problematic. 
Certainly our positions as lesbian, gay, or bisexual teachers, as 
well as the antihomophobic positions proactively taken by teach- 
ers who are transgender identified and/or sexually straight, af- 
fect the ways in which we read, write, and teach. But we must 
take care to resist grounding our pedagogies in a new set of cer- 
titudes. While the rupturing of my own pedagogical presump- 
tions in Singapore helped to transform my teaching and served 
as a valuable reference point that enabled me to later (re)position 
myself in the classroom and in my academic work as queer, I do 
not wish the narrative of my Singapore experience to be read 
quite as seductively as I may have told it. Suspicious of Foucault’s 
faith in epistemological “breaks,” Diana Fuss makes the instruc- 
tive point that we need to be skeptical of such so-called shifts if 
new orientations, new objectives, or new vocabularies simply serve 
to reassert what they had sought to supersede (7); and for that 
reason, it is important to keep in mind that the processes of 
r^seeing, rethinking, and reconsidering our cultural and peda- 
gogical assumptions need to be ongoing. 

All of the essays in this volume theorize, to varying degrees, 
queer difference as a lens through which to read, interpret, and 
produce texts, or as a way of reading the classroom and indeed 
the world, but they also remind us that this in itself is not suffi- 
cient to move us toward a more critical pedagogy. Rather than 
perpetuating the simplistic logic in the cultural debates that usu- 
ally encodes and articulates differences according to race, gen- 
der, social class, and sexuality as if they are in parallel relation to 
one another without accounting for the ways in which they so- 
cially intersect and converge, the essays in this book explore and 
express queerness in a variety of ways while resisting the urge to 
name queer identity, as Phillip Brian Flarper p^ts^it, “as a pri- 






— xix — 



INTRODUCTION 



mary identificatory principle, uninflected by the pressures of other 
subjectivizing factors” (26). Likewise, as bell hooks reminds us 
that “patriarchal domination shares an ideological foundation 
with racism and other forms of group oppression [and] that there 
is no hope that it can be eradicated while these systems remain 
intact” (22), any interrogation of homophobia as an axis of domi- 
nation implies further thinking about where various forms of 
power intersect in culture. Given the diverse positions from which 
the contributors of this volume speak, the essays collected ad- 
dress the ways in which sexual identity is always already medi- 
ated by race, gender, class, and geopolitical spatialization; 
elucidate how queer identity can take multiple, contingent, and 
fluid meanings in a variety of contexts; question the hetero/homo 
opposition that has historically structured discourses on sexual- 
ity; analyze how interarticulations of power, including gender 
oppression, racism, heterosexism, homophobia, and nationalism, 
impinge on classroom analyses of difference; and examine the 
broader implications of these and other issues for the teaching of 
English. 

In addition to this philosophical orientation, these essays 
explore the teaching of lesbian and gay studies from a range of 
disciplinary perspectives within the field of English, including 
composition studies, literary studies, cultural studies, film, En- 
glish education, children’s and young adult literature, and lan- 
guage arts; the essays also make use of relevant interdisciplinary 
work in such areas as academic feminism, Latina studies. Native 
American studies, critical literacy, and postcolonial studies. This 
book is also unique in that it is not limited to university teaching 
but instead contains essays that specifically investigate the teach- 
ing of lesbian and gay studies in elementary language arts and 
secondary English classrooms, where, given the current backlash, 
the risks are sometimes especially fierce. Antigay rhetoric, as 
Simon Watney notes, has identified elementary and secondary 
schools as sites where the “threat” of homosexuality is most acute 
and where preemptive measures are most needed (393-94). Not 
concerned entirely with teaching levels, however, and not mak- 
ing any attempt to erase or elide specific differences between el- 
ementary, secondary, and university teaching, the collection 
explores important issues and questions that center on the teach- 




— xx — 



20 



Queer Studies/English Studies 



ing of lesbian and gay studies; these include, for example, theori- 
zations of the pedagogical closet; the neglect of transgender stud- 
ies in academic feminism, queer theory, and pedagogical practices; 
the ways in which reconstructions of the sexual discourses in the 
English Renaissance can open up a range of historical, theoreti- 
cal, and political issues in the teaching of Shakespeare and other 
historical authors; and the cultural influences that make homopho- 
bic student writing possible. Other essays are ethnographic stud- 
ies. One essay, for example, studies the ways in which children 
reconstruct differences along lines of gender and sexuality in the 
context of discussions of texts about families headed by same- 
sex partners, and how the culture of heteronormativity is imbri- 
cated with these discussions. Another essay studies a lesbian 
faculty member in an English department who resists the im- 
perative to “come out” in the classroom because she sees “les- 
bian” not as a fixed position for the teacher to occupy in the 
classroom but as a relational process of shifting identifications. 
In addition to the diverse geographic locations from which the 
authors of this volume write, which include various parts of the 
United States, as well as Canada and Europe, and in an effort to 
address how lesbian and gay identities and cultural formations 
have taken shape and operate outside of the Euramerican axis, 
other essays ask how assumptions of homosexuality — seen as an 
“import” of empire or as a Western aberration in much of the 
postcolonial world — affect English teaching and curricula in In- 
dia and in South Africa. The essays in the book, then, generally 
concern themselves with how lesbian, gay, and transgendered 
positions rupture heterosexist assumptions about pedagogy, dis- 
ciplinary knowledge, and culture and thus transform the teach- 
ing of English. 



The book is divided into three major sections — positions, 
pedagogies, and cultural politics. Each section addresses, but is 
not limited to, theoretical perspectives, pedagogical strategies, 
and the various social, cultural, and political contexts that sur- 
round the teaching of lesbian and gay studies within the disci- 




— xxi ^ 




INTRODUCTION 



pline of English. The essays in Part I, Positions, primarily though 
not exclusively address the specific, often multifaceted positions 
held by the authors and call attention to the complexity of theo- 
rizing a lesbian, gay, or transgendered position in the classroom, 
whether as teachers, students, researchers, academics, or creative 
writers. What is the place of lived experience and personal his- 
tory in the lesbian and gay studies classroom, and in what ways 
might such experiences and histories unsettle (or perhaps rein- 
vent) many of the fixities built into current teaching assumptions 
and practices? Some of the essays in this section appear to be 
theoretically complex, but finding a viable position from which 
to speak and be heard as queer in the classroom is also about 
finding a language. The section opens with a reprint of a moving 
memoir, “Cruising the Libraries,” by Lee Lynch, who writes 
poignantly of her intense search while a young reader for images 
of herself reflected in literature, of the pleasure she first experi- 
enced in identifying with the character Frankie Addams in Carson 
McCuller’s The Member of the Weddings and of her later ability 
to read with a “variant eye” to discover lesbian difference in 
work by other authors “who hinted at lives behind the hetero- 
sexual stories they wrote.” More than simply anecdotal, a criti- 
cism which often works to silence the lived experience of those 
marginalized as Other, Lynch’s essay speaks forcefully to all En- 
glish and language arts teachers about the viability of reading 
texts and the world with a variant eye and of the important peda- 
gogical consequences of the texts we choose to teach and the 
perspectives we choose to highlight or ignore. 

Edward J. Ingebretsen, in “When the Cave Is a Closet: 
Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed,” explores the confusions that arise 
when the teacher’s private sexual identification or subjectivity 
becomes the public subject under scrutiny. In his reflections on a 
new course he designed at Georgetown University — Unspeakable 
Lives: Gay and Lesbian Narratives — that was part of relentless 
media attacks on the university’s slightly revised English curricu- 
lum, Ingebretsen asks what happens when the teacher (the one 
who “knows”) becomes aligned with the monstrous (whose 
“knowing” is unspeakable) which must be repudiated for the 
‘‘common” good, especially if that teacher is, like himself, gay. 
Catholic, and a priest. Not only does this social trajectory oper- 




— xxii — 




Queer Studies/English Studies 



ate for the queer teacher, who gives voice to the unspeakable and 
simultaneously evokes the spectacle of the monstrous, but 
Ingebretsen also describes how it similarly works for students, 
particularly for those identifying as sexually straight, who, when 
they take his class, can no longer comfortably think of them- 
selves “outside the scrutinizing apparatus of the closet,” since 
they too become the objects of the sexualized gaze. In refusing 
institutional and cultural pressures that urge the lesbian or gay 
teacher to “stay put” or remain under erasure, Ingebretsen 
reimagines Plato’s allegory of the cave as similar to the closet and 
the classroom, where learning becomes an act of “negotiating 
the passage out of the specular.” This does not imply a romanti- 
cized movement from ignorance to enlightenment, but one be- 
yond the fixities of dominant teaching practices and the fixations 
reinforced by the closet. 

Jay Kent Lorenz’s essay “Blame It on the Weatherman” is a 
refreshingly honest recollection of his own queer adolescence, 
particularly how growing up queer sometimes puts us in a posi- 
tion to reproduce homophobia as a defense in order to prevent 
detection of our emerging sexual identity. Lorenz reflects on how 
the internalized homophobia he experienced earlier reappeared 
in a slightly different form in his initial anxiety about being 
“marked” as gay when first asked to teach the film component 
of the lesbian and gay studies course. Unspeakable Lives, taught 
by Edward Ingebretsen at Georgetown University, and the con- 
flict he experienced in trying to maintain the authority to speak 
as a teacher without bracketing, or altogether denying, his queer 
identity. Like other essayists in this section, Lorenz critiques the 
historical discrediting of lived experience in academic contexts. 
As long as lived experience and personal history are not fetishized, 
he argues, they can become both viable political strategies and 
powerful pedagogical tools to resist the silencing, erasive ges- 
tures of heteroculture and its insistence that classroom analyses 
of (sexual) difference taint the “purity” of English studies and 
pedagogical praxis. 

Susan Talburt, in “On Not Coming Out: or. Reimagining 
Limits,” an ethnographic study of one lesbian faculty member’s 
understanding and enactment of the constructs “lesbian” and 
“intellectual” in her academic practice, shows how the category 

— xxiii — fy 



INTRODUCTION 



“lesbian,” when attached to “identity” or “community,” can 
potentially operate as another fixity and therefore can be intel- 
lectually and pedagogically limiting. Challenging the idea of a 
“lesbian personal,” the essay questions the recent wave of peda- 
gogical “coming out” manifestos and reconstructs “lesbian” as a 
site of shifting identifications that enables both teacher and stu- 
dents to enact multiple positions in relation to the texts they study. 
This is not to say that the option is for the lesbian or gay teacher 
to simply remain closeted; rather, the essay examines contexts in 
which “it might be more efficacious to rethink the intentional 
mediation of subjects of study through ‘personal positioning’ as 
an inherently valid pedagogical strategy,” and to see ambiguity 
and the refusal of fixity as the effect of multiple personal and 
pedagogical commitments. 

Taking a different perspective on the place of lived experi- 
ence and personal positioning in the classroom, Jody Norton 
describes the problematic historical shift in English studies from 
the critic’s demeanor of detachment to the position of critic/theo- 
rist/teacher as emblematic of the social and discursive communi- 
ties out of which and for whom he or she speaks. S/he begins 
with a critique of feminist theory as being ensconced in a binary 
paradigm of gender. In “(Trans)Gendering English Studies,” 
Norton argues that the explanatory incapacity of the binary model 
of sex/gender difference obscures other differences and especially 
fails to account for the specificity of transgender. Picking up from 
queer theory, s/he argues that we need to read specifically for 
marginalized genderings; his/her readings of works by Truman 
Capote, Delton Welch, Richard McCann, and Minnie Bruce Pratt 
insightfully call attention to forms of subjectivity that wander 
habitually from the fixations and constraints of gender “nor- 
malcy.” Theorizing his/her own position as a teacher who is 
transgender identified, Norton discusses how it contributes to 
the kinds of pedagogical interventions s/he practices in the class- 
room as one who is “never m, but passing through, genders, sexu- 
alities, discourses, economies, and institutions.” 

The essays in Part II, Pedagogies, address strategies for teach- 
ing lesbian and gay studies in English classrooms and review rel- 
evant texts and instructional materials. Yet this shift of focus is 



Q — xxiv 

ERJC 



24 



Queer Studies/English Studies 



not intended to examine classroom practices at the expense of a 
theoretical or philosophical framework. This section begins with 
a short but pointed introductory chapter by Lillian Faderman 
titled “The Uses of History.” More than a mere collection or 
transcription of objective data, Faderman reminds us, the ren- 
dering of history, including literary history, is a narrative usually 
proffered by socially dominant groups. Though historically the 
(homo)sexuality of certain canonical writers, such as Socrates 
and Shakespeare, was often deemed irrelevant to the serious work 
of literary analysis, Faderman argues that when English teachers 
openly address the lesbian desires of Emily Dickinson or Willa 
Gather, or straightforwardly acknowledge that writers such as 
Walt Whitman and James Baldwin loved and desired men, les- 
bian and gay youth are provided with a sense of a usable past. 

Skeptical of the fixed narratives of history and ideology to 
which Faderman refers, Claudia Mitchell and Jim Reese, in fo- 
cusing on elementary language arts and secondary English class- 
rooms respectively, offer teaching strategies that resist 
heteronormative ways of reading texts and reading the world. In 
“‘What’s Out There?’,” Mitchell lays out a pedagogical frame- 
work from which to examine lesbian and gay identity in fiction 
for children and young adults that contests received assumptions 
about family, gendei; and sexuality. She critically reviews the kinds 
of books that are available, examines possible points of entry for 
discussing with young readers texts about same-sex desire, and 
challenges language arts teachers and teacher educators, as they 
think about using these texts in their classrooms, to consider their 
own sexuality as constructed and the ways in which they imagi- 
natively construct the sexuality of others. In “Creating a Place 
for Lesbian and Gay Readings in Secondary English Classrooms,” 
Reese, a high school English teacher at the International School 
of Brussels, offers a gay (re)reading and analysis of the 1992 
Australian film Strictly Ballroom by Baz Luhrmann. Informed 
by theories of reader response and by feminist theories of read- 
ing, Reese questions dominant reading practices in secondary 
schools that tend to suppress same-sex desire as a vantage point 
from which to read. Following the lucid trajectory he traces 
through the film that opens it to a gay interpretation, Reese ar- 




— XXV -- 



25 



INTRODUCTION 



gues for the pedagogical and cultural importance of resistant read- 
ing in the teaching of literature in secondary schools. 

Attacks on lesbian and gay studies as being frivolous and as 
unnecessarily politicizing the English curriculum become particu- 
larly pronounced when historical writers such as Shakespeare 
are associated with the “sordid obsessions” of homosexuals, such 
as transvestitism, anal eroticism, and sadomasochism. Respond- 
ing to these attacks, Mario DiGangi, in “Shakespeare’s Sexual- 
ity: Who Needs It?,” examines the ways in which modern studies 
of Shakespeare have been (re)appropriated to serve the ideologi- 
cal agenda of locating Shakespeare’s work within the normaliz- 
ing matrix of marital heterosexuality. He argues that scholarship 
on the English Renaissance that reconstructs the sexual discourses 
particular to Shakespeare’s era can serve as a useful paradigm for 
helping both secondary and college students think critically about 
historical and political constructions of the sexual and gender 
ideologies they have inherited, including the myth of universal 
heterosexuality. This myth is often left unexamined in the study 
of premodern literature, insofar as it is assumed that queer read- 
ings apply only to modern and contemporary works. 

Tatiana de la tierra discusses the political and academic con- 
cerns of consciously trying to address lesbian and gay subject 
positions in the pedagogical discourses and approaches used to 
teach English composition. Acknowledging the influence of her 
own positions as Latina, American immigrant, bilingual/bicul- 
tural, and lesbian in her teaching, and unapologetically respond- 
ing to reductive criticisms that any teaching of lesbian and gay 
studies is nothing more than indoctrinating students to a gay 
“agenda,” de la tierra ’s essay “Coming Out and Creating Queer 
Awareness in the Classroom” outlines specific classroom ap- 
proaches for integrating queer and other perspectives of differ- 
ence into the teaching of composition in order to enable students 
to think more critically and to become better writers. Given the 
multiplicity of her positions in the classroom, de la tierra theo- 
rizes homophobia as distinct but not entirely separate from other 
vectors of domination while simultaneously questioning 
heterosexist representations of people of color. More than writ- 
ing about her experience of coming out to her students, she ex- 
poses problematic appropriations of cultural difference that silence 




^ xxvi ^ 




Queer Studies/English Studies 



queer perspectives in the classroom, especially when it is assumed 
that students who come from specific cultural groups that his- 
torically have had taboos against homosexuality may be offended. 
While this is sometimes the case with the Mexican American stu- 
dent population she teaches, de la tierra asks the extent to which 
the writing classroom, as a discourse community, is obligated to 
challenge the rhetorical appeal to these taboos in student writ- 
ing, and the extent to which the code of silence that often sur- 
rounds them further normalizes the articulation of homophobic 
ideas and the concomitant denigration of gays and lesbians in 
the public sphere of the classroom. 

“‘Swimming Upstream’: Recovering the Lesbian in Native 
American Literature” offers an alternative to existing practices 
of teaching Native American literature, especially if teachers wish 
to resist sentimentalizing the all-too-familiar presentation of 
Native Americans as victims. Through a careful reading of the 
short story “Swimming Upstream” by Beth Brant, a Bay of Quinte 
Mohawk, Karen Lee Osborne explores how contemporary Na- 
tive Americans face multiple questions of identity and oppres- 
sion, particularly if she is Native American, lesbian, and a 
recovering alcoholic. Osborne’s analysis of the story invites lit- 
erature teachers to (re)read Native American authors by looking 
for “threads of resistance, subversion, and strength that are nei- 
ther masculinized nor heterosexist,” and to explore lesbian iden- 
tity as a site densely occupied by multiple and intersecting 
subjectivities. 

Of course, it is not possible to theorize lesbian and gay posi- 
tions in the classroom or to discuss and analyze resistant peda- 
gogical strategies as if these transcend, or remain disembodied 
from, social and political struggles. A central focus of the essays 
in Part III is on the cultural and social contexts that shape and 
affect the teaching of lesbian and gay studies in English class- 
rooms both in the United States and abroad. These contexts in- 
clude the effects of gender norms on young children, hate speech 
directed against gay men and lesbians, postapartheid politics in 
South Africa, nationalism, and the politics of AIDS, all of which 
affect English studies and language arts, and, as the authors of 
these essays argue, have broader theoretical and pedagogical 
implications. Drawing from her ethnographic research on a 



ERIC 

MMIMiiTifaii 



— xxvii ^ 



O 

c ( 



INTRODUCTION 



multiethnic primary school in London, Debbie Epstein documents 
how children imaginatively reconstruct differences along lines of 
gender and sexuality through their play and in classroom discus- 
sions. Analyzing children’s responses to texts about lesbian fami- 
lies and to their teacher’s coming out to the class, her essay pays 
particular attention to the ways in which their responses are 
embedded in, and in some cases constrained by, master narra- 
tives of compulsory heterosexuality, which, of course, cannot be 
dissociated from hegemonic notions of gender, which also find 
their way into the children’s responses. But because she found 
that some of the children were able to resist heterosexualizing 
the lesbian characters in the texts they read and discussed, and 
that they were able to inhabit an alternative worldview in re- 
sponse to their teacher’s attempts to shift master narratives of 
compulsory heterosexuality in his teaching, Epstein suggests that 
language arts teachers mediate discussions of texts about lesbi- 
ans and gay men rather than rely on the texts themselves to re- 
flect “positive” images of groups already socially coded 
homophobically. 

In discussing a disturbing, homophobically written student 
essay, “Queers, Bums, and Magic,” in a pre-college-level com- 
munity college composition class, and responding to a subsequent 
Conference on College Composition and Communication 
(CCCC) paper titled “How Would You Grade a Gay-Bashing?” 
given by the instructor of that class, Richard E. Miller, in “Fault 
Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student Writ- 
ing,” disputes the efficacy of such common pedagogical moves 
as removing the writer from the classroom or overlooking the 
offensive aspects of the student paper in order to attend to its 
surface and structural features. Miller asserts the need for creat- 
ing classrooms “in which part of the work involves articulating, 
investigating, and questioning the affiliated cultural forces that 
underwrite the ways of thinking that find expression in this 
student’s essay.” In other words, rather than merely silencing 
voices that seek to oppose the work of constructing knowledge 
in the classroom by reinstating asymmetrical relations of power 
(i.e., “there will be no homophobic writing in this classroom”), 
or simply giving free rein to a student’s self-righteous indignation 




— xxviii ^ 



28 



Queer Studies/English Studies 



and allowing that to pass as a “political intervention,” the focus 
of classroom inquiry needs to be shifted to the cultural forces 
that make the gay-bashing essay not only permissible but preva- 
lent in a homophobic culture. In this sense, Miller argues, writ- 
ing becomes a site of investigation for students to critically 
examine the cultural conflicts that serve to define and limit their 
lived experience. 

Acknowledging some of the erasures historically built into 
the teaching of literature, Ann Smith, in “Queer Pedagogy and 
Social Change,” writes about her conceptualization and imple- 
mentation of the first course ever offered on lesbian literature in 
the Department of English at the University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, in 1995. Her essay and the course she discusses 
are framed by her work as a committed lesbian activist in apart- 
heid South Africa (which was also a misogynistic and homopho- 
bic regime in addition to the racial oppression it legitimated and 
brutally enforced) and in the current postapartheid era. Smith 
calls attention to the historical split between activism, still often 
viewed as the teacher’s personal business outside of the class- 
room, and teaching. For Smith, as for many teachers of lesbian 
and gay studies, teaching is activism. Her essay speaks power- 
fully to American English teachers about the ways in which her 
approaches to literature are shaped by her political commitments 
as lesbian, as feminist, and as advocate for racial equality, and by 
the changing social and political context in South Africa’s transi- 
tion from apartheid to democracy. 

Likewise, Ruth Vanita, formerly of Delhi University and now 
teaching in the United States, addresses issues peculiar to the teach- 
ing of lesbian and gay literature in India in her essay “The Straight 
Path to Postcolonial Salvation: Heterosexism and the Teaching 
of English in India Today.” Even though English studies in the 
Indian academy has questioned the traditional canon of English 
authors and, largely through the influence of postcolonial inquiry, 
has embraced radical texts that focus on victimization and resis- 
tance, Vanita demonstrates how any homoerotically charged 
writing in literature in English that could provide gay and les- 
bian students with a sense of past is virtually absent because any 
foregrounding of homosexuality is still dismissed as not indica- 




— XXIX ^ 



29 






INTRODUCTION 



tive of “Indian-ness” and is regarded as a Western perversion 
imported through the capitalist free market. 

“Rememorating: Quilt Readings” by Marcia Blumberg, the 
final chapter in this collection, speaks evocatively of the ways in 
which the AIDS Memorial Quilt both employs and displaces con- 
ventional art forms and how the Quilt’s postmodern performance 
of mourning is connected to the practice of critical pedagogy in- 
sofar as it “celebrates lives, creates healing narratives, challenges 
and refutes elitism, values creativity, raises awareness, and in- 
spires action,” Refusing the simplistic equation of AIDS with gay 
men, the Quilt’s multiplicity of panels of men, women, and chil- 
dren emphasizes the nexus of gender, race, class, religion, sexual 
identity, and ethnicity, Blumberg’s essay makes a convincing case 
for including this powerful text in our classrooms without senti- 
mentalizing or patronizing those who suffer and have died from 
AIDS-related causes, since preoccupation with emotional re- 
sponses and their cathartic effects can engender political passiv- 
ity and impede active engagement in the social issues that reading 
the Quilt raises. Blumberg’s analysis not only situates the Quilt 
as text but also points to how its component panels — and other 
texts produced by those who are positioned in the margins of 
hegemonic social formations — push the boundaries of standard 
notions of textuality and are inextricably linked to political spheres 
of life. The author pays particular attention to how studying the 
Quilt’s interwoven and politicized signs functions metaphorically 
as a critical praxis of reading that acts on the world. 



While taking the discipline of English studies as its central con- 
cern, Lesbian and Gay Studies and the Teaching of English ex- 
tends work on the teaching of lesbian and gay studies beyond the 
confines of the academy, beyond the more traditional domains 
of literary and composition studies, and beyond the geographic 
boundaries of the United States without replacing any of these 
sites as they are expanded. At the same time, it is important not 
to conflate the institutional affiliations of particular authors with 
the pedagogical issues they raise. Although a small number of 



XXX 



ERIC 




Queer StudiesfEnglish Studies 



essays are directed predominately to university teachers and teach- 
ing, most of the writing collected here speaks to a wider audi- 
ence. For instance, tatiana de la tierra’s theorizations of the ways 
in which her Latina, lesbian, and activist positions in the class- 
room contribute to her approaches to the teaching of writing; 
Karen Lee Osborne’s focus on the intersections of multiple sites 
of subjectivity in her teaching of Native American literature that 
allows lesbian readings to emerge without ignoring other differ- 
ences; and Edward J. Ingebretsen’s (re)reading of Plato’s allegory 
of the cave in relation to the pedagogical closet have significance 
for primary and secondary English and language arts teachers as 
well as for those concerned with college or university teaching. 
Certainly the same can be said of Richard Miller’s analysis of 
homophobic student writing, Mario DiGangi’s critique of 
heterosexist appropriations of Shakespeare in the dominant body 
of Shakespeare criticism, and Marcia Blumberg’s reading of the 
AIDS Memorial Quilt. Likewise, Debbie Epstein’s study of 
children’s readings of gender and sexuality, Claudia Mitchell’s 
overview and analysis of texts for children and young adults that 
address lesbian and gay identity, Jim Reese’s reflections on read- 
ing from gay perspectives in secondary schools, and Lee Lynch’s 
search for images of her emerging lesbian identity as a young 
reader address educators in general as well as language arts or 
secondary English teachers in particular. 

While this book challenges fixed assumptions about (sexual) 
identity, gender, language, literacy, culture, political advocacy, 
and coming out in relation to English teaching, it also exposes 
the instability of borders and questions totalizing structures that 
oppress and exclude. We must be attentive to the ways in which 
narrow reinventions of the dichotomies between university and 
pre-university teaching inform our work insofar as they limit the 
breadth and potential of lesbian and gay studies as a discipline 
and impose problematic boundaries, which can operate oppres- 
sively when they are permitted to define or delimit the profes- 
sional and intellectual space one may occupy as a teacher. Scholars 
who work in academic queer theory and lesbian and gay studies 
need to widen the interrogatory lens through which they read 
and analyze sexual difference and queer pedagogy as those sites 
of inquiry shift considerably in the specific contexts of elemen- 



XXXI 




ERIC 



V. 






INTRODUCTION 



tary and secondary classrooms. At the same time, elementary 
and secondary teachers of English and language arts need to be 
familiar with the range of radical (re)readings of gender, sexual- 
ity, culture, textuality, reading, and writing made possible by queer 
inquiry, which can better inform their pedagogical decisions and 
allow them to bring to the field of lesbian and gay studies the 
insistent pressures of their different questions, their different 
claims. The juxtaposition of queer studies and English studies 
has the potential to broaden both disciplines and, it is hoped, to 
produce new insights in each. 



Works Cited 



Bennett, William J. The De-valuing of America: The Fight for Our Cul- 
ture and Our Children. New York: Summit, 1992. 

Bloom, Harold. The Western Canon: The Books and School of the Ages. 
New York: Harcourt, 1994. 

Butler, Judith. Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of **Sex.^^ 
New York: Routledge, 1993. 

D’Souza, Dinesh. Illiberal Education: The Politics of Race and Sex on 
Campus. New York: Vintage, 1992. 

Freire, Paulo, and Donaldo Macedo. Literacy: Reading the Word and 
the World. South Hadley, MA: Bergin, 1987. 

Fuss, Diana, ed. InsidelOut: Lesbian Theories, Gay Theories. New York: 
Routledge, 1991. 

Harper, Phillip Brian. “Gay Male Identities, Personal Privacy, and Rela- 
tions of Public Exchange: Notes on Directions for Queer Critique.” 
Social Text 15.3-4 (1997): 5-29. 

hooks, bell. Talking Back: Thinking Feminist, Thinking Black. Boston: 
South End, 1989. 

Kimball, Roger. Tenured Radicals: How Politics Has Corrupted Higher 
Education. New York: Harper, 1990. Introduction by Kimball. Chi- 
cago: Elephant Paperbacks, 1998. 




— xxxii 



32 



Queer Studies/English Studies 



Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. “How to Bring Your Kids Up Gay: The War 
on Effeminate Boys.” Tendencies. Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick. Durham: 
Duke UP, 1993. 154-64. 

. “Queer and Now.” Sedgwick 1-20. 

Shakespeare, William. King Lear. Ed. Kenneth Muir. 1972. Arden 
Shakespeare. London: Methuen, 1982. 

Spurlin, William J. “Sissies and Sisters: Gender, Sexuality and the Possi- 
bilities of Coalition.” Coming Out of Feminism^ Ed. Mandy Merck, 
Naomi Segal, and Elizabeth Wright. Oxford: Blackwell, 1998. 74- 
101 . 

Stewart, Susan. “The State of Cultural Theory and the Future of Liter- 
ary Form.” Profession 93. New York: MLA, 1993. 12-15. 

Warner, Michael, ed. Fear of a Queer Planet: Queer Politics and Social 
Theory. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1993. 

Watney, Simon. “School’s Out.” Fuss 387-401. 



O 



^ xxxiii ^ 




I 



Positions 



o 

ERLC 



34 



Chapter One 



0 ©^ 

Cruising the Libraries 

Lee Lynch 



L ittle Ms. Muffet? Phooey. Cinderella? You have to be kid- 
ding. Maybe Prince Charming, but he was pretty innocuous, 
as well as male. Certainly no one in Grimm and Andersen. As a 
matter of fact, all those nursery rhymes and fairy tales, where the 
women were stolen or disappeared in a puff of smoke, where 
animals were hurt and men were not just powerful but superhu- 
man, frightened me. 

Nancy Drew? Now, she had promise. Dr. Doolittle? Abso- 
lutely. Young dykes are often more comfortable with animals 
than with humans — except who could identify with a bumbling, 
middle-aged man? Wasn’t there anyone in literature like little Lee? 
I felt a real affinity with the fairies of Ireland, but all the available 
stories had them stealing babies, like queers corrupting Anita 
Bryant’s children. Besides, they’d been shrunk to less than life 
size and I felt diminutive enough, lost enough in the crowd of 
rapacious, roughnecking boys and primping girls who were my 
peers. 

Where were the stories of tomboys? Of little kids growing up 
with same-sex or single parents? Why did Nancy Drew have to 
have a boyfriend? Why couldn’t a writer portray puppy love be- 
tween best girlfriends? Why wouldn’t a librarian order such 
books? Wasn’t there one picture book, when I was five, of a little 
girl fighting to the death the horror of being skirted-up for a first 
day at school — and winning? Did Jill never save Jack? Or Jane, 

Jill? 



This essay is dedicated to my high school English teacher, Mr. James 
Fechheimer, Flushing High School, Flushing, New York, 1962-1963. 



ERJC 

MMytitiiriikaiJ 



- 3 - 



35 



LEE LYNCH 



At about the age of thirteen I stumbled across Carson 
McCullers’s The Member of the Wedding. I totally understood 
Frankie Addams. Her anguish at not belonging in the world was 
mine. Her aborted attempts to relate to the wedding couple, to 
the femmy little girlfriend, and to the sailor who picked her up 
were so like my own search. When I found The Heart Is a Lonely 
Hunter, Carson McCullers gifted me with hope. Wasn’t Mick in 
this situation just like me? 

Are you just going to tramp around the room all day? It makes 
me sick to see you in those silly boys’ clothes. Somebody ought 
to clamp down on you, Mick Kelly, and make you behave,” 

Etta said. 

“Shut up,” said Mick. “I wear shorts because I don’t want to 
wear your old hand-me-downs. I don’t want to look like either 
of you. And I won’t. That’s why I wear shorts. I’d rather be a 
boy any day.” (35) 

Still, Mick and all McCullers’s characters seemed to live in a 
twisted place nearly as frightening as a fairy tale. In The Member 
of the Wedding, Frankie feared that her own difference would 
trap her in a world of “freaks” like the ones she’d seen at the 
circus. 

Throughout childhood and adolescence, I searched and 
searched for images of myself in literature, on television, in mov- 
ies. I identified not with Scarlett, but with Rhett. At fourteen I 
thought Thomas Wolfe’s passion was my own; I began to pour 
my heart onto paper just like him. Jean-Paul Sartre described 
exactly my feelings of discomfort in the world; I despaired and 
grew cynical. 

At fifteen I came out. I accepted my Rhettness, but no one 
else did. My feeling of exclusion only deepened. I grew more 
fairylike, lost in the dells of my ire-land. 

I found Radclyffe Hall’s The Well of Loneliness, Ann Bannon’s 
books, Vin Packer and her other pseudonym, Ann Aldrich. At 
last, lesbians! I devoured the books, loved the characters, identi- 
fied completely. This was a mistake. These books, while validat- 
ing because they acknowledged the existence of lesbians by 




- 4 - 



s.. 



36 



Cruising the Libraries 



portraying us, destroyed any incipient pride I might have had in 
my true fairy self. Titles like Queer Patterns, The Evil Friend- 
ship, and The Sex Between were instant signals of gay books. 
The characters were more miserable than Sartre’s, and despised 
as well. 

Ann Aldrich’s Take a Lesbian to Lunch, while not released 
until 1971, illustrates the tone of books I read in the early sixties, 
her heyday. (I suspect this was written then and only published 
when the women’s movement began to take hold, as if it reflected 
that spirit!) Aldrich purports to interview a straight male “host” 
in a Mafia-run lesbian bar. He declaims: 

“The pretty ones who come in here — they’re twisted somewhere 
in their heads. I’m better buddies with the hutches. I know 
what they’re about. No man would want them in the first place. 

As females they’re mistakes, pukes. Half of them got faces like 
little midgets — I’ve observed that about them — something about 
their faces, baby faces — they didn’t develop right. Something 
in their genes. . . . But the goodlooking ones who could pass 
for my wife or daughter . . . They become gay to spit in men’s 
eyes.” (95) 

I had found models of lesbians in literature at last, but inside 
them lurked Frankie Addams without her innocence. Radclyffe 
Hall’s Stephen Gordon asserts in The Well of Loneliness what 
we homosexuals “must realize more clearly than ever, that love 
is only permissible to those who are cut in every respect to life’s 
pattern” (188). These lessons were hard, but I took them with 
pride, a sexual rebel. 

So I joined the underground of my own supposedly tormented 
kind, rejecting the far from baby-faced hutches and the occa- 
sional spitting-mad femme, even as I followed them around New 
York City and learned their ways. I fell in love with many young 
women, some of whom wanted to come out, some of whom I 
refused in order to spare them my fate. At the same time I ex- 
ulted in my lot, celebrated it with the girls (and boys) who were 
either of it already or who proved more persistent than my 
scruples. I felt as torn as the lovers in Valerie Taylor’s 1957 novel. 
Whisper Their Love. 




- 5 - 



37 



LEE LYNCH 



“I don’t care. I’d like to tell everybody.” 

“I care,” Edith said sharply. “I like my job, apart from 
having to earn a living. You don’t know how they crucify people 
like us, tear us limb from limb and laugh when we suffer. . . . 
Everybody hates us.” (56) 

Although I read every one of these mass-market paperbacks 
I could get my hands on, always hungry for my life in literature, 
I yearned for more substance. I started to search the libraries and 
used bookstores to discover more authors like McCullers, who 
hinted at lives behind the heterosexual stories they wrote. It is 
amazing how unerring a kid with a variant eye can be, like a 
musical child prodigy with a perfect ear. Katherine Hume wasn’t 
uncloseted for years, nor were Edna St. Vincent Millay, Mary 
Renault, or Virginia Woolf, but they felt variant to me. I even 
checked Cecil Beaton’s photographs out of the library, and stared 
at the work of Louise Nevelson at the Museum of Modern Art, 
fascinated by the variance I sensed in their images. 

Sherwood Anderson became my new hero when I found his 
Beyond Desire, John O’Hara was obviously fascinated by lesbi- 
ans in work like his novel The Ewings, I found poets, Charlotte 
Mew and H. D., for example, before the gay scholars had at 
them. I could have taught a course in gay lit. by the time I hit 
college. 

For the next several years, even into the start of women’s and 
gay liberation, I continued the activity I came to call “cruising 
the libraries.” Identifying variant books was as subtle, frustrat- 
ing, and exciting a process as spotting lesbians on the street. Suc- 
cess depended on a vigilant desperation. I had to find reflections 
of myself to be assured that I was a valuable human being and 
not alone in the world. 

This slightly tinged lavender culture was all I had, this and, 
later, the liquid solace of the bars. From fifteen to twenty- five, 
when the revolution finally reached me personally, I was driven, 
searching for my nourishment like a starveling, grabbing at any 
crumb that looked, tasted, or smelled digestible. Often wrong, 
always hopeful, my gay antennae never rested. Most of the pas- 
sages quoted here I have taken from a yellowing collection of 
index cards I began to gather at age fifteen. These are the words 



ERJC 



38 



Cruising the Libraries 



which taught me who and what I was, which frightened and com- 
forted me, which gave me my own life’s work. 

It’s hard to reconstruct that literary cruising process. My tools 
were few and crude. There was the obvious one: the card cata- 
log, though it yielded little enough. I can remember poring through 
it at my local library in Queens, New York, fruitlessly searching 
for other books by Radclyffe Hall. I was shaken by the intellec- 
tual thrill of finding, at Manhattan’s 42nd Street library, a 
cross-reference to Una Troubridge and a book called The Life 
and Death of Radclyffe HalL Until then, I hadn’t been certain 
that Hall was anything more than a straight writer who’d writ- 
ten a chance novel about lesbians, but Troubridge ’s book, its cover, 
and photographs were fairly convincing evidence — and I took 
this evidence, hoarding it like a lone jewel in an otherwise empty 
case. Not only had I found lesbian characters, but a definitely 
lesbian writer, as I wanted to be. 

How, though, had I first located The Well of Loneliness} I 
recall that moment, too. These were, after all, not simply forma- 
tive, but decisive episodes at the start of a career I would dedi- 
cate to lesbians and lesbian words. There were no bookstores in 
my city, but next to the Paramount Theater in Queens was a 
stationery store. I must have drifted out of a Doris Day feature 
and into the stationery store to browse through the books. I’d 
already discovered paperback racks in the corner drugstore. My 
brother had bought me my first adult book there: The Hunch- 
back of Notre Dame. Now there's a story of an outcast, and a 
love that dared not speak its name. But on this newly discovered 
rack I found The Well of Loneliness. The title had a provocative 
ring to it. Hadn’t I fallen into just such a well? I peered inside. 
Imagine the effect of this passage on a gay, sixteen-year-old, 
would-be writer: 

“You’re neither unnatural, nor abominable, nor mad; you’re 
as much a part of what people call nature as anyone else; only 
you’re unexplained as yet — you’ve not got your niche in cre- 
ation. But some day that will come, and meanwhile don’t shrink 
from yourself, but just face yourself calmly and bravely. Have 
courage; do the best you can with your burden. For their sakes 
show the world that people like you and they can be quite as 



7 




ERLC 



LEE LYNCH 



selfless and kind as the rest of mankind. Let your life go to 

prove this — it would be a really great life-work, Stephen.” (154) 

These words, spoken by Puddle in the novel, still move and in- 
spire me. 

Other racks over the years would yield further rewards. I 
found Gore Vidal on a shelf in a little bookshop at Grand Cen- 
tral Station. On Main Street in Bridgeport, Connecticut, there 
was a newspaper store where regular vigilance turned up books I 
was petrified to take to the cashier. Their ludicrous and blatantly 
sensational cover copy were both my signals and my shame. 
Valerie Taylor’s The Girls in Three-B and Randy Salem’s Man 
among Women: these books I would savor alone, heart pound- 
ing from both lust and terror of discovery, poised to plunge the 
tainted tome into hiding. 

From Spring Fire by Vin Packer: “her hands found Leda’s 
body. Then for the first time she was the aggressor. The strength 
that was sleeping in her awakened. A powerful compulsion welled 
up inside Mitch as she felt the pliant curves of Leda’s body. Then 
they lay together, breathless and filled with a new peace.” (78). I 
recognized this compulsion that heterosexuals called passion; I 
knew the peace “normal” people called love. 

Just as other gays dotted the street populations of my young 
world, turning it into an endless exciting cruising ground, so a 
few of these compatriots led me, by word of mouth, to more 
precious books. This is how I originally heard of Ann Aldrich 
and Vin Packer, whom I was to learn years later are one and the 
same. Ann Bannon’s books were so well loved I never even read 
one until much later. Some treasures were so priceless no one 
would lend them. 

The other gay kids acted as a grapevine. (The word grape- 
vine itself would tip me off to Jess Stern’s work of the same name, 
an exploitative expose of lesbians.) We had an oral Who's Who 
which included not only peers, movie stars, and pop singers, but 
authors. How did the famous names — Somerset Maugham, for 
example, or Marianne Moore — filter down to the sticky tables 
of Pam Pam’s, the baby gays’ ice-cream parlor on Sixth Avenue? 
It could be a hint as small as one I recently ran across in a movie 
review about a male character who wore nail polish to work. 




40 



- 8 - 



Cruising the Libraries 



Immediately my feelers twitched and I was searching for more. A 
long, deeply ingrained habit — or has it become an instinct for 
survival? 

Traditionally, Clue Number One would always be marital 
status. A wedding ring in our circle did not mean quite the same 
thing that it would to a young het stalking husbands. Single was 
suspect and sometimes proof. Of course, married people were 
not safe either. We knew all about marriages of convenience. Some- 
one always knew someone who was married because of her par- 
ents. Cover photographs were scrutinized for short hair on 
women, a pinky ring, and the indefinable “look” we sought on 
everyone: that dyke or faggot stamp that is utterly indefinable. 
These tactics did not always work. Frangoise Sagan finally disap- 
pointed me. She’d had the short hair, the right face, and it was so 
easy to assume that she’d changed the pronouns in her slightly 
decadent love stories. 

Also indefinable was variant content. McCullers was obvi- 
ous, with her tomboys and otherly characters. I sought writers 
like her in the style I would later learn was Southern Gothic. 
Though Flannery O’Connor and William Faulkner proved worth- 
less for my cause, Truman Capote, with his sissified young men, 
was as obvious as McCullers. My first taste of Tennessee Will- 
iams was through the mysterious but undeniably homosexual 
Sebastian in Suddenly Last Summer, 

What did I find in these and other books which made the 
New York Times Book Review? Everything from shadows of my 
life to reflections of my mind — seldom out front, mostly nuance, 
never certain, always terribly exciting. Why was this so impor- 
tant? Simply, I suspected that all of these authors might be queer 
like me. Yet they belonged, truly had a place in the world, were 
valued. Even the fact that those who were gay were closeted 
thrilled me because I was part of their secret society. Someday I, 
too, might be valued even though I was gay. 

Still, the words I needed to see in print remained invisible. It 
was all guesswork on my part: a photograph of no-frills Willa 
Cather; the literary whisper of a close friendship between Vir- 
ginia Woolf and Vita Sackville-West; the frank, unabashed eyes 
and crew cut of Gertrude Stein; certain themes like the idyllic 
childhood scenes of Louisa May Alcott and Mazo de la Roche. 



LEE LYNCH 



The latter panned out much later, though I could not have named 
the attraction of the Jalna novels when I read them, I only re- 
member being hooked, completely. Was Rennie really a woman 
in de la Roche’s mind? Alcott, of course, married, but having 
recently visited her home, and stood in those tiny rooms where 
privacy was obviously unheard of, I can understand why she 
would not come out. Even the desk where she wrote was totally 
exposed. 

And the words, the lovely discriminating words of the poets, 
non-gender specific like Emily Dickinson and Louise Bogan, or 
full of Christina Rossetti’s fiery passion, or of imagery which 
suggested variance. 

Other tip-offs, as unreliable as short hair, were androgynous 
names. This was my original route to Carson McCullers. It also 
led me to Djuna Barnes. Although her lesbians were remote to 
me — as disturbed as Randy Salem’s and as distant in terms of 
class as Radclyffe Hall’s — Barnes’s writing was brilliant. If I 
couldn’t imagine knowing her characters, or creating a world 
like hers when I became a writer, I could at least dream, in ado- 
lescence, of writing as poetically. Though Barnes was later to 
deny her lesbian sexuality, at least I had someone to idolize when 
it counted. I visited Patchin Place, where she lived, like a shrine. 

What is this love we have for the invert, boy or girl? It was they 
who were spoken of in every romance that we ever read. The 
girl lost, what is she but the prince found? The prince on the 
white horse that we have always been seeking. And the pretty 
lad who is a girl, what but the prince-princess in pointlace — 
neither one and half the other, the painting on the fan! ... for 
in the girl it is the prince, and in the boy it is the girl that makes 
a prince a prince — and not a man. (Barnes, Nightwood 136- 

37) 

Then, in a magazine shop in Greenwich Village, I found The 
Ladder, This small, rough periodical was not full of unhappy 
endings. I sensed that its very existence proclaimed a kind of 
healthy survival I hadn’t imagined possible. There were stories 
and poems and articles, advertisements and letters and editori- 
als, just like in a real magazine. To a sadsack little kid who’d 
been badly beaten by blows dealt her from the hands of literary 




- 10 - 



42 



Cruising the Libraries 



gays and straights alike, blows of persuasion to hide and mourn 
her very being, The Ladder allowed entry into a legitimate uni- 
verse. 

I was too young. I’ve told this tale on myself many times, 
about my disappointment when, reading the subscription blank, 
it said I had to be twenty-one to subscribe. Not that I had any 
place where I could have received the priceless journals by mail. 
Not that I would have had the price of a subscription. 

But I now knew The Ladder existed, a magazine for me when 
I grew up. Most important, I had something, as a young writer, 
to which I could aspire. 

Oh, I’m not saying that as a teenager my whole goal in life 
was to write lesbian materials for lesbians and to be published in 
a lesbian periodical and to be part of a growing gay publishing 
empire. No, I wanted to be Wolfe still, and Kerouac and Dreiser. 
Little by little, though, I began to wonder what a lesbian Wolfe 
would sound like. 

Much later Jane Rule’s work came into my life. The Desert 
of the Heart, first published in 1964, put together good writing 
with healthy, respectable lesbians. Rule had the magical ability 
to treat her gay characters as if they could function normally in a 
world large enough to hold them. No longer did I just want to 
write for The Ladder, which I was, by then, doing. Now I wanted 
to write like Jane Rule. The only words I could put to this yearn- 
ing were the ones I use still: I wanted to make gay people feel as 
good about themselves as Jane Rule made me feel: “Evelyn saw 
Ann. It had not been her intention at first. It had not been her 
intention ever. And it was not her intention now, but it was her 
desire to be here or anywhere with Ann, a desire which all her 
intentions denied” (Rule 221). 

Now when 1 read from the vast selection of lesbian and gay 
literature, I am looking for that same uplifting experience. I don’t 
want the tormented complaints of our past abuse, unless they’re 
turned around into hope and acceptance. I don’t want melodra- 
matic stories of desolation. I want our protagonists and heroes to 
be rounded people living in the world. I want our literature to project 
our own newfound or newly acknowledged health and I don’t care 
if it’s in mysteries and romances, or heady intellectual novels and 
perfect short stories. I want us thriving through our words. 



LEE LYNCH 



I do care who writes the words. Straight authors writing gay 
characters are likely to fall as flat as I now realize John O’Hara 
did when creating those stiff, sexless lesbians of his. I’m not that 
hungry anymore. Though straight writers are not the only ones 
who carry homophobia like an illness in the blood (especially if 
they want to make a buck), they have little motivation to prac- 
tice safe writing: writing that’s not dangerous to the gay psyche. 

I want gay characters to be as honestly passionate as gay 
people are. To throb with love and greed and hunger and all the 
driving forces of life which make for a common humanity. Gay 
characters do not have to thrash around obsessed with sexuality, 
though as long as it’s an issue in the world at large it will be part 
of our literary thrashings. 

I don’t believe in prettying up our world for readers. Like 
heterosexuals, some of us are sick, or mean, or criminal. I don’t 
believe in pretending happy endings when they aren’t appropri- 
ate. On the other hand, there’s a whole world of people who 
think they have no stake in our future and who continue to per- 
petuate the negative stereotypes of gays that heterosexual fear 
has invented. Vin Packer’s bar host Arty was ignorant; he need 
be no longer. 

I have been through years of self-destructive behavior, therapy, 
and recovery. I’ve experienced the damage of all that negativity. I 
want to create an alternative literature; to embrace where we 
were, but to deliberately flood our culture with the positive im- 
ages which will make a better future; to create real characters 
with all their foibles, but to let them loose into a universe which 
will support them. 

Writing about Radclyffe Hall, Una Troubridge asserted: “She 
had long wanted to write a book on sexual inversion. ... It was 
her absolute conviction that such a book could only be written 
by a sexual invert, who alone could be qualified by personal 
knowledge and experience to speak on behalf of a misjudged and 
misunderstood minority” (81-82). 

There is no way Little Miss Muffet or Cinderella was gay, 
but Judy Grahn in Another Mother Tongue has traced a gay con- 
nection to the Fairy people. And I was fervently grateful when I 
stumbled across Hall who had achieved her aim and made pos- 
sible every bit of lesbian literature which has followed. 




Cruising the Libraries 



Jane Rule’s Desert wasn’t there for me then, but it’s pushed 
back even further the walls which squeezed us, sometimes to 
death. The young dyke writers growing up will be stronger for 
Hall and for Rule, and will create a literature ever freer of doom 
because of their foremothers. There is no way the constantly ex- 
panded freedoms of the press won’t affect everyone who reads 
our work. Where it will evolve I can’t imagine, as I once could 
not imagine our current culture. My interest is that no little Lee 
ever suffer alone again. 

Works Cited 



Aldrich, Ann. Take a Lesbian to Lunch. New York: Macfadden-Bartell, 
1972. 

Barnes, Djuna. Nightwood. 1937. New York: New Directions, 1961. 

Grahn, Judy. Another Mother Tongue: Gay Words, Gay Worlds. Bos- 
ton: Beacon, 1984. 

Hall, Radclyffe. The Well of Loneliness. 1928. New York: Pocket, 1950. 

McCullers, Carson. The Heart Is a Lonely Hunter. 1940. New York: 
Bantam, 1953. 

. The Member of the Wedding. Boston: Houghton, 1946. 

Packer, Vin. Spring Fire. Greenwich: Fawcett, 1952. 

Rule, Jane. The Desert of the Heart. Cleveland: World, 1964. 

Salem, Randy. Man among Women. Boston: Beacon, 1960. 

Taylor, Valerie. The Girls in Three-B. New York: Crest, 1959. 

. Whisper Their Love. New York: Crest, 1957. 

Troubridge, Una. The Life and Death of Radclyffe Hall. London: 
Hammond, 1961. 




- 13 - 




Chapter Two 



e© 

When the Cave Is a Closet: 
Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed 

Edward J. Ingebretsen, SJ. 

Georgetown University 



Fear, then, begins the story, and, with no apparent bridge 
across the abyss, the story for many of us ends abruptly 
there — at the hard place, 

Mary Elliott, “Coming Out” 

'Ufs a strange image you're describing, and strange pris- 
oners, ” 

Plato, The Republic 



F or a queer teacher to achieve a degree of safety in the class- 
room entails a complex choreography. He or she must nego- 
tiate multiple and generally disguised fault lines of power: civil, 
legal, popular, academic. When that queer teacher is Catholic, at 
a Catholic university, energies of the ecclesiastical kind figure in. 
When that queer Catholic is, in addition, a priest, a rhetoric of 
the monstrous is activated — a civic rubric of reprisal derived in 
large part from the cinema. This essay explores the confusions 
that arise — often with political forethought — when an instructor’s 
private sexual identification or subjectivity becomes the subject 
under academic scrutiny. What happens when the teacher (the 
one who “knows,” according to traditional pedagogical models) 
becomes aligned with the monstrous — a “knowing” that is, civi- 
cally speaking, unspeakable? For the hapless lesbian or gay teacher, 
an unthinking use of Christian theology finds support from civic 




- 14 - 



46 



When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed 

ideology, while media-organized fear politics noisily confirm both 
church and state: monsters cannot be allowed to live. 



At the Front 

Let me begin with some initial considerations about pedagogy as 
it is currently practiced. The classroom is the most public of the 
“private” sectors — the site most liable to “violent ideological 
contestation” (Watney 390). In it, the boundaries between the 
ostensibly private and the necessarily public stand revealed as a 
politically useful fantasy. Indeed, the public classroom is the place 
where the panopticon of social maintenance most exerts itself. 
Karen Harbeck writes, for instance, that “monitoring the activi- 
ties of the teacher has been an affirmative community responsi- 
bility” (1). Public institutions at all levels face endless varieties of 
administrative interventions, usually routinized as calls for “de- 
partmental consistency” and “pedagogic evaluation.” Like its 
public cousin in this respect, the Catholic classroom also sup- 
ports a network of interlaced authoritative surveillances. Some- 
times these privileged entries are gained in the name of social 
welfare, for reasons of health and civic safety, or for economic 
and public accountability. The Catholic classroom, however, pre- 
sumes in addition a further, ecclesiastical intervention. The re- 
sulting tension between the secular and the religious has marked 
Catholic parochial education since its inception in the early nine- 
teenth century. It continues to the present, as evidenced in Rome’s 
most recent document on American Catholic universities, “Ex 
Corde Ecclesiae” (1990). 

While ecclesiastical authority can sometimes be doctrinally 
specific, more often it works less directly, its force being felt as 
appeals for “moral tone,” “orthodoxy,” or “traditional values.” 
Both secular and religious classrooms, then, are highly evalua- 
tive, intensely moralized sites. As a consequence, they are places 
of potential distress for many students as well as instructors. The 
latter, however, are under particular pressure. Whether the in- 
structor is untenured and class evaluations are part of a tenuring 
process, or already tenured and in theory free of such interven- 







- 15 - 



47 



EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



tions, these evaluative moments function as routine de facto po- 
licing. 

It should be clear from the foregoing that no classroom is 
free of ideological pressure. When arranging a class or a curricu- 
lum around gender or sexuality, social investments in the facts 
and values of sexuality — both hotly contested — only compound 
the difficulties. Writes Mary Elliott, “Neutrality ... is a universal 
cultural default setting which is almost always presumed to be 
heterosexual and white; it is not available to those who cannot 
‘pass’ as either or both” (698). Under conditions that can some- 
times be called academic vigilantism — whether encouraged by 
social policing, departmental micromanaging, or ecclesiastical 
zeal — pedagogy in a class featuring sex or gender issues is further 
problematized when the teacher is lesbian or gay, since those iden- 
tities are still almost inevitably morally marked. In the first place, 
the self-identified lesbian or gay is already stigmatized as possi- 
bly diseased, potentially illegal, and certainly deviant. Ecclesias- 
tical censure only increases the pressure, because from the 
Church’s point of view — at least according to Catholics who do 
not bother to nuance church teachings on this issue — to be gay is 
to be necessarily sinful, as well. At best, the condition of homo- 
sexuality, however unwilled it might be, is thought to be a “near 
occasion” of sin, as the old moral manuals would term it. So 
whatever its private politics, being gay or lesbian in a public edu- 
cational context is a social performance requiring skill and fi- 
nesse to manage well. The athleticism, stamina, and sometimes 
sheer luck needed to negotiate these complexities can be formi- 
dable. Sometimes, in the process of negotiating them, education 
threatens to give way to a different set of explanatory terms en- 
tirely: specifically, confession, spectacle, and horror. 



Lifting the Curtain, Opening the Closet 



[CJonfessions are the hottest of all stories. Ask any priest. 

Matthew Rettemund, Boy Culture 

What counts as experience is neither self-evident nor straight- 
forward; it is always contested, and always therefore political. 

Joan R. Scott, **The Value of Experience'' 




- 16 - 






48 



When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed 



In the densely written social palimpsest of the classroom, the les- 
bian or gay teacher easily becomes entangled in a grammar of 
the pornographic. That is, the teacher performs a skin dance, a 
public baring of his or her emotional body that is generally not 
permitted under other conditions. The only problem, of course, 
is that the dance is forced. Indeed, framed as potentially scandal- 
ous, the public deviant presents a spectacle that is much in de- 
mand in eroticized popular culture. Like all prejudice, this focus 
on the instructor’s presumed (anticipated?) sexual deviancy 
fetishizes the visible body in an accustomed cultural manner, fram- 
ing it within a libidinal discourse of violation, contamination, 
and seduction. Theological discourse adds a fourth term — temp- 
tation. Setting up the queer instructor as a potential political spec- 
tacle, then, incites a civic panic that, no matter how it is framed 
(medically, morally, legally, or socially), activates a ritual of mon- 
ster staking. In this civic rite of degradation, whose form is gen- 
erally adapted from the cinema, the body politic defends moral 
or social boundaries by exposing and eliminating the monster 
that threatens the common weal. 

In historical usage, the monster (from the Latin monstrare, 
meaning “to show,” and monere, “to warn”) was an individual 
whose private life became semiotically charged with public in- 
tent by virtue of his or her anomalous body. The “spectacle of 
the extraordinary body” (Thomson 1) was an interpretive event 
with consequences that crossed social and class boundaries and 
affected moral discourses as well as cultural practices. In con- 
temporary usage, monstrosity still functions as it has for centu- 
ries, as an emotional shorthand term for civic reprisal. 
Nonetheless, the monster’s time-honored role — lubricating so- 
cial phobias of different kinds — barely disguises the commercial 
and erotic energies that fuel its politics. That is, erotic energy, 
unnamed as such, becomes the means by which public interest in 
the monster is aroused, since in current usage he or she is gener- 
ally engaged in some sort of illicit intimacy. In turn, this libidinal 
energy converts easily enough into repudiation, not only of the 
monster but also of the monster’s illicit activities. This then is the 
dilemma confronting gay or lesbian teachers long before they 
enter the classroom; they are coerced against their will into be- 
coming agents of an eroticized show of sorts. As a consequence, 

- 17 - 

^ 49 . . 




EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



focusing on the reported or potential erotic interest of the teacher, 
the tabloidal classroom takes its place as one of the means avail- 
able in popular culture by which the erotic and the horrible elicit 
and secure social cohesion (see Crew and Norton; Abelove, 
Ohmann, and Potter). 

To take a specific instance: I am a Catholic priest teaching in 
the English department at a Catholic university. Since 1995 I have 
taught a course examining the uses of social deviancy in Ameri- 
can popular culture. English 118, Unspeakable Lives: Gay and 
Lesbian Narrative, focuses on a variety of self-identified lesbian 
and gay texts, as well as ideologically diverse commentary about 
them. The title of the course sets out the paradox under review; 
despite their highly visible position in United States public dis- 
course, lesbians and gays are nonetheless disavowed in a variety 
of ways. How, then, can lives under social, medical, legal, and 
religious erasure prompt narrative of any kind, either public or 
private? How, that is, can a subject under erasure also be under 
scrutiny? What happens when discredited private experience be- 
comes speakable only to the extent that it functions as a “devi- 
ancy,” moralized for “the public good”? And, finally, if 
homosexuality is so unspeakable, why then in this culture is there 
so much spoken about it? 

In English 118, education, censorious spectacle, and public 
morality entangle, and their various civic energies overlap. None- 
theless, the stated goal of the class is fairly conventional. It in- 
tends to untangle the spectacular from the educational and to 
reshape public thinking about the discourses of entertainment, 
education, and morality. The fact that the link between enter- 
tainment and deviancy is as commonplace as it is unspoken is 
one reason this course seeks to examine the linkage. Thus a course 
popularly perceived to be about social deviants actually poses 
more complicated questions about the reach and scope of devi- 
ancy as a social grammar — questioning in particular the plea- 
sures clearly taken in the public display of “perversities.” How, 
for example, is deviancy productive — of talk, of sales, of moral 
discourse itself? Ultimately this class examines the discursive prac- 
tices in which lives of deviants are made to signify in purposely 
contradictory ways in order to produce a civic text often at odds 
with itself. 




50 



- 18 - 



When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed 



In its emphasis on language and text, English 118 is not all 
that different from more traditionally formulated courses in lit- 
erature and linguistic studies. It differs from others, however, in 
that its scope is potentially wider — concerned as it is with the 
complications of all speech acts — as it assesses the grave conse- 
quences that follow from deflections and erasures in the discur- 
sive domain. To take a case in point: Freedom of speech is 
acclaimed everywhere. Congressional and presidential addresses 
extol it, while newspaper and tabloid alike hail it as the essential 
American freedom. Yet, to the contrary, in contemporary Ameri- 
can society it is not what is said in public that is problematic — 
rather, it is what is not and what will not be said. That is the 
burden of this course’s double-edged title. On the one hand, “un- 
speakable” refers to the social stigmas of taboo and horror at- 
tached to (and sustaining) the suspect lives and social narratives 
of homosexuals — which presumably the course organizes for dis- 
passionate study. On the other hand, in very practical ways “un- 
speakable” is what students in the class find themselves becoming 
as they are forced to enact their own minigothic monster shows 
under the intense glare of publicity. 

What do I mean by this? An initial insight into the social 
machinery of deviancy occurs when students find themselves be- 
coming its scrutinized objects — their choice to take this class com- 
ing under evaluation by friends, acquaintances, even complete 
strangers. In particular, an unreflected taboo about the course 
leads to a pervasive inability to speak about it to peers, other 
professors, or parents. In the first place, in the erotic rhythms of 
pop culture, private lives become public by being sexualized. This 
publicity is one of the primary ways by which erotic interest is 
kept free-floating and culturally available for purchase, whether 
economically or semiotically. Partly because of this already in- 
tense pressure, going public with participation in a course like 
this seems tantamount to confession. How, students wonder, do 
they talk about the course to the prurient or merely curious of 
their friends without at the same time implicating themselves in 
the voyeuristic patterns the questions set up? The students be- 
come for a time the very lives on display; their “private experi- 
ence” is evaluated publicly as “unspeakable” and triangulated as 
gossip in a direct but nonetheless ironic way, while the discourse 

O 

ERIC 



- 19 - 



51 



EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



of deviancy slips and slops around them. It soon becomes evi- 
dent that being socially marked as gay depends less on biology 
than on social need. Anyone, that is, can assume the position of 
the socially abject — and at one time or another most of us have 
experienced the repudiatory uses of failed gender. 

For a handful of students, the class’s first lesson is having to 
acknowledge (and then manage) anxiety over how the course 
will be registered on their transcript. Should the terms “gay” or 
“lesbian” in the course title be listed? How, in other words, will 
their private learning be publicly signified? Will it be perceived 
as “orientation” (and scandalous) or as “learning” (and thus read 
as a sign of liberality and “tolerance”)? These initial confusions 
are soon followed by others, and, when asked what they are study- 
ing, in a sort of cognitive overload students often take immediate 
and unreflected evasive action: “Oh, just some English course.” 
This initial act of voluntary self-erasure may not trouble them at 
the time. By semester’s end, however, even the most unreflecting 
student can recall this moment as a shame-drenched act of 
abjection publicly performed for others. 

In retrospect, what stops students in their tracks is the speed 
by which, without ever thinking about it, even otherwise 
“straight” students silence themselves. In effect, such students 
become socially “queer,” finding themselves engaged in the same 
stigma management common to their lesbian and gay friends — 
having to deal with knowledges, presumed yet not validated, and 
their consequences, real or imagined. As a result, they find them- 
selves constructing their own defensive structures, from which 
vantage point they come to know an anxiety familiar to their 
closeted friends: Is the closet closeted enough? Are they “pass- 
ing” and is their performance adequate enough? Here, as Sedgwick 
observes, the “precisely unnamed . . . delineation between ‘the 
sexual’ and ‘the nonsexual’” creates “threshold effects” (45). This 
fosters the responsibility-less voyeurism that locates itself on stu- 
dents’ bodies. Better than any theoretical lecture, this shifting 
threshold demonstrates the course’s wider reach: all private lives 
have moments of forced public interpellation when, by the dic- 
tates of “politeness,” of legal or religious constraints, or through 
other established mechanisms, private or personal experience is 
rendered unspeakable. Silence is a powerful, purposeful weapon. 




-20- 




When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed 

“Nice” speech — the kind that receives social approbation — is, 
students learn, paradoxically a matter of not speaking at all. They 
also come to see how lesbian and gay persons, unlike other so- 
cially constrained populations, suffer this effect in particularly 
acute ways. In other words, any speech about the most common 
details of such stigmatized lives is, by definition, not “nice”: “I 
don’t care what they do, but why do they always have to flaunt 
it?” Rather than being a set of orders pragmatically governing 
military duplicity, “don’t ask, don’t tell” is a pervasive cultural 
phenomenon. 

Another instance of the closet’s compulsory, and perhaps 
compulsive, performance occurs when a student, enrolled in the 
class, mentions it to another — only, in response, to be asked not 
to describe the class, nor what texts will be read, but “Who else 
is in the class?” Suddenly the student — seemingly outside the scru- 
tinizing apparatus of the closet and perhaps thinking herself look^ 
ing in at others — finds instead that she is now the object of the 
sexualized gaze. Indeed, she now understands experientially that 
the closet’s social usefulness is its punitive flexibility; it organizes 
the visual field of speculation in such a way that no one, not even 
she herself, is outside its potential frame. In this case, the student 
realizes that her inquiring friend thinks her to be in the closet, 
not just peering through the door at others. This is where the 
blackmail that burdens the daily lives of lesbians and gays works 
its effect. That is, the price exacted for being released from the 
suspicion of “being one” is informing on others. A certain kind 
of painful education happens here, of course, but one for which 
this student and others receive no academic credit. Yet by that 
same token, under this pressure the educative process again risks 
being hijacked by emotional terrorism of a fairly banal kind. What 
was once a class becomes an ongoing series of mini-outings staged 
as confessional moments in a model typically associated with TV 
entertainment. 

The swirl of prohibitions and fascinations around the course, 
then, perhaps prompts its general narrative unspeakability. This 
contradiction alone increases the course’s availability for fantasy, 
as evidenced in three different melodramas that play out around 
it, two of which will be discussed in each of the following sec- 
tions. The first script I have already been discussing: the use of 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



53 



- 21 - 



EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



the spectatorial mechanics of the “closet.” Powerful social emo- 
tions permeate any public contesting of “the homosexual ques- 
tion” — as courses like this one are rightly seen to do. The fear 
that a range of experiences socially constrained as taboo might 
actually be spoken accounts for the furious mobilization of pub- 
lic speech against it. An example of the virulence at work would 
be Mike Wallace’s 1998 20/20 television expose on the academic 
study of sexuality and gender issues. Wallace’s show explored 
the shift in the college curriculum from “traditional” topics to 
“pop” studies of deviancy, sex, and gender; he noted in particular, 
with alarm, the efflorescence of courses about homosexuality, 

A slightly ajar closet door permits policing as well as display. 
Thus, from the outside, the closet serves the comfort and enjoy- 
ment of those watching for hints of movement around the closet 
door. The wandering eyes of those outside may cross the thresh- 
old unheeded, at their convenience and as the colonizing reaches 
of their fantasies demand. On the other hand, opening closet doors 
is thought to permit persons held captive to “come out.” Yet just 
how liberating a movement is this? Such a passage is not unlike 
an antebellum American South rite, the degrading cakewalk, al- 
though its use is affectional rather than racial in this case — the 
voyeuristic scrutiny by others must be undergone by instructor 
as well as by any student who, as a consequence of enrolling in 
this course, finds himself or herself standing everywhere in the 
closet’s glare. This of course is exactly why the passage out of the 
closet is never a cakewalk, in the now customary sense of the 
word. Instead, it is like negotiating the so-called demilitarized 
zone — one journeys across this heavily armored space at public 
risk, under the gossipy gaze of those whose “right” to look is 
never challenged.^ 

The intrusive, sexualizing gaze of those in the dominant po- 
sition — authorities, other students, the curious or downright pru- 
rient — passes without comment. The extent of the social power 
wielded by those presumably not in sexually marked closets is 
evidenced in the fact that their prying gaze is never acknowl- 
edged as such, nor is it ever returned by those thus exhibited in 
positions of subordination. Cultural supremacy, then, is demon- 
strated by an ability to pass visually into the closet whenever 
desired, without occasioning remark. For this reason, being 



22 



ERIC 



54 



When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed 

marked gay is often less a statement of biological necessity than 
a pragmatic social assessment. It is, after all, the privilege of the 
dominant, who do the looking, “to know” these things. In an 
ironic way, the closet can be viewed as an extension of the acad- 
emy, since the evaluating gaze that organizes its use can be au- 
thorized, even justified, in the name of knowledge — a point I will 
consider in a moment. 

Murray Kempton writes, “The closet happens to be the single 
human invention whose consequences have been universally be- 
nevolent” (qtd. in McCarthy 31-32). Of course. Like beauty, 
benevolence is in the eye of the one who controls the discourse. 
Further, in a commodity culture in which the traffic in erotizing 
bodies is as pornographic as in a gothic slasher film, the closet is 
especially benevolent when circulation of information about “the 
body” — someone else’s in all cases — functions as “entertainment.” 
The closet is designed in the first place to ensure a habit of pas- 
sive watching that, like entertainment, guarantees the visual as a 
regulatory field. Either from within or outside the closet, the 
closet’s social force depends upon the same specious, untheorized 
notion of visibility that cheers the occasional Ellen who is per- 
mitted to “come out” on TV, performing deviance for the titillat- 
ing pleasures of the always phantasma tic “general public” — those 
whose common virtue lies in their untroubled straightness. 

Teacher as Tour Guide 

After being listed in the school’s catalog for three years and regu- 
larly appearing in departmental announcements, English 118 
achieved a semblance of conventionality. For many students, the 
course seemed similar to various programs abroad, a kind of aca- 
demic tourism. Understood as a safely managed excursion to a 
world of exotica and prohibition, somewhat akin to the semes- 
ter-at-sea program, students initially expected that course require- 
ments would be light (How hard is watching, after all?!). For this 
reason, it was thought that the course would be “safe” for those 
nonexotic and nonprohibited (i.e., straight-identified) students 
who wished, in an old phrase, to take a walk “on the wild side.” 
That is, an exposure that would ordinarily be taboo (hanging 



EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



out with queers, reading “their” literature) was rendered permis- 
sible. Any potential threat or social stigma was sanitized by be- 
ing encapsulated within the morally privileged discourse of 
“learning” — students would be “exposed” to experience that 
would confirm their benevolent tolerance in the first place. 

For some students, however, less laudable reasons motivated 
their interest in the course; inquiries about it tacitly assumed that 
the course would facilitate the unveiling of hitherto hidden devi- 
ancies (not to mention the deviants themselves) that would be 
numbered and arranged, socially located, and made conveniently 
visible to the not always benign gaze of others. Initial comments 
suggested that many students (gay- as well as straight-identified) 
presumed that the course would function in precisely this fash- 
ion, supporting their own self-constructed, naive liberality. Viewed 
in this manner, however, the course could only be one more in a 
series of closets, socially arranged and approved. In addition, 
such views merely collude in a culturalwide liberalism in which 
altruism and abjection are reverse sides of the same mechanism 
of entrenched social power. Further, these expectations register 
the way homophobia plays from within and without, a position 
toxic to gay as well as straight. As time went on, students under- 
stood how such a taxonomizing project (and the leering fascina- 
tion it evidences) targeted each of them in differing, though equally 
pernicious, ways. Gay students found themselves trotted out as 
spectacle and moral program, straight students found themselves 
dispensing a toxic compassion, and a third group, avoiding iden- 
tity politics altogether, silently enacted the passive watching of 
spectator culture. 

At any moment, as we have seen, the “subject” under study 
in this classroom could shift to a different subject or set of sub- 
jects entirely. Nor were students the only ones who faced poten- 
tial entrapment in the series of scrutinies set up by dynamics within 
and outside the classroom. The second script prompted by this 
course, while making similar presumptions about student as well 
as teacher, focuses attention on the teacher. It dictates that I, at 
the front of the classroom as instructor, must therefore “be” one 
of the subjects I professed (or was assumed to profess) to place 
under scrutiny. This illogical conclusion depended in turn on a 
series of faulty premises, most particularly that I could only be 




56 



- 24 - 



When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re) Pressed 

interested in the topic because I need to be — being “one” myself. 
The speciousness and phobic circularity of this reasoning is stun- 
ning, especially when one considers the range of crossover teach- 
ing done by colleagues. For instance, I can easily name male 
instructors teaching in women’s studies, or a woman colleague 
of color who teaches a course on Dead White Males. These and 
others routinely cross gender, racial, cultural, and temporal de- 
marcations without suffering similar categorical collapse. 

But in the case of the queer, or even slightly askew, class- 
room, logic evacuates. The conclusion that the teacher must be 
gay or lesbian is often arrived at with no necessary involvement 
on behalf of the instructor. One might say the conclusion pre- 
cedes the actual course itself, and is warranted by, if not guaran- 
teed by, the course’s existence since, in popular reasoning, 
theoretical interest must devolve from prior experience. This is a 
dubious pedagogical principle, to be sure, but the swift move- 
ment to closure demonstrates the elegant simplicity and opera- 
tional malice of stereotype. Prejudice, like all narrative, always 
gestures toward the formulaic and depends for its effects on the 
authority of the already known, or even the already speculated — 
or perhaps on the already unspoken presumptions and rumors 
that pass as “common knowledge.” 

It is still the case in many civic settings across the United 
States that a gay identity is tantamount to “criminality” — a sort 
of moral felony which automatically debars an individual from 
social and political, if not legal, due process. This is nowhere 
more obvious than in the classroom.^ Indeed, the political wind 
shear buffeting courses such as these, I argue, is intended to cir- 
culate around the instructor, precisely to destabilize her or his 
authority as instructor.^ It was hardly an accident, then, that media 
attention was focused on Unspeakable Lives during a conten- 
tious battle over English curricula at Georgetown. One can see 
the connections readily enough. In a period of intense political 
agitation concerning how and what the English department is 
teaching, as the most “visible” person in the classroom the in- 
structor becomes perhaps its chief subject. The instructor’s “con- 
fession” — simply being there — is read as deviancy of a speculative 
and customarily spectacular kind. Deviancy, of course, has its 
public uses as entertainment of sorts, as talk show, tabloid, and 



EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



news broadcasts all demonstrate. The creation of public devi- 
ancy as moral exemplum is in fact the accustomed political work 
of scandal, by which stigmatized persons are used to establish 
boundaries considered “civil” and normal. 

So there is some irony in noting that at this Catholic univer- 
sity a classroom podium becomes refitted as a confessional, al- 
though one quite unlike the anonymous and historically sealed 
confessional of Roman Catholic practice. Rather, this confessional 
is by definition public — its large bay windows intensifying the 
gaze of many upon an isolated individual in the manner of an 
auction block or police lineup. Configured in this manner under 
the pressure of intense media scrutiny, the classroom podium thus 
facilitates the twin social economies of commodity culture: that 
is, the body is sold as erotic commodity or policed as taboo — 
often both at once. Thus, to refer to my original point, whether 
framed as a moralized spectacle of the forbidden or as tabooed 
desire to be revealed, sexuality in the academy has consequences 
far in excess of the presumed subject. Pedagogy risks being hi- 
jacked by camp while the educative process succumbs to tabloid 
spectacle. 

Although my identity as a priest is not directly related to my 
teaching duties, my presence as a priest in such a pedagogic hot 
zone activated another order of myth altogether. That is, while 
popularly speaking I “must” be gay in order to have the pre- 
sumptive moral authority to teach this class, according to at least 
a grassroots Catholic sensibility I could not “be” gay in the sense 
the word is rhetorically leveraged. That is, I could not be “ac- 
tively political” — a phrase with coded strictures that preclude 
experience of either a personal or public nature. Rather, I could 
only be homosexual — thereby accepting without demure a fram- 
ing narrative of insufficiency that is as pervasive in church poli- 
tics as it is in civil. In other words, homosexuals as such are 
accepted within the scheme of things to the extent that they are 
properly subordinate, accepting as their due the terms of a 
pathologizing discourse that indicates illegality, immorality, and 
failed gender. Unlike the self-identified gay man, the homosexual 
knows his place and so does not speak. The gay man or lesbian is 
one who speaks (and therefore “flaunts”). Rather than perform- 
ing deviancy for the alternately altruistic and titillating needs of 




- 26 - 

Lf 

^ 58 



when the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re) Pressed 

an undeviant majority, the self-identified gay or lesbian explicitly 
disrupts the formulaic narrative. How? Because their self-avowal 
does not depend on someone else’s review or evaluation. They 
have no part in the social cakewalk of formulaic deviancy. 

Yet to announce oneself as gay is already to be folded into 
Geraldo-like strip-search confessional politics, despite one’s best 
intentions. As instructor in English 118, then, my very presence 
becomes confessional, viewed as scandalous by many Catholics. 
This is particularly the case in the present historical moment of 
the Catholic Church when, as Andrew Sullivan puts it, “uniquely 
among failings, homosexuality [is] so abominable it [can] not 
even be mentioned” (Sullivan 47). Catholics, however, do not 
have a corner on the market of prejudice, and in many churches 
(perhaps most) being gay-identified is tantamount to an act of 
social insolence and religious insubordination. Why? Because, 
finally, being gay means refusing the contradictory imperatives 
of silencing and provocative speaking that construe the homo- 
sexual as “the question” to be adjudicated. 

The mechanics of scandal and spectacle upon which 
homosocial institutions depend manipulate socially tabooed 
speech for energy and political cohesion. Those who suffer these 
effects are the demonized persons or social misfits whose chief 
civic virtue is their political dispensability. Sometimes these per- 
sons are marked by race, other times by disease, often by an en- 
tangled code of criminality and failed gender. To some degree or 
other, however, the bodies of lesbian- or gay-identified teachers 
are marked by these stresses; speech is demanded of them in pub- 
lic, while their private subjectivities are denied in public. Enjoined 
to speak truth as a function of education, nonetheless they are 
constrained to lie. Thus any teacher thought to be gay (or even 
actually being — it doesn’t matter which; state-of-the-art preju- 
dice easily conflates the two) gets no respect but a lot of atten- 
tion. Further, as educators, gay or lesbian persons must deal with 
the effects of a thoroughgoing gendering, since teaching is gener- 
ally perceived to be a feminine occupation, or at least not eco- 
nomically “masculine” like business and the corporate world. 
Finally, the visibility of any lesbian or gay teacher can be puni- 
tively held against her or him by civic or ecclesiastical sanction as 
well as by social custom. Often this happens in ways that do not 





-27 - 



EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



admit legal redress. In the final analysis, homosexual taint does 
not depend on proof. To the contrary, it depends on how inter- 
esting — how erotic, in a word — the suspicions of homosexuality 
are or can be made to be. The more outlandish the suspect, the 
better. Yet it is also true that however threatening any particular 
homosexual’s presence might be, isolated instances of homosexual 
‘‘visibility” can be rendered institutionally benign. For instance, 
my presence makes possible a means by which a farsighted eccle- 
siastical authority can demonstrate its earnest liberality: “Why, 
yes, we are very supportive of homosexuals. In fact we have one. 
Consider Father Ed, for example.” Like any racial or gendered 
subaltern, the homosexual is burdened with shouldering an 
institution’s duplicities, his or her body held as ransom against 
its lies. 



Caves and Closets: An Allegory in 
Which the Monster Speaks 



A room for privacy or retirement; a private room; an inner 
chamber . . . esp. Such a room as the place of private devotion. 

“Closet,” Oxford English Dictionary 

Gothic tropes of the unspeakable and the monstrous might help 
us rethink the ethics of the silenced but speculative classroom of 
Unspeakable Lives. Indeed, the course title presumes and antici- 
pates them. I wish to conclude by examining the third phantas- 
matic script activated by English 118, in which pedagogy gives 
way to another discourse entirely, becoming entertainment, scan- 
dal, perhaps even horror show. 

It is the function of scandal to ensure that deviancy, properly 
displayed, does important work. If readily visible as spectacle 
and moralized example, those who are marked as deviant or 
immoral authorize and confirm, by negation, a common civic 
life. Indeed, the watching of deviants is something of a national 
pastime, as indicated by tabloid (National Enquirer or Time 
magazine) or TV talk show. The myth of the “safe” or “benevo- 
lent” closet leaves unspoken its cachet as good theater: coming 
out, in such a context — or like being m, for that matter — is little 




60 



-28 - 



When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed 

more than performing deviancy for people whose straightness is 
not unquestioned. It is schooling them to the normative by means 
of a necessary scandal of the abnormal. Thus, to return to an 
earlier question, what happens when, in effect and purpose, edu- 
cation mimics the methods and cadences of entertainment? 

What might not be immediately noticed is how similarly edu- 
cation and entertainment employ common methodologies — pas- 
sivity and spectacle — while elaborating approved versions of social 
morality. For this reason, the “deviance-exposed-and-repudiated” 
format that underwrites the moral uplift of Oprah or other talk 
shows can easily find its way into the classroom. At the same 
time, it can also be found in an entirely different entertainment 
genre, the cine-porn narratives of gothic fright film. In these tales 
of the flesh ripped and torn, immorality is marked as monstrous 
and unspeakable although always on display in generous quanti- 
ties. In either talk show or cinema, exposure leads to staking, 
since monsters of affection or action cannot be permitted to live. 

The monster’s privileged role is to be the unspeakable marker 
of social distress — the Hannibal Lecter or Jeffrey Dahmer who is 
exposed to titillating public scrutiny and then eliminated for the 
civic good. According to gothic convention, however, the mon- 
ster rarely has a voice; often he cannot be spoken about directly, 
only gestured at, pointed to. There are reasons for this enforced 
silence: the monster’s speechlessness cinematically aligns him or 
her with the “unhuman.” A similar rhetoric and silencing effect 
often frame the gay or lesbian teacher as something of a monster. 
Such rhetoric of course serves a variety of civic purposes. In the 
first place, just as the monster permits the ritual drama of civic 
horror, the teacher, similarly portrayed as a moral or sexual mon- 
ster, makes possible the specular theatrics of an entertainment- 
modeled pedagogy that already has its end in sight. Because finally, 
of course, the monster must die, and it can never be the fault of 
the viewer, who although complicit in and desirous of the death, 
walks away with unbloodied hands. 

The first time I taught English 118, Miramax films had just 
released the film Priest. Early in the semester, a student approached 
me and said, with something of a smile, “Father, there is a film 
out about you.” Now, there are at least three priests in the film — 
four, if one includes the bishop — and so, while the cinematic logic 



EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



of the student’s statement was unclear, her aggressively phobic 
point was not. The film, she intended to say, was about my ho- 
mosexuality — the fact of which she was presuming in the first 
place, for reasons previously stated. The film, although ambigu- 
ously titled and not limited to a (or the) priest, was in her view 
about the homosexual. As presumptive heterosexuals, the remain- 
ing priests, including the bishop, exercise the privilege of the un- 
marked and so remain invisible to the gazing eye. Yet the point 
must be made that in the year 2000, any priest who could imag- 
ine himself in such a film would have to be homosexual and not 
gay — at least as I have defined the terms. Doubly bound by exte- 
rior ideological silencing as well as by internalized self-erasure, 
such a priest would probably never be found performing gay in 
so visible a site as the classroom. Why? Because giving homo- 
sexuals voice in a classroom is clearly more transgressive and 
socially destabilizing than having frantic, groping sex in a dark- 
ened automobile. Knowing the truth, to paraphrase Jesus, sets us 
free, and freedom is what systems of managerial spirituality (or 
education) — and those who are colonized by them — fear most. 

Being an educator today is, like being queer, a public role 
suffused with deviancy. Almost by definition, the point of educa- 
tion is to teach transgression of — or at least a questioning of — 
traditions or habits or ways of thinking that have preceded us. 
But in addition, as noted earlier, the social role of teaching is 
complicated by its routine gendering. In an aggressively 
masculinist culture characterized by bottom lines and cash flows, 
I occupy a social position that is rhetorically privileged but eco- 
nomically and practically dismissed. It was from these twin so- 
cial deviancies of being queer and effeminized as an instructor 
— not to mention being the presumptive subject of a film — that I 
recalled Plato’s “Allegory of the Cave.” It seems to me that Plato’s 
figura offers a useful insight into the toxic closets of American 
popular education. It does so, I add, read “straight,” without 
any Foucauldian or Sedgwickian gloss whatsoever. Consider the 
elements common to both cave and closet: the flickering fire that 
deceptively illuminates the cave’s illusory relations; the bound 
spectators’ mute immobility and the powerful ignorances thus 
normalized and secured, from inside the cave as well as from 
outside it; the fatuous, because speculative, swirl of what is known. 




When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed 

or supposed as known; finally, the resistance provoked by those 
who, in a word, come out. 

I came to self-possession as an educator long before achiev- 
ing self-possession as a gay man. My understanding of Plato is, 
as a result, properly Platonic — that is, understood as a matter of 
retrospection. My education has been about revisiting and re- 
thinking, revisioning — recovery in its original sense. And the 
places I most had to revisit were those small places in which, as a 
young boy, I took solace and comfort or in which I hid. For some- 
times the hiding was the comfort — whether in confessionals in 
the church, closets at home, or those barricaded rooms in my 
heart. It comes as no surprise, then, that now I see education to 
be all about closets. Like the densely publicized “private space” 
of the closet, public educational structures (the “classroom”) 
contrast the lure of secrets with the illusory nature of the visible. 
From the perspective of a student, education signifies the labor 
of coming out of illusion and speculation. As instructors, how- 
ever, education is also concerned with managing the resistance 
that can quite directly get the teacher killed. As Plato remarks to 
Glaucon, “And, as for anyone who tried to free them and lead 
them upward, if they could somehow get their hands on him, 
wouldn’t they kill him?” (189). 

Let me not project all of this resistance elsewhere, however. 
Much of it is internal and self-generated by my need to dance for 
my masters. Thus, from either position — as student or teacher — 
education is an acknowledgment of the various pressures that 
urge us to stay put, to settle for the specular, for the speculative 
as well as the spectacular. To perform the cakewalk, in other 
words. Cast in contemporary terms, Plato’s scene highlights the 
tension between the static furiousness of melodrama and the grace- 
ful mobilities of narrative. In other words, he contrasts a posi- 
tion of abjection in which the “caved” — in education, teacher as 
well as student — are chained side by side. No possibility exists 
for movement or change — in short, for narrative. This common- 
ality of privileged ignorances, and the suppression of speech it 
dictates, sustains and enforces spectacle on the one hand and 
speculation and formula on the other. The drift between spec- 
tacle and speculation — scandal — is the dramatic scene played out 
in many classrooms, as well. 




03 




- 31 - 



V. 



EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



Because of the fixities built into the educational model, and 
because of the fixations enforced by the closet, the queer teacher 
is forever under erasure. His or her face must always be locked 
toward the light of the opening door — not to anticipate release 
but, sadly enough, to be alert to threat. After all, the monster 
must be silenced, lest fearsome spectacle be diluted by the com- 
passion provoked by speech. (James Whale’s Frankenstein [1931] 
eliminated the creature’s speaking role for this very reason.) Yet 
the gay or lesbian teacher has another possibility; he or she can 
subvert spectacle altogether by thwarting prejudicial formulas 
that depend for their energy on cliche. Offered up as sacrifice in 
the rites of civic scrutiny, the monstrous gay or lesbian teacher 
can shatter the filmic illusion by having something to say, some- 
thing to teach more substantive, perhaps, than what might be on 
the syllabus. 

It is fear of this moment that drives the furious public energy 
circulating around a “known” homosexual who teaches, because, 
by virtue of his or her presence, myth collapses. By their silence, 
“unknown” homosexuals confirm the taboo on speech that cages 
them in silent accommodation, and so they can teach whomever 
and wherever they wish without reprisal. On the other hand, 
becoming “visible” engages the enchantments of specularity. Be- 
coming vocal dis-spells the spell. The resulting collapse of struc- 
tured, enforced silence reflects back to a society its immobilizing 
theatrics, the “don’t ask, don’t tell, just stare” rubrics of the 
Monstrous. With these politics and policies, society makes and 
sustains its monsters, flattening human narrative into formula, 
and reducing human complexity to public melodrama. These 
scenes of social crisis conjure up much speculation, but in the 
end nothing of substance changes. 

Plato concludes that caves are never empty. The same can be 
said for closets. Plato underscores the fundamental pedagogic 
crisis faced by a technocratic commodity culture: wanting to leave 
the cave of ignorance “for the sake of enlightenment” must be 
thought to be the^queerest idea of all. Nor should we romanticize- 
the hard work of education, as the bleakness of Plato’s allegory 
is. often sentimentalizedi away.. After all^^the passage out of the 




64 



-.32.- 



When the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re) Pressed 

cave is not a journey into knowledge but, paradoxically, a step- 
ping forward into ignorance. In the Platonic figure, education 
results in freedom from specious and illusory knowledge; the 
enlightened are those who have been made aware only of their 
bondage and immobility. Recognition of entrapment — indeed, 
the resistance to being untrapped — is the enlightened’s only point 
of privilege. 

Plato’s cave instructs us in the metaphors of ignorance, but 
like the closet, the cave can be reimagined within another dis- 
course entirely — that of worship, in which submission also plays 
a role. What do I mean? I have been arguing that education should 
be about converting fixities to movements, melodramas to nar- 
rative. Additionally, it also can be about putting closets to new 
use — perhaps by expanding them into something resembling older 
ones. The closet once was more commodious than we now imag- 
ine it — more than a place of accidental storage in which to de- 
posit and forget so much of life’s baggage. Rather, closets were 
private places, places of self-possession. They were places of one’s 
own, sites of prayer, meditation, devotion. Perhaps they again 
can be sites and occasions of interiority, in which, paradoxically, 
self-possession is part submission to the disciplines of letting go, 
going up, coming out. Plato’s allegory can instruct the poten- 
tially queer student (lesbian and gay, perhaps, but surely anyone 
in a commodity culture who values learning over ignorance) in 
the hard human task of coming to terms with the demands made 
by an interior life. Perhaps this is what St. Paul meant when he 
encouraged the Romans, “Remember that with them that are 
bound you are bound” (Romans 15:3). The teacher appears when 
learning is to happen, and learning in the queer classroom is ne- 
gotiating the passage out of the specular. It invites us out of the 
compellingly solitary gravity of ignorance that holds us bound, 
always solitary, in low dark places. Plato invites pedagogues, 
straight or gay, out of social melodramas in which nothing hap- 
pens into narratives of grace by which we — and our students — 
become better persons than we ever could have imagined. Better, 
at least, than our culture permits us to be, bound and tied, pris- 
oners of our own fear. 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 



- 33 - 



65 



EDWARD J. INGEBRETSEN, S.J. 



Notes 



1. Richard Mohr in Gay Ideas argues that being “out”of the closet is a 
moral imperative since “living in the truth” (39) sets the standard for 
any normative morality. 

2. See Rhoads for further discussion of this point. 

3. Sears outlines some startling figures regarding the negativity with 
which teachers-in-training regard homosexuality: “Eight out often pro- 
spective teachers surveyed harbored negative feelings toward lesbians 
and gay men; fully one third of these persons, using the Index of Ho- 
mophobia classification, are ‘high grade homophobics’ — nearly five times 
as many as classified by Hudson and Rickets (1980) in their study of 
college students a decade ago” (39-40). 



Works Cited 



Abelove, Henry, Richard Ohmann, and Claire B. Potter. “Introduction.” 
Radical Teacher 45 (Winter 1994): 2-3. 

Crew, Louie, and Rictor Norton. “The Homophobic Imagination: An 
Editorial.” College English 36 (1974): 272-90. 

Elliott, Mary. “Coming Out.” College English 58 (1986): 693-708. 

Harbeck, Karen. “Introduction.” Coming Out of the Classroom Closet: 
Gay and Lesbian Students, Teachers, and Curricula. Ed. Karen 
Harbeck. New York: Harrington Park, 1992. 1-7. 

McCarthy, Jeremiah. “The Closet and the Ethics of Outing.” Gay Eth- 
ics: Controversies in Outing, Civil Rights, and Sexual Science. Ed. 
Timothy F. Murphy. New York: Haworth, 1994. 27-45. 

Mohr, Richard D. Gay Ideas: Outing and Other Controversies. Boston: 
Beacon, 1992. 

National Conference of Catholic Bishops. Ex Corde Ecclesiae: The Ap- 
plication to the United States. United States Catholic Conference. 
1990. <http://www.nccbuscc.org/bishops/excorde.htm>. 

Plato. The Republic. Trans. G. M. A. Grube. Indianapolis: Hackett, 
1992. 





- 34 - 



when the Cave Is a Closet: Pedagogies of the (Re)Pressed 

Rettemund, Matthew. Boy Culture. New York: St. Martin’s, 1997. 

Rhoads, Robert A. Coming Out in College: The Struggle for a Queer 
Identity. Westport, CT: Bergin, 1994. 

Scott, Joan R. “The Value of Experience.” The Lesbian and Gay Stud- 
ies Reader. Ed. Henry Abelove, Michele Aina Barale, and David M. 
Halperin. New York: Routledge, 1993. 397-415. 

Sears, James, “Educators, Homosexuality, and Homosexual Students.” 
Coming Out of the Classroom Closet: Gay and Lesbian Students^ 
Teachers, and Curricula. Ed. Karen Harbeck. New York: Harrington 
Park, 1992. 29-79. 

Sedgwick, Eve Kosoisky. Tendencies. Durham: Duke UP, 1993. 

Sullivan, Andrew. “Alone Again, Naturally.” New Republic 28 Nov. 
1994:47-55. 

Thomson, Rosemarie Garland, ed. Freakery: Cultural Spectacles of the 
Extraordinary Body. New York: New York UP, 1996. 

Watney, Simon. “School’s Out.” InsidelOut: Lesbian Theories, Gay 
Theories. Ed. Diana Fuss. New York: Routledge, 1991. 387-401. 



Chapter Three 



— - — -Q© 

Blame It on the Weatherman: 
Popular Culture and Pedagogical 
Praxis in the Lesbian and Gay 
Studies Classroom 

Jay Kent Lorenz 
University of California, Irvine 



All survivors, however they accommodate or fail to re- 
member it, bear the inexorable guilt of the survivor. 

James Baldwin, The Evidence of Things Not Seen 

I had stumbled across something which must be love but 
I had no language. 

Jeanette Winterson, Art Objects: 
Essays on Ecstasy and Effrontery 



T he term experience, in its most recent permutation, has be- 
come the whipping boy of postmodernity, a bad girl who 
tenaciously clings to her memories as if they alone contain the 
privileged signifies Bearing that in mind, please permit me to 
share with you a remembrance of performance, love, and sur- 
vival. I do not claim to be the ultimate authority on the develop- 
ment of the queer adolescent; I merely wish to relate some of the 
motivation behind what I do. 

In 1976, in my thirteenth year, the NBC television affiliate in 
Chicago hired a meteorologist whose tenure at the station would 
be remarkably short. Exhibiting a smart fashion sense and a flam- 
boyant delivery light years removed from his boxy and bland 
male colleagues, the weatherman became an object of derision in 




“ 68 



- 36 - 



Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and Pedagogical Praxis 



o 

ERIC 



my working-class neighborhood. Those children skilled enough 
in employing the most outrageous embellishments when imper- 
sonating the weatherman were rewarded with requests to per- 
form before the neighborhood adults. Hoping to be cacheted into 
the inner circle of grown-up galas, I fine-tuned a showstopper, 
laminated with genderfuck accoutrements courtesy of my mother’s 
closet. 

It was my father who cued me into the equation: gender per- 
formance = sexual orientation, a spurious relation but one that 
provided him with much mirth when I enacted the weatherman 
while simultaneously fulfilling the cultural imperative of expos- 
ing the homosexual. Performing the swish (my father’s term) is 
compulsory in a culture that since the mid-nineteenth century, 
according to Eve Sedgwick, has been organized along a hetero/ 
homo binary — the hetero, of course, occupying the privileged 
position — with other dualistic categories, most notably that of 
masculine/feminine, relying on the unbalanced oppositional di- 
visions of sexuality to provide a prototype (111). As a child for 
whom the inside/outside overdeterminant of sexual orientation 
was not yet an issue, I came to comprehend that to be homo- 
sexual is to be incompatible with masculinity, a reductive, fatu- 
ous assumption but one made because I had aligned the gay male 
alongside the feminine, the devalued, the unloved. Love had be- 
come a conditional, and I believed that survival depended on the 
approval of the father. Passing was to be accomplished by excel- 
ling in athletics and through my flaming impersonation of the 
weatherman, a spectacle so amusing because the humor always 
lies in the straight male performing the homo; a gay male enact- 
ing hyperbolic homosexual stereotypes in 1976 would have been 
perceived as redundant. And so I existed, as I believe many ado- 
lescents did, as a queer Steppin Fetchit, trapped and speaking the 
language of the enemy in a twilight world somewhere between 
the homo and the hetero, uncomfortably complicit in my own 
oppression. 

It is this memory that prodded me into a commitment, two 
years in succession, to teach the film component of a lesbian and 
gay studies course offered by the Department of English at 
Georgetown University during the spring 1995 and 1996 sernes- 
ters. . While I hesitated about attending, graduate school and all; 



37 




JAY KENT LORENZ 



the difficulties that would entail — beginning a master’s program 
in English at age thirty-two, undergoing an abrupt shift from 
comfortable development director to full-time graduate student— 
the decision to enter Georgetown was relatively painless in com- 
parison to tackling the lesbian and gay studies dilemma. I 
procrastinated for as long as possible before agreeing to teach 
the 1995 lesbian and gay studies class because I was reluctant to 
be marked as gay, which I believe, however erroneously, is the 
inevitable conclusion others draw when one assents to teach such 
a course. But the memory of the weatherman, among much more 
unsettling ghosts, provoked my guilt, and I agreed to design and 
teach Lesbian and Gay Representations in Film and Popular 
Culture, an optional section of Edward Ingebretsen’s Unspeak- 
able Lives: Gay and Lesbian Narratives course, during my sec- 
ond semester as a graduate student. Moreover, the classroom 
appeared to have changed since I was an undergraduate during 
the 1980s, with the instructor (under whom I had studied) now 
morphing into a performance artist whose job it has become, 
according to Peruvian novelist Harry Belevan, to entertain a new 
generation of “spectator-students” (16). My dormant thespian 
skills might be useful here; and I had certainly honed the fine art 
of performance during adolescence! 

The incitement to perform straightness as a means of sur- 
vival can prove irresistible to lesbian and gay youngsters. Yet 
while passing as straight may function as an avoidance of scorn 
and violence, the portrayal still leaves the performer deprived of 
a reasonable nurturing network and in a state of thwarted devel- 
opment. If much of secondary education is strictly acculturation 
to the heterosexual contract, just how relevant has this educa- 
tion been for lesbian and gay youths? Ideally, the university func- 
tions as a remedial dock for the queer young adult seeking 
autonomy, empowerment, language, voice. The lesbian and gay 
studies classroom assists the university with this crucial respon- 
sibility by inviting students to investigate heretofore unacknowl- 
edged areas of study — the polymorphous edge in Shakespearean 
sonnets, the queer cryptography sneaking into Hollywood film 
when the industry was subject to regulation by the Catholic 
Church, or the shifting definitions o( sodomy under English com- 
mon law — those areas erased by what Anthony D’Augelli terms 




38 




Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and Pedagogical Praxis 

the homophobic “‘hidden curriculum’ that devalues the exist- 
ence and concerns of gay men and lesbians” (214). 

I ignored the (willfully) hidden curriculum while trusting in 
the ability of the classroom to “rescue imaginative space from 
the onslaught of heterosexual society” (Shewey xiii). I enacted 
the role of “saboteur” and conceptualized a course that would 
ask questions about aspects of the relationship between lesbians 
and gay men and film/popuiar culture. These queries hold a par- 
ticular relevance for a generation that has come of age in a time 
when the image acts as the privileged signifier, when representa- 
tions in the visual economy hold pride of place over the written 
word. If literacy is a dialectic “between human beings and the 
world, on the one hand, and language and transformative agency, 
on the other” (7), as Giroux insists, then that world is rife with 
synthetic images which are readily absorbed and seldom un- 
packed. However dangerously my own teaching moves toward a 
romanticized notion of Friere’s and Giroux’s theories of critical 
pedagogy, I believe it is my job to empower students with the 
tools of resistant reading, that is, to help them achieve cultural 
literacy by recognizing, and perhaps sabotaging, the representa- 
tional mirror of the surrounding heterosexual imperative. 

Firmly believing in my mission, I whittled down the syllabus 
of my section of Unspeakable Lives to a concentration on the 
Hollywood film for the spring 1995 class. This initially seemed 
an astute strategy that would employ a more popular, accessible 
cinema as an aid in offsetting the often abstruse theoretical read- 
ings of the larger class. David Roman elucidates the distrust of- 
ten felt by undergraduates toward “high” theory: 

My students were suspicious of the sometimes “inaccessible” 
academic writing, questioning its utility outside the classroom. 

If it takes a PhD to read some of these critics, they wondered, 
what practical purpose do the texts serve for lesbian and gay 
people who are not academics? ... In other words, the politics 
of theory seemed only to duplicate the hegemonic power struc- 
tures that alienate the disenfranchised. (115) 

I am forced to report that the “practical purpose” of queer theory 
was thrust in my face during the second week of class: Jason, 
struggling with Sedgwick’s “Axiomatic,” demanded to know why 



JAY KENT LORENZ 



the essay had been written in such an oblique style: “Why does 
Sedgwick use words like pellucid instead of writing ‘easy to un- 
derstand’? Who will even attempt to read this outside the univer- 
sity? Maybe someone should buy her a copy of Strunk and White.” 
Although I am weary of the hoary debates about academic jar- 
gon, the specialized lingo of much queer theory does promote 
dissension between two groups — queer academics and grassroots 
organizers — that share many political goals. Therefore I indulged 
the fantasy that engaging commercial cinematic texts alongside 
dense scholarly concepts — ^“popular/low culture” juxtaposed with 
“high theory,” if you will — might somehow fuse the ivory tower 
and the workaday world. 

So much energy was swirling around Unspeakable Lives dur- 
ing the first few weeks of the spring 1995 class that there was no 
time to revamp a syllabus which I now realized was one-dimen- 
sional, somewhat stale, uniform. As the projector flickered on 
the Hollywood flashback-^Garbo in Queen Christina, 
Hitchcock’s Rope, the histrionics of Tea and Sympathy — my con- 
cerns were with how to deflect personal accusations about my 
authority to teach such a course and how to create an atmo- 
sphere in which students were comfortable enough to attempt 
the personal voice in their writing. Perhaps the lesbian and gay 
studies classroom could be the university site in which we wel- 
come a more personalized expression, in contrast to that often 
dry academic monotone, the monolithic impersonal writing style 
instilled when I was an undergraduate in the 1980s. As if a god- 
send, African American law professor Patricia J. Williams’s essay 
“Crimes without Passion” fell into my hands and gave me 
impetus to gently push those students willing to experiment with 
voice: 

Q asks whether I am not afraid that my personal style is “too 
much” for an academic audience. . . . What is impersonal writ- 
ing but denial of self? . . . empowerment without communion 
. . . lack of risk. ... I think the personal has fallen into disre- 
pute as sloppy because we have lost the courage and the vo- 
cabulary to describe it in the face of enormous social pressure 
to keep it to ourselves — but this is where our most idealistic 
and our deadliest politics are lodged, and revealed. (92-93) 




-40 - 






72 



Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and Pedagogical Praxis 

In “keeping it to ourselves,” scholarly writing has traditionally 
played a prominent role in silencing the Other insofar as the im- 
personal style of academic discourse relies on the elision of dif- 
ference. My students willing to experiment might find 
empowerment in daring to articulate the personal voice, and I 
was experimenting alongside them, venturing to write a tricky 
essay (which you are now reading in substantially revised form) 
for a graduate course in composition studies while allowing — 
for the first time and after years of safe, glib film reviews — my 
own voice to creep in. Writing was thus functioning as a coming- 
out process for me and those students — of whatever persuasion — 
courageous enough to expose part of themselves. 

How were the final results? I found that my initial attempt to 
create my own self-narrative-cum-academic essay suffered from 
evasiveness, a manifest reluctance at self-disclosure that impaired 
its effectiveness, and I intended to rewrite extensively over the 
summer. But several of the interesting topics that my ten students 
chose to write about — the love rescue of the lesbian vampire, the 
rationale behind the queer hagiography of Judy Garland and Greta 
Garbo, the sanitation of the AIDS pandemic in mainstream cin- 
ema — were cast into wonderful papers in which the “I” came 
into play. Perhaps having been inspired by gay film critic and 
historian Richard Dyer, a splendid scholar whose personal his- 
tory is integral to his writing on cinema, students attempted to 
incorporate the self as a means of boosting their own authority 
as writers. 

My self-congratulatory humor subsided quickly, however, 
when a faculty member, upon seeing my syllabus, remarked that 
the course was shockingly devoid of any representations that were 
not Anglo-Saxon. While I included lesbian images, those lesbian 
representations were as racially biased as the typical gay male 
depictions. Automatic admission based on group affiliation is 
seldom the policy for those gay men and lesbians not perceived 
as Anglo; instead, membership must be proven before they are 
allowed entrance. Audre Lorde speaks of the triple exclusion of 
lesbians of color: “We knew we were outside the pale.”^ Her 
words made me shamefully grateful that all of my students dur- 
ing the 1995 semester were white, as my trepidation about teach- 



( O 



o 



- 41 - 



JAY KENT LORENZ 



ing the section led me to employ a Hollywood cinema that ig- 
nores multiple perspectives. 

When it was syllabus preparation time for the next year’s 
film component of Unspeakable Lives, I labored diligently over 
the 1996 section with the intent of creating a more expansive 
course; simultaneously, I attempted to avoid the trap of token- 
ism. Blessed with the extravagance of being able to participate in 
the larger class as teacher-cum-student and to utilize extensive 
film theory/queer theory in my section (because of a shift in the 
holistic design of Unspeakable Lives), I aimed for a syncretic film 
and reading selection. I interwove commercial U.S. films, inde- 
pendent releases, and foreign titles with pertinent essays to be 
read solely by the students in the film section, and always in con- 
sideration of the larger class readings. Hopefully, this strategy 
would encompass difference and challenge students. Some ex- 
amples of pedagogical praxes planned in the second syllabus in- 
cluded screening Nestor Almendros and Orlando Jimenez-Leal’s 
1984 documentary Mauvaise conduite (Improper Conduct), an 
indictment of Castro’s reform policies aimed at the “nonexist- 
ent” Cuban homosexual, in conjunction with a discussion about 
the fall of communism in eastern Europe and the unsettling boom 
in gay pornographic video production aimed at a western mar- 
ket; reading Esther Newton’s work on the “mythic mannish les- 
bian,” illuminating why butch/femme role-playing was integral 
to the early lesbian community, before we viewed Forbidden Love: 
The Unashamed Stories of Lesbian Lives, Lynne Fernie and Aerlyn 
Weissman’s Canadian documentary about women who chose to 
live openly as lesbians during the 1940s; and watching Black Brit 
Isaac Julien’s fantasy about Harlem Renaissance poet Langston 
Hughes, Looking for Langston, in juxtaposition with Madonna’s 
“Vogue,” a music video shamelessly aping Julien’s celluloid style 
and containing rap lyrics that sanctify white superstars of the 
past. The intricacy of the second syllabus had a salutary effect on 
me, and I was anxiously looking forward to teaching the spring 
1996 class. 

When the 1996 semester began. Professor Ingebretsen and I 
discovered that we had the most popular offering in the English 
department: we overenrolled the course at forty-five students and 




- 42 - 



74 



Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and Pedagogical Praxis 

placed another forty on a waiting list. I spent the second large- 
class session projecting a compilation reel that had been created 
using film clips conducive to a subsequent discussion on the so- 
cial construction of gender behavior and sexual orientation. I 
had painstakingly assembled footage — utilizing popular films 
from Bringing Up Baby, with Cary Grant and Katharine Hepburn, 
to The Brady Bunch Movie— to create a visual essay that con- 
tained its own, I hoped, amusing narrative. I reasoned that as I 
was essentially advertising myself to students who might desire 
to take the film section, this minimovie could sell the sizzle. I was 
rewarded with twenty students — refreshingly from across the 
multicultural spectrum, most of whom subsequently displayed 
an outward heterosexual identity— who signed up eagerly and 
barraged me with suggestions about possible screenings. 

I was pleased with the lively results during the screening of 
my compilation reel — there would be no impassive spectator-stu- 
dents in this class — and requested, amidst some groans, that film 
section students begin a weekly journal in which they write about 
class screenings and readings or about outside media and print 
representations of gay and lesbian lives. While the groans ini- 
tially appeared somewhat justified — Elizabeth bemoaned the re- 
quirement as she was already maintaining journals for three other 
classes — requiring students to record their thoughts in a less anxi- 
ety-ridden venue than a formal paper is a useful strategy for class 
involvement. In addition, journal writing functioned excellently 
as a seedbed for subsequent essay assignments.^ But a predica- 
ment arose from my reading of student journals: I of course had 
no wish to apply letter grades to this assignment but, considering 
the subject matter of the class, considering that some students 
might be struggling with their own coming-out issues, should I 
merely check to ensure that journals were being maintained? 
Would a quick glance suffice? If I collected and read them, would 
students be more reserved in subject matter and less courageous 
in expository style? As I was only a second-year instructor, and 
because I did wish to be a good teacher, I elected to read the 
journals so that I could get a sense of what was working in the 
course and what was not, which would be especially helpful if I 
taught another course on lesbian and gay film representations in 
the future. 




.v' - ' 



- 43 - 



JAY KENT LORENZ 



As I brainstormed and planned for the 1996 course, a second 
swell of legislation aimed at barring “the promotion of homo- 
sexuality” in public education — that is, any discussion of homo- 
sexuality that does not use words of condemnation — also 
politically threatened the open-forum policy of the private uni- 
versity.^ Fueled by the media focus on both the presence of ho- 
mosexual subject matter in the high school classroom and the 
neoconservative response to the ever-shifting intellectual climate 
of the university, right-wing gadflies were then castigating 
Georgetown in the conservative press because of changes in the 
English curriculum. “Promo homo” could be the rallying cry of 
the opportunistic politician or the overzealous columnist who 
was tipped off about this course.'* But I attempted not to let para- 
noia rule my actions, even though it was doubtful that I could 
count on institutional support in light of Georgetown’s own ig- 
nominious efforts to silence lesbian and gay students: in 1987, 
after prohibiting a lesbian and gay student association from meet- 
ing on campus, Georgetown changed its policy and granted the 
organization the privilege of institutional space but denied it uni- 
versity recognition or financial support. This “privilege” had been 
bestowed because disgruntled students had instigated a lawsuit 
against Georgetown, and the university feared losing in the D.C. 
court of appeals. In a contemptible fund-raising letter to alumni, 
Georgetown portrayed its actions in the language of self-sacri- 
fice, patting itself on the back for avoiding a possible legal prece- 
dent that would lead to the “promotion of homosexuality” at 
other private universities. 

“Promoting,” or rather the academic inclusion of, a sincere 
inquiry into the representations of, the cultural artifacts created 
by, the legal concerns pertinent to, or the social existence lived by 
gay men and lesbians is but one of a number of potentially sus- 
pect scholarly pursuits. While the canon garrison maintains that 
there simply exists, indeed always has existed, an elite group of 
texts worthy of study, this seemingly benign posture betrays its 
pernicious intent through the enmity directed toward minority 
literatures and emerging fields of academic inquiry. Some evidence? 
Look no further than to what Mary Louise Pratt terms the “as- 
toundingly racist remarks” of canon palace guard Saul Bellow: 

“ . . . [W]hen the Zulus have a Tolstoy, we will read him” (15). 




■ u- 




- 44 - 



Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and Pedagogical Praxis 



It was into the fury of the curriculum wars that I swam dur- 
ing the second spring of teaching, but I had had the advantage of 
acting out my insecurities during the previous year and was suf- 
ficiently equipped to handle a department under siege. Oh, but 
that first spring was excruciating: if I was struggling for author- 
ity when instructing First- Year Literature and Writing, imagine 
the pressures of designing my own section as a first-year gradu- 
ate student for a course that some of the faculty deemed worth- 
less, while simultaneously being forced into a coming-out posture 
that elicited a recoding of me from the department and student 
body. My initial mindset was an inescapable paranoia, a self- 
ingested terror that I lacked authority and would be discredited 
no matter what I did. David Halperin writes eloquently of “the 
problem of authorization” confronting the gay and lesbian aca- 
demic: 



How can I acquire and maintain the authority to speak, to be 
heard, and to be taken seriously without denying or bracket- 
ing my gayness . . . [when] a claimed homosexual identity op- 
erates as an instant disqualification, exposes you to accusations 
of pathology and partisanship, and grants everyone else an ab- 
solute epistemological privilege over you. (8) 

While Halperin’s claim can be witnessed functioning outside 
academe with a more pronounced vengeance, “instant disquali- 
fication” exists at the university level in the “feminization” and 
dismissal of lesbian and gay studies programs and practitioners, 
often in the form of decreased funding. Yet paradoxically, a salu- 
tary space might be constructed under the lesbian and gay stud- 
ies rubric where the authority of the instructor in this particular 
classroom receives a boost because of a professed queer identity. 
It was in this idealistic assertion that I took comfort when I real- 
ized how much energy I was expending distressing over my Q 
rating among students, daydreaming of an impressive popularity 
score as if that would somehow alchemize into respect. So I wor- 
ried when, first semester, I turned around to discover a sea of 
angry faces fresh from Alfred Hitchcock’s 1948 Rope, a film that 
even the late director dismissed with a wave of his hand as an 
unsuccessful exercise in style. But I responded to student baffle- 
ment as to what my motivation could have been for screening 



ERLC 



- 45 - 



( i: 



JAY KENT LORENZ 



this film by first questioning their assumption that if the text to 
be investigated is a film, then said text must first function as 
entertainment. While Rope is not, I admitted to the class, a “good” 
film, it is worthy of consideration for several reasons: its inten- 
tional ability to sneak in a strong homosexual subtext under the 
restrictive Hays code; the disquieting, almost hysterical invective 
employed by the closeted homosexual character when denounc- 
ing the two homosexually active villains, a speech act which func- 
tions as a homophobic means of survival; and the overdetermined, 
self-conscious cinematic style that entangles and punishes “artis- 
tic” stereotypes in its intricate design. Students seemed impressed 
. with my responses during our impromptu postscreening discus- 
sion, and while some of their respect appeared to emanate from 
their awareness of my tenure as a film critic, I believe that the 
majority stemmed from the authority I brought to the conversa- 
tion as an out queer, my visibility increasing when I organized, 
among other campus involvements, a queer theory discussion 
group. 

Along with that authority comes the risk that the instructor 
becomes the entitled signifier — something that, unfortunately, 
occurred during the 1995 class when students seemed reluctant 
to speak or to challenge me. But the students in the 1996 class 
managed to be open, outspoken, aggressive, fierce, never hesi- 
tant in stating opinions that might not be shared by me or uni- 
versally admired. As an illustration, when reading Paul Monette’s 
Becoming a Man, Sonia, perhaps the most conservative student 
in the section, articulated a concern about what was for her an 
unnerving, abnormal amount of attention paid by Monette to 
sexual matters during his preadolescence. She wondered if this 
appeared unusual to anyone else in the class. The responses were 
amazingly quick in forthcoming and constituted a pedagogical 
magic moment: recollections of playing doctor and fractured 
Freudian glimpses of parental nudity briefly gave the classroom 
a tinge of the confessional. Sonia discovered that she was a mi- 
nority of one and attributed this to cultural differences, presum- 
ably her rigidly traditional Mexican upbringing. What functioned 
as the catalyst here? What made the 1996 classroom so frank 
and energetic in comparison with the previous year? Was it the 
group dynamic, my new self-assurance, or a combination of both? 

ERIC 






78 



Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and Pedagogical Praxis 



I was not certain but suspected that an awareness of, and the 
focus on, difference — the unique perspective that each individual 
brings to a cultural artifact (something I stressed so firmly the 
second year) — contributed to our success. Culpable the first spring 
in abetting an “exclusionary” academic apparatus hazarding “the 
establishment of programs that might as well call themselves white 
lesbian and gay studies” (Yarbro-Bejarano 125), I forcefully em- 
phasized in the 1996 class that any reading of the filmic cultural 
mirror is individually accomplished through the multifaceted lens 
of class, race, ethnicity, nationality, gender, personal history, and 
sexual orientation. Furthermore, screening such films as the Tai- 
wanese The Wedding Banquet, with its conflicts between East 
and West, young and old, gay and straight, or the American in- 
dependent The Incredibly True Adventure of Two Girls in Love, 
a lesbian bildungsroman entangled in the frictions of race and 
class, facilitated an appreciation of what Homi K, Bhabha terms 
“the vernacular cosmopolitan” — the mixture of identities con- 
fronting modern cultures (qtd. in Greenbaum), In our exception- 
ally multilayered classroom, it became strikingly evident that 
sexual orientation must be negotiated among other competing 
identities, a postmodern inevitability of the way we perceive. 
Yet the postmodern take on personal history — that is, the 
bracketing, if not the outright discrediting, of lived experience — 
proved particularly troublesome in a class such as this. We flirted 
precariously with the possibility of establishing “truths,” but I 
would not silence those students who chose to reveal memories, 
often painful, of those experiences that might possibly enhance 
our understanding of lesbian and gay issues. During the second 
year, there was Thomas, an older student, an African American 
veteran who spoke to us of the isolation he endured when sta- 
tioned in Germany: the fear that the most subtle homosexual 
gesture would be decoded and result in a court martial. And Karen, 
an Anglo West Point transfer whose presence in our classroom 
appeared odd until she shared with us her memories of losing a 
father to AIDS three years previously, shortly after first being 
confronted with his homosexuality. Their recollections were pal- 
pable, unique, invaluable, providing firsthand accounts of cur- 
rent controversies — such as gays serving openly in the military or 
the horrors of the AIDS pandemic. I recollected the lesson of the 




- 47 - 



79 



JAY KENT LORENZ 



weatherman. and noted that if we .unpacked the remembrances of 
Thomas, Karen, and others, if we unmoored the ideological un- 
derpinnings of these memories, then experience emerges from 
(discreditation as a valuable analytical tool. 

Inquiry into the relevance of lived experience, specifically as 
it assists in constructing the subject, became an unforeseen con- 
sequence of showing David Cronenberg’s They Came from 
Within. Unplanned on my end, the disturbing 1975 horror film 
pressed the class into entering the social constructivism/biologi- 
cal determinism debate surrounding sexual identity. The rapa- 
cious sexual appetite exhibited by characters who have ingested 
a combination aphrodisiac/venereal disease prompted some stu- 
dents, a bit surprisingly, to view They Came from Within as the 
confirmation of desire as an innate urge. This viewpoint encour- 
aged some genuine provocation among students surrounding the 
nurture vs. nature debate, an issue often contested in the worka- 
day world but usually ignored by an academe that genuflects at 
the altar of Foucauldian-inspired constructivism. While I tend to 
embrace the constructivist side of the contention, I am nonethe- 
less appalled at how the holy writ of nurture thoughtlessly anni- 
hilates the possibility of a biological component under the auspices 
of an antifoundationalism that disingenuously establishes a new 
foundation. 

Our heated discussion about the constructivism vs. determin- 
ism dispute was representative of the pedagogical approach that 
promotes exposing students to ongoing struggles within (and, in 
this instance, also outside) academe. Perhaps one of the most 
engrossing ivory tower and workaday contestations confronted 
in this classroom concerns language, predominately the positive 
and negative energies generated by the term queer. Is the neolo- 
gistic reinvention of queer, in which the word supposedly com- 
municates positive connotations, working to promote “coalition 
between and among lesbians and gay men” or functioning as 
“an effacement of the subject position delineated by these two 
groups” (Haggerty and Zimmerman 4)? Furthermore, is queer a 
term so embedded in a history of hatred that its use conceivably 
alienates an older generation of gay men and lesbians? It is rel- 
evant to note that students in the spring 1995 course vehemently 
opposed the use of queer on historical grounds, but their response 



Er|c - 80 



-48 - 



Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and Pedagogical Praxis 

was apropos considering that gay and lesbian were hardly ever 
uttered during this semester, and discussions invariably worked 
backward toward gender performatives discussed during the first 
weeks of class. Students in the second offering of my section, 
however, became split between those anxious about yet another 
erasure of the lesbian or gay subject and those optimistic that 
employing queer in all situations would result in a contented plu- 
ralism. 

When these conflicts began to find their way onto paper dur- 
ing the spring 1996 term, the gentle prodding on my part that 
was so much a part of the previous year was replaced by my 
asking students to concentrate on the passages that appeared most 
hazy, most hesitant, most promising. As I considered similarities 
between the processes of composition and coming out, processes 
that involve rewriting and restaging, I found it especially impera- 
tive to attack those drafts in which the student displayed the most 
trepidation and force the writer, in Nancy Sommers’s words, “back 
into the chaos, back to the point where they are shaping and 
restructuring their meaning” (154). This entailed cajoling Russell 
into employing his own observations from time spent in London 
in his writing about homosexual representations in British films 
of the Thatcher era, even though Russell didn’t “want to be pinned 
down.” Or asking David to flesh out the link he discovered be- 
tween communism and homosexuality during the McCarthy 
years, as it is quite relevant to his discussion of 1950s gender 
models. The overall quality of the final papers turned in at the 
end of the 1996 session was noticeably higher than those of the 
previous year. I was pleased. 

Four years later, now struggling through a doctoral program 
in visual studies at the University of California, Irvine, I am more 
inquisitive than when I began teaching, struggling even more 
fiercely to gain a foothold, to grasp the intricacies of pedagogical 
praxis, and, with a tip of my hat toward the solipsistic, to under- 
stand why I do what I do. The “why” must partially lie in the 
satisfaction of encouraging inquiry into a field that I adore, learn- 
ing from my students, and inhabiting the quixotic fantasy that I 
may actually make a small contribution to students’ lives. So it is 
gratifying to recollect Russell making an unannounced visit to 
my office during the spring of 1996 to compliment me on the 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



- 49 - 



81 



JAY KENT LORENZ 



arbitration skills I had employed when ideological skirmishes 
erupted in our section. And equally reassuring in 2000 is the 
memory of the time when, while I was experiencing a low point 
during April 1995, Professor Ingebretsen informed me that I had 
been performing my teaching duties with felicity, and students 
had encouraged him to offer the film option the following year. 

The latter incident could not have come at a more opportune 
time. I had just returned from signing my name to a contract to 
coach soccer at a middle school in Arlington, Virginia. I had bro- 
ken the rules of my graduate fellowship because I had to do some- 
thing in which I could be certain of my competence. Walking 
across the playing field toward my car, I acknowledged that the 
issue had never really been about the weatherman; the blame 
had been shifted onto him as part of a tangled scheme to evade 
the history of the self. 

My parody of the weatherman was also an unconscious at- 
tempt to erase the memory of a little boy named Michael, a quiet, 
blindingly beautiful seventh grader taunted by peers and teach- 
ers for his aversion to athletics, his effeminacy, and his Asian 
American ethnicity. Beholding Michael in the doorway of a sev- 
enth-grade English class is the first time I experienced desire, and 
alongside that attraction existed the urge to annihilate, as if by 
destroying Michael I could permanently vanquish an unsanctioned 
urge. Always fearful of exposure and, of course, consulting no 
one — for what language would I use to tell? — I surmised that the 
survival of my secret depended on my participation in the verbal 
and physical abuse. 

Matters reached critical mass during a rainy April day. Forced 
to stay indoors because of weather conditions, we organized an 
impromptu dodgeball game in the school gymnasium. Michael 
never once threw any of the red “safety” balls during the game, 
but remarkably he did manage to evade all the balls until he was 
one of only two boys remaining on the opposing team. Annoyed 
with Michael’s refusal to fully participate, I picked up one of the 
smaller balls, lined him up in the position of fire, and threw that 
ball with the intent to maim. When the ball impacted — at the ideal 
moment it was surging with maximum velocity — it first broke 
Michael’s nose. The force caused him to lose his balance and fall 
backward, his head the first body part to hit the concrete floor. 





- 50 - 



Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture and Pedagogical Praxis 

The relevance of lived experience? With me forever is a 
memory of myself committing violence against another young 
man who could not play dodgeball, who did not possess the abil- 
ity to pass, but who was beautiful enough to unsettle me. I teach, 
therefore, as an act of atonement. 



Notes 



1. horde’s quote is taken from the documentary Before Stonewall, dirs. 
Greta Schiller and Robert Rosenberg, 1985. 

2. For a detailed discussion of journal writing, see Toby Fulwiler. 

3. The first wave of legislation aggressively aimed at intimidating and 
silencing gay and lesbian students and teachers occurred in the late 1970s 
and was spearheaded by advertising pitchperson Anita Bryant and Cali- 
fornia state senator John Briggs. See Yarbeck. The second swell of antigay 
legislation occurring during the mid- to late 1990s uses a variant of 
Bryant’s “Save Our Children” platform — children must be protected 
from the “allure” of homosexuality — as its blueprint. 

4. The media brouhaha over the changes in requirements for English 
majors at Georgetown began when the Washington Times published 
several unflattering op-ed pieces in late 1995. See, for example, Clevenger. 
Subsequently, other local and national publications weighed in with their 
verdicts on the three new English tracks, of which only one made a 
course in Chaucer, Shakespeare, or Milton no longer mandatory. See 
Dowd; Pollit. 



Works Cited 



Belevan, Harry. “The American Professor: That’s Entertainment!” Wash- 
ington Post Education Review 6 Aug. 1995: 16. 

Clevenger, Ty. “GU Pays Big Price for PC English.” Washington Times 
25 Feb. 1996: Al. 

D’Augelli, Anthony. “Teaching Lesbian/Gay Development: From Op- 
pression to Exceptionality.” Coming Out of the Classroom Closet: 
Gay and Lesbian Students, Teachers, and Curricula. Ed. Karen 
Harbeck. New York: Haworth, 1992. 




- 51 - 




JAY KENT LORENZ 



Dowd, Maureen. “A Winter’s Tale.” New York Times 28 Dec. 1995: 
A21. 

Fulwiler, Toby. “The Personal Connection: Journal Writing Across the 
Curriculum.” Language Connections: Writing and Reading Across 
the Curriculum. Ed. Toby Fulwiler and Art Young. Urbana, IL: 
NCTE, 1982. 15-32. 

Giroux, Henry. Introduction. Literacy: Reading the Word and the World. 
Paulo Freire and Donaldo Macedo. South Hadley, MA: Bergin, 
1987. 1-27. 

Greenbaum, Steve. “A Cadre of New Scholars.” Chronicle of Higher 
Education 22 Mar. 1996: A15. 

Haggerty, George, and Bonnie Zimmerman. Introduction. Professions 
of Desire: Lesbian and Gay Studies in Literature. Ed. George 
Haggerty and Bonnie Zimmerman. New York: MLA, 1995. 1-7. 

Halperin, David M. Saint Foucault: Towards a Gay Hagiography. New 
York: Oxford UP, 1995. 

Pollit, Katha. “Sweet Swan of Avon!” Nation 4 Mar. 1996: 9. 

Pratt, Mary Louise. “Humanities for the Future: Reflections on the 
Western Cultural Debate at Stanford. ” The Politics of Liberal Edu- 
cation. Ed. Darryl J. Gless and Barbara Herrnstein Smith. Durham: 
Duke UP, 1992. 13-31. 

Roman, David. “Teaching Differences: Theory and Practice in a Les- 
bian and Gay Studies Seminar.” Professions of Desire: Lesbian and 
Gay Studies in Literature. Ed. George Haggerty and Bonnie 
Zimmerman. 113-23. 

Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. Epistemology of the Closet. Berkeley: U of 
California P, 1990. 

Shewey, Don. Introduction. Out Front: Contemporary Gay and Les- 
bian Plays. Ed. Don Shewey. New York: Grove, 1988. xi-xxii. 

Sommers, Nancy. “Responding to Student Writing.” College Composi- 
tion and Communication 33 (1982): 148-56. 

Williams, Patricia J. “Crimes without Passion.” The Alchemy of Race 
and Rights. Ed. Patricia J. Williams. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1991. 
80-97. 



Yarbeck, Karen Y. “Personal Freedoms/Public Constraints: An Analysis 
of the Controversy over the Employment of Homosexuals as School 
Teachers.” Diss. Stanford U, 1987. Appendix C. 




Blame It on the Weatherman: Popular Culture arid Pedagogical Praxis 

Yarbro-Bejarano, Yvonne. “Expanding the Categories of Race and Sexu- 
ality in Lesbian and Gay Studies.” Professions of Desire: Lesbian 
and Gay Studies in Literature. Ed. George Haggerty and Bonnie 
Zirhrnerman. 124-35. 




- 53 - 




Chapter Four 





On Not Coming Out: 
or. Reimagining Limits 

Susan Talburt 
Georgia State University 



There is no innocent way to wear the category, no cat- 
egorical innocence, 

Robyn Wiegman, “Introduction: 
Mapping the Lesbian Postmodern” 



I n her recent book about gay men and lesbians in the academy, 
Toni McNaron describes the impact of her sexuality on her 
intellectual life, saying, “Lesbian is an intellectual lens through 
which I sift all the data that enter my consciousness daily” (110). 
Speaking of coming out and beginning to teach and conduct re- 
search in gay and lesbian studies after being closeted for years in 
the English department at the University of Minnesota, McNaron 
posits that the challenge for lesbians in the academy is “integrat- 
ing our personal identities into our intellectual pursuits” (112). I 
suspect that even those who perceive themselves as not having 
the option of being “out” or working in gay and lesbian studies 
might agree with her. But while I do not wish to minimize the 
difficulties faced by those who would like but are unable to inte- 
grate their sexuality with their academic and pedagogical pur- 
suits, it may be helpful to put a bit of pressure on an unquestioned 



Portions of this essay were adapted for inclusion in my book Subject to 
Identity: Knowledge, Sexuality, and Academic Practices in Higher Educa- 
tion, Albany: SUNY Press, 2000. 







- 54 - 



86 



On Not Coming Out: or. Reimagining Limits 

desirability of such an integration. What if “lesbian” is not a 
lens? Or the most salient lens? What if “lesbian” is not a “per- 
sonal” identity? What if a “lesbian” feels no need for such con- 
scious integration? 

McNaron’s concerns follow several currents in antihomo- 
phobic and feminist thought. Gay and lesbian writing on peda- 
gogy has been influenced by political incitements for instructors 
to come out in order to combat heterosexism and homophobia, 
to offer gay and lesbian students role models, and to counter 
institutionalized silencing of gays and lesbians. George Haggerty, 
for example, has argued that gay and lesbian faculty members 
have a “duty” to be open about their sexuality because they “of- 
fer one of the few contexts in which the thoughtless and demean- 
ing label can be reinvested with personal and cultural meaning. 
But we must also teach our students to be gay and lesbian, to 
show them that it is possible to flourish as lesbians and gay men 
in a culture that does everything it can to silence and oppress us” 
(12). Along similar lines, Amy Blumenthal explains, “As an edu- 
cator, I want to be a positive role model for all my students and a 
special support for lesbian and gay students. , , , I also believe 
that one of my professional obligations is to be a change agent, 
especially when that change leads to greater understanding” 
(Mittler and Blumenthal 4). Following calls for gay and lesbian 
voice and visibility, there is an imperative — indeed, an obliga- 
tion — for teachers to figure themselves as classroom texts, to rep- 
resent and embody a category of sexuality so that their very 
presence is pedagogical. 

The logic of taking a gay or lesbian subject position is linked 
to oppositional pedagogies that would challenge ideologies of 
the instructor as universal bearer of truth, knowledge as disinter- 
ested, and pedagogy as properly detached from political concerns. 
A primary impetus behind such stances has been the feminist 
mantra “the personal is the political” as it has been translated 
into an emphasis on the personal in the classroom.^ Broadly con- 
strued, these pedagogies argue that instructors should name their 
subject positions and personal stakes in the subject matter in or- 
der to demonstrate the situated relations of knowers and known: 
“By assuming a position in the classroom, on the contrary, the 






- 55 - 



67 



SUSAN TALBURT 

teacher makes it possible for the student to become aware of his 
[or her] position, of his [or her], own relations to power/knowl- 
edge formations” (Zavarzadeh and Morton 11). For the gay or 
lesbian academic, the personal becomes the sexual; sexual iden- 
tity becomes the political. Presumably, a sort of osmotic model- 
ing occurs: see my personal-sexual-political position and you will 
know your position. 

Despite the dangers of a slippage between identity, position- 
ing, and the personal, this “personalization” of pedagogy has 
not been without positive effects. It partakes of a moment of 
ferment in the academy characterized by efforts to democratize 
access to higher education and to challenge institutional norms 
brought about by civil rights and social movements since the 
1960s. With political and demographic changes on campuses, 
programs in racial, ethnic, women’s, and gay and lesbian studies 
have proliferated in order to accommodate the demands of newly 
vocal minority groups. The institutionalization of these identity- 
recognizing and identity-constituting programs has profoundly 
affected the content and methods of academic research and teach- 
ing and in many cases has enabled the work of minority and 
oppositional scholars. At the same time, however, the rhetoric of 
identity politics and universities’ responses to it have had the so- 
cial and academic effect of conflating identity with minority group 
affiliation. Social categories of identity have thus become struc- 
turing forces in higher education. In this context, feminist and 
other challenges to universality and objectivity, and the related 
trend, of bringing the “margins” to the “center,” have been con- 
straining even as they have been enabling. For example, with 
pushes for the representation of “new voices” in the academy 
have come increasing pressure for scholars to account for what 
Roof and Wiegman- describe as the “inescapable epistemic con- 
tingencies” (ix) in their scholarship and classrooms. As a result, 
demands on minoritized faculty have shifted so that a privileged 
few become representatives of a social position, contained in “a 
new, deafening ‘authenticity,’ one that disturbingly reduces the 
complexity of social subjectivity’’ (x). As David Palurnbo-Liu 
points out, scholars, who were once asked to universajize them- 



O — 56 - 

ERIC 



w .. 



88 



On Not Coming Out: or, Reimagining Limits 



selves — to ignore, for example, their gendered and racialized be- 
ings — are now being asked “not only to recognize the personal 
as racial but to foreground it particularly in their scholarly du- 
ties” (1078). 

With demands for (knowledge of) multicultural subjects, fac- 
ulty hired on the basis of their identities or areas of “identity 
scholarship” become objects of exchange on the academic mar- 
ket, filling niches that demonstrate institutional commitments to 
diversity. The recognition of differences, however, is structured 
by a dichotomy of dominant and subordinate that sets the terms 
for the behaviors of minority faculty. Roof and Wiegman write: 
“In return for being adopted as a token member and for gaining 
entry into the privileges of the canon and/or scholarly authority, 
the representative of the subordinate group complies with a vari- 
ety of critical demands, including acting true to ‘type’” (152). 
But even with the salience of identity politics, ideologies of ob- 
jectivity persist, creating a duality in which the erasure and the 
highlighting of identity are simultaneous and contradictory ide- 
als that structure academic and pedagogical authority. 

In the face of these constraints, faculty have begun to ques- 
tion professorial identity politics in and out of the classroom. 
Indira Karamcheti, for example, has written against “the 
commodification of the multicultural body” (145). She argues: 

The demand on the minority teacher for the personal (a de- 
mand which often forms the grounds for pedagogical author- 
ity) appears in many places: in teaching strategy, in subject 
matter, certainly in the power dynamics and the erotics of the 
classroom. More important, it moves the marketplace into the 
classroom. The personal is something we narrativize and pro- 
duce as part of the package as well. The personal is part of our 
academic, economic product. (145) 

What Karamcheti points to is a shift in which the “personal” is 
becoming less a force in transforming academic norms and increas- 
ingly a function of the “institutional incitement to discourse” (Fou- 
cault, History 18) that completes the multicultural contract. What 
happens, then, when a teacher rejects discourses of the personal? 




57 



ERIC 



SUSAN TALBURT 



An Ethnographic Reading That 
Succumbs to the Intentional Fallacy 

In this essay, I theorize the academic and social positioning of 
Olivia Moran, an associate professor of English at a prestigious 
public research institution.^ Olivia is a white lesbian with a na- 
tional reputation in lesbian theory, an area increasingly marketed 
in literary studies. She brings to her department a prolific pub- 
lishing record and teaching abilities in Shakespeare, British and 
American twentieth-century literature, feminist critical theory, gay 
and lesbian studies, film studies, and cultural studies. In framing 
Olivia’s pedagogical stances and actions, I begin with her rela- 
tion to “lesbian,” a category that, when attached to “identity” 
or “community,” she finds limiting, static, and contradictory to 
her intellectual project of questioning to create new forms of 
thought. This relation is enacted most clearly in her departmen- 
tal “anti-identity” performances against assumptions attached 
to “lesbian/lesbian theorist.” At the same time, her experience of 
being a lesbian and her academic goals inform her pedagogy, but 
instead of constituting herself as a legible classroom text by nam- 
ing her sexuality, Olivia creates situations in which she and her 
students must enact positions in relation to the texts under study. 
The juxtaposition of her words to my observations of her class 
suggest that at stake in her teaching is the constitution of a com- 
munity based in relations to ideas rather than identities. What I 
offer, then, are my readings of both Olivia’s actions and her read- 
ings of her actions. 

By reading Olivia’s departmental and pedagogical actions in 
relation to her articulated stances, I in a sense read against her 
words, for Olivia does not locate her work in relation to “self” 
or personal history. In fact, she is a vocal critic of authorial inten- 
tionality in biographical literary criticism, concerned that read- 
ers not think there is a “real” against which they can read an 
author’s work. Olivia does not often offer a “real,” describing 
her intellectual pursuits much as she describes identity: multiple, 
shifting, and relational. Experiences and intentions are not per- 
sonal, but expressions of culture. I thus understand her actions 







- 58 - 



90 



On Not Coming Out: or, Reimagihing Limits 



as responses to what she perceives to be social and institutional 
exigencies. My reading is informed by Foucault’s understanding 
of human practices as the creative use of existing systems. He 
describes “practices of the self,” or “the way in which the subject 
constitutes himself [or herself] in an active fashion” (“Ethic” 11) 
as inventions that are suggested or imposed by social and cul- 
tural discourses. At times my analysis merges with Olivia’s and 
at times it departs from it, for I read both with and against her 
understandings and actions. 

Being a Cranky Lesbian Critic 

For Olivia, “lesbian” is not a category to represent, voice, or 
make visible, but a relational process of shifting identifications. 
Her approach to what a lesbian is or is not — a verb rather than a 
noun, identifications rather than an identity, a source of limita- 
tion rather than liberation — is constitutive of much of her aca- 
demic work and serves as a backdrop to understanding her 
performance against location and a lesbian “personal.” In de- 
scribing “identity,” Olivia drew on the psychoanalytic notion of 
an ego fiction, “the thing that deludes you into believing there’s 
something whole that you’re speaking from,” something that can 
speak but that is usually spoken: “This is identification, it’s a 
process, it’s not a static thing, it’s not a category, it’s not a thing. 
I prefer that as a way of understanding this because it allows 
flux, it allows the tensions, dynamics, and shifts, whereas “iden- 
tity” seems to provide the fiction that there is this thing, this 
stable thing that’s sort of unchanging through time.” Not fully 
constituted, “identities” are situationally evoked: 

We have a legion of things that are providing identities; they’re 
not that full, they’re like attachments in some way. . . . They’re 
always there, but they recede and they’re more prominent at 
times and they recede at times. They’re like a whole wardrobe, 
and sometimes, they’re there, they’re in the closet, you take 
them off and put them on, but it’s more involuntary than that, 

I think. They come. They’re called up by certain stimuli; it may 
be contextual, it may be environmental. 



- 59 - 




SUSAN TALBURT 



Her unsettling and evocative mixture of theatrical and closet 
metaphors suggests not a unified subject but a contextual self 
that is constituted transactionally. 

For Olivia, understanding identity as a substance is impli- 
cated in the construction of “counterpoint identities,” in which 
the meanings of inferior terms in hierarchized oppositions (such 
as man/woman, white/black, straight/gay) become overdetermined 
in their specificity vis-a-vis unmarked universals. Counterpoint 
identities such as “lesbian” conflate difference and identity, and 
elide their constitution within the recognitions of others. She thus 
understands the use of positionality (“As a white male hetero- 
sexual, I . . .”) as a rhetorical strategy in which “identities are 
nouns rather than verbs, and that somehow is seen as a legiti- 
mate rhetorical move that authorizes even as it excuses.” Rhe- 
torical strategies are dependent on context, which defines “what 
a relevant identity category is there.” Olivia seeks to sidestep the 
contextual relevance of “lesbian” by not naming a “personal.” 
As Khayatt observes, “for a statement on the order of ‘I am a 
lesbian’ to have any coherence, there has to be an understanding 
of the term ‘identity’ as stable and unchanging or a recognition 
that the statement is momentary or necessary in a particular con- 
text” (132). If “lesbian” is a shifting process, if neither sexual 
categories nor our relations to them are static, what are the ben- 
efits of positioning oneself categorically? To reverse the ques- 
tion, what might be the benefits of questioning the category in 
practice? Olivia’s response is to enact a performance that has as 
its point of departure location within the category but that, as 
David Roman describes, “due to its discontinuity^ offers neither 
a fixed subject position nor an essential representation of the 
‘real’” (“Performing” 212). 

She takes on this performance in the context of her scholarly 
visibility as lesbian in a department she understands as attaching 
certain roles to her status of “lesbian/lesbian theorist.” Olivia 
described colleagues’ treatment of her and Karen, a colleague 
who also works in lesbian studies: “We will be our countercultural 
figures, we will be relied upon to do certain kinds of things and 
we speak for all gay people, and all that kind of stereotypical 
association kind of crap that you get.” Such expectations play 




60 




On Not Coming Out: or. Reimagining Limits 

themselves out across the university as Olivia is granted author- 
ity to speak for gay and lesbian persons and issues. After' being 
asked to take a lesbian candidate for a faculty position in an- 
other department to dinner and to be interviev^ed for an article 
on gay and lesbian rights for a university publication, Olivia spoke 
of her use of her token position: 

I use the opportunity to debunk the notion of the category. ... 

I don’t know to what extent the privilege I have is because of 
[the category] and because I produce a helluva lot — I can’t fig- 
ure that, I don’t know which it is. But that work has to be 
done. And the work means providing an interesting discussion 
about what these issues and categories are, in the place of an 
assumption about the category. 

Her wariness of “lesbian” echoes Michel Foucault’s claim 
that “[vjisibility is a trap” (Discipline 200) that disciplines the 
subject and inherently perpetuates itself: 



If you say that any identity category is limiting, then why isn’t 
being lesbian limiting? ... I really have a problem with the 
whole idea of role models and all of that stuff, particularly 
with sexuality, because it involves a reification of stereotypes 
and the entrapment of people in a particular place. So what I 
see as the virtue of debunking the sexual category is that it 
allows — not flexibility — but it allows you to move beyond that 
category which is a self-delimiting category. It’s not an acci- 
dent that you get “I am what I am” in the middle of La Cage 
aux Folks. That’s the tautological “What is a gay person like? 
They’re gay.” Over and over again. . . . It’s a version of narcis- 
sism, but it’s also a self-limiting narrative of self-discovery that 
keeps circling on itself, and if people treat you like that’s the 
only salient fact about you, it actually is playing on the ho- 
mophobia that you would like to get rid of. In other words, 
there’s a way in which coming out and reifying that category is 
exactly the opposite of what one would want to happen. 



Inverting the.efficacy of identity politics, -Olivia suggests that to 
claim the category is to become complicit with the structure of 
the closet and to confirm the construction of sexuality as an iden- 
tity.. To .^modd a* role presumes an ideal ‘that can ’be taught and 
copied’ thati.is-.transparent,,self-identicalj and unchanging. 







- 61 - 



SUSAN TALBURT 



Olivia’s rejection of centering sexuality as a locus of identity 
is linked to her disconnection from lesbian communities. In one 
of our interviews, after she mentioned an uncharacteristically 
personal paragraph in one of her books, I asked, “Are you impli- 
cated in what you study?” 

I don’t know. I have an odd position in relation to it, partly 
because I’ve never been able to be part of a lesbian community 
in my life. I mean, any time I was around them I was always 
put off by it in some way, like I don’t really fit here. Nor was I 
actually ever allowed to fit, and it’s not like a vendetta or any- 
thing, but it’s more like “what the hell’s going on here,” what 
are the assumptions of these communities? What is the self- 
portrait being drawn of lesbians? I mean, lesbian literature is a 
pretty dismal self-portrait. . . . They [lesbian communities] tend 
to be, well now, but then they were focused around celebrating 
women and then walked around sort of screwing each other 
over, and they were terribly anti-intellectual, and most of them 
never did a goddamn thing, and they’d sit around — this was 
during the bar years mostly — they’d sit around and drink in 
bars and they would never do anything. ... I have made a choice 
that academe is the most political place that you can be. 

In separating herself from bar-dyke and lesbian feminist commu- 
nities, Olivia overgeneralizes negative elements of “lesbian com- 
munity” and ignores individual and collective changes they have 
enabled; however, her critique enacts her rejection of assump- 
tions that identity is coextensive with sexuality and her disdain 
for the solipsistic tendencies of identity politics.^ Across the mul- 
tiple domains of Olivia’s scholarship, there has been a persistent 
thread in lesbian studies that takes up these concerns, a fact that 
leads me to read her work to some extent autobiographically. 
Part of what leads me to do so is based in a connection she drew 
in one interview: 

Well, talk about bogus, if you want activism to have credibil- 
ity, and then you end up with Rita Mae Brown, who has none, 
but a lot among people who are not academics. God, her nov- 
els get worse and worse. Ruby fruit Jungle, I don’t know why, I 
think that started my career as the cranky lesbian critic, actu- 
ally. ... I don’t celebrate. What is this trash I’m forced to read? 



62 




On Not Coming Out: or. Reimagining Limits 



Yuck, gag writing. This does not . . . very little of it is actually 
intellectually exciting, very little of it is titillating. 

An interpretive leap I pursue is that lived experience and aca- 
demic structures intersect to construct Olivia’s performance 
against “lesbian” as the personal. It may be that Olivia is, as 
McNaron says, integrating her personal experience of “lesbian” 
with her intellectual work. To consider that she is doing so leads 
to a rethinking of what that integration can look like, what forms 
it can take, and what effects it can have. In Olivia’s case, that 
integration entails an intellectual interrogation of meanings at- 
tached to the category and an academic enactment of anti-essen- 
tialism. As a result, she works in something of a performative 
contradiction: known for her work in “the commodity category” 
of lesbian theory, she uses the premises on which she is called to 
speak to challenge — even decommodify — the very category that 
has enabled her academic success. 



Undisciplining Subjects 



I find my commodity category deeply annoying. 

Olivia 

As a symptom of the assumptions surrounding “lesbian/lesbian 
theorist” in her department, Olivia explained, “Karen and I are 
often confused; like how the hell could they do that? It’s not 
based on physics or appearance or anything like that, it’s based 
on that identity business. ‘They’re both lesbians, ergo they’re both 
the same.’” An anecdote suggests how “lesbian” can narrow the 
ways in which she and Karen are understood: 

There is a course that is required of all incoming students in 
the department, . . . which is deeply, deeply badly conceived. It 
has always been team taught. The teams have always, for rea- 
sons that are historical in the department, tended to represent 
the modern and historical areas, but they’ve also reflected other 
kinds of difference; usually it has been male/female, often the 
male has been senior, the female has been junior — it’s not been 
a terribly good thing. Occasionally they will have white male. 





'V 



SUSAN TALBURT 



black female or senior woman and middle man, but it’s always 
been this hetero configuration. They have trouble finding people 
to teach this course. ... So Karen and I decided we’d like to 
teach this course, and we volunteered to teach it. The graduate 
director went to the former director of graduate studies and 
said, “Olivia and Karen put in for this course, should I let them 
teach it?” He said basically, “Why the hell not?” “Well, be- 
cause they’re the same, they do the same thing.” Well, Karen 
and I don’t do the same thing; we’re both twentieth century, 
we don’t do the same thing. Well, the graduate director e-mailed 
Karen and said, “Well, you and Olivia are too much the same, 
but would you be willing to teach this with Bob?” this white 
guy that does twentieth-century American literature, which is 
what she does. And Karen said, “No, I’m not going to do this 
with anybody besides Olivia, and what’s the difference between 
Bob and me?” Karen went on and said she [the graduate direc- 
tor] was being homophobic. So the graduate director goes and 
gets two other groups of people to do it. Her real coup was 
having a white male who does nineteenth-century British [lit- 
erature] teach it with another white male who does nineteenth- 
century British. 



In order to combat their conflation and open up “lesbian” 
for their colleagues, Olivia explained that in departmental con- 
texts she and Karen “come from different angles, on purpose, to 
keep enacting the fact that we are not the same.” Olivia reiter- 
ated a Foucauldian concern with disciplining persons as subjects — 
as well as with disciplining disciplines — as she performs against 
the predictable role of lesbian theorist who implements predict- 
able gay and lesbian studies courses: 



Why is it that sexuality is given the prominence it is in this 
culture, which is a fairly modern invention, and it’s politically 
efficacious to do that, but hell, that’s a control, that’s a disci- 
pline here. In what way do we delimit people by naming it — 
and it’s just the delimitation that one wants to fight against. In 
other words, if you’re a lesbian and you don’t act like one, 
you’re supposed to, but you don’t, but you still are, do you 
screw up the disciplinary function? I don’t know. It’s an inter- 
esting question. I’m playing it out to see what happens. I have 
the perfect setup for it [with Karen]. . . . We are not going to 
act according to type. We are not going to do the things you 
think we are supposed to do. We would never give a course on 




- 64 - 






96 



On Not Coming Out: or, Reimagining Limits 

gay and lesbian studies, we would give a course called Studies 
in Sexuality. . , , That^s what the discipline has to do and it can 
only do it by seeping into things other than its discipline, which 
is what Karen and I do, seep into other things than THAT 
THING, that isn’t really a discipline but people keep trying to 
call one. We’re going for versatility here. . . . What we need to 
do ... is to not reify the categories that they want to reify via 
us, but rather to explode that by being anything or everything 
in addition to and but that. We need to show how it is always 
an element of interrogation, not ignore it nor overly include it, 
but do it in intelligent relation to other things. 

Not wanting to participate in a discipline that turns in on itself 
as categories of identity turn in on themselves, Olivia seeks mul- 
tiple locations. Rather than accept a place as lesbian subject or 
create a place for a discipline of gay and lesbian studies, Olivia in 
a sense performs the slogan “we are everywhere.” “Everywhere” 
is undisciplined, unpredictable, and unlocatable. The fact that 
her work is not confined to feminist and lesbian studies enables 
her project of seeping into canonical period- and genre-based 
courses. If the vitality of feminist theory can be attributed to its 
integral role in textual and cultural inquiry across a number of 
topics, a goal for lesbian studies may be parallel: “It’s just that 
my idea is that it needs to be like feminist theory, integrated into 
questions about other material, which is one of the reasons I 
don’t like identity politics very much.” 

Olivia’s self-conscious performances may be understood as a 
“doing” that disclaims “being” in a static social and academic 
location. To speak of performance to describe her work is not to 
suggest that she enacts a role (see Sayre); rather, her performances 
seek to transform roles and constitute new relations. They are 
productive precisely because they engage norms that already ex- 
ist and are continually being reconstructed. In other words, the 
meanings of her iterations depend on context for their legitima- 
tion, as what is normative is articulated with what is not. Thus at 
times her performances are performative, in that they iterate yet 
refigure extant norms in practice.^ It is this play with expecta- 
tions that characterizes Olivia’s use of the assumptions by which 
she and her work would be constructed and located to deconstruct 
and dis-locate her subject and disciplinary positions: 




- 65 - 




SUSAN TALBURT 



If you’re a commodified category, it gives you an entree, it’s up 
to you to change it. You know, maybe this is idealistic, but 
okay, they hired me because they want someone in feminist 
theory that does gay and lesbian studies. But they don’t really 
want anybody to do gay and lesbian studies, so you don’t re- 
ally do gay and lesbian studies in a way that anyone can under- 
stand as gay and lesbian studies. So instead you do something 
else that’s even worse than gay and lesbian studies, which they 
think is more benign because it looks more traditional. Sexual- 
ity or American literature that’s chock-full — you saw what we 
did in my performativity class. 

Even as Olivia’s performances of dis-location challenge the wis- 
dom that transparent voice and visibility as lesbian are necessary 
to transform areas of study, Olivia is bound to the recognition of 
others in order to effect change. Her project of “being anything 
or everything in addition to and but that” depends precisely on a 
“that” not to be. By playing deliberately against expectations, 
Olivia depends on visibility as “lesbian” and on others’ social 
knowledge of “lesbian” in order to achieve a debunking. While 
her performances may not be those of an essential self or an es- 
sential field, they rely on essential knowledges for their effects. 
Olivia claims, “I don’t walk around thinking of myself as a les- 
bian. I walk around thinking of myself as me, and I relate to 
people the way I relate to people and I don’t even think about 
that.” But her disavowal of the relevance of “lesbian” in her in- 
teractions is belied by the ways the recognitions of others define 
her articulated tactics for unraveling assumptions attached to 
“lesbian/lesbian theorist.” The fact that Olivia sees the goal of 
“breaking down the tokenism” as successful at “times when your 
agenda is not assumed to be gay studies” suggests that her rejec- 
tion of thinking of herself as lesbian creates the paradoxical situ- 
ation of thinking of herself as lesbian.^ 

What happens in a classroom in which the instructor seeks 
to avoid the entrapment of the location of gay and lesbian sub- 
jects? What can “lesbian” mean in a pedagogy that claims an 
anti-essential subject? Again, performance comes into play. Teach- 
ing as performance may be understood as an instantiation of self 
in interaction with others, what Gallop refers to as im-person- 
ation, or ^^appearing as a person^^ (9). Appearing as a person is 




- 98 



- 66 - 



On Not Coming Out: or. Reimagining Limits 



not a presentation of self in relation to students and subject mat- 
ter but a representation, for an appearance is mediated 
transactionally within a context, particularly as it is constituted 
by the (mis)recognitions of others. To turn to Olivia’s classroom 
is not only to ask how her personal experiences and theoretical 
understandings of “lesbian” are enacted pedagogically but also 
to inquire into how her antidisciplinarity informs her pedagogy. 
Her responses to expectations of “lesbian/lesbian theorist” are 
most evident in her department; even though she did not 
problematize these same expectations from students, she per- 
formed her desires to “un-fix” subjects in her classroom. 

Although I have not dwelled on Olivia’s academic work be- 
yond her goals of challenging the cultural construction of “les- 
bian,” I should note that in defining her intellectual life as directed 
toward change, she places her political efficacy in the classroom. 
While she situates academics who question the category “les- 
bian” as speaking primarily to each other, she explains, “The 
answer is not that the books are going to effect cultural change. 
They’re not. The process of thinking through the work that you 
do gets translated into the classroom, and it’s via the classroom 
that very small changes are made.” Because these changes are 
unpredictable and impossible to control, however, pedagogy can- 
not assume its effects beforehand. Olivia thus emphasizes pro- 
cesses of questioning and eschews the notion that students can 
take a “product” from her classes. 



Is There a Text in This Class? 

About the change, the effect in the classroom, it wouldn’t be 
around any specific theme of particular thought about some- 
thing, but about ways of thinking about, instilling, or suggest- 
ing — I can’t instill much — but suggesting that those questions 
are (a) worth asking, and (b) worth answering. I’m not sure 
they [students] know they can ask those questions themselves, 
and I think teaching is teaching them to ask those questions, 
because I’m not sure they do, or if they do, they’re not posing 
them. So the change comes in simply asking questions. 

Olivia 




- 67 - 

99 

i 



SUSAN TALBURT 



I think she perceives students’ function as taking material that’s 
almost a non sequitur and to constantly question it. 

Frank, a student in Olivia's American Fiction course 



To speak of Olivia’s pedagogy is to speak of method and goals 
together, of a process that seeks to engender new habits of ques- 
tioning through classroom experiences. In her earlier comment 
about doing something that is “even worse than gay and lesbian 
studies,” Olivia referred to her graduate class titled American 
Fiction, which she had dubbed “Performativity Paranoia.” She 
spoke of this class as “an exploration rather than something that’s 
an accomplished fact,” in which she sought for students to “per- 
form a model of inquiry, a particular kind of questioning that I 
want them to be able to do in their own fashion.” Her 
antidisciplinarity was enacted in a course that looked benign be- 
cause it sounded “traditional,” but that subverted the traditional 
through its analysis and choice of texts. For example, the struc- 
ture of the class was designed to question academic practices that 
define boundaries of knowledge, such as area definitions (includ- 
ing Duras and Brossard in a class on American fiction) or generic 
divisions (in at least one class, the “literary” text showed itself to 
be theoretical and the “theoretical” text literary). And the class 
was indeed “chock-full” of gender and sexuality, even as these 
issues were not consistently at the center of analysis.^ 

In order to achieve a questioning that unsettles expectations, 
Olivia strives for authentic inquiry that is improvisational. Al- 
though she structured the class and positioned herself as asker of 
questions, students were to participate in shaping the inquiry that 
emerged: 

There are moments ... of actual excitement, and that comes 
when there is actually a question, and they know when I really 
don’t know the answer to a question, and I’m looking for an 
answer. And you can’t fake that; maybe you can fake an or- 
gasm, but you can’t fake that. So if you go in there and try to 
play that, it really is improv in the sense that it happens at the 
moment and it’s not preplanned. I think what happens with 
me is that there is very much a plan, but I don’t know it, I will 
not tell myself what the plan is, so I maintain this disavowal 
stance. 




loo 



- 68 - 



On Not Coming Out: or, Reimagining Limits 

Integral to the creation of spontaneity is Olivia’s position of 
not “being the text,” for the text is the process of inquiry. She 
thus performs herself as tabula rasa in order to perform the ab- 
sence of professorial intentions: “They know when you have cer- 
tain things in mind, and it limits what they’re going to do. It also 
limits what you do, so you can’t be active in relation to what 
they’re saying, and let it push you, then nothing you say is going 
to push them.” She explains, 

[Graduate students’] whole project is figuring out what the 
teacher’s agenda is. It’s a game. They’ll figure out the teacher’s 
agenda and then play along, and if you flip it on them and 
make the agenda based on their questions, it shifts the balance, 
it shifts the activity/passivity scale in the class. I wouldn’t say it 
empowers them, because I don’t think they are empowered in 
that way, but it enables them to be part of a community that’s 
working together in relation to certain texts, where there are 
not preconceived ideas about how these texts work, and where 
everyone in the class should come out having learned some- 
thing, including me. 

This detextualization not only shifts responsibility to students 
but also allows for her seeming neutrality, so that students do 
not have preconceived notions about how Olivia works as text: 
“You can never actually aim at a political agenda because stu- 
dents pick that up and dismiss it. They read it as political and 
they dismiss it. It has to be a by-product, you have to actually 
teach so that it’s a by-product.” In order to avoid closing down 
inquiry by locating herself, Olivia shares few aspects of herself 
with students, although she is aware that graduate students draw 
conclusions about her sexuality based on her work in lesbian 
studies: 

I make no secret. I make no point. My sexual preferences are 
not a text in any class I teach, just as I am not a text in any 
class I teach, except for what I have to say that is relevant to 
that course. ... I don’t find it necessary whatsoever to announce 
it, just like I don’t find it necessary to announce my religious 
upbringing, my tastes in pasta, or my political leanings. I think 
they all might be deeply evident, but I’m not going to announce 
them. 




lux 

til' 



- 69 



SUSAN TALBURT 



A “personal” is not only irrelevant but would also undermine 
her pedagogical efficacy by mediating the subject matter and clos- 
ing down possibilities for new forms of thought: 

Being the text means that people are studying you instead of — 
they study whatever the subject matter is through you. Their 
total lens is, it’s more like, what does she want here? To a certain 
extent, it’s unavoidable given the pedagogical circumstances, but 
you really have to work against that because to some extent, 
yeah, that’s exactly what they’re getting, is my version of this, 
and if you say that, it tends to sort of debunk it. But what you 
want them to do is to begin to think independently, and as long 
as they’re reading you as the text, they won’t do that. 

Unwilling to accept teaching as mimetic, Olivia does not posi- 
tion herself or her stances as a model; rather, she posits the pro- 
liferation of questioning and the disruption of assumptions as a 
model of sorts. Thus the “personal” as text represents closure 
that enables students to read and conform to a professor’s preex- 
isting intentions, whereas processes of inquiry as text represent 
openness that enables the appropriation of questioning for new 
uses and purposes. 

Olivia’s pedagogy — encouraging students to create questions 
whose effects cannot be known in advance — resonates with 
Foucault’s description of the work of the specific intellectual as 
“not to shape others’ political will; it is, through the analyses 
that he carries out in his own field, to question over and over 
again what is postulated as self-evident, to disturb people’s men- 
tal habits, the way they do and think things, to dissipate what is 
familiar and accepted” (qtd. in Kritzman 265). Because intellec- 
tuals are not outside social and institutional discourses, they play 
a part in “forming” will through questioning the discourses in 
which they are implicated. In Foucault’s formulation, as in Olivia’s 
pedagogy, discursive formations rather than identity per se are 
constitutive of intellectual work. In fact, it could be argued that 
Olivia’s nonpersonal questioning cites a norm of objectivity in 
order to engage students with the subject matter rather than with 
herself as a subject who matters. Her pedagogical anti-essentialism 
may function as a strategy of legitimation in which knowledge is 
detached from person as social knower. 




102 



- 70 - 



On Not Coming Out: or. Reimagining Limits 



Rather than suggest an assimilationist strategy, I think it more 
important to highlight the fact that Olivia’s intellectual, academic, 
social, and political commitments are not based in articulating 
or representing “lesbian identity” as such but in positing alterna- 
tive forms of thought and practice. Her choice not to teach “as 
lesbian” — her refusal to occupy a category she understands as 
constraining — constitutes a performative response to pedagogi- 
cal coming-out manifestos that urge instructors to come out in 
classrooms in order to represent homosexuality and to have a 
place from which to speak. She thus offers a nuanced counter- 
balance to what are often decontextualized imperatives for pro- 
fessorial identity politics. “Coming out” in classrooms is not a 
simple either/or dichotomy but a highly idiosyncratic act made 
in the context of social and academic knowledges; intellectual, 
political, and personal commitments; and pedagogical goals and 
relations. Although intuitively appealing in their basis in “per- 
sonal authenticity,” calls for teachers to name their sexuality ig- 
nore the contextualized circumstances under which it might be 
more efficacious to rethink the intentional mediation of subjects 
of study through “personal positioning” as an inherently valid 
pedagogical strategy. While Adams and Emery argue, “You say 
it so that you can say something else. You say it because doing so 
allows you to say so many other things” (30-31), they fail to ask 
what other things one may not be able to say, how what one says 
is received and transformed, and how one’s speech affects what 
others may say. Litvak has rather simplistically asserted that “the 
closeted gay or lesbian teacher’s compulsory ambiguity seems, 
like all compulsions, forced on him or her” (25). His defeatist 
tone ignores the way that ambiguity, or, better said, refusal of 
fixity, is less forced than it is the effect of multiple personal and 
pedagogical commitments, albeit constructed within given dis- 
courses. Khayatt has remarked: “To come out is not simply to 
inform others of one’s sexuality; it is a process whereby the speaker 
reiterates a certain relation, and perhaps a commitment to an 
identity, even if momentarily, and always in context” (140). Is a 
refusal to commit to lesbian identity tantamount to capitulating 
to compulsory ambiguity? Or could it be thought of as a perfor- 
mance of anti-essentialism — itself a commitment? 

Pressures to “take a position” by embracing the “personal” 




-f • ' 



- 71 - 



SUSAN TALBURT 



break down, as sexuality may not necessarily be a “personal” to 
reveal. To be placed as lesbian is to be put into place. To enact 
relations to ideas rather than invoking identities is to dwell in 
spaces that may be endlessly expanded and changed. Putting ideas 
into play rather than representing, embodying, or fixing them 
challenges the sexuality-identity nexus. To reject the “duties” of 
the lesbian instructor is akin to Agamben’s understanding of eth- 
ics as born of unpredictability, of irreducible singularity. He ar- 
gues that “there is no essence, no historical or spiritual vocation, 
no biological destiny that humans must enact or realize. This is 
the only reason why something like an ethics can exist, because it 
is clear that if humans were or had to be this or that substance, 
this or that destiny, no ethical experience would be possible — 
there would only be tasks to be done” (43). Rather than the clo- 
sure of a “lesbian personal,” a multiplicity of positions and actions 
may be made possible by a “lesbian impersonal.” 

Shifting Institutional Limits with/out Identities 

Although the rise of gay and lesbian studies offers significant 
new sites from which to work, fetishizing the visibility of gay 
and lesbian studies, identities, and bodies as signs of progress in 
the academy endangers sustained critical analysis of the social 
and economic relations that make their circulation possible and 
that may limit their transformative potential. The segmentation 
of gay and lesbian studies into what Judith Roof calls a “con- 
sumer discipline” directly affects scholars’ work: “The link be- 
tween identity, epistemology, and discipline appears to open the 
academy, while in practice it restricts thought, limits and con- 
solidates authority under the guise of distributing it, and seques- 
ters individuals within manageable consumer groups with discrete 
market interests” (182). In a consumer culture that constructs 
freedom as individual choice, differences become self-fashioned 
consumer lifestyles that, as Clark argues, are depoliticized as the 
marketplace appropriates subcultural practices of resistance un- 
der the guise of tolerance. With the commodification of 
multiculturalism, critical identity becomes overdetermined as 
academics are contained in what Karamcheti describes as a 




104 



On Not Coming Out: or, Reimagining Limits 



“proper and personal field” (141) that would reduce them to 
roles of representing, embodying, and speaking as or about their 
reified categories — offering consumers informational commodi- 
ties. If, as Lauren Berlant has ventured, the public sphere is “a 
marketplace where people participate through consumption” 
(175), gay and lesbian faculty may be entering the academic pub- 
lic sphere as ostensible subjects in order to become consumable 
objects of knowledge. Thus, despite the potential uses to which a 
new location could be put, liberal pluralist inclusion may oper- 
ate to contain differences. Such is the skepticism Olivia enacts in 
relation to the liberatory nature of her social and disciplinary 
positions. Given present social discourses, to accept a “lesbian 
personal” would be to represent an identity to which she is not 
committed and to limit herself as metonym for a field of study. 
Although there are contradictions in her project — she embodies 
“lesbian” even as she disavows its relevance — the contradictions 
themselves may perform a questioning of how personal the les- 
bian position is. They may also perform the impossibility of the 
containment of faculty or subject matter in a field of study. 

Despite the haltingly persistent advances of gay and lesbian 
studies and scholars, it is premature to describe either as institu- 
tionalized in the academy. David Roman has argued that to do 
so “imagines commodity fetishism and the rhetoric of tolerance 
as viable sites for gay and lesbian agency. The task at hand is to 
critically locate sites of agency in order to challenge the 
commodification and depoliticization of lesbian and gay studies 
within institutional movements based on tolerance and market 
trends” (“Speaking” 171). Roman would suggest a liminality for 
the field of gay and lesbian studies, so that it is perpetually in 
process, never fully legitimated, acculturated, or defined. The limi- 
nal is a temporal space that “enacts the move toward canonicity: 
it produces the illusion of assimilation while still holding license 
to remain temporarily outside of disciplinary control, even as it 
presupposes a narrative that will conclude in the initiation of 
customary norms” (173). Parallel to Roman’s antidisciplinary 
stance, Elizabeth Grosz’s caution against overtheorizing, nam- 
ing, and codifying lesbian pleasure serves as a warning against 
regarding gay and lesbian studies as a project of representation. 
Resistance to transparency allows limits and boundaries to re- 




1 J J 



- 73 - 



SUSAN TALBURT 



main open. The unknowable, that which cannot be contained 
ontologically or epistemologically through disciplinary represen- 
tation or canonization, must be allowed free play: “To submit 
one’s pleasures and desires to enumeration and definitive articu- 
lation is to submit processes and becomings to entities, locations, 
and boundaries, to become welded to an organizing nucleus of 
fantasy whose goal is not simply pleasure and expansion but con- 
trol, the production of endless repetition, endless variations of 
the same” (Grosz 226). 

I am inclined to argue that Grosz’s and Roman’s proposals 
against codification and for perpetual liminality may be overly 
optimistic views of the ways in which lesbian and gay scholars 
can combat forces that simultaneously contain and tolerate, par- 
ticularly in light of both oppositional and mainstream pressures 
for legitimation, inclusion, and location. Even as fields and schol- 
ars begin to embody that which cannot be fixed or personalized, 
however, they may do so in ways that preclude the closure that 
naming brings through performances and interactions that rear- 
range the meanings of those names — performances that, in short, 
surprise. Although not without contradictions, projects such as 
Olivia’s suggest that even with the limitations of incipient can- 
onization and disciplining, the theoretical insights of gay and les- 
bian studies may seep into other areas, and the disciplined subjects 
who work under its aegis may confuse the terms by which they 
would be located. Commodification allows for Olivia’s presence; 
the challenge is to appropriate the terms of disciplined presences 
in order to perform alternatives to fixed categories. This appro- 
priation may occur by moving in and out of disciplinary norms, 
both in departmental interactions and in a pedagogy of question- 
ing in which expectations are never fulfilled but always rearranged. 
Although codification, representation, and market trends may 
contain thought and action, they may also offer resources with 
which to maneuver, allowing academics to rewrite the terms of 
their location by being there, nowhere, and everywhere, in and 
out of proper places. In this way, there may be a continual shift- 
ing of limits. 





74 - 



On Not Coming Out: or, Reimagining Limits 



Notes 



ERIC 



1. For an early text, see Culley and Portuges; on classroom positionality, 
see Maher and Tetreault; for a history of feminist pedagogy, see Weiler; 
on the personal as “mantra,” see Gallop. 

2. This essay constitutes a reflection drawn from an ethnographic in- 
quiry into three lesbian faculty members’ enactments of the constructs 
lesbian, intellectual, and academic in their research, teaching, and colle- 
gial relations (see Talburt). All names given here are pseudonyms. 

3. On identity politics’ implication in bar-dyke and lesbian feminist prac- 
tices and divides between “academic” and “activist” lesbians, see 
Faderman; Krieger; and Phelan. 

4. Derrida argued that the “success” of performatives does not lie in the 
originality of a statement but in the citation of an “iterable model” 
(326). Butler locates agency in citationality, arguing that performativity 
is “a reiteration of a norm or set of norms” (12). A performative ''accu- 
mulates the force of authority through the repetition or citation of a 
prior, authoritative set of practices'" (111). The citation of a norm en- 
ables its appropriation for new uses in new contexts. 

5. Olivia would rewrite interactions that the knowledge of others would 
define: “You have to interact with a person enough to get that out of 
the way; [for] the more homophobic people, it’ll be a lot longer. ... If 
you make a big deal out of it, they’ll make a big deal out of it. People 
have a way of picking up from you what they’re supposed to do.” Al- 
though she understands performance as beyond an actor’s control, cre- 
ating a Barthesian “writerly text” in which the reader is “no longer a 
consumer but a producer of the text” (4), she claims an ability to set the 
stage for others’ readings. This contradiction reveals both the ways the 
recognitions of others construct her actions and her hope that a lesbian 
“impersonal” may discourage fixed readings. 

6. The texts for the class included Barnes, Nightwood; Acker, Portrait 
of an Eye; Pynchon, Crying of Lot 49; DeLillo, White Noise; Nabokov, 
Lolita; Diirrenmatt, The Assignment; Harris, Lover; Brossard, Picture 
Theory; Duras, The Malady of Death; and Baudrillard, Cool Memories. 



- 75 - 



107 



SUSAN TALBURT 



Works Cited 



Adams, Kate, and Kim Emery. “Classroom Coming Out Stories: Practi- 
cal Strategies for Productive Self-Disclosure.” Garber 25-34. 

Agamben, Giorgio. The Coming Community. Trans. Michael Hardt. 
Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1993. 

Barthes, Roland. S/Z. Trans. Richard Miller. New York: Hill, 1974. 

Berlant, Lauren. “National Brands/National Body: Imitation of Life."" 
The Phantom Public Sphere. Ed. Bruce Robbins. Minneapolis: 
U of Minnesota P, 1993. 

Butler, Judith. Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of “Sex.” 
New York: Routledge, 1993. 

Clark, Danae. “Commodity Lesbianism.” The Lesbian and Gay Stud- 
ies Reader. Ed. Henry Abelove, Michele A. Barale, and David M. 
Halperin. New York: Routledge, 1993. 186-201. 

Culley, Margo, and Catherine Portuges, eds. Gendered Subjects: The 
Dynamics of Feminist Teaching. Boston: Routledge, 1985. 

Derrida, Jacques. Margins of Philosophy. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1982. 

Faderman, Lillian. Odd Girls and Twilight Lovers: A History of Les- 
bian Life in Twentieth -Century America. New York: Columbia UP, 
1991. 

Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Trans. 
Alan Sheridan. New York: Pantheon, 1977. 

. “The Ethic of Care for the Self as a Practice of Freedom: An 

Interview with Michel Foucault on January 20, 1984.” Conducted 
by Raul Fornet-Betancourt, Helmut Becker, and Alfredo Gomez- 
Miiller. Trans. J.D. Gauthier. The Final Foucault. Ed. James Bernauer 
and David Rasmussen. Cambridge: MIT P, 1988. 1-20. 

. The History of Sexuality: An Introduction. Trans. Robert Hurley. 

New York: Vintage, 1978. 

Gallop, Jane. “Im-personation: A Reading in the Guise of an Introduc- 
tion.” Gallop, Pedagogy 1-18. 

, ed. Pedagogy: The Question of Impersonation. Bloomington: 

Indiana UP, 1995. 





- 76 - 



On Not Coming Out: or. Reimagining Limits 



Garber, Linda, ed. Tilting the Tower: Lesbians Teaching Queer Sub- 
jects. New York: Routledge, 1994. 

Grosz, Elizabeth. “Bodies and Pleasures in Queer Theory.” Roof and 
Wiegman 221-30. 

Haggerty, George E. “‘Promoting Homosexuality’ in the Classroom.” 
Haggerty and Zimmerman 1-18. 

Haggerty, George E., and Bonnie Zimmerman, eds. Professions of De- 
sire: Lesbian and Gay Studies in Literature. New York: MLA, 1995. 

Karamcheti, Indira. “Caliban in the Classroom.” Gallop, Pedagogy 138- 
46. 

Khayatt, Madiha Didi. “Sex and the Teacher: Should We Come Out in 
Class?” Harvard Educational Review 67.1 (1997): 126-43. 

Krieger, Susan. The Mirror Dance: Identity in a Womens Community. 
Philadelphia: Temple UP, 1983. 

Kritzman, Lawrence D., ed. Michel Foucault: Politics, Philosophy, Cul- 
ture: Interviews and Other Writings 1977-1984. Trans. Alan 
Sheridan et al. New York: Routledge, 1988. 

Litvak, Joseph. “Pedagogy and Sexuality.” Haggerty and Zimmerman 



Maher, Frances A., and Mary Kay Thompson Tetreault. The Feminist 
Classroom. New York: Basic, 1994. 

Mittler, Mary L., and Amy Blumenthal. “On Being a Change Agent: 
Teacher as Text, Homophobia as Context.” Garber 3-10. 

McNaron, Toni A. H. Poisoned Ivy: Lesbian and Gay Academics Con- 
fronting Homophobia. Philadelphia: Temple UP, 1997 . 

Palumbo-Liu, David. “Historical Permutations of the Place of Race.” 
PMLA 111.5 (1996): 1075-78. 

Phelan, Shane. Identity Politics: Lesbian-Feminism and the Limits of 
Community. Philadelphia: Temple UP, 1989. 

Roman, David. “Performing All Our Lives: AIDS, Performance, Com- 
munity.” Critical Theory and Performance. Ed. Janelle G. Reinelt 
and Joseph R. Roach. Ann Arbor: U of Michigan P, 1992. 208-21. 

. “Speaking with the Dead.” Roof and Wiegman 165— 79. 



19-30. 



- 77 - 




SUSAN TALBURT 



Roof, Judith. “Buckling Down or Knuckling Under: Discipline or Pun- 
ish in Gay and Lesbian Studies.” Roof and Wiegman 180-92. 

Roof, Judith, and Robyn Wiegman, eds. Who Can Speaks Authority 
and Critical Identity. Urbana: U of Illinois P, 1995. 

Sayre, Henry. “Performance.” Critical Terms for Literary Study. Ed. 
Frank Lentricchia and Thomas McLaughlin. Chicago: U of Chi- 
cago P, 1990. 91-104. 

Talburt, Susan. Troubling Lesbian Identities: Intellectual Voice and Vis- 
ibility in Academia. Albany: SUNY P, 2000. 

Weiler, Kathleen. “Freire and a Feminist Pedagogy of Difference.” 
Harvard Educational Review 61.4 (1991): 449-74. 

Wiegman, Robyn. (1994). “Introduction: Mapping the Lesbian 
Postmodern.” The Lesbian Postmodern. Ed. Laura Doan. New 
York: Columbia UP. 1-20. 

Zavarzadeh, Mas’ud, and Donald Morton. “Theory Pedagogy Politics: 
The Crisis of ‘the Subject’ in the Humanities.” TheoryfPedagogyf 
Politics: Texts for Change. Ed. Donald Morton and Mas’ud 
Zavarzadeh. Urbana: U of Illinois P, 1991. 1-32. 





- 78 - 



Chapter Five 




(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



[T]he English language is rigid, and the thought patterns 
that form it are rigid, so that gender also becomes rigid. 



ne way of viewing the history of English studies from the 



1960s to the present, and in particular the history of liter- 
ary criticism, is to conceive it as having defined itself through a 
series of gendered denials: the systematic, if not always explicit, 
denial by men of the existence, importance, or interest of women — 
especially as writers, critics, and scholars — and of those who are 
neither women nor men; and the subsequent collusional denial 
by many women, caught up in the struggle for equality and iden- 
tity, of the existence, importance, and interest of transgenders 
and intersexed persons.^ In the 1970s, gender came to connote 
the particularities of women in culture, in opposition to the ob- 
tuse universalism of the term man\ but the essentialist sex/gender 
binary malelfemale remained largely uninterrogated until the 
1990s, and continues its de facto dominance over our pedagogies, 
curricula, and critical writing to this day. 

In this essay, I want to open up the question of the represen- 
tation, misrepresentation, and lack of representation of women, 
within the context of the developmental history of English stud- 
ies, to the more complex historical-theoretical question of gen- 
der. Specifically, I want to ask about the nature of the shifts in the 
last thirty years in what we thought we knew about gender, point 



Jody Norton 
Eastern Michigan University 



Leslie Feinberg, Transgender Warriors: 
Making History from Joan of Arc to RuPaul 




- 79 - 



m 



JODY NORTON 



to certain superficialities in what we take to be our more sophis- 
ticated contemporary awareness of gender, and suggest that as 
practitioners of English and cultural studies, we should avoid the 
classic predeconstructive error of declaring one truth while en- 
acting another. In effect, I will argue that this means we need to 
work out our collective spiritual, intellectual, and political re- 
covery from the paralyzing (and largely unconscious) commit- 
ment to the heteronormative fiction that two (and only two) sexes 
ground the cultural expression of two (and only two) genders. 

In the 1960s, literature was not just taken to be about male 
power and ability but about the relative importance and interest 
of some forms of experience (war, politics, courtship, and similar 
forms of adventurous competition) as opposed to others (peace, 
community, intimacy, the everyday, the domestic). This disposi- 
tion toward the masculine was supported by masculine critical 
and pedagogical paradigms and methods. Standards of literary 
aesthetics valorized a dense textual allusiveness, intricate formal 
patterning, and intellectual complexity. Kinds of writing and other 
modes of cultural representation that did not seem to accord them- 
selves to the values of academic formalism were trivialized or 
dismissed (including popular culture tout cours). 

The mutually enabling relations among male domination, 
masculinist sociopolitical ideologies, and monologic language is 
nowhere more clearly legible than in literary textbooks from this 
period. The third edition of Cleanth Brooks and Robert Penn 
Warren’s classic Understanding Poetry, published in 1960, ap- 
propriates Coleridgean poetics to assert the organic character of 
the poem and the relation of reciprocal metaphoricity between 
the poem and the reader, each of which is whole — that is, com- 
plete in itself (a point on which Western men have expended a 
great deal of ink and nervous energy).^ At the same time, how- 
ever (and quite un-Romantically), poetry is not crucially a mat- 
ter of the capacity to attune one’s imagination to the harmonies 
of nature. It is a matter of establishing control over the chaos of 
the meaningless — which, of course, theorists from Aristotle to 
Lacan have given the name of woman. 

For Aristotle, the female is fundamentally without formal 
capacity. The male principle is “the efficient cause of generation” 
(1112), and in general, “the female always provides the material. 




112 



- 80 - 



(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



the male that which fashions it” (1146). For Lacan, in Jacqueline 
Rose’s words, “woman ... is not^ because she is defined purely 
against the man” (49). That is, “woman is constituted as ‘not 
all,’ in so far as the phallic function rests on an exception (the 
‘not’) which is assigned to her” (Rose 49). It is ironic, as Rose 
points out, that “[a]s negative to the man, woman becomes a 
total object of fantasy (or an object of total fantasy), elevated 
into the place of the Other and made to stand for its truth. Since 
the place of the Other is also the place of God, this is the ultimate 
form of mystification” (50). Symbolic control over woman is thus 
at the same time (the fantasy of) symbolic control over God. 
According to Brooks and Warren, finally, “The sense of order 
and control in the vital act ... is what in a successful poem 
confirms us in the faith that experience itself may be made mean- 
ingful” (343). We can appreciate the poem, they explain, “for 
the sense of the conquest over disorder and meaninglessness which 
it gives us” (343). 

In the fourth edition of The Norton Introduction to Poetry, 
J. Paul Hunter, writing about interpretation, echoes Brooks and 
Warren’s concern with unity (“a literary text is unified” [501]) 
and wholeness (“the overall effect and meaning of the work of 
poetry” [501]; ''the theme or whole” [501]). But in Hunter’s mind, 
poetic meaning is also characterized by a certain privilege and 
pride of place. We are told that “[i]n most instances” a poem can 
be made to reveal a “central theme” (501-2). There are thus 
conflicting imperatives for both poem and interpretation, on the 
one hand, to display total self-containment and homogeneity 
(unity, wholeness, creation of an “overall effect”) and, on the 
other, to reveal themselves as collectivities of multiple meanings 
among which one reigns as chief (the imperial model). The suspi- 
cion that the meaning of a poetic text is never absolutely autono- 
mous is registered in the slippage from "the theme or whole” to 
“central theme” and “central statement” (502), which suggests 
both that the poem must include marginal or peripheral themes 
or ideas that are not fully encompassed by "the theme,” and that 
it cannot be fully unified. 

The hesitancy over whether theme is the only, or the most 
important, meaning of the literary text mirrors a similar contro- 
versy described by Thomas Laqueur in Making Sex: Body and 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 




- 81 - 



JODY NORTON 



Gender from the Greeks to Freud^ and extending from Aristotle 
to the present, over whether man is the only sex or simply the 
most important. The issues are related in that each reflects mas- 
culine anxiety over how to understand and institute rhetorically 
the dynamics of domination. The act of writing is paradigmatically 
an act of mastery — one that establishes a necessary, triumphal 
relation between meaning and order. The language of Brooks 
and Warren and of Hunter in effect constitutes poetic value as 
the formalization of the social supremacy of masculinity. It is a 
hypostatization, not of literature or textuality, but of the mascu- 
line ego, metaphorized as text. 



Literature is not the business of a woman’s life, and it cannot 
be. 

Robert Southey, letter to Charlotte Bronte 

Sandra Gilbert and Susan Gubar begin their classic work of femi- 
nist criticism The Madwoman in the Attic by quoting Gerard 
Manley Hopkins on the gendered character of literary creativity. 
In a letter to R. W. Dixon in 1886, Hopkins writes that the “most 
essential quality” of the literary artist is “masterly execution, 
which is a kind of male gift, and especially marks off men from 
women, the begetting of one’s thought on paper, in verse, or 
whatever the matter is” (Abbott 133). Upon further thought, 
Hopkins decides that, in fact, “The male quality is the creative 
gift” (Abbott 133) — that is, it is not that masterly execution (a 
male capacity) marks men’s writing as superior to women’s, nor 
even that men’s creative abilities are, in toto, superior to women’s; 
it is that maleness itself is creativity. 

Concomitant with this identification of maleness with cre- 
ativity, as Gilbert and Gubar and many other feminist critics from 
Virginia Woolf to Carolyn Heilbrun have shown, is the convic- 
tion of the inappropriateness of writing women and writing by 
women.^ The initial tasks carried out by feminist critics in the 
early 1970s were to break the male monopoly of literature, criti- 
cism, and pedagogy, and to promote the recognition of women 




- 82 - 



(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



as equally legitimate subjects of letters/ Almost simultaneous with 
the critique of masculine hegemony in/over literature, and the 
discovery, creation, and critical validation of writing by women, 
feminist thinkers began to explore conceptual foundations for 
the specific political, social, spiritual, and aesthetic importance 
of women’s writing as opposed to writing in general. In effect, 
this amounted to asking what gender, or sex/gender, is, and why 
it is significant. Marianne Hirsch writes that “seventies feminism 
. . . was very set on theorizing difference — in the sense of at- 
tempting to define the specificity of women. From the mid to the 
end of the seventies, difference, in this sense, was the operative 
term” (Gallop, Hirsch, and Miller 351). 

But “difference,” of course, turned out to be a much more 
treacherous intellectual and political concept than a naive 
liberationist of the early 1970s might have assumed. Most im- 
portant, there is rarely any indication in feminist writing of the 
1970s and 1980s that gender is not simply the name for the so- 
cial formation of a female or a male, conceived as a kind of regi- 
mentation of the body of each — or, at best, as a psychic economy 
already named male or female by virtue of the anatomy of the 
individual it inhabits.^ The idea that a female might become, or 
live as, a man (or vice versa) — that is, that one’s gender destiny 
might not be fundamentally determined by one’s body — is largely 
unimagined, ignored, or denied, even as biological essentialism 
is heatedly rejected. Nor is it generally acknowledged that the 
structure of sex “itself” is not simply dimorphic but indefinitely 
variable.^ 

Even after Sedgwick, Butler, and the various queer theory 
projects of the 1990s, the problem of difference continues to vex 
feminist theory. In her essay “The Doxa of Difference,” Rita Felski 
argues that the second-wave effort to ground women’s liberation 
in “the affirmation of their irreducible difference” (1) has led to 
a privileging of difference over identity that is obsessive and theo- 
retically unfortunate, in that it tends to create a purely opposi- 
tional terrain within and outside feminist thought.^ Felski reads 
Rosi Braidotti, Drucilla Cornell, and len Ang, all leading sexual 
difference theorists, as in effect re-essentializing women at a higher 
power of abstraction, at the cost of their putative commitment to 
an antifoundationalist theoretics. 



O 



Xlo 



- 83 - 



JODY NORTON 



I would suggest that Braidotti, Cornell, and Ang are in fact 
reliving the classic problem of poststructuralist feminism: how 
to think “woman” as both a material and a constructed category. 
For example, Ang asserts that “ [t]he subjective knowledge of what 
it means to be a woman ... is ultimately inaccessible to men” 
(60). But in order for there to be “subjective knowledge,” or any 
other kind of knowledge, of “what it means to be a woman,” 
“woman” must have a specificity of meaning. At the same time, 
if what constitutes being a woman cannot be defined in any ex- 
plicit (and hence limiting) way, except by recourse to infinite re- 
gression (a woman is a woman is a woman), being a woman 
might mean anything — including being a man. Hence there could 
be no grounds for Ang’s claim, since men, or some men at least, 
might be women. 

Braidotti and Cornell each, at some point, takes the category 
“woman” to be patently meaningful — and indeed transparently 
referential. Braidotti, elucidating Irigaray, distinguishes between 
“[w]oman as institution and representation” and “real-life 
women” (36). What or who, we might ask, are these “women”? 
And if the usage is merely rhetorical, why specify “real-life”? 

Cornell presses for the right of abortion at any point until 
“the cutting of the umbilical cord” (43) as a corollary of the 
right of all sexuate beings to bodily integrity. Yet the example of 
abortion indicates that women do indeed constitute a cognizable 
material class of persons with specific particularities. And the 
unqualifiedly indicative form of Cornell’s statement that “women 
must have the right to abortion” (43) carries an almost 
performative force: “women” become women insofar as they are 
persons for whom “abortion” can have an immediate meaning — 
that is, persons for whom the choice/act of abortion is a logical 
and material possibility. 

Can an intersexed person have “subjective knowledge” of 
“what it means to be a woman”? What about a male-to-female 
transsexual? What about a woman with a beard and/or con- 
structed penis? What about a woman who has survived cancer 
but has had her uterus, or ovaries, or breasts removed? If the 
answers are no, no, yes, and yes, it looks a lot as though biology 
were indeed destiny in contemporary feminist philosophy, and 
that insofar as sexual identity is concerned, the fancy talk over 



84 



ERIC 



XlQ 



(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



the years about the social construction of gender has amounted 
to little more than a (philosophically, if not politically) trivial 
discussion of sex roles of people with XX chromosomes. 

In reliving the problem of the woman who is/is not “real,” 
Ang and others relive as well the condition of denial that consti- 
tutes the problem: the incapacity to let go their resistance to the 
idea that women do not exist categorically (any more than do 
men). Women's experience, and consequent fear, of the historical 
consequences of a naturalization either of their existence or of 
their nonexistence has tended to block feminist thinkers from 
making what is arguably a necessary strategic separation between 
the category “woman” and the historical/material individuality 
of each female person (reading “female” under erasure). The prob- 
lematic of transgender opens itself at the point of recognition of 
the explanatory incapacity of the binary model of sex/gender dif- 
ference and of the fruitlessness of further attempts to conceptual- 
ize actual human beings on the basis of a radical constructionist 
model that understands personhood as the largely determinate, 
passive product of social discourse. 



Jessica Benjamin argues that “even though the original feminist 
emphasis on the singular sexual opposition man-woman may have 
obscured many other differences, it opened up a necessary intel- 
lectual space ... in which the real social and psychological ef- 
fects of that opposition on our world could be observed” (11). I 
believe it is crucial not to forget this practical reason for main- 
taining a historical and political awareness of the hegemonic force 
of the binary model of sex difference in Western societies. It is 
also crucial to remember that the sociocultural and economic 
consequences of the reification of sexual difference have not only 
been real, but are ongoing. Having said this, I want to press the 
claim that we need considerably more complex and sophisticated 
theories of sex/gender than are explicitly or implicitly available 
in most of the existing work on gender, whether in the humani- 
ties or the social or biological sciences. 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 



jLI / 



- 85 - 



JODY NORTON 



At the level of popular discourse, gender no longer constrains 
itself to the measure of our conventional assumptions. Talk shows, 
documentaries, TV specials, news articles, and mainstream and 
independent films are only a few of the media genres that have 
facilitated the Foucauldian proliferation of categories and mean- 
ings the signifier gender mobilizes. Gender is now a name, not 
for the culturally constructed “woman” or “man,” but for the 
affinities, desires, and modes of self-presentation that mark the 
aesthetic/erotic/social character of the individual subject. 

At the same time, while gender is never reducible to sex and/ 
or the body, it is rooted in the materiality of genetic, hormonal, 
and anatomical developmental processes. Environment and ex- 
perience shape only what is there to shape. The social construc- 
tion of gender, properly understood, is the process of the 
phenomenological morphing of the “is-ness” of the individual. 
This continually transformative structuring takes place through 
a complex psychophysical and sociocultural interactivity, in which 
mind/body and self/other relations are fluid, mutually sensitive, 
and co-responsive. In human being there is never an it — an idea 
of the self or an a priori template of the individual — since genes 
are themselves developmental hypertexts: historical narratives 
with multiple new narrative potentials. But there is always an 
is — a contingently individual being perpetually combining and 
recombining matter, energy, symbols, signs, and experience into 
a historical becoming. The topographies of conscious memory, 
of the unconscious, of genes (phyletic memory), and of the body 
as biograph (the myriad textualities of growth, psychosomatic 
transformation, disease, trauma, scarification, medical/techno- 
logical intervention, ritual practices [circumcision, tattoos], and 
aging) all testify to the conditional reality — the perdurability — 
of the person as an identifiable entity. 

In my own theoretical reflections on gender, I use the work 
of Jessica Benjamin and D. W. Winnicott to provide clinical sup- 
port for the argument that gender takes on specificity as a form 
of creative play.^ I use the term play not in the abstract, Butlerian 
sense, but in the more literal Winnicottian sense of imaginative, 
psychophysical acting/narrating into which other subjects are 
tentatively and experimentally invited. The playing of gender in- 




86 




(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



volves a certain freedom to be — polymorphously, fantastically — 
and to actualize, provisionally, possibilities of identification and 
relation, partially sexed, partially sexual, partially affectional, 
and partially stylistic — and always mediated by culture and con- 
text. My concern here, however, is not with the theorization of 
gender per se, but rather with a point that the foregoing reflec- 
tion on the complexities of difference should by now have made 
obvious: we (male, female, and other-identified teachers of En- 
glish) are not reading and teaching literature with the knowledge 
of gender we already possess, and we ought to be. 

I have suggested that much of even the most sophisticated 
sexual difference theory remains trapped in binary paradigms of 
gender. Curricula always lag behind theoretical developments, 
and teaching anthologies, especially textbooks, follow at a still 
greater distance, striving, often vainly, to acquire the semiotics, if 
not the substance, of intellectual contemporaneity. Yet what En- 
glish teacher who has studied literature and gender at the gradu- 
ate level in the last ten years has not at least heard of Judith 
Butler? And if we have so much as cast a glance at Gender Trouble 
(and even if that glance has caused our brows to draw together 
in a frown of irritation), can we justify any longer an approach 
to the teaching of literature that, when all is said and done, ad- 
heres doggedly to the principle that sex is the only true “mark of 
gender” (Wittig 76)? 

Three imperatives to teachers of English follow from the rec- 
ognition that current approaches to questions of gender in both 
teaching and critical/cultural interpretation largely remain stuck 
within an absurdly reductive either/or: 

1. We need to teach the transreading of texts that raise or 
represent, either covertly or explicitly, variations from the 
standard gender dichotomy of male/female. That is, after the 
manner of queer readings of canonical texts from the Re- 
naissance to the modernists, we need to read specifically for 
“deviant,” anomalous, fluid, creative, or marginalized 
genderings, either as characteristic of certain people in spe- 
cific cultural/historical locations, or as moments, phases, 
hybridities, and countermemories within individual lives. 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



■ 




- 87 - 



JODY NORTON 



2. We need to teach more literature that foregrounds specifi- 
cally transgender subjects or subjectivities for whom gender 
identity is a struggle not just to accommodate individual hu- 
man complexity to cultural constraints (as it is for everyone), 
but for whom the specificity of their way(s) of being gendered, 
and the degree of intensity of feeling around the question of 
gender, is such that they cannot or will not readily assimilate 
themselves to prevailing gender norms. 

3. We need to teach more writing by transgenders, or by 
people for whom the preceding description of gender-as- 
struggle holds true. 



Truman Capote’s Other Voices, Other Rooms is a kind of south- 
ern gothic bildungsroman. Capote’s overt protagonist, thirteen- 
year-old Joel Harrison Knox, is both the masculine ego-ideal of 
the author (“a fine boy” [5] and all boy) and an airbrushed ro- 
manticization of the feminine gay boy Capote actually was. The 
first, Tom Sawyerish Joel is somewhat flattened by his creator’s 
affective disengagement from him: he fights, belongs to a detec- 
tive club, and flirts with and fantasizes about girls — in short, is 
conventionally boyish. The femme Joel is more visible, both aes- 
thetically and dramatically. Joel is described as “too pretty, too 
delicate and fair-skinned; each of his features was shaped with a 
sensitive accuracy, and a girlish tenderness softened his eyes, which 
were brown and very large” (4). At one point. Zoo, the maid, 
compares him to Alicaster (alabaster?) Jones, “a Paradise Chapel 
boy what used to sing in the choir. Looks like a white angel, so 
pretty he got the preacher and all kinda mens and ladies lovin 
him up” (160). When Joel kisses Idabel, his “tomboy”/transboy 
friend, he winds up pinned to the ground, naked, his bottom 
penetrated painfully by shards of Idabel’s dark glasses that have 
broken under him. And when the two are confronted by a water 
moccasin, it is Idabel who takes Jesus Fever’s sword from the 
paralyzed Joel and successfully wields its phallic power. 




(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



However, the transphobic, homophobic conventions of the 
world in which Capote writes ultimately win out, narratively. 
Joel recognizes his own gender deviance and propensity for sexual 
“perversion” in the debauched, world-weary Cousin Randolph, 
the “queer lady” (67) who reminds Joel of his distorted mirror 
image.^ But at the novel’s end, Joel’s femininity is split off defini- 
tively and wholly absorbed by Randolph. Joel sees Randolph’s 
utter helplessness and futility, “the zero of his nothingness” (227), 
which, the novel suggests, is ineluctably implicit in his being “nei- 
ther man nor woman” (211). Joel, on the other hand, becomes 
certain that he “knew who he was, he knew that he was strong” 
(228). Even though we leave Joel going to “be with” Cousin 
Randolph (for the time being), he goes as a young man, now sure 
of his masculinity (whether gay or nongay), not as a younger 
version of the gender-abject Randolph.^® Capote thus allows the 
culturally constructed ego-ideal to triumph over the real of 
gendered desire. He concludes by resolutely closing the door on 
his hero’s subtextual transgender potential, allowing young-man 
Joel to look “back” at the feminine “boy he had left behind” 
(231). 

The novel’s most consequential flaw, however, is its failure to 
legitimate formally its true protagonist: Idabel, the young transboy 
Joel’s age who is marginalized in his family and his community — 
and even in his somewhat tense friendship with Joel — because of 
his nontraditional gender.^ ^ Idabel does everything “boylike” 
(129). He moves “as jerky and quick as a boy” (31), hooks his 
thumbs in his belt loops, talks tough, and beats up his bratty 
high-femme sister when he can catch her. He claims he never 
thinks “like I’m a girl” (132) — his Uncle August “says I’m not a 
girl” (130) — and adjures Joel, when he makes the mistake of 
obliquely suggesting marriage, to “behave like we’re brothers, or 
don’t you behave at all” (174). 

Against the heteronormative tendency to read Idabel as sim- 
ply a tomboy who will “naturally” feminize/hetero-eroticize him- 
self over time are the coherence and consistency of his masculine 
identification, and the fact that his first crush is not on Joel but 
on Miss Wisteria, a tiny circus performer cast as the intergen- 
erational femme to Idabel’s butch. That Idabel is not just butch 
but trans is registered in a variety of ways, most dramatically by 










- 89 - 



JODY NORTON 



his identification with an escaped convict for whom the people 
of Noon City once scoured the countryside: “I kept thinking I 
was him and he was me and it was both of us they were out to 
catch” (177). This fantasy of Idabel’s is of himself as gender out- 
law: I am the criminal, the one who ought to be/will be hounded 
and pursued, as guilty of gender nonconformity.^^ It is significant 
that the convict is never caught, though “[s]ome folks hold that 
he’s still about . . . hiding in the Cloud Hotel, maybe, or living at 
the Landing” (177) — where cross-dressing Cousin Randolph, that 
other gender outlaw, resides. Idabel too remains uncaught, how- 
ever constrained his circumstances socially, economically, and 
ideologically may be and remain. For he escapes Joel, his family. 
Noon City, and the discipline of heterosexual femininity. 

In “What Is an Author?” Foucault suggests that the initia- 
tion of a discursive practice — let us insert “transreading” here — 
must involve a return to a textuality, the reception of which has 
been constructed as misprision (borrowing Harold Bloom’s term) 
through the ambivalently intentional failure of its author to limit 
its potential meaning. The selectivity of both writer and reader 
involves omission — omission which serves crucially to structure 
the text-as-it-is-received. Foucault writes: 

[T]he barrier and the means for its removal, this omission . . . 
can only be resolved by a return. In addition, it is always a 
return to a text in itself, specifically, to a primary and unadorned 
text with particular attention to those things registered in the 
interstices of the text, its gaps and absences. We return to those 
empty spaces that have been masked by omission or concealed 
in a false and misleading plenitude. (135) 

In Foucauldian terms. Other Voices, Other Rooms constructs 
its own reception as misprision by creating a fictional world which, 
for all its bizarrerie, assumes the normativity of heterosexuality 
and dimorphic gender. Capote centers his project formally on a 
(putatively) conventional male protagonist and thus forces the 
misreading of a text in which the true hero — the true adventurer, 
wanderer, breaker of rules, and so on — is the unconventionally 
embodied male Idabel. Capote mistakenly takes the genuine af- 
fective register of his work to be the frisson of the gothic — every- 
thing that strikes Joel as weird, out of which he eventually matures. 




- 90 - 



(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



But his book is really trying to get at what it feels like to be Other 
in specifically transgendered ways, within a rigidly dichotomized 
social space. The discursive field on which Idabel could be un- 
derstood as the protagonist (and fully written into the role) — an 
operant conception of gender that exceeds (and supercedes) di- 
morphism — remains submerged and unrealized in Other Voices, 
and it is such a field that transreading, and the transgender theory 
that precedes and supports it, can extract and actualize. 



Denton Welch’s In Youth Is Pleasure often does not initially reg- 
ister with students as involving either gay sexuality or gender 
nonconformity, in part because Orvil, the fifteen-year-old pro- 
tagonist, does not recognize these categories within the field of 
hir own experience. That, in turn, is one of the aspects of Welch’s 
novel that makes it particularly useful to teach. On the one hand, 
Orvil mirrors the typical naivete of student readers on the sub- 
jects of gender and sexuality. At the same time, however, the nar- 
rative viewpoint enables these same readers, once pointed toward 
revelatory passages, to perceive that Orvil, though s/he remains 
unable to articulate to hirself the meaning of hir own desire, is 
plainly strongly magnetized by certain images and fantasies of 
men (as objects) and women (as identificatory subjects) that place 
hir at a rather distant remove from hir thoroughly masculine 
brothers. 

In one striking scene in In Youth Is Pleasure, after wishing 
s/he were a girl at a dance in the hotel ballroom (so that some 
young man might ask hir to dance), Orvil goes upstairs to hir 
room, takes out a stolen lipstick, and colors hir lips very sexily. 
But s/he doesn’t stop there. S/he goes on to make hirself a clown, 
with red cheeks and nose, ultimately marking hir entire body 
with “gashes and spots” — miming, serially, hir cross-gender iden- 
tification, hir sense of hir impossible absurdity as a woman (not, 
of course, that s/he is right about this), and hir symbolic self- 
mutilative punishment. At the end of the novel, s/he tells the 
Lawrencian schoolteacher with whom s/he has a passionate, vio- 



JODY NORTON 



lent, erotic (albeit nonsexual) romance, about the death of hir 
mother and hir own dilemma as a transgirl: “I don’t understand 
how to live, what to do” (135). The man’s simultaneously 
commonsensical and opaque response is, “you can’t stop still at 
your mother’s death” (137). 

These and other narratives of the pain, guilt, and frustration 
of transgendered youths — from Henry James’s Morgan Moreen, 
to Radclyffe Hall’s Stephen Gordon, to Jean Genet’s Louis 
Culafroy — serve, if the characters are read specifically as 
transgendered, as vehicles for the coming to voice of nontradi- 
tionally gendered individuals as a kind of human being. 
Transreading such narratives can enable students to understand 
the transgender journey — whether toward a more, or less, stable 
identity — as more complex and processual than the singular, pub- 
lic-dramatic, readily assimilable event of coming out that 
(mis)informs so many popular conceptualizations of gay sexual 
awakening. Rather, “transitioning,” as it is known in the gender 
community, can be comprehended as the primarily private com- 
ing to consciousness, often despite intense negative social pres- 
sure, of forms of being and relating to others that “deviate” — that 
wander habitually — from the fixities and constraints of gender 
normalcy. These narratives function to a certain extent as meta- 
phors for the journey any human being must travel in order to 
establish a reasonably comfortable sense of self. The stories thus 
work both to particularize transgenders (while deconstructing 
normative ideologies of gender) and to link them to those whose 
experience of gender more nearly reflects cultural norms. 



Richard McCann’s brilliant short story “My Mother’s Clothes: 
The School of Beauty and Shame” is not about abstract 
conceptualizations of gender, despite the acuity of its narrator’s 
analyses. Indeed, the story suggests that gender “itself” — and this 
is a point that is almost universally missed in poststructural theo- 
retical discussions — is not about abstractions and categories. Most 
consequentially, it is about the affect that drives, shapes, and con- 





92 - 



(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



ditions our engendering. Gender, effectively, is what we feel it to 
be in our individual lives, not what we think it is. 

“My Mother’s Clothes” centers on a boy and his difficult 
identificatory relation to the mother he adores. Reflecting on the 
affective meaning of gender to himself as a boy, the narrator de- 
scribes his sense of himself cross-dressed as follows: 

no matter how elaborate my costume, I made no effort to cam- 
ouflage my crew cut or my male body. How did I perceive 
myself in my mother’s triple-mirrored vanity, its endless repeti- 
tions? I saw myself as doubled — both an image and he who 
studied it. I saw myself as beautiful, and guilty: the lipstick 
made my mouth seem the ripest rose, or a wound; the small 
rose on the black slip opened like my mother’s heart disclosed, 
or like the Sacred Heart of Mary, aflame and pierced by ar- 
rows; the mantilla transformed me into a Mexican penitent or 
a Latin movie star, like Dolores Del Rio. The mirror was a 
silvery stream: on the far side, in a clearing, stood the woman 
who was icily immune from the boy’s terror and contempt; on 
the close side, in the bedroom, stood the boy who feared and 
yet longed after her inviolability. (551) 

Two issues come up in this passage, and in the story as a 
whole, that, if they are brought out in class, can transform the 
reading experience from one in which students readily distance 
themselves from a “weird” kid to one in which they must per- 
force examine their own gender anxieties. First of all, if the boy 
desires to be/have femininity, beauty, his mother, he also fears 
and scorns the feminine; and in his fear and his contempt, he — 
proto-trans kid that he is — mirrors the general position of men 
in Western societies. He worries about being feminine the way 
most boys worry about being masculine; and these seemingly 
polar foci amount, in “My Mother’s Clothes” and in the cultural 
context of its production, fundamentally to the same thing. Anxi- 
ety about masculinity is anxiety about femininity. As a boy, what 
one is taught is to be not like a girl.^^ 

The second issue that surfaces here, and that applies to all 
the female characters in the story, is the way in which material 
women are subsumed under the abstract positionality of the femi- 
nine. It is no accident that an article of clothing, worn in mas- 
querade, transforms the narrator not into a woman in his fantasy. 




- ' 



- 93 - 



JODY NORTON 



but into an allegory, and then into another instantiation of mas- 
querade: Dolores Del Rio, the Hollywood movie star. McCann 
never addresses this phenomenon in his text, but a bit of 
metatextual reflection can uncover the omission as part of the 
legible political and ethical history of gender in the United States: 
The root cause of the oppression of women, as a class, is the 
effacement of the actuality and significance of each woman as a 
historical individual 

I would argue that social, ethical, and political acceptance of 
transgenders necessitates the prior acknowledgment and valua- 
tion of individual women. And I would argue further that a mor- 
ally viable place of being for the male-to-female transperson that 
is not merely a series of hideouts from women and myths of femi- 
nine mystery and power — a place that is not, in other words, a 
series of misogynistic little boys’ clubs in disguise — necessitates a 
similar commitment to the historical specificity and individual 
realness of women before any politically legitimate transitioning 
is possible. Unless we deal with our own issues as transpeople, 
we will continue to play them out on the backs of others, and we 
will appropriate oppressive forms of femininity while, to our 
shame, reenacting the most virulent masculinist forms and prac- 
tices of disempowerment and depersonalization of women. 



In addition to teaching literature that represents dilemmas of 
gender and complications of the impoverished male/female model 
(Capote; Welch), or that foregrounds more overtly transgender 
concerns (McCann), we need to recognize that transgenders are 
not purely mythical beasts or monstrous anomalies. This is best 
done by teaching and taking seriously — and teaching is itself, of 
course, a way of taking seriously — works by transfriendly or 
transgendered authors. 

In “Stripped,” Minnie Bruce Pratt writes of her outrage at 
the treatment of Brandon Teena, the preoperative female-to-male 
transsexual stripped, raped, and eventually murdered by 
transphobic thugs in a small town in Nebraska (recently the sub- 




94 




(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



ject of the documentary The Brandon Teena Story and the Hol- 
lywood film Boys Don't Cry). But Pratt’s most bitter anger is 
reserved for the lesbian author of a Village Voice article on the 
case who strips Brandon once again, metaphorically, by treating 
him as “a confused lesbian” who couldn’t get ‘‘her” sex straight. 
“The writer,” Pratt points out, “never mentions he died when he 
insisted he would choose his own pronoun” (174). The Teena 
case itself makes real the danger of living transgendered, and 
implicitly underscores the need for gender not to be reduced to 
the drag farce or the freak show and thereby dismissed as a non- 
issue for “real” human beings, trans or nontrans. Pratt’s contri- 
bution is to show us how our discursive reception of the events 
of a life like Teena’s often repeats the physical violence the sub- 
ject has already suffered, and in doing so legitimates that vio- 
lence as a proving of the truth. 

For student readers, such a text demonstrates the rhetorical 
power of language to construct misguided “understandings” of 
transpeople, and the violence inherent in the use of hegemonic 
constructions to manipulate people into being what one wants 
them to be. Pratt’s writing also demonstrates the possibility of 
critique and reconstruction: we can point out in language the 
misappropriations of power that others attempt, and thereby 
subvert the false hierarchies of value they seek to establish. 



As a male-to-female transgender — one who identifies more closely 
with “women” than with “men,” but who is neither — I take some 
care lest I overwhelm, or frighten, or antagonize my students. 
Each course I teach is about them much more than it is about me 
in relation to particular kinds of intellectual content and experi- 
ence. Yet because my composition courses are always focused on 
critical thinking, dialoguing, and writing about significant socio- 
cultural and political issues, most of which involve gender as one 
level of inquiry (though they may foreground race, sexuality, 
nationality, ethnicity, economic status, and so on); because I teach 
literature on the theory that literary experience necessarily in- 



JODY NORTON 



volves readerly identification with character, rememoration by 
readers of their psychostructural history, and consequent trans- 
formation; and because, finally, I understand self-exploration as 
in some sense the end of reading and the beginning of responsi- 
bility, I must, if I wish to be consistent with my own pedagogical 
values, model the practice of introspection and the imperative to 
self-disclosure. 

I was told by a colleague that on the first day of class this 
semester, one of my students didn’t know whether I was a woman 
or a man. Before our formal work together had even begun, then, 
the problem of gender — ^which on one level is the problem of 
why “the problem of gender” is a problem — had been raised for 
her. Without the willingness to be, honestly, and to search ac- 
tively for the sources of what is meaningful to me in the social 
worlds I inhabit, I can neither own nor offer my subjectivity. The 
students who share a learning community with me, like my friends 
in transgender communities, lesbian communities, gay commu- 
nities, and recovery communities, need me, as I need them, to 
model the struggle to become intensely present in my own life, 
while striving to respond with equal passion to the calls of others 
to shared speech and feeling. To fail in my responsibility to make 
the effort toward openness and integrity that will facilitate the 
growth of communication, affection, and trust is for me to be- 
come spiritual — and pedagogical — deadwood. Exchanging 
knowledge about who we are helps build bridges over initially 
intimidating differences between s/he’s and she’s, between “make 
believe” and “real,” between human being and human being. 

At the same time, my relationship to my students is a 
mentoring one, and therefore one in which I must take the initia- 
tive to hear and respond both to the needs of the group as a 
whole and to those of particular individuals. I must balance the 
need for sharing sameness with the need for attention to, and 
validation of, particularities and differences; the need to speak 
with the need to listen; the need for security with the need for 
risk; the need to cover certain disciplinary ground with the need 
to wander out into the world outside the classroom; the need to 
nurture and support students in their efforts to make meaning 
out of experience with the need to challenge and, occasionally, to 
confront. Sensitivity to the feelings and needs of others is always 





96 



(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



central to good teaching. But those others need to be brought to 
develop their own sensitivities as well, and sometimes transitional 
discomfort is a necessary part of transformational growth, as it 
is of healing. It cannot always be the woman, or the teacher, who 
gives, and the man or student who receives. 

In one form or another, the reception theory of Hans Robert 
Jauss and Wolfgang Iser, and the discourse theory of Bakhtin, 
insist on the centrality in literature of the Other as well as the 
self, and of the reader as well as the text. The “given human 
being” (Bakhtin, Art 230) is conceived as constitutive of the aes- 
thetic value of the text, the task of which is to give form to the 
individual in her world. A character’s existence as ethical subject 
becomes comprehensible to the reader through the establishment 
of an empathic moral/interpretive relation grounded in “one’s 
own questions” (Bakhtin, Speech 7). If we find the theory of Iser, 
Jauss, and Bakhtin useful in even this most general and partial 
summarization, we can extrapolate from their work the thesis 
that interpretation involves a complex triangular negotiation be- 
tween reader; text, and culture, the specific dynamics of which will 
vary, as will the meanings experienced in the reading process.^^ 

Interpretation and critical thinking both become fuller and 
richer when the feelings and questions of others become, by shar- 
ing and dialogue, part of one’s own matrix of feelings and ques- 
tions. As a teacher of literature and composition, I can facilitate 
the passage back and forth of “others’” questions among stu- 
dents in whose consciousnesses they might otherwise never have 
surfaced. In English composition, we might ask, for example, 
whether it is necessary or right to alter the genitals of boys (in the 
United States), of girls (in many developing countries), or of 
intersexed children worldwide (including the United States); oi; 
perhaps more tellingly, we might ask why partial or total abla- 
tion of female genitals is acceptable in some cultures in which 
ablation of male genitals would be reacted to with horror. We 
might ask whether it is anybody’s business if a “boy” wears a 
dress or a “girl” wears a man’s suit. Finally, we might ask whether 
it is surprising that some little boys with access to automatic weap- 
ons shoot other children and grownups, of whom a dispropor- 
tionate number are female, for “no reason.” 



ERIC 




- 97 - 



JODY NORTON 



My ability to pose or facilitate these and myriad other 
gendered questions of value, identity, morality, history, culture, 
and politics, in literature and in the range of contemporary vi- 
sual and linguistic discourses, is determined in part by my insti- 
tutional position. Currently, I teach through a department of 
English language and literature and a women’s studies program, 
but because I am not a tenured or tenure-track employee, I nec- 
essarily teach on the border between the inside and the outside of 
my university’s institutional structure. It is likely that I will re- 
main in this borderland for the rest of my academic career. If 
there is a certain loneliness and severity to this position, it also 
makes possible a critical distance on the sociality of the univer- 
sity that can provide a productive perspective for critique, both 
of the micropolitics of the “coordinator class” to which we teach- 
ers and scholars belong, and of the relentless desire of the admin- 
istration to create an ideological justification for its (transparently 
gendered) investment in power, prestige, and capital (all of which 
depend on the principle of subordination).^^ Living on the mar- 
gins of privilege, I am by no means necessarily purer than those 
at the center, but I am less invested. 

Perhaps more important, by being “out there” in various 
political, economic, and social senses — never m, but passing 
through^ genders, sexualities, discourses, economies, and institu- 
tions — I show my students that it is possible to do. One can sur- 
vive with considerable freedom, frequent satisfaction, and 
occasional serenity. I can model that possibility for others far 
more marginalized and disempowered than myself. It is a point 
of faith for me that in doing so, I can help some students find the 
forms of consciousness, contentment, political awareness, and 
productivity that are most appropriate, on their terms, to their 
own subjectivities. 



In this essay, I have discussed what I see as the need to expand 
drastically our conceptualizations and understandings of the 
problematics of gender as we encounter them in theory, in litera- 




98 




(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



ture, in our sociopolitical worlds, and in our individual lives. 
Gender is not the only identificatory rack upon which the young 
are stretched. But gender, considered as more than a myth of 
sexual difference, is, I have argued, an inadequately represented 
problematic in the discourse of English studies; and it is one that 
leads potentially to vast interpretive, affective, spiritual, and theo- 
retical riches for student and teacher, connecting as it does with 
virtually every other human concern. As English teachers, we 
must confront, and work through, our collective denial of the 
fact that gender can be neither uncontroversially linked to sex 
nor facilely accounted for as the product of discourse. 

From one perspective, all males, at least, are transpeople, 
since not only does each male combine genetic inheritances from 
a mother and a father, as do we all, but he spends his first months 
literally as a woman — that is, as part of his mother’s body, her 
blood his blood — before emerging as a “boy.” But a boy is not 
simply the penis and testicles that may initially garner him that 
label from the obstetrician, or even the chromosomes, hormonal 
particularities, anatomy, physiology, and so forth that, in mul- 
tiple ways, typically distinguish him from the “other” sex. The 
psyche has its own reality. And to complicate things still further, 
psychic reality often literally changes the materiality of the body — 
and vice versa. In short, as the French film Ma Vie en Rose so 
touchingly illustrates, all “boys” are not boys. And as the life of 
Brandon Teena demonstrates, not all “girls” are girls. Why do 
we refuse these truths? Why do we efface the gendered reality of 
others — and of ourselves? Why do so many of us never really 
teach gender, let alone transgender? If the answer is fear, we have 
some self-reflection to do. And if the indicative response is, “I 
never really thought about it,” the imperative rejoinder is, “Start 
thinking.” 

Notes 



1. I recognize that gender, as an analytic category, can be disengaged 
from the array of issues with which it is intertwined — sexuality, race, 
ethnicity, nationality, class — only strategically, for the purpose of mak- 
ing an argument about its particular significance in a local context (in 
this case, the history of the study of literature in English). 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



- 99 - 



JODY NORTON 



2. Brooks and Warren contend that “[t]he human being is a unity” (341). 
Similarly, “a poem, in so far as it is a good poem, is an organic unity in 
which all the elements are vitally interfused” (34). 

3. On the history of gender bias in literary criticism and critical theory, 
see Abel; Heilbrun; Millett; Showalter; and Woolf for important and 
representative critiques. 

4. Elaine Showalter writes: 

In its earliest years, feminist criticism concentrated on expos- 
ing the misogyny of literary practice: the stereotyped images of 
women in literature as angels or monsters, the literary abuse or 
textual harassment of women in classic and popular male lit- 
erature, and the exclusion of women from literary history. . . . 

The second phase of feminist criticism was the discovery 
that women writers had a literature of their own, whose his- 
torical and thematic coherence, as well as artistic importance, 
had been obscured by the patriarchal values that dominate our 
culture. (5-6) 

5. Even in feminist psychoanalytic theory of this era, the concept of the 
feminine often slips back into the female — unsurprisingly, since Freud’s 
work, antedating the theoretical distinction between sex and gender, 
characteristically assumes the conjunction of bodily and psychic sex 
except in children and pathological adults. 

6. See Epstein; Fausto-Sterling; and Kessler. When a freer relation be- 
tween sex and gender is recognized, as it is in the writing of Janice 
Raymond and a handful of followers, it is condemned (in the case of 
male-to-female transsexuals) as a masculine (medical/transsexual) plot 
to infiltrate the ranks of real women, and to reassert patriarchy from 
within. The notion of multiple sexes and genders became fully think- 
able in feminism only around 1990, with the publication of works such 
as Diana Fuss’s Essentially Speaking: Feminism, Nature and Difference^ 
Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick’s Epistemology of the Closet; and especially 
Judith Butler’s Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Iden- 
tity. 

7. Felski suggests Robert Young’s concept of hybridity as a useful way 
to keep difference and sameness simultaneously in mind: 



Metaphors of hybridity and the like not only recognize differ- 
ences within the subject, fracturing and complicating holistic 
notions of identity, but also address connections between sub- 





- 100 - 



(Trans) Gendering English Studies 



jects by recognizing affiliations, cross-pollinations, echoes, and 
repetitions, thereby unseating difference from a position of ab- 
solute privilege. (Felski 12) 

8. See Benjamin; and Winnicott, especially Chapter 3, “Playing: A Theo- 
retical Statement.” 

9. The w^hole novel plays off Hans Christian Andersen’s fairy tale “The 
Snow Queen,” most particularly the image of Old Nick’s looking glass 
and the propensity of its broken slivers to penetrate the eyes and heart, 
thereby destroying the human capacity for love, compassion, and the 
perception of beauty. Cf. Idabel’s “dark” glasses, above. 

10. Marvin E. Mengeling suggests that Joel assumes “the position of 
husband ... in relation to Randolph” (104). 

11. I use masculine pronouns for Idabel and later, neologistic 
transpronouns for Orvil Pym, protagonist of Denton Welch’s novel In 
Youth Is Pleasure. At this historical moment, in what is still a male- 
dominant world culture, it seems important to legitimate (female-to- 
male) transmen without qualification, lest people born “female” once 
again be denied the right of self-determination. It seems comparably 
important to avoid born-“male” appropriation/exploitation of females, 
and of the meaning of female bodies, by indicating an awareness of, 
and respect for, differences in the life experiences and present social 
potentials of born females and born males — differences that unequal 
amounts of social power have historically conditioned. Hence the male- 
to-female signifiers hir and s/he. 

12. Staring down at Idabel from the ferris wheel. Miss Wisteria laments, 
“Poor child, is it that she believes she is a freak, too?” (195). 

13. See note 11 on my use of hir and s/he. 

14. See James; Hall; and Genet. 

15. See Badinter for a theorization of masculinity as the Other of the 
feminine. 

16. Jay Prosser’s Second Skins: The Body Narratives of Transsexuality 
provides an excellent analysis of transsexual narratives. Prosser’s book 
includes a chapter on Radclyffe Hall’s The Well of Loneliness, which 
could be described as female-to-male fiction. Male-to-female fiction in- 
cludes such works as Jean Genet’s Our Lady of the Flowers and Hubert 
Selby Jr.’s “The Queen Is Dead” (a section of Last Exit to Brooklyn). 
Leslie Feinberg’s Stone Butch Blues is the best fictional representation 




JODY NORTON 



SO far of a transgender community in the late-twentieth-century, West- 
ern, medico-technological world. Herculine Barbin’s autobiography (with 
a foreword by Foucault) is an important intersexual document. Recent 
biographies include Kate Summerscale’s The Queen of Whale Cay: The 
Eccentric Story of ‘‘]oe'' Car stairs. Fastest Woman on Water and Diane 
Wood Middlebrook’s Suits Me: The Double Life of Billy Tipton. Sig- 
nificant photographic works include Nan Goldin’s The Other Side and 
Loren Cameron’s Body Alchemy: Transsexual Portraits. For a review of 
theory and historical scholarship on transgender, see Norton, 
“Transsexualism/Transgenderism: History and Politics,” and Norton, 
“Transsexualism/Transgenderism: Psychological Accounts,” in the 
Reader's Guide to Lesbian and Gay Studies. 

17. See Bakhtin, Art and Answerability and Speech Genres and Other 
Late Essays; Iser, The Act of Reading and The Implied Reader; and 
Jauss, Aesthetic Experience and Literary Hermeneutics and Toward an 
Aesthetic of Reception. 

18. See Readings, The University in Ruins, for a brilliantly provocative 
reflection on the intellectual future of the postnational university. 



Works Cited 



Abel, Elizabeth, ed. Writing and Sexual Difference. Chicago: U of Chi- 
cago P, 1982. 

Abbott, C. C., ed. The Correspondence of Gerard Manley Hopkins and 
Richard Watson Dixon. London: Oxford UP, 1935. 

Andersen, Hans Christian. “The Snow Queen.” Fairy Tales. Trans. R. 
P. Keigwin. Ed. Svend Larsen. Vol. 1. Odense, Den.: Flensted, 1953. 
296-366. 

Ang, len. “Comment on Felski’s ‘The Doxa of Difference’: The Uses of 
Incommensurability.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and So- 
ciety 23.1 (1997): 57-64. 

Aristotle. The Complete Works of Aristotle. Ed. Jonathan Barnes. 2 
vols. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1984. 

Badinter, Elisabeth. XY: On Masculine Identity. Trans. Lydia Davis. New 
York: Columbia UP, 1995. 

Bakhtin, Mikhail M. Art and Answerability: Early Philosophical Es- 
says. Trans. Vadim Liapunov. Ed. Michael Holquist and Vadim 
Liapunov. Austin: U of Texas P, 1990. 




- 102 - 



(Trans)Gendering English Studies 



. Speech Genres and Other Late Essays. Trans. Vern W. McGee. 

Ed. Caryl Emerson and Michael Holquist. Austin: U of Texas P, 
1986. 

Barbin, Herculine. Herculine Barbin: Being the Recently Discovered 
Memoirs of a Nineteenth -Century French Hermaphrodite. Trans. 
Richard McDougall. New York: Pantheon, 1980. 

Benjamin, Jessica. Like Subjects, Love Objects: Essays on Recognition 
and Sexual Difference. New Haven: Yale UP, 1995. 

Boys Dont Cry. Dir. Kimberly Peirce. Twentieth-Century Fox/Search- 
light, 1999. 

Braidotti, Rosi. “Comment on Felski’s The Doxa of Difference’: Work- 
ing through Sexual Difference.” Signs: Journal of Women in Cul- 
ture and Society 23.1 (1997): 23-40. 

The Brandon Teena Story. Dir. Susan Muska and Greta Olafsdottir. 
Zeitgeist4SIew Video, 1999. 

Brooks, Cleanth, and Robert Penn Warren. Understanding Poetry. 3rd 
ed. New York: Holt, 1960. 

Butler, Judith P. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Iden- 
tity. New York: Routledge, 1990. 

Cameron, Loren. Body Alchemy: Transsexual Portraits. Pittsburgh: Cleis, 
1996. 

Capote, Truman. Other Voices, Other Rooms. 1948. New York: Vin- 
tage-Random, 1994. 

Cornell, Drucilla. “Comment on Felski’s The Doxa of Difference’: Di- 
verging Differences.” Signs: Journal of Women in Culture and So- 
ciety 23.1 (1997): 41-56. 

Epstein, Julia. Altered Conditions: Disease, Medicine, and Storytelling. 
New York: Routledge, 1995. 

Fausto-Sterling, Anne. “The Five Sexes: Why Male and Female Are Not 
Enough.” The Sciences 33.2 (1993): 20—25. 

Feinberg, Leslie. Stone Butch Blues. Ithaca: Firebrand, 1993. 

. Transgender Warriors: Making History from Joan of Arc to 

RuPaul. Boston: Beacon, 1996. 

Felski, Rita. “The Doxa of Difference.” Signs: Journal of Women in 
Culture and Society 23.1 (1997): 1-21. 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 



' J. o 0 



- 103 - 



JODY NORTON 



Foucault, Michel. “What Is an Author?” Language, Counter-Memory, 
Practice: Selected Essays and Interviews. Trans. Donald F. Bouchard 
and Sherry Simon. Ed. Donald F Bouchard. Ithaca: Cornell UP, 
1977. 113-38. 

Fuss, Diana. Essentially Speaking: Feminism, Nature & Difference. New 
York: Routledge, 1989. 

Gallop, Jane, Marianne Hirsch, and Nancy K. Miller. “Criticizing Femi- 
nist Criticism.” Conflicts in Feminism. Ed. Marianne Hirsch and 
Evelyn Fox Keller. New York: Routledge, 1990. 349-69. 

Genet, Jean. Our Lady of the Flowers. Trans. Bernard Frechtman. 1963. 
New York: Grove, 1987. 

Gerin, Winifred. Charlotte Bronte: The Evolution of Genius. Oxford: 
Oxford UP, 1967. 

Gilbert, Sandra M., and Susan Gubar. The Madwoman in the Attic: 
The Woman Writer and the Nineteenth-Century Literary Imagina- 
tion. New Haven: Yale UP, 1979. 

Goldin, Nan. The Other Side, Ed. Nan Goldin, David Armstrong, and 
Walter Keller. Zurich: Alltag/Parkett, 1992. 

Hall, Radclyffe. The Well of Loneliness. 1928. New York: Anchor- 
Doubleday, 1990. 

Heilbrun, Carolyn G. Writing a Woman^s Life. New York: Ballantine, 
1988. 

Hunter, J. Paul. The Norton Introduction to Poetry. 4th ed. New York: 
Norton, 1991. 

Iser, Wolfgang. The Act of Reading: A Theory of Aesthetic Response. 
Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1978. 

. The Implied Reader: Patterns of Communication in Prose Fic- 
tion from Bunyan to Beckett. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP, 1974. 

James, Henry. “The Pupil.” The Great Short Novels of Henry James. 
Ed. Philip Rahv. 2nd ed. New York: Carroll, 1996. 565-619. 

Jauss, Hans Robert. Aesthetic Experience and Literary Hermeneutics. 
Trans. Michael Shaw. Minneapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1982. 

. Toward an Aesthetic of Reception. Trans. Timothy Bahti. Min- 
neapolis: U of Minnesota P, 1982. 




- 104 - 



(Trans)Gendering English Studies 



Kessler, Suzanne J. “The Medical Construction of Gender: Case Man- 
agement of Intersexed Infants.” Signs: Journal of Women in Cul- 
ture and Society 16 (1990): 3-26. 

Laqueur, Thomas. Making Sex: Body and Gender from the Greeks to 
Freud. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1990. 

Ma Vie en Rose. Dir. Alain Berliner. Perf. Georges Du Fresne, Michele 
Laroque, Jean-Philippe Ecoffey, and Helene Vincent. Sony Pictures 
Classics, 1997. 

McCann, Richard. “My Mother’s Clothes: The School of Beauty and 
Shame.” The Penguin Book of Gay Short Stories. Ed. David Leavitt 
and Mark Mitchell. New York: Viking, 1994. 540-56. 

Mengeling, Marvin E. ''Other Voices, Other Rooms: Oedipus between 
the Covers.” The Critical Response to Truman Capote. Ed. Joseph 
J. Waldmeir and John C. Waldmeir. Westport, CT: Greenwood, 
1999. 99-108. 

Middlebrook, Diane Wood. Suits Me: The Double Life of Billy Tipton. 
New York: Houghton, 1998. 

Millett, Kate. Sexual Politics. Garden City: Doubleday, 1970. 

Norton, Jody. “Transsexualism/Transgenderism: History and Politics.” 
Reader's Guide to Lesbian and Gay Studies. Chicago: Fitzroy 
Dearborn, 2000. 586-89. 

. “Transsexualism/Transgenderism: Psychological Accounts.” 

Reader's Guide to Lesbian and Gay Studies. Chicago: Fitzroy 
Dearborn, 2000. 589-92. 

Pratt, Minnie Bruce. “Stripped.” S/HE. Ithaca: Firebrand, 1995. 173-74. 

Prosser, Jay. Second Skins: The Body Narratives of Transsexuality. New 
York: Columbia UP, 1998. 

Raymond, Janice. The Transsexual Empire: The Making of the She- 
Male. 1979. New York: Teachers College P, 1994. 

Readings, Bill. The University in Ruins. Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1996. 

Rose, Jacqueline. “Introduction-II.” Feminine Sexuality: Jacques Lacan 
and the ecole freudienne. Ed. Juliet Mitchell and Jacqueline Rose. 
New York: Norton, 1982. 27-57. 

Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. Epistemology of the Closet. Berkeley: U of 
California P, 1990. 




4 . A 

X J i 






- 105 - 



JODY NORTON 



Selby, Hubert Jr. “The Queen Is Dead.” Pt. II of Last Exit to Brooklyn. 
1964. New York: Grove, 1988. 21-79. 

Showalter, Elaine, ed. The New Feminist Criticism: Essays on Women, 
Literature, and Theory. New York: Pantheon, 1985. 

Southey, Robert. Letter to Charlotte Bronte, Mar. 1837. Gerin 110. 

Summerscale, Kate. The Queen of Whale Cay: The Eccentric Story of 
“Joe” Carstairs, Fastest Woman on Water. New York: Viking-Pen- 
guin, 1997. 

Welch, Denton. In Youth Is Pleasure. 1945. Cambridge: Exact Change, 
1994. 

Winnicott, D. W. Playing and Reality. 1971. New York: Routledge, 1991. 

Wittig, Monique. “The Mark of Gender.” The Straight Mind and Other 
Essays. Boston: Beacon, 1992. 

Woolf, Virginia. Room of One’s Own. 1928. New York: Harcourt, 
1981. 

Young, Robert. Colonial Desire: Hybridity in Theory, Culture, and Race. 
New York: Routledge, 1995. 




138 



- 106 - 



II 



Pedagogies 



o 

ERIC 



139 



Chapter Six 



Q© 

The Uses of History 

Lillian Faderman 
California State University, Fresno 



I n her book Epistemology of the Closet, Eve Sedgwick disarm- 
ingly queries, “Has there ever been a gay Socrates? Has there 
ever been a gay Shakespeare? Has there ever been a gay Proust?” 
And she saucily responds, “Yes,” and “their names are Socrates, 
Shakespeare, and Proust” (52). But why should it matter whether 
we can claim these icons of Western culture as our own? Why 
should we go even so far as to commit the sin of ahistoricity 
(imagine “gay” culture in sixth-century b.c.e. Greece or sixteenth- 
century c.E. England!) for the sake of finding connections be- 
tween those icons and us? Why do we need to know that there 
were great men and women in the past who shared our traits or 
our desires? What justification is there for outing people who are 
now dead? 

As lesbians and gays, it is in our interest to know the lesbian 
or gay facts in the lives of the great and to acquaint others with 
those facts. That certain historical figures had something in com- 
mon with contemporary homosexuals would be of little impor- 
tance in a world where gay was considered as good as straight, 
where homosexuals had never been put in jails or insane asylums 
or fired from their jobs or disowned by their families merely be- 
cause they were lesbian or gay. We would not especially need to 
lay claim to great figures of the past if our homosexuality were 
never a factor by which weVe been meanly judged. 

What are the uses of history? The various furors over the last 
years regarding changes in the guidelines for teaching history in 
the public schools should serve as evidence that “history” is never 
simply a collocation of objective facts. The public school battle 
was about crucial conflicts such as whether American history 




- 109 - 




LILLIAN FADERMAN 



should be related by stories that emphasize an Anglo heritage or 
stories that emphasize slave rebellions and immigrant experiences. 
Both sides in the battle realized what is at stake in the relating of 
history: among the uses of history are its possibilities for provid- 
ing role models to the young, for giving people reasons for pride 
in who they are, for teaching lessons about the past that we can 
incorporate in the present and use to plan the future. The record- 
ing and relating of history is always a matter of angle of vision 
and is seldom without some degree of chauvinism. History can 
provide something vital to any people who bond in a meaningful 
group; it can provide what Van Wyck Brooks has called in a 
different context a usable past. 

Lesbian and gay history has been nonexistent until quite re- 
cently. Heterosexuals certainly had no reason to record lesbian 
and gay history for us, and it was virtually impossible for us to 
record it ourselves since an admission of interest in homosexual- 
ity (apart from its legal or medical connections) was tantamount 
to the perilous admission of being homosexual. Thus we had few 
heroes, we had no lessons of the past, we had little wisdom that 
was handed down to us by our “elders.” Generations of lesbians 
and gays were never dignified with a history. The belief that no- 
body in history has lived or felt as they have — nobody sane or 
socially viable, at any rate — must surely have encouraged in more 
than a few homosexuals the self-hating conviction that nobody 
sane or decent should want to live or feel that way. Perhaps it’s 
no wonder that the suicide rate among lesbian and gay teens, 
who generally have not learned our history, has been astronomi- 
cally high relative to the general population of teens. 

Will knowing that Shakespeare or Sappho was homosexual — 
or having access to books such as the Chelsea House series. Lives 
of Notable Gay Men and Lesbians — lower the suicide rate for 
homosexual teens? In fact, it might. Surely in a homophobic so- 
ciety that has had little good to say about us, it would help our 
young people to know (and have it known by others) that Jane 
Addams could not have done her great social work for the un- 
derprivileged and neglected of society were it not for the love of 
her life, wealthy and generous Mary Rozet Smith; that Walt 
Whitman wrote some of his best poems to his “manly comrades” 
whom he loved no differently from the ways that contemporary 





- 110 - 



The Uses of History 



gay men love other men; that many of Emily Dickinson’s most 
passionate love poems were written not to the elusive “Master” 
but to Sue Gilbert — the woman who later became her sister-in- 
law; that Willa Gather had a forty-year domestic partnership with 
Edith Lewis; that Virginia Woolf and Katherine Mansfield were 
bisexual; that Auden and Housman and Spender were gay; that 
though she was closeted, African American playwright Lorraine 
Hansberry identified as a lesbian; that we figure very heavily in- 
deed among those who have created the very best that has been 
thought and said — and done — in the world. 

It is absolutely vital for young gays and lesbians to know 
that individuals who have been respected and valued even in a 
homophobic society have shared with them that very trait that 
the rest of the world has claimed to despise. And surely those 
dead greats would not have begrudged being used for such nec- 
essary solace and aid. 



Work Cited 

Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. Epistemology of the Closet. Berkeley: U of 
California P, 1990. 




- Ill - 



X 



* 



Chapter Seven 






‘^hafs Out Theref” Gay and 
Lesbian Literature for Children 
and Young Adults 



Educators would significantly benefit from acquainting 
themselves with the fields of gay and lesbian studies, not 
because it would access some distant other, but more 
immediately, reading gay and lesbian scholarship, repre- 
sentations, and expressions might compel a second look 
at one’s own constructed sexuality and a different look 
at what it is that structures how the sexuality of another 
is imagined. 

Deborah Britzman, “What Is This Thing Called Love?” 



I n making this statement, teacher educator and activist Deborah 
Britzman is drawing our attention to the fact that the field of 
gay and lesbian studies is not simply for gays and lesbians, and 
not just for the purpose of having “them” understand “us” bet- 
ter. Rather, through contact with representations of gay identity, 
all educators can have what she terms a “second look” at them- 
selves and their own constructed sexuality. Her point is an im- 
portant one in that, amongst other possibilities, it supports the 
notion that as teachers and teacher educators we need to be en- 
gaged in studying ourselves as part of our efforts to transform 
our own teaching. As I have noted elsewhere, it benefits all teach- 
ers that a discourse community has recently emerged that closely 
examines (homo) sexuality in the context of teaching (Mitchell 



Claudia Mitchell 
McGill University 




- 112 - 



Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young Adults 

and Weber). This community, which includes such authors/works 
as Kissen’s The Last Closet: The Real Lives of Lesbian and Gay 
Teachers; Jennings’s One Teacher in Ten; Tobin’s Making a Place 
for Pleasure in Early Childhood Education; and Khayatt’s Les- 
bian Teachers: An Invisible Presence, has in a sense placed sexu- 
ality on the agenda within the professional literature on teacher 
education. 

I highlight the significance of teachers and teaching here be- 
cause Britzman’s point also serves as a personal reminder of the 
number of times I am asked by either the beginning teachers in 
my classes in a Faculty of Education or by experienced teachers 
who come to workshops on literature for children and adoles- 
cents: “Can you suggest some books on gay and lesbian themes,” 
“What’s out there?,” and “What teaches well?” Anxious to ac- 
commodate their requests, thereby ensuring that at least some of 
these books get into circulation, I usually leap at the chance to 
pass out annotated bibliographies, without necessarily stopping 
to ask such questions as “Good for what or whom?” Or “Teach 
what well?” The question “Does it teach well?” is one that can 
be highly problematic both for what it implies about literature 
and reading practices and for what it says about teaching itself. 
At the same time, the question, because of its frequency in one 
formulation or another, suggests the need for strategies for ex- 
amining the kinds of books that are available for young people 
on gay and lesbian issues. The purpose of this essay is not to 
provide some grand scheme of categorization of books, but rather 
to offer those who work with young readers some strategies for 
questioning the very question “What teaches well?” and what 
that might mean both in our classrooms and for taking a second 
look at ourselves. The question then is really one of how gay and 
lesbian literature for young people can become a meaningful site 
for learning and teaching in our own classrooms. 

Gay and Lesbian Literature for Young Children 

One of the most frequently banned children’s books in Canada is 
Asha's Mums (by Rosamund Elwin and Michele Paulse), a pic- 
ture book which challenges both the heteronormative practices 







- 113 - 



CLAUDIA MITCHELL 



of schools, insofar as they assume that everyone’s family (regard- 
less of whether it is “intact,” headed by a single parent, blended, 
or newly constituted) is heterosexual, and the impact of 
heteronormativity on students and teachers. In the story, Asha’s 
teacher asks the class to bring back signed consent forms so that 
the class can visit the Science Centre. When Asha brings back her 
form with two signatures, the teacher insists on knowing which 
of the names belongs to the mum: 

I said, “Both.” 

“It can’t be both. You can’t have two mums,” she said briskly. 

“But I do! My brother and I have two mums,” I protested, (np) 

The problem (as the teacher sees it) is settled during a meeting 
with the two mothers; it becomes clear that for the school both 
mothers can be “Mummy Number One.” The story is an impor- 
tant one historically because it is one of the first to challenge 
overtly the ways that schools regulate what counts as “family,” 
who can be a mother, and so on. Since schools can either repro- 
duce or challenge dominant discourses, the issue is significant. 
Peer groups — particularly those in school — often reinforce for 
children what is socially acceptable. Potentially, schools can of- 
fer a mediating space for questions such as, “Am I the only one? 
What is wrong with my family?” Asha's Mums, far from offering 
“lesbianism in your face,” as several school boards have charged, 
foregrounds the issue of divergent family structures by 
unapologetically making the lesbian relationship of the mothers 
central to the text. 

In relation to teaching, the book reveals a number of layers. 
Interestingly, or ironically, it is frequently put on a suggested read- 
ing list for lesbian parents (perhaps as a warning of what they 
may be up against with the school system). While it is important 
for gay and lesbian couples and their children to know that there 
are books “out there” about us, there is probably nothing in the 
book that any gay or lesbian couple with children has not al- 
ready thought about, anticipated, or even experienced. As Erika 
Courvoisier observes in her case study of one lesbian family that 
is preparing for the entry of their three-year-old son into the school 
system: 




- 114 - 



145 



Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young Adults 

As Nicholas is still only three years old, there have been no 
school-related experiences for the family to engage in as an 
openly lesbian family. Nicholas has not attended daycare, but 
is currently registered for pre-kindergarten. ... A significant 
portion of the interview was spent discussing the upcoming 
problems facing Nicholas as the son of openly lesbian parents. 

The first long, uncomfortable pause in the interview occurred 
when discussing their fears for Nicholas. As single adults or 
partners their strategies for reducing the effects of homopho- 
bia on self-esteem are practiced. For their son, they know that 
“there’s going to be a lot of pain for that little kid.” (32) 

Perhaps the greatest teaching potential of the book is for 
straight teachers who might themselves become conscious of 
heteronormative teaching practices (such as insisting that stu- 
dents bring a note from home with signatures that designate 
‘‘mother” or “father,” or organizing activities such as making 
Mother’s Day or Father’s Day cards). Thus the point is not that a 
minority group — what Hardiman and Jackson call the “target 
group” — needs to read stories about its own members, but that 
members of the “agent group” (in this case the heterosexual com- 
munity) need to become more aware of their own teaching prac- 
tices. Additionally, Asha's Mums offers teachers all the “entry 
points” they could ever need for extending and enriching the 
notion of family, a theme that characterizes almost every lan- 
guage arts curriculum in North American primary education. In 
short, yes, the book “teaches well,” but it also makes the point 
that schools are too often outdated, excluding, and in need of 
change. 

Whereas the lesbian mothers and the heteronormative prac- 
tices of schools are foregrounded in Asha's Mums, another pic- 
ture book, Saturday Is Pattyday by Leslea Newman, focuses on 
what happens to the child when the lesbian couple breaks up. In 
this story, Frankie is upset because his two mums have split up 
and he worries about whether he will still be able to see Patty, 
who no longer lives with him. Like other stories which represent 
families in which the parents are no longer together, Saturday Is 
Pattyday is about children in the position of living with one par- 
ent and spending “custody time” with the other. Although this 
subject has received widespread treatment in children’s books — 









1 vU 



- 115 - 



CLAUDIA MITCHELL 



in those for very young children, such as Mom and Dad Don't 
Live Together Any More (by Kathy Stinson), and in the range of 
books for preteens and young adolescents — Saturday Is Pattyday 
might be regarded as groundbreaking in that it is one of the first 
books to describe honestly separation in nonheterosexual fami- 
lies. The focus is on Frankie’s sense of loss and fear of separation, 
not on the fact that his mothers are lesbian. While the book is 
important for any young reader who might be experiencing a 
sense of loss, it also challenges adult mediators to confront their 
own sense of “what is a family.” For adults who are themselves 
gay or lesbian, the book offers an interesting take on what is 
possible for family life. For example, while the myth of the happy 
heterosexual two-parent family has been challenged as the model 
of family life — so much so that the heterosexual parents in 
children’s books are often separated or divorced — in the few books 
for children in a gay or lesbian family, there has generally been 
no room for anything but representations of the family as happy 
and cohesive. The point of these books is becoming a family, or 
being part of a nonheterosexual family, as in Asha's Mums. Aside 
from the fact that books about lesbian and gay families have the 
potential for so many other story lines, this formulation of “the 
new happy family” could become a type of colonization whereby 
gay and lesbian couples must stay together, if not for the sake of 
the children, then for the sake of the community. Saturday Is 
Pattyday subverts this master narrative. 

Leslea Newman’s Gloria Goes to Gay Pride explicitly ex- 
plores a sense of community. We see a gay pride march through 
the eyes of Gloria, a little girl who attends the march with her 
lesbian mothers. The book offers an acknowledgment of what a 
number of authors might describe as biculturalism as a feature of 
gay culture. In using the term biculturalism, Allen and Demo and 
Lukes and Land refer to the possibility that many gay and les- 
bian families have strong support through the gay community 
and outside of the more mainstream networks. This support, 
though, may be in addition to some of the regular support sys- 
tems to which these families already have access. While this may 
not be quite the same as the biculturalism of, say, a Greek Cana- 
dian family, which might have access to the Greek community 



116 



ERLC 




Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young Adults 



(customs, rituals, friends) as well as access to the mainstream 
culture, a “first start” is to recognize that there are identifiable, 
visible cultural components such as Gay Pride Day that should 
be celebrated (as opposed to being dismissed or pathologized). 
As Courvoisier notes, “While gays and lesbians have grown up 
in and have largely embraced the dominant heterosexual culture, 
they also have a rich alternative culture, complete with language, 
symbols, organizations and icons” (14). A recognition of this 
community by schools is important both for an understanding of 
cultural diversity generally and as a way to help de-pathologize 
the family life of gays and lesbians, where the “Other” can often 
be taken to mean “less.” Books such as Gloria Goes to Gay Pride 
challenge that idea by highlighting the gay and lesbian commu- 
nity as it features in Gloria’s life. 

The three books just discussed do not fall into an imagina- 
tive fictional mode. Rather, they are in keeping with a genre of 
literature for young children that employs a narrative style — some- 
times in the third person but most often in the first person — that 
operates under the rubric of “This is my life.” The books are 
meant to inform. In none of these books is there anything explic- 
itly sexual, although the idea of two mums (or two dads) is read 
by some censors as blatantly sexual for what it implies about the 
relationships between adults of the same sex, and for the ques- 
tions it might provoke in children: “How could you have two 
mummies?,” “Who sleeps where?,” “How do they have babies?” 
Beyond what such works might convey about gay and lesbian 
families or a sense of community, the books can also contribute 
to Britzman’s idea of a second look for educators, both in rela- 
tion to our own constructed sexuality and the ways in which we 
imaginatively construct the sexuality of others, including that of 
children. For example, at present we know of no books for young 
children that address the idea of childhood sexuality (outside of 
those of the “know your body” genre). Indeed, even some of 
those that deal with the body in a very straightforward way, such 
as Kathy Stinson’s The Bare Naked Book, have sometimes been 
censored in school settings. Where sexuality does appear in lit- 
erature for young children, it is more likely to involve social pa- 
thology or disease — either in the form of warnings against child 




- 117 - 






iu 



CLAUDIA MITCHELL 



molestation (for example, Tom Doesn't Visit Us Anymore by 
Maryleah Otto) or in relation to HIV and AIDS (for example, 
Come Sit by Me by Margaret Merrifield). 

However important these works are for the issues of sexual- 
ity they address, they do not address any notions of sexuality 
which are not framed within adult sexuality, Valerie Walkerdine, 
in her work on the eroticizing spaces of some popular culture 
texts in relation to young girls, questions the silence that sur- 
rounds this space, noting that “even though most parents will be 
used to little girls dressing up, gyrating to their favorite pop mu- 
sic and fantasizing a starring role, nobody appears to have put 
this together with all the educational, moral and sexual concerns 
about young girls today” (3), Using the idea of “the presence of 
absence,” we might begin to question what kinds of stories are 
not available — perhaps not even imaginable — and to consider the 
apparent discomfort many teachers feel with the relationship 
between childhood and sexuality. While these three books on 
lesbian and gay issues represent landmarks in children’s publish- 
ing, they also need to be read as much for what they have not 
said — yet. Here we might think of Elizabeth Bishop’s poem “In 
the Waiting Room,” which is based on her memory of being seven 
years old and looking at images of African women in a National 
Geographic in the dentist’s office. In her autobiographical writ- 
ing, Bishop interprets the memory as “the dawning of lesbian 
consciousness,” something that Corinne Blackmer explores in 
her analysis of what she describes as “lesbian childhood” (17). 

Gay and Lesbian Themes as Social 
Change in Young Adult Literature 

Some picture books clearly directed at young children might also 
be appropriate for older readers, providing “teachable moments” 
by serving as springboards to discussion. Beyond those books 
already mentioned, consider the description offered by a junior 
high teacher of his use of Michael Willhoite’s Uncle What-Is-It Is 
Coming to Visit As Les Parsons writes: 

With colorful, lively drawings and a straightforward, wry and 





- 118 - 



Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young Adults 

fast-moving text, this picture book is ideal for any level when 
questions need to be answered and stereotypes need to be dis- 
pelled. “The teachable moment” for my Grade 8 students came 
up in a spontaneous discussion of Gay Pride Day. The book 
was a great hit as a read aloud and was passed around the 
classroom for days afterwards. My partner used the picture 
book to similar effect with a Grade 3 class when the “Ooooh, 
that’s gay!” syndrome popped up.” (11) 

Clearly, teachers who have a knowledge of the range of books 
being published on gay and lesbian themes can be poised to act. 

At the same time, there is a wide range of adolescent novels 
dealing with gay and lesbian identity, some of them dating back 
to at least the mid-1970s. Marion Dane Bauer gives a sense of 
the diversity of issues that can be explored when she describes 
how she put together her anthology. Am I Blue? Coming Out 
from the Silence: 

[W]hat about the joys of falling in love? What about all the 
minute complexities involved in finding a relationship at all? 

Or the grief of losing someone? Or the deep relief when some- 
one who might have been lost comes home? What about sto- 
ries which involve people who happen to be homosexual simply 
living out their lives? That was my dream when I first con- 
ceived of the idea for a collection of original young adult short 
stories on gay and lesbian themes. (Walker and Bauer 28) 

Her distinctions are important and should serve as a reminder 
that there is no unitary experience of gayness — nor are the read- 
ers themselves coming to or looking for the experience of read- 
ing in any homogeneous way. Indeed, to add to the distinctions 
Bauer makes, one might also consider the differences between 
coming-out stories, stories in which the protagonist is gay, sto- 
ries in which the protagonist is questioning his or her sexuality, 
stories in which the protagonist is working on behalf of a family 
member or close friend who is gay, and so on. While the differ- 
ences should of course be obvious to anyone who reads and works 
with young people, the issue of diverse experience can sometimes 
get lost amidst the idea of “here’s a book on that theme.” 

Given the range of books on gay and lesbian identity avail- 
able for adolescent readers, however, the questions “Does it teach 





- 119 - 



CLAUDIA MITCHELL 



well?,” “Teach what well?,” “Good for whom?” are no less fre- 
quently asked and no less relevant. In this section, I give consid- 
eration to the ways in which some of the books and short stories 
can be regarded as strategic entry points for embarking on a study 
of literary-social relations with twelve- to fifteen-year-old stu- 
dents. How, for example, might representations of otherness be 
explored? Where does the idea of voice figure into explorations 
of the Other? What do certain conflicts in these texts, such as the 
tensions between progressive and more conservative ways of 
thinking, contribute to an understanding of the Other? 

Consider, for example, an examination of these conflicts 
through other axes of oppression found in a number of gay and 
lesbian texts. One such text is M. E. Kerr’s short story “We Might 
as Well All Be Strangers,” included in Am I Blue?, The protago- 
nist, Alison, wants to tell her Jewish grandmother that she is a 
lesbian. Her mother, however, disagrees: 

“Alison, this coming out thing isn’t working. You came 
out to me, all right, Fm your mother and maybe you had to 
come out to me. But where your grandmother’s concerned: Keep 
quiet.” 

“You think she’d want that?” 

“I think she doesn’t even dream such a thing could come 
up! She’s had enough tsuris in life. Back in the old country 
there were relatives lost in the Holocaust! Isn’t that enough for 
one woman to suffer in a lifetime?” 

“Maybe that would make her more sympathetic.” 

“Don’t compare gays with Jews — there’s no comparison.” 

“I’m both. That’s prejudice against both. And I didn’t 
choose to be either.” 

“If you want to kill an old woman before her time, tell 
her.” 

“I think you have Grandmother all wrong.” 

“If I have Grandmother all wrong,” said my mother, “then 
I don’t know her and you don’t me and we might as well all be 
strangers.” ( 26 ) 

In explaining how and why she came to write this story, M. 
E. Kerr notes that the story was inspired by a friend of hers who 
came out to her Jewish grandmother in spite of her mother’s 
warnings that “the old lady couldn’t take it.” As she observes. 




Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young Adults 

“To my friend’s amazement, her grandmother was the only sym- 
pathetic member of the family. She told her grandchild that she 
had seen more than enough of prejudice in her life-time and asked 
to meet ‘your girlfriend’” (27). 

In the same volume, Lois Lowry’s story “Holding” tells of 
the hidden history of Willie, whose father’s lover, Chris, has just 
died. Willie, we discover, has been misleading his friend Jon into 
thinking that his father’s lover was a woman simply because of 
the lover’s ambiguously gendered name, Chris. 

“Jesus. Your dad’s wife died. Bummer.” 

“They weren’t married,” I reminded Jon, continuing the 
lie I’d been living so long that it came easily. “They only lived 
together.” (179) 

When Willie returns from the funeral, he decides he can no longer 
tolerate perpetuating the “lie” and tells Jon that Chris was not a 
wife or a female “significant other”: 

I ended the lie, then, and gave a tiny sliver of life back to Chris 
and to my father and to myself. “Chris was a guy. . . . My 
father’s significant other, as you would put it, was a guy,” I 
said clearly, looking at him. 

“All these years? What’s it been, like eight or nine years? 
Since we were little kids? It’s always been a guy? But you said — ” 

I gave him what I thought was a disdainful, condescend- 
ing look. I did my John Gielgud accent. “I said nothing, my 
good man. You made certain assumptions. I allowed you to do 
so. It suited my purposes.” (185; emphasis added) 

In this passage, there is a heightened sense of who can become 
“othered.” Not only does it include Chris — referred to as the 
“significant other” — and Willie’s father, whose relationship has 
been kept secret, but it also includes Willie’s friend Jon. In lying 
about his father’s relationship with Chris, Willie categorizes it as 
the unmentionable. Deceived all those years by Willie into think- 
ing that the relationship between Chris and Willie’s father was a 
heterosexual one, Jon is in the position at the end of the story of 
discovering that he too has been part of a lie, and he begins to 
question his own heteronormative assumptions. 



ERIC 

MMMIriiTifaiJ 



- 121 - 



V- 



\ “V • 



CLAUDIA MITCHELL 



We also see this kind of questioning of the Other in Skindeep, 
a novel by the South African novelist Toeckey Jones. First pub- 
lished in 1985 during the height of oppression in the apartheid 
era, the novel contains some of the first gay references in adoles- 
cent fiction in South Africa. Eighteen-year-old Rhonda, who is 
“putting in time” at a shorthand and typing school until the uni- 
versity term begins, meets and becomes romantically interested 
in Dave. Dave is mysterious from the very beginning. His head is 
completely shaven, for no apparent political or other reason, and 
his family connections remain ambiguous. At one point, he says 
that his brother and two sisters are dead. Rhonda senses there is 
more to know about Dave than what she has been told. She de- 
cides that Dave must be gay when she sees him at a party being 
attentive to a young man known to be gay. For Rhonda this is an 
end-of-the-world experience, and she becomes despondent at what 
she perceives as his deception. But her suspicions that Dave might 
be gay are dispelled and replaced by an equally “unthinkable” 
revelation — Dave is actually colored and has kept his head shaven 
so that he can pass as white. (“Colored” was the term used in 
South Africa during apartheid to refer to people of racially mixed 
heritage.) Rhonda learns that Dave was adopted by a white fam- 
ily in Johannesburg, but in actual fact his mother and siblings are 
alive in Cape Town. Eventually Dave “comes out” as colored 
and goes back to live with his family in Cape Town. Rhonda, 
who throughout most of the book has wanted to get out of South 
Africa, decides to stay and fight against the oppression that has 
made it necessary for Dave and others to live secret lives. The 
book is an important one for what it says about the kind of sus- 
picion that Rhonda has of Dave; the status of the Other to which 
Dave is relegated by Rhonda is no small point. Indeed, in setting 
the story during some of the most oppressive years of the apart- 
heid era, when being colored carried with it significant social 
stigma, Jones is drawing our attention to the seriousness of the 
stigma of being suspected of being gay. 

Related to the status of the Other is the issue of voice and 
narrative authority: who can speak? Kirk Fuoss notes that one of 
the characteristics of many of the young adult novels dealing with 
male homosexuality is that the characters “are more often than 
not presented as characters in someone else’s story [rather] than 




Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young Adults 



[as] narrators of their own life stories” (163). On the one hand, 
this can provide a type of “speaking on behalf of” activism, as 
we see in M. E. Kerr’s Deliver Us from Evie, where Parr, who is 
straight, is fighting against the injustices done to his lesbian sis- 
ter, or in Bette Greene’s The Drowning of Stephan Jones, where 
Carla must acknowledge, regardless to the consequences of their 
relationship, that her boyfriend is directly responsible for the 
harassment and ultimately the death of Stephan Jones. These 
books pick up on Anne Bishop’s idea of “becoming an ally” in 
working toward breaking the cycle of oppression. Bishop is re- 
ferring to the ways in which those who have been identified as or 
associated with being agents of oppression might learn to work 
alongside those who have been its targets. At the same time, as 
Fuoss points out, this “speaking on behalf of” can also be read 
as a “sustained resistance to the articulation, by a gay narrator, 
of his [or her] own story. The implication seems to be that while 
it’s one thing to permit talk about homosexuality, it is quite an- 
other matter to permit a homosexual to talk” (165). In a sense, 
then, there is often a censoring of the gay voice to speak on its 
own behalf. While it is clearly “safer” to have someone speak on 
behalf of gay voices, this is not without political implications, 
something teachers may be able to take up with students who 
themselves may often be subjected to kinds of voicelessness in 
their own lives. 

Teachers might also consider the ways in which this litera- 
ture can be read as impelling social change, something that is 
central to rhuch of the literature of social realism written for young 
people generally (Mitchell and Smith, “More Than Just a Love 
Story” and “Nervous Conditions and the Smell of Apples”). How 
do particular works or their reading provide a map for social 
change by offering what might be regarded as strategies for grap- 
pling with change? For example, when Rhonda in Skindeep real- 
izes that she must stay in South Africa to fight against apartheid, 
she asks her best friend to get her some political books from her 
boyfriend who is politically active. She realizes that if she is go- 
ing to stay and fight, she needs to know more. Likewise, students 
might be guided to look at the radical/conservative binary that 
impels action in many of these works as itself a type of mapping 
for social change. M. E. Kerr’s Deliver Us from Evie provides a 

- 123 - 




/ 

/ 



good example of this. What is particularly important about this 
book is that it takes oppression out of a purely personal mode 
and places it in a social framework. Parr, for example, cannot 
bear to see what is happening to his sister but he also comes to 
see how the issue is not just an individual one. When the family is 
ostracized by the bank, the church, and the community in gen- 
eral, he comes to understand some of the ways in which institu- 
tions exert power and control over social norms. 

In Deliver Us from Evie, as well as in a number of other 
works, the radical/conservative tension is often encountered more 
directly. Bette Greene’s novel The Drowning of Stephan Jones 
and Diane Wieler’s Bad Boy each interrogates the kind of value 
system in which intolerance of gays and lesbians is quite open, 
largely a result of “small town-ness,” the force of fundamentalist 
religions, and the conservatism of a family values ethos, espe- 
cially in rural areas. While these may seem like rather blatant 
stereotypes of rural life and the way it often perpetuates homopho- 
bia, it is perhaps the contained world of rural life as presented in 
these novels that highlights the contrasts between the radical- 
thinking protagonists and those who hold more conservative 
views. At the same time, the representation of rural conservatism 
and more progressive thinking can raise questions for students to 
consider about the ways in which political systems of thought 
construct sexuality. 

We also see this kind of tension interrogated by South Afri- 
can writer Barrie Hough in his novel Vlerkdans, first published 
in Afrikaans and prescribed as a “set work” in many Afrikaans- 
medium high schools in South Africa. Now translated into En- 
glish as In Full Flight, the book describes the relationship between 
a young artist, Hannes, and his model, Anton, a dancer. While 
there is no explicit acknowledgment of a sexual relationship be- 
tween Hannes and Anton (in fact, Hannes tells his father they 
only peed together at a urinal), through its focus on the intensity 
of the relationship, the novel provides an opening for the ques- 
tion of whether they could be gay. Like many books for young 
adults. In Full Flight uses generational conflict as a way to con- 
front radical and more conservative modes of thought. Hough 
uses the surface feature of an earring as a way into this investiga- 
tion. Thus the novel opens with the following passage: 



Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young Adults 

It’s because of Anton that I started wearing the earring. I had it 
put in after I started sketching him. I’ll never forget that first 
afternoon, a few weeks before the earring. It was the first time 
I felt like a real artist. With my own model. (1) 

When Anton becomes ill with AIDS, Hannes in despair telephones 
his father, a medical doctor who no longer lives with Hannes’s 
mother and who is living in Cape Town. On the way to the air- 
port, Hannes’s mother asks in her “please-do-it” voice, “‘Won’t 
you please take off the earring? Until he’s gone back to Cape Town?’ 
I keep quiet, don’t look at her” (61). The earring, as the mother 
predicts, is a source of conflict when Hannes’s father arrives: 

I don’t know when exactly he notices the earring. When he’s in 
front of me, he puts the case down again and hugs me. ‘‘Hullo 
Hannes.” He steps back, looks at me fixedly straight in the 
eye. It feels like time stands still. Pa is the first to look away. 

(62) 

As the visit continues, Hannes’s father finally gets around to ac- 
knowledging the source of his son’s grief and asks him about 
Anton. Their conversation, a stilted one made up of a series of short 
questions and answers, reveals the conflict between father and son: 

“Do you know how he got AIDS?” 

“He used drugs for some time a few years ago . . . spiked.” 
“Don’t they realize what they are doing?” 

Pa stares in front of him. He frowns. His eyes are almost 
slits. “This . . . Anton ... I didn’t realize you’d met him at the 
Gym. I got the impression he was one of your classmates. Was 
he still at school when he got sick?” 

“He was doing matric at a college somewhere here in town 

“And you’re good friends?” 

“Yes.” 

“Just good friends?” 

I clench my fist and take a deep breath. “Why don’t you 
ask me outright? If he’s gay? And me?” (65) 

Hannes and his father part on a note of reconciliation, although 
the earring continues to be a source of conflict. Just before the 
father returns to Cape Town, he asks Hannes: 




I 



- 125 



u6 



CLAUDIA MITCHELL 



‘The earring. Does it mean anything?” 

“It makes me feel . . . different, Pa. ...” (67) 

The earring serves as a site of contestation between the conserva- 
tive father and the more radical Hannes. For adolescent readers, 
these straightforward points make such books work in ways that 
are both personal and literary. As Hough points out in an inter- 
view I conducted with him in South Africa in 1995, the novel 
encourages the idea of raising consciousness about gay identity. 
In commenting on his visits to some Afrikaans secondary class- 
rooms, he notes that one of the most frequent questions that 
students ask him about this book relates to whether Anton and 
Hannes sleep together. Hough says he puts the question back to 
the students: “What do you think?” He acknowledges that it is 
the “open-ended” nature of the text as well as his presence in the 
classroom as an openly gay man that makes room for discussion. 

Hough’s comments are important for what they tell us about 
the significance of going beyond the primary text. In participat- 
ing in school visits, for example. Hough is adding a layer of 
textuality to the reading, an act in keeping with what John Fiske 
would describe as a cultural reading. Fiske talks about the sig- 
nificance of the overlapping yet separate nature of (a) the pri- 
mary text, (b) the text of the reader (the reader’s response), (c) 
the behind-the-scenes text of why writers write and why publish- 
ers publish, and (d) the texts of critical reception, or what adult 
critics might say about the work. Lesbian and gay works lend 
themselves to a multitextual reading for a variety of reasons, not 
the least of which is their consideration of issues of censorship; 
authors, critics, politicians, parents, school administrators, and 
teachers all have a great deal to say about these texts, in terms of 
either why they should be written or why they should not be 
read in schools. Built into some works such as Marion Bauer’s 
Am I Blue? is the idea of the behind-the-scenes voice of the au- 
thor and references to critical reception and censorship. For ex- 
ample, Bauer observes in the introduction (directed toward young 
readers) that she did not approach as potential contributors writers 
who were necessarily gay. Part of her motive in compiling the 
collection was to ensure that the participation of well-known 




- 126 - 




Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young Adults 



popular writers, regardless of their sexual identity, would make 
it difficult for librarians to refuse to stock the book. She also 
addresses the issue of “who can write gay” and the significance 
of “the informed imagination.” Thus the text Am I Blue?, as 
young readers encounter it, includes both short stories and short 
autobiographical accounts of the writers. In some cases, the writer 
is openly gay. For example, the editor herself, who is also author 
of one of the stories, “Dancing Backwards,” acknowledges in 
her autobiographical narrative that she married right after high 
school and that it took her thirty years to realize what “direction 
I had been facing all along” (273). Nancy Garden, well known 
for her lesbian “coming-out” novel for adolescent readers Annie 
on My Mind, addresses the significance of political movements, 
dedicating her story “Parent’s Night” “to the schools that have 
gay-straight-bisexual support groups, in hopes that all schools 
will soon have them” (128). What is interesting about Bauer’s 
text is its invitation to young people to do more than just specu- 
late about the question “Is he or is she (gay)?” It has an honesty 
to it, and at the same time offers an affirmation of the signifi- 
cance of readings which are informed by the primary text, by 
one’s own response to the text, by the author’s actual or imag- 
ined reasons for writing the text, and by the text’s political con- 
text. Am I Blue? is exceptional in its inclusion of the 
behind-the-scenes accounts for the students to read. Too often 
only the teacher has background information on the author or 
the controversy surrounding the text, so there is always an added 
layer of mediation between the reader and the text. In making 
the behind-the-scenes accounts accessible to adolescent readers, 
books like Bauer’s treat the readers as knowers. 

The works for adolescent readers referred to in this essay 
represent only a small number of those available. While novels 
dealing with gay and lesbian identity are by no means the only 
ones suited to the kinds of interrogation I have been discussing, 
they are particularly suited to adolescent readers and their inter- 
est in their own sexuality. But I return to Britzman’s notion of 
educators taking a second look at ourselves and our own con- 
structed sexuality. As Nancy Boutlier writes in her essay on les- 
bian literature in the secondary classroom: 




- 127- 



^ ‘ J O 



CLAUDIA MITCHELL 



I have found that the process of bringing lesbian and gay lit- 
erature into the classroom, like coming out, leaves no room for 
turning back. The experience has reaffirmed my personal com- 
mitment to challenging myself to face the worst of my fears. 
Because my school had a strong commitment to multicultural 
education, I was able to use the description of the course I 
taught to introduce students to gay and lesbian literature. I do 
not assume that all teachers are in such a happy circumstance, 
but everywhere there is some boundary that needs exploring, 
some limit that needs to be pushed. (141; emphasis added) 

In drawing our attention to the idea of “some boundary that 
needs exploring” and “some limit that needs to be pushed,” 
Boutlier reminds us of the significance of works on lesbian and 
gay identity written for young people as potential sites for teach- 
ing and for learning. While the phrase “what’s out there” in the 
title of this essay might be read as a reference to literature which 
is “out,” we might also take it as a complement to Boutlier’s 
notion of boundaries and limits. Here I have focused on some of 
the ways in which these works and their various readings can 
operate as “points of entry” for teachers and students to work 
together to engage in exploring boundaries and pushing limits. 
In focusing in particular on the notion of otherness as a con- 
struct in social-literary criticism, as well as a construct for inter- 
rogating lived experience, we see possible ways in which these 
works operate as meaningful pedagogical sites. 



Works Cited 



Allen, Katherine R., and David H. Demo. “The Families of Lesbians 
and Gay Men: A New Frontier in Family Research.” Journal of 
Marriage and The Family 57 (1995): 111-27. 

Bauer, Marion Dane, ed. Am I Bluef Coming Out from the Silence. 
New York: HarperCollins, 1994. 

Bishop, Anne. Becoming an Ally: Breaking the Cycle of Oppression. 
Halifax, Can.: Fernwood, 1994. 

Blackmer, Corinne E. “Ethnoporn, Lesbian Childhood, and Native 
Maternal Culture: Reading National Geographic with Elizabeth 
Bishop.” GLQ: A Journal of Lesbian and Gay Studies 4.1 (1998): 
17-58. 





Gay and Lesbian Literature for Children and Young Adults 



Boutlier, Nancy. “Reading, Writing and Rita Mae Brown: Lesbian Lit- 
erature in High School.” Tilting the Tower. Ed. Linda Garber. New 
York: Routledge, 1994. 

Britzman, Deborah. “What Is This Thing Called Love?” Taboo: The 
Journal of Culture and Education 1 (1995): 65-93. 

Courvoisier, Erika. Lesbian Families: An Emerging Phenomenon. Un- 
published ms. Dept, of Educational and Counselling Psychology, 
McGill U, 1998. 

Elwin, Rosamund, and Michele Paulse. Asha's Mums. Toronto: Women’s, 

1990. 

Fiske, John. “British Cultural Studies and Television.” Channels of Dis- 
course, Reassembled: Television and Contemporary Criticism. Ed. 
Robert Allen. London: Methuen, 1987. 254-89. 

Fuoss, Kirk. “A Portrait of the Adolescent as a Young Gay: The Politics 
of Male Homosexuality in Young Adult Fiction.” Queer Words, 
Queer Images: Communication and the Construction of Homo- 
sexuality. Ed. R. Jeffrey Ringer. New York: New York UP, 1994. 
159-74. 

Garden, Nancy. Annie on My Mind. New York: Farrar, 1982. 

Greene, Bette. The Drowning of Stephan Jones. New York: Bantam, 

1991. 

Hardiman, Rita, and Bailey W. Jackson. “Conceptual Foundation for 
Social Justice Courses.” Teaching for Diversity and Social Justice: 
A Sourcebook. Ed. Marianne Adams, Lee Anne Bell, and Pat Grif- 
fin. New York: Routledge, 1997. 16-29. 

Hough, Barrie. Vlerkdans. Johannesburg: Tafelberg, 1992. In Full Flight. 
Trans. Wierenga Jelleke. Johannesburg: Heinemann, 1996. 

Jennings, Kevin. One Teacher in 10: Gay and Lesbian Educators Tell 
Their Stories. Boston: Alyson, 1994. 

Jones, Toeckey. Skindeep. London: Bodley Head, 1985. 

Kerr, M. E. Deliver Us From Evie. New York: HarperTrophy, 1995. 

Khayatt, Madiha Didi. Lesbian Teachers: An Invisible Presence. Albany: 
SUNY P, 1992. 

Kissen, Rita. The Last Closet: The Real Lives of Lesbian and Gay Teach- 
ers. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann, 1996. 

Lowry, Lois. “Holding.” Bauer 175-87. 



ERJC 

MMMliiTifaii 






- 129 - 



16Q 



CLAUDIA MITCHELL 



Lukes, C.A., and H. Land. “Biculturality and Homosexuality.” Social 
Work 35 (1990): 155-61. 

Merrifield, Margaret. Come Sit by Me. Toronto: Women’s, 1990. 

Mitchell, Claudia, and Ann Smith. “More Than Just a Love Story: In- 
vestigating the Literary and Social Significance of the Young Adult 
Novel in South Africa.” Alternation 3.2 (1996): 173-83. 

. Nervous Conditions and The Smell of Apples: Investigations 

of Innocence and Trauma through Adolescence as a Literary Space 
in Some South African Contemporary Literature.” Association for 
Bibliotherapy Conference. Ottawa, Ontario. 28-29 May 1998. 

Mitchell, Claudia, and Sandra Weber. Reinventing Ourselves as Teach- 
ers: Beyond Nostalgia. London: Falmer, 1999. 

Newman, Leslea. Gloria Goes to Gay Pride. Boston: Alyson Wonder- 
land, 1991. 

. Saturday Is Patty day. Toronto: Women’s, 1993. 

Otto, Maryleah. Tom Doesnt Visit Us Anymore. Toronto: Women’s, 
1987. 

Parsons, Les. “Completing the Puzzle: Gay-Positive Literature in the 
Classroom.” The Rainbow Classroom 3.1 (1998): 11. 

Stinson, Kathy. The Bare Naked Book. Toronto: Annick, 1986. 

. Mom and Dad Don't Live Together Any More. Toronto: Annick, 

1984. 

Tobin, Joseph Jay, ed. Making a Place for Pleasure in Early Childhood 
Education. New Haven: Yale UP, 1997. 

Walker, Kate, and Marion Dane Bauer. “The Gay/Lesbian Connection: 
Two Authors Talk about Their Books.” Bookbird 32.2 (1999): 
25-30. 

Walkerdine, Valerie. Daddy's Girl: Young Girls and Popular Culture. 
Cambridge: Harvard UP, 1997. 

Wieler, Diana. Bad Boy. Toronto: Douglas, 1989. 

Willhoite, Michael. Uncle What-Is-It is Coming to Visit! Boston: Alyson, 
1993. 




- 130 - 



161 



Chapter Eight 




Creating a Place for Lesbian 
and Gay Readings in Secondary 
English Classrooms 



s a cautionary note to readers, let me begin by stating my 



preferred title for this piece: “How Watching a Silly Film 
Initiated the Process of Rethinking My Own Approach to Reader- 
Response Theories.” What that title lacks in pithiness it makes 
up for in accuracy. For in this essay, I will return to 1993 when I 
first saw the Australian comedy Strictly Ballroom, which evoked 
in me a powerful response. In considering that response, I, as a 
novice teacher and a gay man, began to think about the implica- 
tions of the pattern of responses I have as a reader of film and 
literature. Why would this film strike a chord with me? Was I 
merely projecting my own desires as a gay reader onto the film? 
Or was I constructing meaning in a personal way, one that was 
perhaps similar to that of other gay spectators? In trying to an- 
swer these questions, I began to examine the place of lesbian and 
gay readers and readings in secondary English classrooms. 

We Are Everywhere? 

Since the Stonewall riots of 1969 and the advent of the gay rights 
movement, lesbian and gay visibility has increased dramatically 



Jim Reese 

The International School of Brussels, Belgium 



A life lived in fear is a life half-lived. 

Strictly Ballroom 





- 131 - 



JIM REESE 



in the culture at large. In the academic realm, we have seen the 
formation of a new discipline — lesbian and gay studies — and in 
many quarters we can honestly say that there is a better under- 
standing of sexual difference. Secondary schools, however, for 
the most part seem to have resisted such change; while there are 
isolated instances of progress — gay-straight alliances, same-sex 
couples attending school dances — lesbians and gay males are still 
by and large an invisible minority in middle and senior high 
schools. 

In facing the everyday reality that most lesbian and gay stu- 
dents would not dare to reveal their sexual identity to their peers 
or teachers, we have to push ourselves to understand why this is 
so. Describing the difficult psychosocial adjustments these stu- 
dents face, Harbeck and Uribe write: 

For [lesbian and gay adolescents, secondary] school is often a 
time of isolation, humiliation, and pain. Those who openly 
admit their sexual orientation or who depart from traditional 
sex-role stereotypes . . . are verbally harassed and physically 
abused. Those who conceal their homosexual feelings experi- 
ence loneliness and alienation, a splitting of their gay, lesbian, 
or bisexual identity from the rest of their personality. ... By 
developing elaborate concealment strategies these young people 
are often able to “pass as straight,” but at some significant, 
unmeasurable cost to their developmental process, self-esteem, 
and sense of connection. . . . The traditional support structures 
that serve all other children do not serve gay, lesbian, and bi- 
sexual youth. (11-12) 

My own experience with U.S. public schools and interna- 
tional schools abroad leads me to conclude that many teachers 
and administrators often turn a blind eye to blatant examples of 
homophobia such as name-calling or bullying of those thought 
to be lesbian or gay. In other words, institutionalized homopho- 
bia usually goes unchallenged. At the international school where 
I currently teach, when discussing with colleagues the general 
need to foster greater tolerance and understanding, I am impressed 
by the high level of awareness shown for various minority groups 
within the school, as well as a certain willingness to appreciate 
individual differences among students. The faculty seem genu- 
inely eager to promote openness and curiosity, to have students 




- 132 - 



Creating a Place for Lesbian and Gay Readings in Secondary English 



look beyond themselves in order to consider the world at large, 
and to help them find a place for themselves in a rapidly chang- 
ing society. Yet when I attempt to discuss the need for increased 
awareness of issues facing lesbian and gay people and the impor- 
tance of confronting homophobia within the school community, 
I often encounter what at first seems to be ignorance. Many well- 
meaning colleagues say they would be more inclusive if only they 
had more knowledge; some say they would rather not talk about 
homosexuality at all because the issue makes them uncomfort- 
able; still others cannot understand why such discussions are rel- 
evant in the classroom setting; and I even have heard a few say 
that so long as they have no students who identify as lesbian or 
gay, there is no need to raise the topic. There are times, of course, 
when I wonder if this ignorance is not in fact veiled hostility. 

Have we not reached the point in the year 2000 where we 
can agree that lesbian and gay people do exist in significant num- 
bers and in all walks of life? Why, then, do these arguments against 
their inclusion persist? Would social studies teachers be serving 
their students well by ignoring feminism in a unit on social move- 
ments of the past fifty years because they just did not know enough 
to include such information? Would science teachers be nurtur- 
ing a healthy approach to scientific investigation if, during work 
on genetics, they bypassed topical discussions on research into 
genetic predisposition for, say, eye and hair color, because such 
discussions brought discomfort? Would we consider it accept- 
able for literature teachers to refuse to assign works by African 
American authors on the grounds that there were no African 
American students in their classrooms? So many of us fool our- 
selves into thinking that we have no lesbian or gay students or 
that discussions about homosexuality are irrelevant for our stu- 
dents who identify as straight. By making such decisions, teach- 
ers deny students the opportunity to develop understanding and 
open-mindedness toward other ways of being in the world. 

If we consider the attempts made in the past few decades to end 
racism and sexism in schools, we certainly have not expected chil- 
dren from groups which have been excluded or marginalized to 
challenge the system on their own. Rather, we have counted on 
adults in schools to ensure the safety of all children and to help 
them develop to their fullest potential in academic and social realms. 







- 133 - 



164 



JIM REESE 



Implications for the English Teacher 

These questions about inclusion have evolved over the years as I 
have explored more deeply my role as a secondary English teacher 
in encouraging personal response to the literature my students 
and I read and discuss. Having been trained in reader-response 
theory, I have noted the “opening” many theorists provide for 
various types of discourse, from the subjective approach articu- 
lated by Bleich, for example, who asserts that “all people, young 
and old, think about themselves most of the time and think about 
the world in terms of themselves. . . . [UJnderstanding and 
reconceptualizing a work of literature can be best understood as 
expressions of the personalities of the reader. The role of person- 
ality in response is the most fundamental fact of criticism” (4); to 
Rosenblatt’s theory that meaning emerges from “the reader’s con- 
tribution in the two-way, ‘transactional’ relationship with the 
text” (The Reader ix). While I want to imagine the inclusion of 
lesbian and gay readers in these theories, never in the canon of 
reader-response texts have I found reference to the role sexual iden- 
tity plays in the reader’s efforts to read and understand literature. 

Gradually a new set of questions emerged for me to ponder, 
such as: Don’t lesbian and gay readers locate themselves in a text 
just as other groups of readers do? Moving beyond mere response 
and realizing that most works taught in the secondary English 
classroom ignore or pejoratively depict homosexuality, I asked 
myself: When confronted with heterosexist or homophobic bias 
in the text and subsequently in class discussions, do lesbian and 
gay adolescents, in order to protect themselves, efface their own 
identity for the sake of fitting in with “accepted” or “traditional” 
interpretations which validate those biases? 

While at the university level such questioning has been elabo- 
rated under the auspices of queer theory, I have seen little inter- 
rogation of this issue at the secondary level. Yet let us look at the 
way Rosenblatt envisioned the ideal English classroom setting in 
her seminal text Literature as Exploration: 

The youth needs to be given the opportunity and the courage 

to approach literature personally, to let it mean something to 




- 134 - 



Creating a Place for Lesbian and Gay Readings in Secondary English 

[him or her] directly. The classroom situation and the relation- 
ship with the teacher should create a feeling of security. [She or 
he] should be made to feel that [her or his] own response to 
books, even though it may not resemble the standard critical 
comments, is worth expressing. Such a liberating atmosphere 
will make it possible ... to have an unself-conscious, sponta- 
neous, and honest reaction. (66-67) 

While Rosenblatt may not specifically have had lesbian and gay 
students in mind, her words should resonate with English teach- 
ers who, sensitive to the needs of all students, aim to foster “a 
liberating atmosphere” and “unself-conscious, spontaneous, and 
honest reaction[s]” in literature discussions. The contrary would 
be classrooms which inhibit or, worse, prohibit students (in the 
context of this argument, read lesbian and gay students) from 
participating fully and honestly in the study of literature. 

In widening the reader-response approach, therefore, we can 
consider the work of a number of feminist critics who have ar- 
gued for a new type of reading. Patrocinio Schweickart, in cri- 
tiquing the androcentric bias in canonical literature, urges 
resistance in the act of reading: 

Taking control of the reading experience means reading the 
text as it was not meant to be read, in fact, reading it against 
itself. Specifically, one must identify the nature of the choices 
proffered by the text and, equally important, what the text 
precludes — namely, the possibility of reading as a woman with- 
out putting one’s self in the position of the other, of reading so 
as to affirm womanhood as another, equally valid, paradigm 
of human existence. (81-82) 

This idea of the “resisting” reader is precisely what I have in 
mind when discussing lesbian and gay readers and readings. Yet 
it would be naive to assume that adolescents, especially those 
who identify as lesbian or gay, would come forward to challenge 
heterosexist readings of texts, especially in a school environment 
in which being identified as homosexual could lead to physical 
and/or psychological abuse. For that reason, we as teachers must 
not only encourage but also be willing to lead the broadening of 
dialogue in the classroom so that it is inclusive of every student. 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 




JIM REESE 



which in reality is just one step in the process of transforming an 
intolerant school environment into one which genuinely accom- 
modates lesbian and gay people. 

An English classroom which embraces lesbian and gay read- 
ers and readings would serve all students — those who are lesbian 
and gay themselves, those who have other differences which go 
unrecognized, and those who lack sensitivity to difference. Ulti- 
mately in this essay I would like to introduce such a scenario, but 
before we enter the classroom I want to go back to 1993 when I 
first saw the film Strictly Ballroom, the starting point of my own 
understanding of myself as a gay reader. 

The Text: Strictly Ballroom 

Strictly Ballroom focuses on the world of competitive ballroom 
dancing in Australia. By the time it was released in the United 
States, the film had already received much favorable attention in 
Australia and parts of Europe. Director Baz Luhrmann conceived 
the story, originally performed as a play, as an allegory of the 
suppression of artistic expression behind the Iron Curtain during 
the cold war (Brunette 26). The principal characters are Scott 
(Paul Mercurio), a rebellious young competitive dancer who bucks 
the system in the name of artistic freedom; Fran (Tara Morice), a 
shy young student in a ballroom dance school who aspires to be 
Scott’s dancing partner; and Scott’s father, Doug Hastings (Barry 
Otto), a rather detached and seemingly broken man who quietly 
encourages the pairing of Scott and Fran. 

The film begins with on-screen red velvet stage curtains open- 
ing to reveal sparkly titles, perhaps serving as an enticement to 
enter another world. Such an opening — the film ends with the 
curtains closing — asks the audience to suspend its disbelief, thus 
allowing the director to introduce implausible plot shifts and fan- 
tasy sequences. 

In the ensuing ninety minutes, Luhrmann concocts a fairly 
simple and somewhat silly story. Fortunately, he decorates it with 
wonderfully eccentric characters and intentionally exaggerated 
melodrama. Strauss’s “Blue Danube Waltz” provides a backdrop 
for the opening scene, as we glimpse, behind half-opened double 





- 136 - 



Creating a Place for Lesbian and Gay Readings in Secondary English 



doors, silhouettes of dancers in slow motion warming up just 
before starting a competition. As the music ushers in twirling 
couples in slow motion, the lights come up and the camera zooms 
in on their garish costumes and highly stylized moves. 

Luhrmann grabs our attention as we wonder at this artificial 
world. We laugh at the spectacle, yet we remain curious about 
who these people are. Suddenly, documentary-style, the camera 
jump-cuts to a living room where Scott’s inconsolable mother, 
Shirley Hastings (Pat Thomson), disconsolately describes her 
agony over her son’s audacity in trying new “crowd-pleasing” 
steps in a regional ballroom dance competition. “That’s the trag- 
edy — my son was a champion!” she laments. 

Next, we flash back to the scene Shirley has just described. 
On the dance floor, Scott and his partner Liz (Gia Carides), mov- 
ing to a samba beat, become boxed in by another couple, forcing 
Scott in an act of desperation to break out of his traditional steps. 
From this point on, he seems unable to control himself. We hear 
from Scott’s coach, Les Kendall (Peter Whitford), who derides 
Scott’s behavior; we recoil as dance federation head Barry Fife 
(Bill Hunter) moralistically admonishes those who would dare 
to try new steps; and then Scott’s mother comes back on screen, 
this time even more upset, wailing, “I keep asking myself. Why? 
Did I do something wrong? Did I fail him as a mother?” 

Less than ten minutes into the film, we are fully immersed in 
the lives of characters who take themselves so seriously; to add 
to their zaniness, Luhrmann often films them in extreme close- 
up. We quickly understand, though, who is being shaped as the 
hero: The camera loves Scott’s handsome, angular face and his 
lithe body, which moves so elegantly; furthermore, his rebellious 
streak, brazen self-confidence, and youthful nature all stand in 
stark contrast to the oppressive stances taken by the older gen- 
eration. Obviously he does not heed the federation’s rules as the 
others do, as evidenced by his risking a chance at winning. 

Once the dust has settled, Scott seems as shell-shocked as 
everyone else, although his confusion more likely stems from the 
overreaction of others to his behavior. The omnipotent and sleazy 
Barry Fife sums up the general reaction to Scott when he says, 
directly to the camera, “Well, of course you can dance any steps 
you like. That doesn’t mean you’ll win.” We realize that Scott 

er|c 




JIM REESE 



has effectively ruled out any future he might have had as a com- 
petitive dancer by challenging the authority of the dance federa- 
tion. 

The rest of the film charts Les and Shirley’s frantic attempts 
to find Scott a suitable partner, Fran’s newfound boldness in ask- 
ing Scott to give her a chance as his partner, and Doug’s vicarious 
thrill at seeing his son rebel against a system which years before 
had crushed him in a similar manner due to the machinations of 
Shirley, Les, and Barry. Although most of the film comes off as 
parody, Luhrmann never lets it get out of hand. The audience 
grows giddy with the bizarre goings-on, only to be reminded ev- 
ery so often that something important is at stake here; namely, 
artistic freedom. 

If the film had been played straight — that is, without the wink- 
ing of the camera’s eye — Strictly Ballroom would have been no 
better than the standard Hollywood comedy. By using heavy doses 
of humor and irony, however, the director weaves a significant 
message and provides visual and textual clues which invite the 
viewer into an act of complicity in the interpretive process. We 
cannot help but cheer for Scott and Fran, and yet we revel in the 
depiction of the cartoonish characters who stand in their way, 
simply because they are larger than life. 

Crafting a Gay Reading of the Film 

As far back as I can remember, I have been most attracted to 
films and literary texts that reject the rules, that show me the 
world from an unusual perspective. My passion for a particular 
work stems from my attachment to characters with the ability to 
overcome obstacles, which often take the form of societal op- 
pression. The three characters at the center of Strictly Ballroom 
all have some trait that sets them apart from and makes them the 
object of derision by the rest of the crowd; however, they retain 
dreams that translate into fierce optimism. If they were to accept 
the reality as laid down by the majority, they would never suc- 
ceed. 

As I became engrossed in the film, certain lines of dialogue 
took me beyond the surface story, allowing me to read the film in 




169 



- 138 - 



Creating a Place for Lesbian and Gay Readings in Secondary English 



a deeply personal way. For example, Shirley Hastings’s dismay 
over her son’s refusal to conform (“Did I fail him as a mother?”), 
along with her disparaging comments about her ineffectual hus- 
band, strangely echo the misogynistic and homophobic cultural 
myths in our society, perpetuated through now-outdated medi- 
cal and psychiatric discourses ■ which have insisted that 
homosexuality in males is “caused” by a domineering mother 
and a weak father. Les Kendall, who appears to be a gay charac- 
ter, is called a “faggot” by Barry Fife when it is discovered that 
he has assisted Scott and Fran. In general, the lines spoken by the 
film’s authority figures about preserving sacred traditions, con- 
forming for the sake of upholding the status quo, and fighting 
the corrosive influence of nonconformist behavior mirrored the 
kinds of utterances I was reading daily in the conservative media 
in response to lesbian and gay visibility. As Barry prepares to 
wage war against Scott, he imperiously declares, “It’s about time 
that lad learned some home truths about where this kind of thing 
can lead.” 

On another level, I was drawn into the film by Scott’s physi- 
cal appeal and his independent spirit, which pushes him to go 
against the grain. He rejects the regulation dance steps not just 
because they are not right for him but also because there is injus- 
tice in the dance federation’s tyranny. He follows his instincts, 
and in doing so he disrupts the world around him. When he can- 
not understand why such fierce opposition is directed toward 
him for doing what he feels is natural, he cries out, “What’s wrong 
with me? What is so wrong with the way I dance?” Reading the 
film as a gay man, it did not take long for me to develop an 
affinity with Scott. 

Interestingly, Scott, who exudes sexuality on the dance floor 
yet appears to have no interest in anyone except himself and his 
dancing, falls for Fran by the end of the movie; it is not clear how 
serious their relationship will be, as Scott himself admits that it is 
the passion of the dance that has made him romantic. While one 
might assume that this blossoming romance defines Scott as het- 
erosexual, I found Scott’s hedging on his feelings an even more 
appealing aspect of his character. It gave me, the viewer, a further 
opening through which to project my own same-sex desire, know- 
ing as I do how impossible it is to fix boundaries to desire. The 



JIM REESE 



moment when Scott shares a kiss with Fran comes across as the 
least authentic scene in the film and led me to read their romance 
as inconsequential. 

Certainly Strictly Ballroom is not a gay film per se. Rather, I 
would argue that my reading of the film relies on my sensibility 
as a gay man. Charting this difficult terrain in his afterword to 
The Celluloid Closet: Homosexuality in Movies^ Vito Russo cau- 
tions against defining a gay sensibility while acknowledging that 
it does exist: 

Gay sensibility is not something we have or share or use. It 
isn’t even something that only gay people express. It’s a blind- 
ness to sexual divisions, an inability to perceive that people are 
different simply because of sexuality, a natural conviction that 
difference exists but doesn’t matter; that there’s no such thing 
as normal even when a majority of people think so. (326) 

In the past two decades, studies of the reception of film by gay 
viewers have placed the viewer/reader in focus alongside the “text” 
and “author,” mirroring in many respects reader-response theo- 
ries in literature. In a chapter on gay readings of film in Inter- 
preting Films: Studies in the Historical Reception of American 
Cinema, Janet Staiger studies various gay male responses in the 
1950s to film star Judy Garland, contending: 

One of the procedures gay men seem to have used is to find 
homologous image structures between themselves and others — 
of the same or different gender and sexual orientation — and to 
apply those individuals’ experiences to their own circumstances. 
Without images of their own, this seems ... a reading strategy 
much like that of any repressed group’s struggle over the mean- 
ing of a sign. (176) 

Staiger carefully stresses that she is not lumping together all gay 
males as a monolith but instead is analyzing a phenomenon which 
existed within a certain faction of the gay male population over 
forty years ago. For when we attempt to understand responses to 
texts, we look for patterns. 

Beyond the aforementioned elements of my own construct of 
Strictly Ballroom, I also saw a camp quality to the film. As Susan 




- 140 - 



Creating a Place for Lesbian and Gay Readings in Secondary English 



Sontag defines it, camp “is the farthest extension, in sensibility, 
of the metaphor of life as theater” (281). Director Luhrmann has 
put such effort into every detail of the film’s look and sound that 
he sacrifices character development; dance and music do most of 
the storytelling for us. From the outlandish costumes to the out- 
rageous personalities portrayed on screen, the entire film seemed 
to be true to Sontag’s definition in that we can see a “proper 
mixture of the exaggerated, the fantastic, the passionate, and the 
naive” (285). While Strictly Ballroom might not appeal to all 
lesbian, gay, and knowing straight viewers, it would most likely 
resonate with many of them for these reasons. 



Lesbian and Gay Readers and 
Readings in the Classroom 

Imagine lesbian and gay students in an English classroom who 
might “read” a text similarly to the way I have read Strictly Ball- 
room. If not openly gay at school, they would face a dilemma 
over responding honestly to the text. Knowing that their teacher 
asks students to share responses, they most likely would be 
tempted to choose a response other than the one they instinc- 
tively feel, for obvious reasons reluctant to expose themselves as 
gay 

Imagine too that the only romantic relationships depicted in 
literary texts are heterosexual and that no reference whatsoever 
is made to the possibility of divergence from this “norm.” In 
class discussions, lesbian and gay students would listen as class- 
mates — most of whom probably self-identify as heterosexual — 
express strong reactions to and personal connections with the 
text at hand. They would sit by feeling marginalized, unable to 
speak their minds. The essay or presentation which could have 
emerged from an honest response might not have been brilliant, 
but it would have been heartfelt; most students are energized and 
motivated by the thought of sharing their original ideas. In sup- 
pressing their responses, however, lesbian and gay students learn 
a sad lesson about their sexual identity: neither the teacher nor 
their classmates will acknowledge it. They themselves fear as- 
serting it in public, and even though they might share certain 




- 141 - 



4 (m 



JIM REESE 



values with their peers, they are effectively silenced because of 
who they are. Fear prevents recognition, and with the absence of 
lesbian and gay voices, we easily develop and perpetuate stereo- 
types and prejudices. 

I am not asserting that every lesbian and gay student reads 
the way I have done, or that such readings exclude or take prece- 
dence over other types of reading; rather, I am putting forward 
the idea that if we do not give students the opportunity to be 
truly genuine in their responses, no matter where they locate them- 
selves in the text, we have fared poorly as teachers. We must try 
to imagine the world through their eyes by opening ourselves to 
the various possibilities of reading the texts we teach. We also 
surely must strive, as Rosenblatt urges, “to help the student ar- 
rive at a more balanced and lucid sense of the work [which] in- 
volves the parallel effort to help [the student] understand and 
evaluate [his or her] personal emphases” (Literature 96). More- 
over, we must understand that “the nature of the student’s rudi- 
mentary response is, perforce, part of our teaching materials” 
(51). 

How does an English teacher create a place for lesbian and 
gay readers and readings in the secondary classroom? An impor- 
tant step would be to acknowledge publicly that there are lesbian 
and gay readings of texts and to find a way to express them in 
the classroom. This task is not necessarily easy to undertake, for 
again, reader-response theorists do not usually locate lesbian and 
gay readings in their theories although they do provide spaces 
for them. If we were to take, say, Richard Beach’s approach to 
various perspectives of reader-response theories, which he labels 
textual, experiential, psychological, social, and cultural (8-9), 
we could locate lesbian and gay readings in most, if not all, of 
these categories. Opening ourselves as teachers to these possibili- 
ties would enable such readings to emerge and develop. 

Furthermore, as texts concerning lesbian and gay studies are 
published in greater numbers each year, teachers can find valu- 
able resources in bookstores and libraries and on the Internet. 
Several critical series which deal primarily with texts used in sec- 
ondary schools are beginning to address issues of sexual identity. 
In teaching The Catcher in the Rye, for example, I have found 
Twayne’s Masterwork Studies edition of this 1950s novel to be 




- 142 - 



173 



Creating a Place for Lesbian and Gay Readings in Secondary English 



helpful in challenging overt homophobia in the text. Sanford 
Pinsker, in a chapter titled “And Holden Caulfield Had a Great 
Fall,” discusses the protagonist’s derogatory references toward 
homosexuality throughout the novel and his efforts to confront 
his feelings for his favorite English teacher, whom he suspects is 
“a flit.” Presenting Pinsker’s analysis as a basis for class discus- 
sion, I urge students to address Holden’s homophobia in the course 
of seeing patterns in his behavior; not surprisingly, they can draw 
from their own experiences of hearing antigay comments from 
their peers. Students readily see that Holden often uses homopho- 
bic language when he grows defensive or confused on sexual 
matters, but as he matures he shows a willingness to reevaluate 
his attitude when faced with the possibility that a man he idol- 
izes is gay. 

I remember the profound effect The Catcher in the Rye had 
on me as a young reader. Holden’s rebelliousness and his search 
for goodness in the world made him a hero in my eyes. At the 
same time I was admitting to myself my own desire for the same 
sex, sadly, homophobic comments made by peers, silence on the 
part of adults, and daily validation of heterosexism and even 
homophobia in school became powerful warnings to me against 
public disclosure of my own sexual identity, I accepted Holden’s 
homophobia because I had no means with which to challenge it. 
Now, as a teacher of young people, I know that being complicitous 
through silence when encountering such antigay sentiment only 
reinforces oppressive social relations. 



"A life lived in fear . . 

Teachers must open up their own imaginations before they can 
expect their students to do the same. Rosenblatt, again writing in 
general terms but making a point which has a special meaning 
for gay people, defines the role a literature teacher must play in 
encouraging personal response: 

We must indeed forgo the wish for a single “correct” or abso- 
lute meaning for each text. If we agree on criteria for validity 
of interpretation, however, we can decide on the most defen- 



JIM REESE 



sible interpretation or interpretations. Of course, there remains 
the possibility of equally valid alternative interpretations as 
well as for alternative criteria for validity of interpretation. Such 
an approach enables us to present a sophisticated understand- 
ing of the openness and the constraints of language to our stu- 
dents without abnegating the possibility of responsible reading 
of texts. (The Reader 183) 

To take this a step further, we must see lesbian and gay readings 
as valid, but we also must question criteria for validity of inter- 
pretation when they are heterosexist, just as feminist critics have 
challenged sexist and masculinist criteria. 

Creating space for lesbian and gay readings initiates a dia- 
logue which in practice most secondary classrooms lack. This 
dialogue can lead to wholesale transformation of attitudes, for in 
reading and discussing texts we must remember that “the point 
is not merely to interpret literature in various ways; the point is 
to change the world. We cannot afford to ignore the activity of 
reading, for it is here that literature is realized as praxis. Litera- 
ture acts on the world by acting on its readers” (Schweickart 70). 

I would not want to conclude this essay without a return to 
Strictly Ballroom, to which I am indebted for my own initiation 
into appreciating lesbian and gay readings of texts. In an inter- 
esting turn, it is not until late in the film that Doug Hastings, the 
protagonist’s father, is developed as a heroic character. His role 
in the film becomes transformed when he comes out of his shell 
and from behind his annoying home- video camera, and implores 
his son to follow his heart. Doug’s redemption is the most satis- 
fying and emotional moment of the film. 

To me, Doug easily represents a past generation stymied by 
social pressures and an oppressive culture. Through the present 
generation — epitomized in brash and confident Scott but perhaps 
more subtly brought across through shy but strong-willed Fran, 
Doug’s real soulmate — Doug is able to recapture the moment of 
glory stolen from him years earlier. While others might not read 
exactly the same meaning into Doug’s role in the film, for me he 
exemplifies the film’s motto, which Scott learns from Fran: “A 
life lived in fear is a life half-lived.” 

In the classroom, we should be able to understand that our 
lesbian and gay students who suppress their true responses out 




V 




- 144 - 



Creating a Place for Lesbian and Gay Readings in Secondary English 



of fear resort to half responses to texts. In the same way, students 
who identify as straight lose the opportunity to understand and 
appreciate multiple readings if lesbian and gay readings are not 
given full expression. After all, an important aspect of our work 
as English teachers is to foster honest and genuine dialogue in 
our classrooms so that literature can help us and our students 
imagine worlds beyond the ones we normally inhabit. In doing 
so, we can take the lead in making schools better places for ev- 
eryone. 

Works Cited 



Beach, Richard. A Teacher's Introduction to Reader-Response Theo- 
ries. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1993. 

Bleich, David. Readings and Feelings: An Introduction to Subjective 
Criticism. Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1975. 

Brunette, Peter. “More Than Romance Colors Strictly Ballroom.” New 
York Times 7 Feb. 1993: 26. 

Harbeck, Karen, and Virginia Uribe. “Addressing the Needs of Les- 
bian, Gay, and Bisexual Youth: The Origins of PROJECT 10 and 
School-Based Intervention.” Coming Out of the Classroom Closet: 
Gay and Lesbian Students, Teachers, and Curricula. Ed. Karen 
Harbeck. New York: Harrington Park, 1992. 9-28. 

Pinsker, Sanford. The Catcher in the Rye: Innocence under Pressure. 
New York: Twayne, 1993. 72-88. 

Rosenblatt, Louise. Literature as Exploration. 1938. London: 
Heinemann, 1970. 

. The Reader, the Text, the Poem: The Transactional Theory of 

the Literary Work. Carbondale: Southern Illinois UP, 1994. 

Russo, Vito. Afterword. The Celluloid Closet: Homosexuality in the 
Movies. New York: Harper, 1987. 325-26. 

Schweickart, Patrocinio P. “Reading Ourselves: Toward a Feminist 
Theory of Reading.” Readers and Reading. Ed. Andrew Bennett. 
London: Longman, 1995. 66-93. 

Sontag, Susan. “Notes on ‘Camp.’” Against Interpretation, and Other 
Essays. New York: Dell, 1966. 277-93. 




145 - 



o 



JIM REESE 



Staiger, Janet. “The Logic of Alternative Readings: A Star Is Born” 
Interpreting Films: Studies in the Historical Reception of American 
Cinema. Princeton: Princeton UP, 1992. 154-77. 

Strictly Ballroom. Dir. Baz Luhrmann. Buena Vista Pictures Distribu- 
tion, 1992. 




- 146- 




Chapter Nine 






Shakespeare^s Sexuality: 
Who Needs Itf 

Mario DiGangi 

Lehman College^ City University of New York 



A ccording to a familiar and enduring myth, the works of 
Shakespeare express universal truths of human nature and 
therefore transcend the limitations of historical contingency and 
political ideology. Tellingly, the proponents of this myth do not 
consider the virtue or naturalness of same-sex love to be among 
those ‘‘universal truths” they find in Shakespeare, To the con- 
trary, they often regard any analysis of same-sex desire in 
Shakespeare’s works as irrelevant at best and sordidly proselytiz- 
ing at worst, especially in educational settings, where the “proper” 
transmission of high culture to the next generation is at stake. 
Why should students be asked to think about pederasty in As 
You Like Ity lesbian desire in Twelfth Night, or anal eroticism in 
Romeo and Juliet? What would justify the discussion of AIDS, 
homophobia, or queer theory in a course devoted to Elizabethan 
drama? And how could a consideration of these issues possibly 
enhance appreciation for Shakespeare’s genius, which is the goal, 
after all, of serious teaching? 

Questions like these have become the familiar refrain of re- 
actionary cultural critics, who frequently exploit the ostensible 
discrepancy between a revered body of work and a new critical 
approach. Because lesbian and gay studies has emerged as a dis- 
tinct academic discipline only during the last decade, it is par- 
ticularly vulnerable to dismissal as merely the latest fashion 
sported by the so-called intellectual left. Lesbian and gay studies 
has certainly displayed the characteristically rapid growth of a 
hot new trend. ‘ Even a selective account of recent developments 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 




- 147 - 



in publishing will reveal the degree to which queer inquiry has 
grown, both inside and outside academia, in forums old and new. 
Educational journals as different as College English and Radical 
Teacher have featured articles or issues on lesbian and gay peda- 
gogy (Phillips); in 1995 the MLA published Professions of De- 
sire, “the first collection of essays to address issues concerning 
lesbian and gay studies in the undergraduate classroom” 
(Haggerty and Zimmerman, back cover); new journals such as 
The Journal of the History of Sexuality (1990), GLQ: A Journal 
of Gay, Lesbian, and Queer Studies (1993), and Sexualities (1998) 
are featuring interdisciplinary approaches to the study of sexual- 
ity; and competition for the lesbian and gay studies book market 
continues to thrive among university and commercial publishers 
alike. From an unsympathetic perspective, however, this palpable 
excitement about lesbian and gay studies might be cited as evi- 
dence of its mere faddish appeal. 

The increasing visibility of lesbian and gay scholarship has 
certainly been regarded in some quarters as undeniable proof of 
the decline of “legitimate” literary studies. Lesbian and gay in- 
quiry has recently been scapegoated along these lines in the con- 
tentious “Forum” section of PMLA, widely regarded as the 
premier academic journal in the field of language and literature. 
For instance, in 1996 PMLA published a letter by one Thomas 
C. Greene, who accuses the journal’s editors of rejecting essays 
that are “original,” “apolitical,” and “stubbornly not hip” in 
favor of essays that showcase “vogue names” and “vogue words” 
(473-74). When he offers a representative list of “vogue words,” 
Greene draws widely from multiculturalist and poststructuralist 
jargon; however, many of the offending terms inhabit the par- 
ticular domain of lesbian and gay studies: Eros, feminine, gen- 
der, masculine, queer, sex, and any word beginning with homo-, 
Greene uses “homo-” studies as a synecdoche for the absurdity 
of all “theoretical” approaches, much as a tabloid journalist might 
use a particular sex scandal to epitomize the decadence of celeb- 
rities in general. 

Insinuating that lesbian and gay scholars exploit and unfairly 
profit from current academic fashion reproduces the techniques 
of homophobic silencing that prohibited queer modes of analysis 
in the past. Given the pervasive homophobia of the cold war era, 

- 148 - 



179 



Shakespeare*s Sexuality: Who Needs Itf 



it is not surprising that previous generations of U.S. scholars did 
not speak appreciatively, if at all, about homosexuality in history 
or literature. Nor is it surprising that the sudden explosion of 
openly lesbian and gay scholarship into this void should send 
powerful shock waves through conservative quarters. While they 
sometimes mask as sagacious and timely critiques of the 
postmodern academy, tirades against the visibility of lesbian and 
gay studies play a familiar homophobic card: reducing a mean- 
ingful lesbian and gay presence to a superficial “lifestyle” or a 
temporary “phase.” Such complaints thus seem to be motivated 
by nostalgia for the values and etiquette of a more repressive era, 
when traditional works were interpreted through traditional 
methods — the study of genre, textual form, and historical back- 
ground — and when queers remained silent and abject. 

Appeals to tradition are nonetheless powerful, especially when 
the difference between an established tradition and an encroach- 
ing “trend” is represented as self-evident and absolute. Queer 
theory is indicted on just these grounds in another letter from the 
same volume of PMLA cited previously. Referring to the sessions 
at annual MLA conventions, Larry Isitt asks: 

Of the some twelve hundred panels of the last two years, how 
many deal with the canonical and not the trendy? How many 
place radical political agendas above simple literary analysis? 
How many panels, for example, have been given on William 
Faulkner at the last two conventions and how many on queer 
theory? (475) 

Isitt offers the cataloging and counting of session titles as an ob- 
jective scientific procedure that exposes the palpable bias of the 
MLA leadership. Yet the logic of the procedure requires queer 
theory to function as a transparent sign of all the radical political 
“agendas” and impenetrable poststructuralist methods that have 
corrupted a once respectable profession. An ideological agenda 
evidently motivates the primary distinction between “tradition” 
and “trend,” as well as the narrative of queer decadence that 
distinction produces. Furthermore, the coherence of Isitt’s attack 
requires that he remain blind to the manifold differences within 
the field of queer theory, and also between queer theory and other 
“radical” methodologies. Ignoring these significant internal dif- 

130 

- 149 - 




; 



MARIO DIGANGI 



ferences bolsters the fantasy of a united radical front, the threat- 
ening advance of \vhich justifies retaliation by equal force. 

Attacks on lesbian and gay studies as the latest outgrowth of 
academic theory (poststructuralism) or identity politics (cultural 
studies, multiculturalism) falsely exaggerate its novelty. Lesbian 
and gay scholarship did not spontaneously issue from the minds 
of contemporary academics who have built high-profile careers 
on the merits of their brilliant work. Along with other critical 
discourses based on the differentials of gender, race, and class, 
queer cultural analysis emerged in the United States from the 
political and intellectual upheavals of the 1960s, and it flour- 
ished in the aftermath of the legendary Stonewall riots of 1969. 
According to sociologist Jeffrey Escoffier, post-Stonewall lesbian 
and gay intellectuals attempted to authenticate their newly af- 
firmed sexual identities by promoting an awareness of homosexual 
history and culture (11). Groundbreaking works of this stamp 
include Karla Jay and Allen Young’s anthology Out of the Clos- 
ets: Voices of Gay Liberation (1972); a special volume of College 
English — The Homosexual Imagination (1974) — comprised of 
essays on literature, criticism, and pedagogy (Crew and Norton); 
and Jonathan Ned Katz’s Gay American History (1976). Louie 
Crew, the co-editor of The Homosexual Imagination and editor 
of The Gay Academic (1978), recently reflected on his involve- 
ment in the lesbian and gay studies explosion of the early 1970s. 
It is no wonder, he observed, that lesbian, gay, and bisexual schol- 
ars during this period “poured forth such an abundance of manu- 
scripts: in addition to sleuthing and reclaiming our past, we were 
writing ourselves into community” (52). Many scholars of this 
generation regarded their intellectual endeavors as a vital contri- 
bution to the struggle for homosexual emancipation. 

Neither faddish nor frivolous, lesbian and gay cultural analysis 
has demonstrably contributed not only to the development of 
lesbian and gay communities since Stonewall, but also to the 
ongoing institutional changes in academia that are the legacy of 
1960s radicalism. According to Gerald Graff, the political re- 
volts of the 1960s finally made it clear “that there was no more 
consensus on the disciplinary foundations of English than there 
was about the social function of education in general” (18). Les- 
bian and gay scholarship helped to shatter this consensus, and it 




181 



- 150 - 



Shakespeare's Sexuality: Who Needs Itf 



continues to expand the boundaries of English studies today. For 
instance, recent efforts to “queer the Renaissance” have furthered 
the methodological innovations that feminist and materialist crit- 
ics brought to the study of English Renaissance literature in the 
early 1980s (Goldberg, Queering:^ Ferguson, Quilligan, and 
Vickers). Moreover, lesbian and gay scholarship on the Renais- 
sance has provided significant insight into our own culture by 
revealing the historical foundations of modern constructions of 
sexuality, and by showing how these ideological constructions 
continue to shape our interpretation of premodern literary texts. 
The study of sexuality, then, is hardly the exclusive domain of a 
self-interested minority of contemporary lesbian and gay schol- 
ars. At its best, it has served as a model of cultural analysis, syn- 
thesizing history, theory, and politics. 

In the analysis that follows, sexuality is revealed to be a highly 
charged site of past and present conflict over the meaning of, and 
uses for, “Shakespeare.” Since the late eighteenth century, the 
significance of same-sex desire in Shakespeare’s life and works 
has been a topic of debate in the arena not only of literary criti- 
cism but also of ethics, law, sexology, politics, religion, and psy- 
chology (Fisher; Porter; Radel; Shepherd; Stally brass). After 
sketching the history of this debate, I will examine its present 
manifestation in academic scholarship and popular culture, with 
the aim of showing that lesbian and gay studies can be political 
as well as intellectually rigorous, theoretical as well as socially 
engaged. The thorny political and theoretical issues surrounding 
the introduction of queer material into the English literature class- 
room will be the focus of a concluding discussion on pedagogy 
and queer Shakespeare studies. 



Queer Genealogies: Two Hundred 
Years of Shakespeare’s Sexuality 



English departments need Shakespeare. This, at least, is a gov- 
erning assumption of contemporary Anglo-American culture. If 
that statement sounds more like an axiom than an assumption, 
however, it only proves the success of an ideological campaign 
launched over a century ago within a particular institutional con- 





x;)4 



- 151 - 



MARIO DIGANGI 



figuration that has long since vanished. As Thomas Dabbs ex- 
plains, “[m]ass Shakespearean education did not come to frui- 
tion until the second half of the nineteenth century, when the 
playwright, then one of the most popular cultural figures in En- 
gland, was placed at the core of the new English literature cur- 
riculum” (89). Teaching Shakespeare’s plays made university 
education more accessible to working middle-class students, who 
did not have the time to study the Latin and Greek texts that 
formed the basis of the traditional curriculum. To elevate 
Shakespeare into a legitimate academic subject, however, Victo- 
rian educators presented his plays as repositories of philosophi- 
cal and philological knowledge, thereby draining them of the 
sexual energies that contributed to their enduring popularity in 
the theater (Dabbs 90). 

Whereas Shakespeare’s place in the English curriculum now 
seems unshakable, the place of sexuality in the English curricu- 
lum remains a topic of fierce contestation. In vehement polemics 
against “political correctness,” conservative individuals and or- 
ganizations such as the National Alumni Forum typically repre- 
sent lesbian and gay course offerings as the symptom of a 
degenerate English department. In 1996, for instance, critics 
roundly attacked the English department at Georgetown Univer- 
sity for not requiring majors to take courses in Chaucer, 
Shakespeare, and Milton (see Strauss). Writing in the New York 
Times, Maureen Dowd ridiculed the faculty for “dissing” these 
“timeless” classics and replacing them with the dogmatic, jar- 
gon-filled offerings of the “race and gender brigade.” It is no 
accident that two of the three courses so mocked — History and 
Theories of Sexuality, Women, Revolution, and the Media, and 
Unspeakable Lives: Gay and Lesbian Narratives^ — explicitly fo- 
cus on lesbian and gay subjects. Presumably, the media outcry 
against the “political” and “theoretical” corruption of the En- 
glish department was intended to intimidate minority faculty 
members at this Catholic institution and to delegitimize their 
concerns in the eyes of the university, the academic community, 
and the general public. Unspeakable lives indeed. 

Even critics with more benign, less overtly political motives 
may feel that English professors do students a disservice by ap- 
plying contemporary theories of sexuality to literary works of 




Shakespeare*s Sexuality: Who Needs It? 

timeless genius. In the wake of the Georgetown controversy, an 
established Shakespearean actor expressed to me the conviction 
that only when discussing modern gay-themed plays such as 
Marvin's Room or Bent was a teacher justified in raising the is- 
sue of homosexuality. Teachers of Shakespeare, he insisted, are 
obliged to convey the brilliance of his achievements in dramatic 
art: rich language, engaging plots, and psychologically credible 
characters. 

Yet it is misleading to imply that the study of sexuality and 
theatrical craft are fundamentally incompatible. As numerous 
studies have demonstrated, sexuality infuses the very texture of 
Shakespeare’s plays: erotic meaning does not exist independently 
of its expression through language, plot, and character (Bredbeck; 
DiGangi; Goldberg, Queering and Sodometries; Orgel, Imper- 
sonations; Smith; Traub, “(In)significance” and Desire), The ques- 
tion, therefore, is not whether Shakespeare’s plays portray 
homoerotic relations, but the kind of recognition we are willing 
to afford those portrayals. Unfortunately, too many scholars have 
chosen to ignore homoeroticism altogether. Stephen Orgel ob- 
serves that as of 1995, not one edition of As You Like It had 
mentioned the unmistakable homoerotic allusion in Rosalind’s 
choice of the name “Ganymede” for her male alias (“Teaching” 
64). This is no innocent oversight. When Rosalind declares her 
intention to disguise herself as a boy and take the name of “Jove’s 
own page” (1.3.120), she evokes the most famous narrative of 
homoerotic desire in classical mythology. Rosalind’s homoerotic 
role-playing, moreover, is integral to the development of the comic 
plot: as “Ganymede,” she initiates a romantic courtship with 
Orlando, the man she will marry at the end of the play (DiGangi 
275-78). 

Although contemporary lesbian and gay scholarship has cer- 
tainly made it more difficult simply to ignore or dismiss the ho- 
moerotic aspects of plays such as As You Like It, Shakespeare’s 
sexuality has in fact been a topic of scholarly interest for the past 
two hundred years. Attending to Shakespeare’s sexuality, for all 
its postmodern currency, thus turns out to be a very traditional 
pursuit. In the eighteenth century, editor George Steevens was 
the first to argue that the Sonnets provided a record of 
Shakespeare’s objectionable sexual morality. Beginning with 



MARIO DIGANGI 



Edmond Malone in 1780, subsequent editors and critics anx- 
iously strove to construct “a normative character and sexuality” 
for Shakespeare (Stallybrass 96). While modern interpretations 
of the Sonnets do not as regularly conflate the narrator of the 
poems with the biographical author, they take up the legacy of 
these defenses when they attempt to justify the speaker’s desire 
for the young man he addresses in terms of platonic friendship or 
literary patronage. More than a local skirmish within literary 
criticism, the nineteenth-century discourse about the Sonnets 
played an important role in constructing the modern discourse 
of sexuality (Stallybrass 102). Conversely, Victorian historiogra- 
phers and sexologists used contemporary notions of sexuality to 
construct “the Renaissance” as a historical period and to dem- 
onstrate Shakespeare’s artistic superiority over playwrights such 
as Marlowe (Fisher; Radel). 

First in “The Portrait of Mr. W. H.” and then through his 
highly publicized trials, Oscar Wilde played a remarkable role in 
developing the late nineteenth-century narrative about 
Shakespeare’s sexuality (Stallybrass 102-3). Accused by the Mar- 
quis of Queensbury of “posing as a sodomite,” Wilde sued him 
for libel; consequently, Wilde was required to prove that 
Queensbury’s charge was neither true nor conducive to the “public 
benefit” (Cohen 126-27). Having failed to prove his case against 
Queensbury, Wilde was himself tried for committing “acts of gross 
indecency.” During the first trial, Wilde had justified an eroti- 
cally suggestive letter he wrote to Lord Alfred Douglas as a “prose 
sonnet,” a poetically phrased expression of one artist’s regard 
for another (Cohen 150). In the second trial, he defended the 
letter again, this time as an expression of the “deep spiritual af- 
fection” between an older and a younger man found throughout 
history, as instanced in the biblical story of David and Jonathan, 
the philosophy of Plato, and the sonnets of Michaelangelo and 
Shakespeare (Cohen 200). Instead of serving to legitimate his 
associations with younger men, however, Wilde’s “aesthetic” 
imitation of Shakespeare was regarded as further evidence of his 
morally suspicious “extraordinary character” (Cohen 159). For 
the media and the jury, Wilde’s homoerotic writings and appro- 
priations of Shakespeare established not his place within a gene- 
alogy of spiritual male love, but rather his embodiment of the 








5 



- 154 - 



Shakespeare's Sexuality: Who Needs Itf 

popular stereotype of the male homosexual: an effeminate, lei- 
sured aesthete. 

The notoriety of the Wilde trials thus served to crystallize the 
male homosexual as a “paradigmatic sexual figure,” a deviant 
who was recognizably distinct from his “‘normal’ twin, ‘the het- 
erosexual’” (Cohen 102, 211). During the early decades of the 
twentieth century, emergent sexological discourses continued to 
establish heterosexuality as “the ruling sexual orthodoxy”; by 
1930 this normative understanding of heterosexuality had en- 
tered into widespread popular usage (Katz, Invention 82, 92- 
94). As a result of these developments, the claims and 
counterclaims made on behalf of Shakespeare’s sexuality began 
to be articulated in the terms of sexual object-choice. Early twen- 
tieth-century scholars attempted to stabilize Shakespeare’s sexu- 
ality once and for all by fixing his identity as homosexual or 
heterosexual. Heterosexuals and homosexuals alike could then 
claim Shakespeare as “one of us.” Whereas the appropriation of 
Shakespeare has remained a familiar strategy of gay pride rheto- 
ric up to this day (Shepherd 97), the significance of heterosexual 
appropriations of Shakespeare during the earlier twentieth cen- 
tury should not be overlooked. To conclude this historical sur- 
vey, then, I want to consider two striking instances of the 
heterosexist appropriation of Shakespeare’s sexuality from this 
era: a Shakespeare lecture delivered in 1920 by noted Renais- 
sance scholar C. H. Herford, and the introduction to Shakespeare's 
Bawdy (1947), Eric Partridge’s influential glossary of Elizabe- 
than sexual terminology. 

In “The Normality of Shakespeare Illustrated in His Treat- 
ment of Love and Marriage,” Herford surveys Shakespeare’s de- 
velopment as a dramatist of love and marriage. While conceding 
that “Shakespeare’s persons and plots are in a sense foreign to 
us,” Herford affirms that “when compared with those of almost 
any of his contemporaries, [they] avoid eccentric, pathological, 
or fantastic types, and in this contorm, as Marlowe or Webster, 
or even Jonson do not, to the broad highway of experience” (4). 
More is at stake here than Shakespeare’s superiority to his con- 
temporaries, for Herford aims to prove that Shakespeare’s “ma- 
ture” plays and Sonnets advance a supreme ideal of “normal” 
love. Although Herford does not employ the terminology of sexual 



MARIO DIGANGI 



identity, he unambiguously defines as “normal” the “joyous” and 
“healthy” love “betAveen men and women” (4). A 1928 sex edu- 
cation pamphlet cited by Katz similarly describes conjugal love 
in terms of physical and emotional health, as “an unsurpassed 
joy, something which rightly belongs to every normal human 
being” (Invention 93). Herford thus appropriates the unique cul- 
tural status of Shakespeare for a particularly modern ideological 
agenda: the celebration of the “lofty Normality” of marital het- 
erosexuality (15). 

Although the distinction between normality and abnormal- 
ity also informs Shakespeare's Bawdy, its use of prevalent dis- 
courses on sexual identity permits an even more thorough 
normalization of Shakespeare. Explaining his motives for com- 
piling a glossary of sexual terms from Shakespeare’s works. Par- 
tridge approvingly cites the homophobic quip of a contemporary 
scholar: “Pederasts and pedants have been the curse of 
Shakespearean biography and criticism.” As “neither pederast 
nor pedant” (xi). Partridge believes that his normal heterosexual 
identity provides an objective position from which the oft-re- 
peated “charge” of homosexuality brought against Shakespeare 
can finally be refuted. According to Partridge, it was “a 
homosexual” — Oscar Wilde — who first charged Shakespeare not 
merely with sodomy but with homosexual identity (12). There is 
a chilling irony in representing Wilde as the source of 
Shakespeare’s criminal homosexual identity, a libel from which 
the maligned poet must be exonerated. Says Partridge, “Like most 
other heterosexual persons, I believe the charge against 
Shakespeare[ — ]that he was a homosexual[ — ]to be, in the legal 
sense, ‘trivial’: at worst, ‘the case is not proven’; at best — and in 
strict accordance with the so-called evidence, as I see it — it is 
ludicrous” (11-12). Such positivism leads Partridge to the equally 
ludicrous conclusion that, had Shakespeare indeed been a 
homosexual, “he would have subtly yet irrefutably conveyed the 
fact” (16). Remarkably, however. Partridge also conveys the 
contradictory idea that rather than historical or textual evidence 
from the sixteenth century, the sexual identity of the modern critic 
will ultimately decide “the fact” of Shakespeare’s sexuality. For 
despite the intention to adjudicate the matter scientifically. Par- 




ERIC 



- 156 - 



Shakespeare's Sexuality: Who Needs Itf 



tridge reveals his actual bias with the solipsistic assertion that he, 
like “most heterosexual persons,” believes that Shakespeare was 
also heterosexual. 



Queer Renaissance: Shakespeare^s 
Sexuality in the 1990s 

Partridge’s blatant heterosexist partisanship refutes the myth that 
the proponents of “trendy” lesbian and gay studies are respon- 
sible for politicizing Shakespeare’s sexuality. As this brief histori- 
cal account shows, lesbian and gay critics have in fact entered 
into a perennial debate over the meaning of and uses for 
Shakespeare’s sexuality (Shepherd 98-101). Undeniably, these 
critics have significantly altered the political terrain of the debate 
by openly addressing contemporary sexual issues. Nonetheless, 
the most compelling lesbian and gay accounts of the Renaissance 
have avoided projecting modern notions of sexual identity back 
onto Shakespeare and hence anachronistically claiming him as 
“a homosexual.” Instead, they recognize the historical alterity of 
Shakespeare’s texts even as they use their interpretations of these 
texts to intervene into present political concerns. 

An excellent illustration of this critical strategy appears in 
Bruce Smith’s influential study. Homosexual Desire in 
Shakespeare's England (1991). While producing a historicist ac- 
count of Renaissance sexuality. Smith nevertheless links the 
present to the past by arguing that a modern male homosexual 
subjectivity first emerged in Marlowe’s Edward II and 
Shakespeare’s Sonnets, He explains that his “political purpose” 
in making such an argument was to show gay men that they 
“have not only a present community but a past history” (27). 
Smith’s desire to use the past “to consolidate gay identity in the 
last decade of the twentieth century” (27) doubtless took impe- 
tus from his particular historical circumstances as a gay man 
writing in the late 1980s. Bolstering a sense of gay history, iden- 
tity, and community would have been especially crucial during 
this period, when doubts had peaked about the ability of gay 
men to survive, individually and collectively, the ravages of AIDS. 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



- 157 - 



188 



Deriving a genealogy of male homosexual subjectivity from 
male-oriented Renaissance texts, Smith primarily appeals to the 
communal identifications of gay men. Other critics have opened 
up avenues of identification and affirmation for lesbian readers. 
In a historical analysis of female homoeroticism, Valerie Traub 
points to the analogous tendency in Renaissance and modern 
cultures to differentiate female lovers by gender and erotic role 
as “feminine” or “masculine” women (“(In)significance” 78-79). 
Even more suggestively, in her book Desire and Anxiety Traub 
concludes a theoretical excursus on “gender” and “sexuality” 
with a personal fantasy about Shakespeare’s Olivia, the countess 
who falls in love with the cross-dressed Viola in Twelfth Night. 
Envisioning Olivia “sitting at her computer, wearing high heels,” 
Traub intimates the complex personal and political investments 
a lesbian reader might bring to Shakespeare’s plays {Desire 116). 
This modernized Olivia might represent a feminist academic, 
perhaps a version of Traub herself, writing to produce social 
change. But what kind of gender or erotic roles do Olivia’s high 
heels signify? Is she legible as a feminine lesbian? Do the high 
heels suggest a parody of femininity or rather a concession to a 
professional role? Traub’s fantasy does not make any truth claims 
about the sexuality of Shakespeare or his characters; rather, it 
acknowledges that interpretation is a dynamic process involving 
acts of identification, desire, and resistance. 

Whereas Smith and Traub foreground positive models of 
reader identification with Shakespeare’s poetic persona and dra- 
matic characters, other approaches emphasize the repression of 
same-sex practices from the Renaissance to the present day. For 
instance, Jonathan Goldberg examines the legacy of the sixteenth- 
century juridical discourse of sodomy in the 1986 Bowers v. 
Hardwick ruling, in which the Supreme Court upheld the consti- 
tutionality of sodomy laws (Sodometries 6-18). For Goldberg, 
however, the presence of sodomitical discourses and acts in the 
Renaissance does not imply the existence of homosexual identi- 
ties or individuals. His poststructuralist approach to Renaissance 
sexuality thus sharply contrasts with the essentialism of Joseph 
Cady, who posits the existence in Shakespeare’s England of an 
oppressed minority of homosexuals. Nevertheless, Cady likewise 
applies his knowledge of Renaissance sexuality to contemporary 

- 158 - 



JS8 



Shakespeare's Sexuality: Who Needs Itf 



political struggles. He argues that campaigns for lesbian and gay 
civil rights will gain credibility if scholars can prove that through- 
out Western history homosexuals have not only existed but have 
also suffered from the intolerance and animosity of the domi- 
nant culture. 

As I hope to have shown, the overt politicizing of Shakespeare 
during the 1990s represents an important development in the 
queering of academic scholarship. Of course, the specialized read- 
ership and restricted circulation of academic criticism necessar- 
ily limits its political impact. Fortunately, lesbian and gay 
filmmakers and writers have brought queer appropriations of 
canonical Renaissance texts to a larger audience. For instance, 
by rewriting the history plays of Shakespeare and Marlowe, re- 
spectively, the films of Gus Van Sant [My Own Private Idaho) 
and Derek Jarman (Edward II) powerfully critique the repres- 
sive heterosexual institutions of family and state (see Jarman; 
Goldberg, “Hal’s Desire”). Furthermore, these innovative and 
provocative films have generated significant debate about les- 
bian and gay politics, postmodern representational strategies, and 
the translation of high culture texts into more popular media. 

In Paris Is Burning (1991), Jennie Livingston’s enormously 
successful documentary about Harlem drag balls, a single allu- 
sion to Shakespeare delivers a powerful emotional and political 
charge. At one point in the film, a drag queen seemingly echoes 
Shylock, the usurer from The Merchant of Venice, when defend- 
ing herself before a disapproving crowd. Just as Shylock insists 
that Jews share a common humanity with the Christian majority 
that persecutes them — “if you prick us do we not bleed?” 
(3.1.58) — so the queen affirms, “I am a person just like you: you 
cut me, I bleed the same red you do.” She refuses, however, Shylock’s 
role as abject and vengeful Other; instead, she makes her antago- 
nists erupt into raucous laughter by identifying them as members 
of her community: “See, see, there goes my sister right there . . . 
she’s a bulldagger; that’s my husband back there; and that’s my 
girlfriend.” Transforming her vulnerable situation into a hilari- 
ously campy performance, the queen exemplifies the creative sur- 
vival strategies for which Livingston’s subjects are so memorable. 

A similarly witty, if more deliberate, appropriation of Shylock 
appears in David Feinberg’s novel Spontaneous Combustion 




100 






- 159 - 



MARIO DIGANGI 

(1991). Gay, Jewish, and HIV-positive, the novel’s protagonist, 
B. J. Rosenthal, wryly jokes, “If you prick us, we may bleed, but 
we try to clot as rapidly as possible” (193). More than a joke, 
Feinberg’s alteration of Shylock’s famous words parodies what 
Marjorie Garber calls the “penchant for quoting Shakespeare out 
of context, as a testimony simultaneously to the quoter’s own 
erudition and the truth of the sentiment being uttered” (25). 
Garber points to the Senate hearings on Clarence Thomas’s nomi- 
nation to the Supreme Court, a forum in which Thomas’s sup- 
porters used Shakespeare to elevate their own moral and political 
convictions to the status of unassailable truths about greed, envy, 
and the nature of women. Rejecting such tendentious and recu- 
perative appropriations of Shakespeare’s wisdom — or any con- 
ventional wisdom — Feinberg does not even mention Shakespeare 
as the source of B. J.’s quip. Instead, he tests lofty Shakespearean 
sentiment against hard reality, reminding us that, for the HIV- 
positive, “bleeding” has material as well as metaphorical conse- 
quences. 

Queer Pedagogy: Shakespeare^s 
Sexuality and Cultural Change 

Having explored some paradigmatic appropriations of 
Shakespeare’s sexuality in scholarship and popular culture, I want 
to end by considering the place of lesbian and gay studies in the 
Shakespeare classroom. Anachronism need not be a concern here, 
for whereas homosexuality properly speaking is a modern phe- 
nomenon, any literary analysis can include consideration of same- 
sex desires and homosocial relations. The survey of medieval and 
Renaissance literature I regularly teach, and which is a staple of 
many college English department curricula, offers the opportu- 
nity to discuss same-sex desire in the works of Chaucer, Marlowe, 
Shakespeare, and others. I would argue that a student has a greater 
chance of comprehending and appreciating these difficult works 
when challenged to think critically about the ways in which they 
may articulate the gender and sexual ideologies of their eras. 
Moreover, an understanding of premodern discourses of same- 
sex desire facilitates the understanding that “heterosexuality” and 

- 160- 

1 ? 

X 





Shakespeare's Sexuality: Who Needs It^ 



“homosexuality” are modern inventions, not universal catego- 
ries of experience. The historical distinctness of Shakespeare’s 
sexuality thus provides a valuable perspective on the erotic tax- 
onomies we have inherited. 

Of course, some students might not welcome this perspec- 
tive, especially in a course on early English literature, in which 
the issue of same-sex desire might not be expected to arise. As 
one student remarked in an end-of-semester evaluation, “The 
professor uses [the course] to support his own views on 
homosexuality in both his interpretation of the texts and his choice 
of texts.” Even though I would question the reactionary thinking 
behind this student’s comment, I would not deny the basic truth 
it expresses. My selection and interpretation of texts does indeed 
reveal (hence “support”) my “own views” on homosexuality. My 
“own views” are not merely my own, however, for they are shared 
by other scholars and historians, nor are they limited to 
homosexuality, for I also express my views about gender roles, 
social conflict, religious doctrine, courtly politics, literary influ- 
ence, poetic form, and many other topics pertinent to the study 
of early English literature. It makes little sense to argue that the 
course is “about” medieval and Renaissance literature, not 
homosexuality, for depictions and even occlusions of same-sex 
desire contribute to what and how these texts might mean. My 
reasons for teaching about same-sex desire are personal, politi- 
cal, and scholarly all at once, precisely because these realms can- 
not be completely separated. By the same token, the student 
previously cited uses the course evaluation not merely to analyze 
my teaching but also “to support” his own views on homosexu- 
ality. 

Teaching openly about same-sex desire may strike students 
as flagrantly political not only because homosexuality is a con- 
troversial subject but also because teaching controversial sub- 
jects powerfully debunks the myth of pedagogical objectivity. It 
seems perfectly natural when English teachers discuss relation- 
ships between men and women, because heterosexuality is gen- 
erally understood to be a “natural” condition, not an ideological 
construct. Creating the illusion of the natural, which in this case 
serves to render heterosexuality cognitively un(re)markable, is of 
course a primary operation of ideology. It may take less natural- 





- 161 - 



MARIO DIGANGI 



ized topics such as homosexuality to alert students to the pro- 
duction of knowledge as inevitably an ideological and intellec- 
tual endeavor. A student who recognizes the motive behind one 
teacher’s discussion of homosexuality might then recognize the 
motive behind another teacher’s refusal to talk about 
homosexuality. Especially when employed in a traditional (hence 
presumptively heterosexual) space such as the Shakespeare class- 
room, queer approaches can have the salutary effect of challeng- 
ing the myth of universal heterosexuality. 

Rather than deny the ideological dimensions of my peda- 
gogy, then, I would argue that teaching about homoerotic desire 
in Shakespeare’s texts constitutes a minor intervention in an edu- 
cational system already dominated by heterosexist agendas and 
assumptions. As I have suggested, the presumption of hetero- 
sexuality often makes these agendas invisible. To take a concrete 
example, it may seem perfectly reasonable and unobjectionable 
that Romeo and Juliet is one of the most commonly taught 
Shakespeare plays at the high school level. Yet as queer critiques 
of this play’s symbolic cultural importance have shown, Romeo 
and Juliet is regularly used, quite ahistorically and tendentiously, 
to promote a transhistorical myth of heterosexual romance. The 
ideological ends which the play can be made to serve become 
especially apparent when teenage high school students are pre- 
sumed (or encouraged) to identify with Shakespeare’s sympathetic 
young couple (see Goldberg, “Romeo”; Porter). 

While the kind of heterosexism instanced above may seem 
commonplace and relatively innocuous — images of the hetero- 
sexual couple, after all, dominate our media — homophobia is 
being practiced more flagrantly in the educational system, per- 
haps most damagingly at the secondary level. Across the nation, 
parents, school board members, and right-wing Christians have 
been demonizing lesbians and gay men in an attempt to remove 
all mention of homosexuality from the curriculum in the public 
schools. In such a climate, insensitivity to the needs of lesbian 
and gay students can produce devastating consequences. This 
became painfully clear in a recent lawsuit involving a young gay 
man who sued his former high school administration for failing 
to protect him from the relentless verbal and physical abuse in- 
flicted by his peers. Before finally dropping out of school, he had 





- 162 - 



Shakespeare's Sexuality: Who Needs Itf 

attempted suicide several times (Chandler; “Agenda”), In the 
romantic fiction of Romeo and Juliet, suicide seals the tragic des- 
tiny of “star-crossed lovers”; in our own world, studies have 
shown that lesbian and gay teenagers are at least three times more 
likely to attempt suicide than their straight peers. 

As an isolated practice, teaching about same-sex desire in 
Shakespeare’s plays may not prevent suicides. Bringing lesbian 
and gay subjects into the classroom for serious analysis and dis- 
cussion, however, can certainly help to change the generally ho- 
mophobic climate that promotes suicidal self-hatred and despair 
in young people just coming to terms with their sexuality. As 
Lillian Faderman has argued. 

Surely in a homophobic society that has little good to say about 
us, it would help our young people to know (and to have it 
known by others) that Jane Addams and Lorraine Hansberry 
and Bayard Rustin and Willa Gather — individuals who have 
been respected and valued even in that homophobic society — 
have shared with us that very trait which the rest of the world 
has claimed to despise. ( 80 ) 

Doubtless, many of us who teach courses in lesbian and gay studies 
hope to give queer students institutional and personal valida- 
tion, as well as to provide all students with a rare opportunity to 
learn about lesbian and gay culture from an antihomophobic 
perspective. Since not all students will have the opportunity (or 
desire) to take a lesbian and gay studies course, however, it is 
imperative not to sequester queer analysis from the methods and 
spheres of inquiry that constitute English studies. 

By stressing the value of bringing lesbian and gay subjects 
into the English classroom, I do not mean to imply that the more 
traditional goals of teaching reading, writing, and critical think- 
ing are unimportant or merely secondary to more or less overt 
political struggles. To make such an argument would be to rees- 
tablish a version of the “tradition” versus “trend” dichotomy I 
have been challenging. Moreover, I would not want to dismiss 
out of hand Stanley Fish’s argument that English teachers should 
embrace the importance of the pedagogical role they are gener- 
ally expected to fulfill: “Someone, after all, should be taking care 
of verbs and adjectives. Someone should be codifying and refur- 



MARIO DIGANGI 



bishing those verbal skills that on occasion move the world” ( 161 ), 
Despite the validity of this claim, however, members of minority 
communities might not see instruction in verbal skills as the most 
effective way to participate in immediate political struggles for 
social change. For me, and I suspect for others of my generation, 
the opportunity to teach and research lesbian and gay subjects 
within the discipline of English provided an important motiva- 
tion for pursuing a career in academia instead of politics, law, 
journalism, social work, or AIDS services. The knowledge that 
students will not be responsibly exposed to lesbian and gay is- 
sues elsewhere raises the stakes of incorporating them into the 
classroom, a discursive arena where I influence the terms and 
direction of the discussion, if not its final outcome. 

Treating homosexuality as a legitimate subject of classroom 
discussion does not mean preaching or propagandizing — meth- 
ods best left to the homophobic right — but challenging students 
to confront, articulate, and question some of their most deeply 
held assumptions and beliefs. For some students, this process will 
feel unsettling, provocative, or even threatening. Already con- 
vinced that sexuality is an inherent, natural trait of persons, they 
might refuse to view it differently, as a messy tangle of histori- 
cally variant significations. On the other hand, some students 
resent having to learn what they consider “useless” specialized 
information — such as the structure of a Shakespearean sonnet — 
relevant only to their grade in an English course. 

Asking students to confront “controversial” social issues 
might produce resistance, but resistance can be a sign of growth. 
By participating in the ongoing discussion about the meaning of 
and uses for “Shakespeare’s sexuality,” students can learn just 
how much is at stake in the ways that questions of sexuality get 
framed, debated, and answered. If it can provide the opportunity 
for such an inquiry, Shakespeare’s sexuality will have served a 
very real need. 



Notes 



1. Throughout this essay, I will use “lesbian and gay” and “queer” in- 
terchangeably when referring to modes of analysis and critique that 





- 164 - 



Shakespeare's Sexuality: Who Needs Itf 



focus on same-sex relations. I will use “lesbian and gay,” however, when 
I wish to stress the social and institutional formations that have arisen 
from a modern (post- Stonewall) political identification and movement 
(e.g., “lesbian and gay studies”). 

2. For further discussion on the Unspeakable Lives course at Georgetown, 
see essays by Edward Ingebretson and Jay Kent Lorenz in this volume. 
Ed. 



Works Cited 



“Agenda: Youth.” The Advocate 24 Dec. 1996: 11—14. 

Bredbeck, Gregory W. Sodomy and Interpretation: Marlowe to Milton. 
Ithaca: Cornell UP, 1991. 

Cady, Joseph. “Renaissance Awareness and Language for Heterosexu- 
ality: ‘Love’ and ‘Feminine Love.’” Renaissance Discourses of De- 
sire. Ed. Claude J. Summers and Ted- Larry Pebworth. Columbia: 
U of Missouri P, 1993. 143-58. 

Chandler, Kurt. “A Reluctant Hero.” The Advocate 28 May 1996: 29- 
34. 

Cohen, Ed. Talk on the Wilde Side: Towards a Genealogy of a Dis- 
course on Male Sexualities. New York: Routledge, 1993. 

Crew, Louie. “Back to the Future.” Raymond 44—61. 

Crew, Louie, and Rictor Norton, eds. The Homosexual Imagination. 
Spec, issue of College English 36 (1974): 271-401. 

Dabbs, Thomas. “Shakespeare and the Department of English.” 
Raymond 82-98. 

DiCangi, Mario. “Queering the Shakespearean Family.” Shakespeare 
Quarterly 47 (1996): 269-90. 

Dowd, Maureen. “A Winter’s Tale.” New York Times 28 Dec. 1995: 
A21. 

Escoffier, Jeffrey. “Generations and Paradigms: Mainstreams in Lesbian 
and Gay Studies.” Gay and Lesbian Studies. Ed. Henry L. Minton. 
New York: Harrington Park, 1992. 7-26. 

Faderman, Lillian. “History in the Making.” The Advocate 28 May 
1996: 80. Reprinted in revised form in this volume. 



o 

ERLC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 




- 165 - 



MARIO DIGANGI 



Feinberg, David B. Spontaneous Combustion. New York: Viking, 1991. 

Ferguson, Margaret W., Maureen Quilligan, and Nancy Vickers, eds. 
Rewriting the Renaissance: The Discourses of Sexual Difference in 
Early Modern Europe. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1986. 

Fish, Stanley. “Them We Burn: Violence and Conviction in the English 
Department.” Raymond 160-73. 

Fisher, Will. “One Hundred Years of Queering the Renaissance.” 
Historicizing Queerness Forum. MLA Convention. Washington, 
D.C. 29 Dec. 1996. 

Garber, Marjorie. “Character Assassination: Shakespeare, Anita Hill, 
and JFK.” Media Spectacles. Ed. Marjorie Garber, Jann Matlock, 
and Rebecca L. Walkowitz. New York: Routledge, 1993. 23-39. 

Goldberg, Jonathan. “HaPs Desire, Shakespeare’s Idaho.” Henry IV: 
Parts One and Two. Ed. Nigel Wood. Theory in Practice Series. 
Buckingham, Eng.: Open UP, 1995. 35-64. 

, ed. Queering the Renaissance. Durham: Duke UP, 1994. 

. “Romeo and Juliet's Open Rs.” Goldberg, Queering 218-35. 

. Sodometries: Renaissance Texts, Modern Sexualities. Stanford: 

Stanford UP, 1992. 

Graff, Gerald. “Is There a Conversation in This Curriculum? Or, Co- 
herence without Disciplinarity.” Raymond 11-28. 

Greene, Thomas C. Letter. PMLA 111 (1996): 473-74. 

Haggerty, George E., and Bonnie Zimmerman, eds. Professions of De- 
sire: Lesbian and Gay Studies in Literature. New York: MLA, 1995. 

Herford, C. H. “The Normality of Shakespeare Illustrated in His Treat- 
ment of Love and Marriage.” Pamphlet 47. Oxford, Eng.: English 
Association, 1920. 

Isitt, Larry R. Letter. PMLA 111 (1996): 474-75. 

Jarman, Derek. Queer Edward II. London: BFI, 1991. 

Jay, Karla, and Allen Young, eds. Out of the Closets: Voices of Gay 
Liberation. New York: Douglas Book Corp., 1972. 

Katz, Jonathan Ned. Gay American History: Lesbians and Gay Men in 
the U.S.A. New York: Crowell, 1976. 

. The Invention of Heterosexuality. New York: Plume, 1996. 



166 



ERIC 




Shakespeare's Sexuality: Who Needs Itf 

Orgel, Stephen. Impersonations: The Performance of Gender in 
Shakespeare's England. Cambridge: Cambridge UP, 1996. 

. “Teaching the Postmodern Renaissance.” Haggerty and 

Zimmerman 60-71. 

Paris Is Burning. Dir. Jennie Livingston. Prestige/Miramax, 1991. 

Partridge, Eric. Shakespeare's Bawdy. 1947. 3rd ed. London: Routledge, 
1968. 

Phillips, Kathy J. “Billy Budd as Anti-Homophobic Text.” College En- 
glish 56 (1994): 896-910. 

Porter, Joseph A. “Marlowe, Shakespeare, and the Canonization of 
Heterosexuality.” Displacing Homophobia: Gay Male Perspectives 
in Literature and Culture. Ed. Ronald R. Butters, John Clum, and 
Michael Moon. Durham: Duke UP, 1989. 127-47. 

Radel, Nicholas F. “Our Havelock Ellis: Queer Theory and the Uses of 
Shakespeare.” The Uses of Shakespeare Seminar. Sixth World 
Shakespeare Congress. Los Angeles. 9 Apr. 1996. 

Raymond, James C. English as a Discipline; or. Is There a Plot in This 
Play? Tuscaloosa: U of Alabama P, 1996. 

Shakespeare, William. As You Like It. Ed. Agnes Latham. Arden 
Shakespeare. London: Routledge, 1989. 

. The Merchant of Venice. Ed. John Russell Brown. Arden 

Shakespeare. London: Routledge, 1988. 

Shepherd, Simon. “Shakespeare’s Private Drawer: Shakespeare and 
Homosexuality.” The Shakespeare Myth. Ed. Graham Holderness. 
Manchester, Eng.: Manchester UP, 1988. 96—111. 

Smith, Bruce R. Homosexual Desire in Shakespeare's England: A Cul- 
tural Poetics. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1991. 

Stallybrass, Peter. “Editing as Cultural Formation: The Sexing of 
Shakespeare’s Sonnets.” MLQ 54 (1993): 91-103. 

Strauss, Valerie. “Relaxed Rules for English Majors Set Some at 
Georgetown University Muttering.” Washington Post 12 Dec. 1995: 
E1+. 

Traub, Valerie. Desire and Anxiety: Circulations of Sexuality in 
Shakespearean Drama. London: Routledge, 1992. 

. “The (In)Significance of ‘Lesbian’ Desire in Early Modern En- 
gland.” Goldberg, Queering 62-83. 





- 167- 



Chapter Ten 






Coming Out and Creating 
Queer Awareness in the Classroom: 
An Approach from the 
US, -Mexican Border 



fter being out for over fifteen years, not being out is not an 



option for me. When I began to teach English composition 
in 1996, 1 did not debate whether I would come out in the class- 
room. I did, however, consider the different ways it could be done, 
the timing and the theatrical aspects of it. I wondered and even 
worried about the response from my students and the adminis- 
tration. I considered my social responsibility to come out in an 
academic arena that was relatively foreign to me as a new gradu- 
ate student in an M.F.A. creative writing program. 

I did not consult with peers or conduct research on theory or 
pedagogy before coming out. I simply came up with ideas and 
organized them into a lesson plan. But before getting into that 
lesson plan and the strategies I subsequently developed, let me 
preface this essay with the identities that are at my core and drive 
most of my actions. I was born in Colombia and, at seven years 
of age, immigrated to Miami with my family in 1968. For all 
practical purposes, I am a product of the culture and educational 
system of the United States. But I am Colombian, fully bilingual 
and bicultural, as well as a lesbian. 

What do my identities have to do with my approach to com- 
ing out in the classroom? Everything. When we walk into the 
classroom, we bring the entirety of ourselves with us. Beyond 
our political and religious inclinations and economic status are 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 
University of Texas at El Paso 




- 168 - 



199 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 



the particular ways in which we maneuver in society. In my case, 

I became a leftist when I came out as a lesbian in a heavily politi- 
cized antipatriarchal feminist environment. I am of working-class 
stock, a goddess worshiper, a lover of art, and a stickler for or- 
der. 

I mention this because my background and personality have 
notable effects in the classroom. T am conscious of the amount of 
money students spend on materials for class. I ask them not to 
turn in assignments with unnecessary fancy plastic or cardboard 
covers. I design a syllabus not to be taken lightly; I expect stu- 
dents to come to class prepared, to turn in their assignments on 
time, and to participate. And finally, I strive to make the class- 
room fun. I am passionate about writing, and I know that many 
first-year students in English composition courses have negative 
attitudes as a result of being force-fed five-paragraph formulas 
and having their writings marked up in furious red ink by their 
previous teachers. I want students to walk out of my class re- 
freshed by the power of the written word. I want them to appre- 
ciate the writing process, to be able to identify a good essay, to be 
inspired by a story or a poem, to realize that there are many 
approaches they can take to completing assignments, and to know 
that they are creative thinkers capable of producing good writing 
themselves. 

Being out and making my political positions known as a com- 
position teacher raises important pedagogical questions. Do I want 
my students to walk out of my classroom better informed about 
lesbian and gay issues? Do I want them to see gays and lesbians 
and all other sexual “outlaws” as human beings? Furthermore, 
do I expect students to be politically astute? Do I want them to 
realize that the nuclear dumping site proposed for Sierra Blanca, 
ninety miles from El Paso and twenty miles from the Mexican 
border, was the result of environmental racism and U.S. imperi- 
alism? Quite honestly, given my history and political convictions, 
I would love for my students to oppose anti-immigrant legisla- 
tion and support gay rights. But do I expect my students to disre- 
gard the religious and cultural doctrines, bestowed on them by 
their parents and grandparents, that say homosexuality is a sin? 
Do I encourage them to eat less meat? Do I instruct them on how 
they too can be gay, if only they would allow themselves to ex- 



O 

ERIC 






- 169 - 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



periment? Do I use the classroom as a political arena of my mak- 
ing, with conscious intent to change their convictions? 

When I am teaching writing, whether it is English composi- 
tion, research and critical thinking, or creative writing, my main 
priority is just that — to teach students to write. The way I do 
this, however, is influenced by my political ideology and person- 
ality, as well as by guidelines from the English department at my 
university. This combination of factors determines the materials 
and pedagogies that all instructors choose for a class, including 
syllabi, lesson plans, and class policies. It is not realistic or ap- 
propriate to use one’s authority in the classroom to impose one’s 
politics on students. Yet some may interpret my selection of ma- 
terials or topics, or even the way I present myself, to have the 
same political overtones I claim to be avoiding. Regardless of 
intention or interpretation, the classroom works as a site of so- 
cial transformation. On the cover of a membership brochure of 
the National Council of Teachers of English are words that con- 
firm this idea: “Changing the Classroom. Changing the World.” 

Change occurs within a complex environment. Students and 
teachers both enter the classroom with preexisting ideologies that 
range from political convictions to expectations of the learning 
process. Inevitably, some of our differences will be revealed along 
the way, and these differences may affect the dynamics in the 
classroom. To further complicate things, even though most of us 
are in class by our choice, there is great resistance to being there. 
As a teacher, I have to lecture, lead discussions, and review my 
students’ essays, regardless of my mood. I may be annoyed at the 
Bible-thumping student who sits in the front row and constantly 
makes comments that I find obnoxious, but still I have to teach. 
Meanwhile, my students may be overwhelmed with the workload, 
critical of my teaching methods, angry because it takes them half 
an hour to find a parking space, or frustrated with writing itself. 
Whatever the reasons, teachers sometimes resist teaching and stu- 
dents sometimes resist learning. And then there is the fact that 
the classroom is inherently politicized through the hierarchy be- 
tween teacher and student, whereby students are disempowered 
by the very structure of the classroom. As Maxine Hairston writes 
in “Diversity, Ideology, and Teaching Writing,” “The real truth 
about classrooms is that the teacher has all the power; she sets 




- 170 - 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 

the agenda, she controls the discussion, and she gives the grades” 
(536). The change that occurs in the classroom, then, is the result 
of this complex mixture of elements. 

Learning takes place when teachers acknowledge that ideo- 
logical differences, resistance, and an unbalanced power struc- 
ture are at work in the classroom. We need to recognize that 
education is ideological and that the classroom is a politicized 
space, instead of pretending that it is politically neutral ground. 
We need to engage our students’ resistance, instead of trying to 
dismiss it. And we need to assure our students that even though 
teachers are in a position of power, we are there to facilitate their 
learning experiences. We need to be honest, to an extent, about 
who we are, and we also need to give students the opportunity to 
be honest about themselves. All of this allows the classroom to 
become an organic space in which ideas are debated, contested, 
redefined, and articulated in different ways. Acknowledging and 
working with factors already present in the classroom creates an 
opportunity for it to become a site of social transformation be- 
cause students are then able to problematize their own positions. 

The innate power of the classroom was a key concept in the 
work of Brazilian educator Paulo Freire. When Freire placed lan- 
guage within a political context and taught Brazilian students to 
read and write in their natural environment, he discovered just 
how empowering literacy skills were when the students were able 
to become political advocates for themselves. Scores of teachers 
were influenced by Freire’s work and followed suit by deliber- 
ately using the classroom in ways that could greatly transform 
the lives of their students. While I do not advocate teaching with 
an “agenda,” it is important to set up conditions that encourage 
students to think critically. I want students to open their minds 
to other perspectives, but I am not trying to force them to think 
the way I do. 



So Much Social Responsibility, So Little Time 

These are frightening times, however, and I am concerned, not 
only about queers who are not protected from bigotry, but also 
about immigrants under attack by the federal government and 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 




- 171 - 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



all people of color who are losing the battle against affirmative 
action. As Henry Giroux writes in “National Identity and the 
Politics of Multiculturalism,” “Nationalism is currently being 
shaped to defend a beleaguered notion of national identity read 
as white, heterosexual, middle-class, and allegedly threatened by 
contamination from cultural, linguistic, racial and sexual differ- 
ences” (48). Peter McLaren, in “Paulo Freire and the Academy: 
A Challenge from the U.S. Left,” takes this concern into the class- 
room: “Teachers and students together face New Right constitu- 
encies of all types and stripes — in particular, fundamentalist 
Christians and political interest groups who are exercising an 
acrimonious appeal to a common culture monolithically unified 
by a desire for harmony in sameness” (152-53). 

These mistaken ideas of a homogeneous society to which 
Giroux and McLaren refer can lead to the kind of bigotry at the 
root of two incidents that received national attention in 1998 — 
the gay-bashing death of Matthew Shepard in Wyoming and the 
racially motivated murder of James Byrd Jr., an African Ameri- 
can man who was dragged to death in Texas. While extreme ex- 
amples, these events do represent the serious nature of hatred 
and fear of difference. And in my case, as someone whose legal 
identity in this country consisted of a green card that labeled me 
a “resident alien” for twenty-seven years, and as someone who is 
out as a lesbian, I am clearly “other.” When I walk into the class- 
room, I am conscious of being a racialized, gendered body. The 
fact that I am a Latina lesbian affects me as a teacher, because in 
order to teach, at some level I have to break through my stu- 
dents’ notions of the “mainstream.” The classroom does not ex- 
ist in isolation from the horrific deaths of Matthew Shepard and 
James Byrd Jr. As someone conscious of social inequities and as 
someone who is vulnerable to acts of hatred just because of who 
I am, I feel a measure of social responsibility. 

What to do with this social responsibility? I have several strat- 
egies and coming out is one of them. I come out, not only as a 
courtesy to my gay students who deserve queer support, but also 
because coming out affirms a reality of the moment. Teachers 
today must acknowledge that there are gay students in the class- 
room and that we are in the midst of a queer revolution, one that 




- 172 - 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 



spans the entire world. Every day I receive dozens of e-mails about 
queer conferences, demonstrations, and legislative challenges in 
places such as Madrid, Sao Paolo, Cologne, Buenos Aires, Lon- 
don, Mexico City, and so on. In September 1998, for instance, I 
received an e-mail from Infogay, an international listserv, with 
the subject heading “Latin American Briefs.” The message in- 
formed me that Colombia’s Constitutional Court ruled that 
schoolteachers cannot be fired for revealing they are gay. Beyond 
issues of gay rights, hate crimes, and social visibility, there is grow- 
ing discourse on gender and sexuality as bisexuals, transvestites, 
and transsexuals contribute to public debate. “Father Knows Best” 
has been discarded by those of us who have come to realize that 
“family values” do not include our families or even us in our 
representations of ourselves. Regardless of where they stand in 
this discourse, or even if they have yet to consciously consider it, 
students form part of a society that is already actively working 
within queer solidarity or trying in various ways to eradicate it. 
Queer issues are relevant in English courses, just as are topics 
such as the death penalty, Ebonics, and English-only legislation. 
These are our contemporary issues, the ones that make head- 
lines, that citizens cast their ballots on, and that students need to 
learn to consider in a critical manner in English composition 
classes. The arguments articulated in discussions and debates al- 
low students to examine their positions. 

Another strategy integral to my teaching methods is to in- 
clude within the materials I select for my classes texts by and 
about people of color and queers. Each semester I compile a reader 
of essays and creative writing for my English composition courses 
with the purpose of using selected writings to show a variety of 
writing styles and techniques. I emphasize literature by people of 
color for several reasons. To begin with, perspectives of people 
of color are too often absent from English composition textbooks 
and from classrooms in general. The reality is that there is a sig- 
nificant and growing body of work by Latins, Caribbeans, Asians, 
African Americans, and Native Americans. If in the process of 
selecting material for my reader I choose to ignore this literature, 
then I am guilty of erasing important voices. One advantage to 
emphasizing writing by people of color is that, by interacting 





TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



with the texts, students will see that no one model represents the 
experience of people of color. The literature offers the reader al- 
ternative worlds. 

Another reason for using texts by people of color is that there 
is great power in representation, and our students of color de- 
serve to have texts that reflect their lives. While white hetero- 
sexuals are presented with multitudes of images of themselves in 
the media, the classroom, and the political arena, gays and lesbi- 
ans and people of color rarely see representations of ourselves, 
and when we do, they are usually negative ones. Throughout my 
education in this country, I seldom saw my Colombian or lesbian 
self reflected in any classroom. The challenge is for all educators 
to assume the responsibility of multicultural representation in 
the classroom. 

Here at the University of Texas at El Paso, situated on the 
border between the United States and Juarez, Mexico, 74 per- 
cent of the undergraduate population is of Mexican descent. The 
dead-white-European-heterosexual-male canon, which has been 
sanctified and debated in literary circles for decades, is decidedly 
challenged in my classroom. What, then, are my students read- 
ing? Edwidge Danticat, Esmeralda Santiago, Nellie Campobello, 
Amy Tan, Amiri Baraka, Jamaica Kincaid, Cristina Garcia, Alice 
Walker, other writers of color, and even a few white males,, such 
as Joe Brainard and Michael Cunningham, and white females, 
such as Susan Minot and Lucia Berlin. But because most of my 
students are Mexican American, I focus heavily on Chicano voices, 
such as Helena Maria Viramontes, Luis Valdez, Sandra Cisneros, 
Gloria Anzaldua, and Rudolfo Anaya. I also include several pieces 
that touch upon gay experiences, such as fiction by Nice Rodriguez 
and John Rechy, as well as a contemporary gay-themed article 
from a magazine or newspaper. 

Am I cramming ethnically and “politically correct” texts down 
my students throats? Am I doing what I claim to be attempting 
not to do — politicizing the classroom? Am I guilty of using a 
model that, according to Hairston, “envisions required writing 
courses as vehicles for social reform rather than as student-cen- 
tered workshops designed to build students’ confidence and com- 
petence as writers” (530)? Well, yes and no. I am an out Latina 
lesbian who is using representation as a political tool, and I am 





- 174 - 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 



using these texts to teach writing. Teaching composition goes 
beyond presenting formulas for cohesive essays — it involves teach- 
ing students to think critically and to develop skills in logic and 
argumentation. The materials I select prompt students to think, 
write, consider a variety of topics and perspectives, and teach 
them to write effective introductions. The reader I compile for 
my classes in many ways mirrors English composition textbooks; 
the main difference is the addition of creative writing and texts 
by queers and people of color. 

I teach students to write essays through focusing on such 
contemporary methods as employing prewriting techniques and 
having a clear thesis statement, organizing information logically, 
and revising. In addition, I liberally use creative writing tech- 
niques, such as “showing” versus “telling,” and ask students to 
attempt to emulate strategies used by published writers. Each 
selection in the reader has a corresponding writing assignment. 
At times the assignment is an open response, a page in length. 
Other times students are instructed to try out specific techniques 
or to comment on a specific aspect of the piece, such as the topic 
(i.e., love, grandparents, prostitution, language, movies, gays). 

I also use creative texts to demonstrate important elements 
of composition and craft. For instance, we discuss thesis state- 
ments in class and then read Amy Tan’s “Fish Cheeks” as an 
exercise to identify the thesis statement. To discuss distinctions 
between expressive, informative, and persuasive texts, I use 
Esmeralda Santiago’s “How to Eat a Guava.” For the persuasive 
essay, some texts focus on contemporary debates, such as smok- 
ing in public spaces, euthanasia, and English-only legislation. I 
use Gloria Anzaldiia’s “How to Tame a Wild Tongue,” Julia 
Alvarez’s “Bilingual Sestina” and Luis Valdez’s “Zoot Suit” as 
springboards to discussing the relationship between language and 
culture. Students turn in a creative writing journal three times in 
the semester and are graded for completing the assignments, not 
on the content. The grades are then combined at the end of the 
semester; they total a percentage of the final grade, usually be- 
tween 10 and 20 percent. Students are never penalized for their 
response to my selections. The grades they receive on the final 
drafts of the four essays they write carry the greatest weight on 
their final grade. 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 




TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



If I were teaching in a predominantly white university, I would 
probably still use a large number of texts by writers of color and 
queers. My selection of material would depend on the course 
and the complexities of the geographical region and of the stu- 
dent population. I would use some texts that reflected the stu- 
dent body, though I would look for unique works that might be 
unfamiliar to them. Given the growing population of “minori- 
ties” and the rising visibility of gay issues in the mainstream, 
maintaining a multicultural and queer perspective in the class- 
room is essential regardless of the geographical location of the 
classroom. 

‘^Speaking Secrets” from the "Hard Place” 

I have been out in the classroom since I began teaching over two 
years ago, and I have employed a variety of strategies, from a 
full-blown presentation to simply allowing students to interact 
with the queer texts in the reader. Coming out is easy for me 
because the word lesbian is so integral to my identity. It is also 
comfortable for me to be out in an academic setting in El Paso, 
where I feel solidarity and even a sense of familia, Latin style, 
with the undergraduates. If I were somewhere else, maybe com- 
ing out would be a different issue for me. But here I am out in the 
community, I participate in local readings, date a butch in pub- 
lic, and dance in a gay bar. Most of my published writings reveal 
my lesbianism, one of my lesbian plays has been staged at this 
university, and students have prior knowledge of my sexuality 
(and word gets around) — so I can’t keep a secret that clearly isn’t 
one. And neither do I want to, for I chose many years ago to be 
vocal about being a lesbian. 

It is too late for me to “hide” because I have already come to 
terms with my lesbianism. As Mariana Romo-Carmona writes 
in the introduction to Compaheras: Latina Lesbians, “When we 
weigh the benefits of being silent and saving the other people 
from the shock, or ourselves from the pain, we internalize the 
hatred against us. In essence, we begin to believe that our lives 
are less important, and we continue to hide a part of ourselves” 
(xxiii). There is little benefit to being silent in a course in which 





- 176 - 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 



students are, in part, using writing to express their personal his- 
tory and experience. By revealing my lesbianism, I am showing 
students there is no need to hide, that all of who we are is signifi- 
cant, and that silence is not required. 

But my ease with coming out contrasts sharply with other 
teachers’ experiences. As Mary Elliott writes in “Coming Out in 
the Classroom: A Return to the Hard Place”: “Perhaps we feel 
that our political or personal development should have delivered 
us beyond ‘the hard place’ — the pounding hearts, shaking voices, 
sleepless nights, and hours of strategizing with friends” (694). 
Elliott cites deep fear as the cause of difficulties in coming out. 
She continues: “Fear, then, begins the story, and, with no appar- 
ent bridge across the abyss, the story for many of us ends abruptly 
there — at the hard place” (701). This “hard place” Elliott refers 
to is one with which I do not identify. It’s not that I don’t worry 
or consider the repercussions, but this visceral response, this in- 
tense fear embodied, is not my experience. Coming out does in- 
volve personal risk, though. It forces you to confront yourself, 
not only as a lavender-blooded queer with political overtones, 
but also as a human being willing to speak your truth. 

If only I had done as my grandmother instructed me when I 
was a teenager: “Never reveal all that you are or all that you 
know.” Putting yourself out there is dangerous. Some things are 
meant to be a secret. Deena J. Gonzalez tackles secrets in her 
essay, “Speaking Secrets: Living Chicana Theory”: “Speaking 
secrets is never easy. In many cultures, it is considered bad form 
because secrets stigmatize families and community, separate one 
from loved ones, and leave bad impressions” (46). What would 
my grandmother think of me now, I wonder? I never did come 
out to her, but then, she died before I had fully come out to my- 
self. She was a keeper of secrets, and I doubt she would have 
approved. By coming out, and also by “speaking secrets” of other 
sorts, I hope to be part of the greater movement to which Gonzalez 
alludes: 

To deal with these issues [woman-identification, lesbianism and 
misogyny] in an academic environment, and break the cycle of 
violence into which we have been socialized and accommo- 
dated, means that we must begin to name our fears, to ac- 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



knowledge that we cannot move forward alone, and that each 
step we take to tell secrets moves us one step closer toward 
what bell hooks and others term a liberatory, transformative 
life. (69) 

Coming Out: A One-Dyke Version 

Coming out, whether in El Paso or Manhattan, is a process that 
should be personalized by each instructor. There is no one way 
or “the” way to do it. How we choose to come out depends on 
us as individuals, on the setting of the classroom, and on the 
context of discussion in which it occurs. My Mexican American 
students are mostly Catholic and working class and tend to iden- 
tify on the conservative side of the political spectrum. Many of 
them live with their parents, work, and are the first in their fam- 
ily to attend college. Most likely they grew up dancing to disco, 
listening to rancheras, and eating tortillas with one hand and 
French fries with the other. They have an image of the Virgen of 
Guadalupe in their homes. They rock with Mana and Shakira 
and croon with Juan Gabriel and Selena. They are well-dressed, 
well-mannered, and respectful. I, on the other hand, am a writer 
and a pagan. I am a melomaniac — a music lover — especially fond 
of salsa and vdllenato, I drive too fast, live too hard, hibernate 
one day and travel the world the next. I love plastic flowers, loud 
colors, gaudy rings. These are simplistic generalizations, of course, 
of both my students and myself, but I include them here as a 
synopsis of the players involved in my act of coming out. 

To reiterate a central point from my introduction, when we 
walk into the classroom, we bring the entirety of ourselves with 
us. Be yourself, and you will find a way to “be” queer. Come out 
because you want to, because it is a gift you can offer your stu- 
dents and your school or university, because you want to be so- 
cially responsible, because you want to check it out, because you 
can. Do not come out because of queer political pressure. Fol- 
lowing, then, is a recounting of a coming-out lesson plan, along 
with other approaches I have used in coming out and creating 
queer awareness in the classroom. An analysis, as well as an over- 
view of student responses from end-of-semester evaluation forms, 
follows this pedagogical section. 



178 



ERIC 




Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 



To begin with, coming out is a “process,” You don’t just yell 
“I am queer” into a bullhorn and leave it at that, because there is 
a reverberation, before-during-and-after effects. I am a “person” 
and a “lesbian” in the classroom, I am someone with particular 
characteristics that my students are able to identify as “me” in 
the form of my appearance, my personality, my response to them 
as people and as students. All of this makes me a “person” with- 
out emphasizing the fact that I am a woman who desires other 
women. This is not to say that I would lie or otherwise mislead if 
I were somehow put to the test before officially coming out. But 
if possible, I prefer to establish my personhood before being 
branded as the dyke that I am. As Elliott writes, “to announce 
my sexual orientation as I hand out the class syllabus unproduc- 
tively fragments my identity and polarizes the students in rela- 
tion to that fragmentary self-representation in a way that seems 
no less deceptive” (704). In her conclusion, she states: “Only if 
students can see the teacher as an individual rather than an 
‘agenda’ is there hope of that teacher forging the kinds of new 
and productive ways of thinking, writing, and working with the 
students that most of the coming out testimonials describe” (706), 
I agree with this statement wholeheartedly; it is the gist of com- 
ing out. To give students the opportunity to see a lesbian as a 
person may sound simple, but considering that lesbians are com- 
monly thought of as perverted, man-hating, and dangerous and 
indecent bulldaggers, the simplicity of being perceived as an indi- 
vidual is powerful. 

The first time I came out in the classroom was the result of a 
lesson plan I had very carefully constructed. National Coming 
Out Day, celebrated on the 11th of October, was the magical 
date. It was also convenient that we were past the middle of the 
semester (so I was already a “person” in my students’ eyes), and 
that we were about to commence working on the persuasive es- 
say. By then my students and I had already established what I 
perceived to be a free-flowing relationship. Our collective pur- 
pose was to develop writing skills; this was accomplished in a 
friendly, familial environment. I had come to genuinely like and 
care for some of the students. What if my favorites turned out to 
be homophobic? Or if the laid-back atmosphere were to become 
charged with politics? Or if they walked out on me en masse. 




XU 



- 179 - 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



complained, rebelled, rejected me or my lesbianism? These were 
my concerns as The Day neared. 

I began class by writing the words “gay” and “lesbian” on 
the board and instructed students to freewrite for five minutes 
on what these words meant to them. This process is one I had 
previously used in class with different topics, so this was familiar 
to them. They were free to turn their writing in with their jour- 
nal, which was due at a later date, or to keep their initial opin- 
ions to themselves. As I noted later when I reviewed their journals, 
this generated a variety of (unedited) comments: “fags and ho- 
mos should go back in the closet”; “If someone is a good person 
then his/her sexual preference has no ill effect on who they are”; 
“gays are people who don’t like themselves”; “they bring dis- 
eases”; “it’s unnatural”; “gays know how to dress”; “they make 
great room decorators”; “it’s a disorder of the mind”; “people 
are usually born this way”; “glamorous world”; “freedom of 
choice”; “not accepted by God”; “doesn’t bother me”; “power 
rangers”; “dirty jotos”; “lesbians are a turn-on”; and so on. 

Then I asked students who had gay and lesbian people in 
their lives to raise their hands. About half of them did, which 
surprised me; I expected fewer. Later on I was to learn that my 
students had gay family and friends, and that several were them- 
selves gay. I told those who had not raised their hand that from 
then on, they could say they knew a lesbian because, in fact, their 
teacher was one. I proceeded to give a brief overview of National 
Coming Out Day and to relate some of my personal history as a 
lesbian, such as how long I had been out and how my lesbian 
identity had evolved over the years. They responded with a rush 
of excitement, laughing at some of my anecdotes and shouting 
out questions. 

Taking advantage of their enthusiasm about my personal rev- 
elations, I invited them to ask me lesbian-related questions. They 
asked: When did you first know that you were a lesbian? How 
did your mother react? Have you ever had a boyfriend? If lesbi- 
ans like other women, then why do they dress as men? Have you 
ever wanted to marry another woman? Is it true that one woman 
acts like a man and the other one acts like a woman? How has 
society’s rejection of lesbianism affected you? These are typical 





- 180 - 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 



questions that most of them had never had an opportunity to ask 
a “live” lesbian. I answered their queries quickly and honestly. I 
related my lesbianism to current homophobic legislation that does 
not allow marriage or equal access to constitutional rights and 
employment benefits. I told them about the Colombian girlfriend 
rd had whom I was not allowed to marry and bring into the 
United States. I also found out that a few students in each class 
already thought I was gay. I ended our question-and-answer ses- 
sion by getting on to the work as outlined in the syllabus. 

The topic for the day was developing ideas and writing an 
effective introduction. I came prepared with lesbian-related ex- 
amples for all of the techniques we were going to cover. I let the 
students know that if they listened closely they would learn to 
apply the techniques to their own essays. Following are several 
examples of the texts I wrote and used to demonstrate a variety 
of writing techniques. 

Facts: Although statistics fluctuate, it is believed that about 
10% of the general population is gay. Every large city has its 
share of gay bars, bookstores, groups, and events. There are 
also lesbian and gay publishing houses, electronic chat lines, 
and restaurants. There is even a gay credit card publicized by 
the lesbian tennis star, Martina Navaritalova. 

Description: Imagine seven thousand women in the woods 
for a solid week. At night, beneath the starry skies, campfires 
burn throughout the land and women gather in circles, sing- 
ing and talking. At one in the morning the amber flames are 
still flickering; by now the women are dancing and drum- 
ming. At some point, the women will crawl into their tents 
with each other beneath the twinkling stars. They are in na- 
ture and they are part of nature. 

Classification: A separatist is a lesbian who attempts to elimi- 
nate male interference from her life. She does not want or 
need men for any reason, and she goes to great lengths to 
keep them out, even going as far as changing the spelling of 
certain words. A “woman” becomes “womon;” “women” 



ERJC 



- 181 - 




Vi. 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



becomes ‘‘womyn” or “wimmin;” “history” becomes 
“herstory,” and so on. Thus, language is a key to asserting a 
separatist identity. 

Examples: When she was eight years old, she was insepa- 
rable from her best friend, Lucia. Then it was Vicki, the girl 
with the golden hair, who held her in awe. When she was ten 
years old she became best friends with Amy and refused to 
do anything unless Amy was involved. By the time she was 
eleven she realized that these close friendships were more 
like the crushes that other girls her age had on boys. Although 
she hadn’t realized it, she had had lesbian tendencies through- 
out her childhood. 

If this had not been The Day, my students would have read 
about airplanes. Girl Scouts, softball teams, and musicians — the 
topics in the textbook at hand that semester. Your Choice: A Basic 
Writing Guide with Readings (see Mangelsdorf and Posey). In- 
stead, they were presented with my lesbianized versions of texts 
that demonstrate strategies for developing ideas in an essay. 

With a few minutes of class time remaining, I asked the stu- 
dents to freewrite once again on what “lesbian” and “gay” meant 
to them and to note if there were any changes. Then, to wrap up 
the coming-out class, I sang “Amazon ABC,” a lesbian-pride song 
written and recorded by Alix Dobkin (510). The class ended with 
a healthy round of applause. My coming out was a theatrical 
event of sorts; I was on exhibit and my audience was scrutinizing 
me and the lesbianism I represented. My students were mostly 
respectful and naturally curious, even though there was some 
snickering during the question-and-answer segment. It wasn’t until 
after the end of the semester, however, that I could really assess 
the impact my coming out had on my students. 

The rest of that particular semester continued as planned in 
the syllabus. The only other significant in-class activity that fo- 
cused on gay issues was an exercise several weeks later designed 
to show how to explore the pros and cons of an issue as prepara- 
tion for the persuasive essay. I brought copies of “Gay Families 
Come Out,” an article about gay adoption inside that week’s 
Newsweek, which had a photograph of Melissa Etheridge and 





- 182 - 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 



Julie Cypher embracing on the cover. After reading the article 
aloud and leading a discussion on some of the points and anec- 
dotes in the article, I instructed students to write ‘‘I do/do not 
support the adoption of children by gays.” They were to free write 
on whichever statement reflected their opinion by listing ideas 
and information that supported their belief. Then, so that they 
could become adept at identifying the other side of the argu- 
ment, I instructed them to support the opposing view. A few stu- 
dents resisted, claiming that their views were too strong. Did I 
overdo it? Am I guilty of manipulative teaching methods? Or did 
the students’ homophobia get in the way of an exercise created 
to encourage them to think through both sides of an issue, re- 
gardless of the issue itself? 



'Tlesh and Blood” versus “Why Does 
Everything in this Class Have to Be Gay?” 

Coming out that semester had an immediate effect in the class- 
room and affected my relationship with several students. For in- 
stance, one student complained, “Why does everything in this 
class have to be gay?” Another student, who was obviously an- 
gry about a D+ I had given him on his expressive essay, com- 
plained to the administration that I had been too personal and 
graphic in my coming-out presentation. In another case, a stu- 
dent addressed me in his journal: “But what I can’t understand is 
why do gays want so much attention. I never saw any of my 
straight high school teachers read or talk so much about straight 
people like you do about gays. It seems you want to convert some 
of the students into what I call ‘gayism.’ p.s. nice try!” This was 
a student I liked and his hostility threw me. I responded, “No, I 
don’t think it’s even possible to ‘convert’ people into ‘gayism’ 
any more than you can convert others to ‘heterosexualism.’ What 
I do want to do is have it be an open issue that is okay to talk 
about in the classroom, and since there are so many different 
kinds of antigay legislative efforts in the works at this moment, 
it’s also a timely issue.” 

On the other hand, there were some notable and surprising 
reactions from students. One, who had written “gross, sick fags” 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 




- 183 - 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



during the initial freewriting, approached me several days later 
seeking information for a pro-gay rights speech he had decided 
to write for his speech class. Nearly half of the students selected 
a gay-related issue for the persuasive essay. The essays included 
one that opposed gays in the military because they make hetero- 
sexuals uncomfortable; one that used the “all men are created 
equal” argument to support legislation that favors gay partner- 
ships; and one that sanctioned homophobia as long as violence 
was not involved. Regardless of the positions students took, how- 
ever, the most valuable result of my coming out was that they 
took the time to consider queer issues in a meaningful way. Most 
of them, for instance, opposed the adoption of children by gays, 
but their main reasoning was that it could be detrimental to the 
children because of the societal stigma against homosexuality. 
With the exception of some Christian fundamentalists, most of 
my students did not appear to be homophobic. They spoke freely 
to me about their gay relatives and friends, for instance. And the 
ones I had branded as “conservative” because of the topics of 
their previous essays, such as quinceaheras (a Latin version of a 
sweet sixteen cotillion, but done at fifteen years of age), church 
retreats, and traditional Mexican weddings, were surprisingly 
open-minded and sympathetic. 

The most tremendous and positive result from having come 
out that semester, though, was that my gay students felt that they 
had someone on their side. One let me know through his journal 
that he was afraid the male students would interpret his friendli- 
ness as a come-on. Another student, who had written a personal 
essay about being gay, avoided coming to class on peer-review 
days, when students are required to comment on each other’s 
essays. During the last week of the semester, this same student 
stood up in front of the entire class and read his coming-out es- 
say, “Flesh and Blood,” and received a respectful round of ap- 
plause. (I have subsequently used his essay in my reader.) On the 
last day of class, I found out that I had at least two other gay 
students whom I hadn’t known about. One wrote in his evalua- 
tion, “thanks for coming out. It made me feel better about my- 
self as a gay.” Another, my favorite student of all, trailed me to 
my office afterward for his true confessions. When he was fif- 




215 



- 184 - 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 



teen, he had told his father that he was gay and was sent to a 
psychologist, who “cured” him. He lived with his parents, had a 
girlfriend, and pretended to be straight. A year after he spoke 
with me, he moved to California on his own. He wrote me a 
letter, saying, “Now all of my friends know Fm gay, so I am 
completely out!” Long after the semester was over, several of my 
gay students often visited me during office hours, seeking a gay 
connection. Clearly, the fact that I had come out had an impact 
on my gay students. 

Overall, my assessment of having come out in the classroom 
that semester is, more than anything, a positive one. With the 
exceptions already noted, the majority of my students did not 
change how they related to me or how they approached their 
work. They continued to participate in class discussions, and as 
far as one could tell, English composition was just another one 
of their classes. Were they inhibited as a result of my having come 
out? Were they merely being polite and tolerant? And if this is 
the case, is this necessarily a bad thing? It is impossible for me to 
know what effect my lesbianism had on my students during or 
even after class. I do know there was healthy debate, pro and 
con, on all the issues discussed in class, including the gay ones. 

I also know what they wrote in their class evaluations, and if 
this is a reliable measure, the results are decidedly favorable. 
During the last week of the semester, I pass out an evaluation 
form with specific questions. Students also fill out an official com- 
puterized evaluation that goes directly to the English department, 
the results of which I do not see until the following semester. I let 
students know that the evaluation I pass out is for my own infor- 
mation and that I am interested in their assessment of class be- 
cause their viewpoints could affect how I plan future classes. I 
also ask them not to put their name on it (though some of them 
do) in the hope that they will be as honest as possible. One of the 
questions on the evaluation form that semester was, “How do 
you feel about the fact that your teacher came out as a lesbian?” 
The overwhelming responses were along the lines of “it’s cool,” 
“does not bother me,” “it’s her choice,” and “it didn’t change 
anything.” Many wrote that they were initially shocked. A few 
commended me, with comments such as, “It took a lot of cour- 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



fib 



v.-> .y 






- 185 - 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



age and I respect you for that.” Only two students out of fifty 
wrote what I interpreted as negative comments. A few noted that 
I was, above all, a teacher. One wrote, “She is just as respected as 
all my other teachers.” Finally, one of the student’s responses hit 
home: “I thought you had confidence in us and shared what was 
a secret. By this the class became closer.” That for me was at the 
heart of coming out. I was real, the students were open, and it 
was, above all, a revealing, human experience. 

I have not come out again in quite the same way I did that 
first semester, mostly because I am curious to see how different 
approaches affect the classroom. Looking back, it was an in-your- 
face approach and it had correspondingly strong effects. Never 
since have I had nearly half the class select a gay-related topic for 
their persuasive essay. No other student has complained about 
me to the administration. I do not have gay students trailing me 
to the office, confiding in me. I do still come out, but I do it in the 
midst of a debate, in answer to a question, casually and unplanned. 
I do not make a big deal out of it. I don’t even ask students the 
lesbian question on the evaluation forms at the end of the semes- 
ter. Even though I eventually let my students know that I am a 
lesbian, I rely more and more on their responses to the queer 
texts in the reader, hoping that their minds are open to cultural 
and sexual diversity. 

My subdued approach still garners hostile reactions from 
select students, evidenced through their responses to the writing 
assignments in the reader. In reaction to “The Land of the Free,” 
an essay in favor of gay rights written by a previous student, one 
student wrote, “The constitution says all men are created equal 
therefore you must be a man not a homo sexual, the reason gays 
do not have the support of the government is because they chose 
to be gay. I did not choose to be a Mexican I was born one . . . 
gays are fighting for rights that are against the constitution and 
against the law of God.” Another student, in response to a chap- 
ter from John Rechy’s novel City of Night, wrote, “I have a solu- 
tion to cure the worlds AIDS problem but when I called Hitler 
his secretary told me he was booked for life. Ha, ha, get it.” I do 
not respond to these hostile and ignorant comments; there is no 
need to fuel hatred, and there is little hope that any reaction on 
my part will favorably influence this kind of homophobia. 





- 186 - 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 



Inclusion of texts by people of color in the reader and a focus 
on Chicano writings also drew notable criticism from a few stu- 
dents. The same student who made the Hitler reference wrote in 
his evaluation, in response to “What did you like least about this 
class?”: “I felt I had to be Mexican to fit in. I felt I was discrimi- 
nated against because I am a Christian.” (Ironically, this same 
student’s response to “What did you like most about this class?” 
was “The openness.”) Another white student e-mailed me early 
one semester: “I suppose I could be considered as a bitter old 
white guy. ... I get frustrated at all the material that seems to me 
to be either too TOUCHY/FEELY, or man-hating, or gay, or eth- 
nic, or just plain boring for me. I have no prejudices, I am just 
not interested in this stuff.” A week later, he wrote me again, 
saying, “I am starting to like ‘ethnic-bicultural-gay-touchy/feely 
stuff’ more by the minute. Seriously, I do like your class. I will try 
to keep my ignorance to myself, and get on with [the] lesson.” 
These students are exceptions to mostly favorable responses to 
materials in the reader; I cite them to show the power of includ- 
ing certain texts. 

My English composition classroom has my lesbian presence, 
queer and ethnic texts in the reader, creative writing assignments, 
strict class policies, a fun atmosphere, and an intense focus on 
writing. What has been, across the board, the main criticism stu- 
dents make of my class? Too much work. What are their “Addi- 
tional comments, critiques, &C praises” on the end-of-semester 
evaluations? Comments include: “It was the bomb.” “I learned 
more about writing style in this class than any other English class.” 
“I liked and appreciated the day you showed us yourself. Up 
until then I thought you were sort of slave driving.” “You are an 
original teacher whose comments are helpful and direct.” “The 
class went well because there wasn’t much pressure on what top- 
ics to talk about, and everybody was pretty open minded,” “This 
is the first English class that I have liked &C actually learned some- 
thing good in. I also liked the stories you picked for us to read.” 
“I really liked the student-teacher interaction. I was really glad 
that you weren’t no monotoned professor.” “Everything here was 
off the wall and made me realize that there’s always more than 
one way to get something done. . . .Thanks!” 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 




- 187 - 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



Creating Queer Awareness for Queers and Allies 

My approach to teaching, which emphasizes a personalized style 
in an environment with notable queer and multicultural pres- 
ence, is one that can be used by any instructor. Creating queer 
awareness in English composition classes is quite simple when 
the instructor weaves gays and lesbians into the fabric of the 
course. A teacher need not be gay to do this, and in fact I strongly 
urge heterosexual allies to consciously make their classrooms 
queer-friendly. 

There are many ways in which English composition teach- 
ers, gay or straight, can incorporate queer visibility into their 
teaching methods, and it can be done without deviating from the 
focus of the class. Coming out in a way that complements some 
aspect of the writing process, as I did with the lesbian-themed 
excerpts that exemplify writing techniques, is one way. If an in- 
structor is not gay or does not want to come out, he or she can 
invite a local gay activist or artist to make a presentation to the 
class. This presentation can be used as a catalyst for in-class de- 
bates on gay issues, or the students can do an in-class writing 
that evaluates the presenter on his or her performance and on the 
content of the material presented. The presentation can simply 
be a creative reading that includes queer themes, something I 
have done in other English classes at the request of colleagues. 
Students can be assigned readings and responses aside from those 
in the textbooks, and gay authors or gay themes can be included 
in the options they have to select from. Multimedia presenta- 
tions, including music, film, theatre, art, and photography, can 
be used to bring queers to life in a colorful and provocative way. 

Queer topics can be presented or discussed when the teacher 
is introducing the range of topics appropriate for particular es- 
says. A firsthand account of growing up gay and what it’s like to 
have a gay relative, for instance, are good topics for expressive 
essays. An informative essay on cultural symbols can focus on 
gay symbols, such as the rainbow flag, the pink triangle, double- 
male and double-female signs, and the color lavender. Essays about 
cultural icons can include figures such as Audre Lorde, Frida 
Kahlo, Harvey Milk, Xena, Zorro, Sappho, Liberace, Wonder 




- 188 - 



Coming Out and Creating Queer Awareness in the Classroom 

Woman, and so on. Holidays can include Gay Pride Day, Na- 
tional Coming Out Day, and the anniversary of the Stonewall 
riots. Persuasive essays can tackle topics such as the expanding 
definition of “family,” hate crime legislation, coming out on tele- 
vision, and queer texts in elementary school libraries. With a little 
knowledge and creativity, English composition teachers can eas- 
ily support gays and lesbians within the classroom while teach- 
ing students to debate current issues and formulate ideas for their 
essays. 

Each semester is a coming-out experiment for me. I am inter- 
ested in gauging my students’ reactions to homosexuality, in see- 
ing how they respond to texts, how they respond to me as a 
teacher and as a human being. There is nothing scientific about 
my perception of their perception of me or of lesbianism. I read 
their gay-related commentaries (in their journals, essays, and cre- 
ative writing responses) with great interest. Sometimes I respond 
to their comments, sometimes I don’t. I have ended up, for now, 
taking a mellow, middle-of-the-road approach to coming out. I 
have a “que sera, sera” attitude. Coming out is my small contri- 
bution within a society that I hope will one day be just, inclusive, 
and progressive. I don’t want to look back at my life years from 
now and wonder what would have happened if only I had come 
out, if only I had strived for racial equality, if only. ... I have a 
clean conscience, and I have hope. 

Works Cited 



Dobkin, Alix. “Amazon ABC.” Lesbian Culture: An Anthology: The 
Lives, Work, Ideas, Art and Visions of Lesbians Past and Present, 
Ed. Julia Penelope and Susan Wolfe. Freedom, CA: Crossing, 1993. 
510. 

Elliott, Mary. “Coming Out in the Classroom: A Return to the Hard 
Place.” College English 58 (1996): 693-708. 

Giroux, Henry A. “National Identity and the Politics of Multi- 
culturalism.” College Literature 22.2 (1995): 42-57. 

Gonzalez, Deena J. “Speaking Secrets: Living Chicana Theory.” Living 
Chicana Theory, Ed. Carla Trujillo. Berkeley: Third, 1998. 46-77. 







0 



- 189 - 



TATIANA DE LA TIERRA 



Hairston, Maxine. “Diversity, Ideology, and Teaching Writing.” Com- 
position in Four Keys: Inquiring into the Field: Art, Nature, Sci- 
ence, Politics. Ed. Mark Wiley, Barbara Gleason, and Louise 
Wetherbee Phelps. Mountain View, CA: Mayfield, 1996. 530-40. 

Kantrowitz, Barbara. “Gay Families Come Out.” Newsweek 4 Nov. 
1996: 51-57. 

“Latin American Briefs.” Online posting. 13 Sept. 1998. Servicio de 
noticias para la comunidad lesbitgay. 13 Sept. 1998 <Infogay@ 
mx.gw.com>. 

Mangelsdorf, Kate, and Evelyn Riggs Posey. “Writing an Effective In- 
troduction.” Your Choice: A Basic Writing Guide with Readings. 
New York: St. Martin’s, 1997. 165-68. 

McLaren, Peter. “Paulo Freire and the Academy: A Challenge from the 
U.S. Left.” Cultural Critique 33 (1996): 151-84. 

Romo-Carmona, Mariana. “Introduction.” Compaheras: Latina Les- 
bians: An Anthology. Ed. Juanita Ramos. New York: Routledge, 
1994. xx-xxix. 

Scharrer, Gary. “Mexico Official: Dump Approval May Incite Protests.” 
El Paso Times 8 Oct. 1998: 1B+. 




- 190 - 



Chapter Eleven 



a© 

“Swimming Upstream”: 
Recovering the Lesbian in 
Native American Literature 

Karen Lee Osborne 
Columbia College of Chicago 



T he landscape of American literature has dramatically changed 
during the past thirty-five years. Our curricula and syllabi 
have been transformed by postmodern literary theory and teach- 
ers and critics who have “recognized that underlying the ques- 
tions of what is taught and to whom, what is anthologized, 
published, and written about, are ideas about what a culture val- 
ues and why” (Lauter 148). African American, feminist, and les- 
bian/gay studies exposed the myth of a values-neutral profession 
of literature as early as the 1960s. Recent critical and pedagogi- 
cal theory, by exploring not only the changing canon but also 
questions of authorship, social constructs, subject positions, and 
the relationship between the “literary” and the “political,” has 
led teachers to question what we need to know in order to teach, 
and to consider more fully what our students bring with them 
into the classroom. 

The growing attention by publishers, scholars, critics, theo- 
rists, and teachers to Native American literature has been a sig- 
nificant part of the changing canon. While commercial publishers 
have actively and successfully promoted the work of a few, a 
large group of less well-known Native American writers has also 
begun to receive attention. There was, of course, a body of litera- 
ture by Native Americans long before this literature was formally 
studied. But it is not enough simply to enlarge the canon. Like 
feminist, lesbian/gay, and African American critics, scholars of 
Native American literature continue to bring our attention to 




(') :■>. o 

. ^ ^ ^ ^ 



- 191 - 



KAREN LEE OSBORNE 



texts that have been excluded from the dominant canon of liter- 
ary study, but they also discuss culturally specific approaches to 
texts once they have been included. The question now is "‘"‘how 
we teach what we teach and why we teach what we teach” (Abbott 
1). Other critics have stressed the necessity for situating Native 
American texts within their tribal, cultural, mythological, reli- 
gious, historical, and political contexts,' Additionally, Arnold 
Krupat has warned of the dangers of interpreting Native Ameri- 
can literature from dominant Western perspectives, 

A multicultural commitment . , . does not particularly encour- 
age one to urge additions to the curriculum or the canon in the 
name of . . , “diversity” or “tolerance” (important as these 
are), but, rather to urge the deconstruction of all dichotomized 
paradigms of the us/them, West/Rest type, and so to undo 
manichean allegories at every level (Eth no criticism 237-38), 

Even Native American postmodern theorists do not satisfy Krupat, 
who argues that postmodern approaches to Native American lit- 
erature are still based on Western models and/or assumptions 
about vaguely understood, overgeneralized “Indian” modes, 
Krupat concludes that overgeneralization ignores intertribal di- 
versity and is often useless if not dangerous. Well-meaning critics 
and readers have also developed a postcolonial revisionism that 
takes the form of “victimist history” depicting the same binary 
oppositions featuring “genocidal Euramericans” and “innocent 
and hapless Native Americans” (Ethnocriticism 20), 

Ironically, the popular consumerist trend toward Native 
American culture tends to reinforce such binary oppositions, Non- 
Indian readers often take a proprietary stance toward Native 
American culture and romanticize Native Americans as all good, 
all natural, all spiritual. This can be as dangerous as racism. When 
reading texts by, say, African American authors, white readers 
do not frequently claim that they are really black, boast of their 
black spirituality, or suggest that their knowledge of matters 
African American qualifies them to write texts that can be classi- 
fied as African American literature. Yet such appropriations of 
Native American identity by whites is common. Commentaries 
resisting this new form of cultural imperialism have been pub- 




- 192 - 



‘‘Swimming Upstream:” Recovering the Lesbian in Native American Literature 

lished by many Native American writers. Hilarious satires on 
Native American literature classrooms appear in Sherman Alexie’s 
Indian Killer and in Dorris and Erdrich’s The Crown of Colutn- 
bus} 

Critics also tend to “dabble” in Native American literature. 
Although much progress has been made in transforming the canon 
since the publication of Krupat’s The Voice in the Margin in 1989, 
it is still true that “too many Westerners have played carelessly in 
the realms of Otherness, taking what they wanted — a little of 
this, a little of that — and blithely moving on, ‘savagizing’ or 
‘orientalizing’ the Other” (Krupat, Ethnocriticism 36). Although 
he has trouble with those who claim that Native American writ' 
ers or contributors speak with one voice, and raises important 
questions about relying on essentialized categories of Native and 
non-Native, Krupat argues that “in the same way that one would 
not want to see the criticism of literature by women and African 
Americans largely in the hands of men or Euramericans, so too 
criticism of the literature of Native Americans should not be 
largely in the hands of non-Native people” (Turn to the Native 9). 

I agree with Krupat. Non-native scholars should approach 
texts by Native American writers with some care. Yet in practice, 
the majority of teachers who teach Native American texts in the 
literature classroom are non-Native people. How can well-inten- 
tioned non-Native teachers include Native American texts in the 
curricula without perpetuating the kind of damage Alexie, Krupat, 
and others describe? By situating texts in their contexts. Native 
and non-Native scholars and teachers can do much to avoid the 
overgeneralizations just mentioned. 

Simply put, teachers need to consider their own motives and 
those of their non-Indian students. Presumably, most teachers 
have abandoned the “banker” model of pedagogy long since and 
instead are making efforts to engage students as active learners 
and participants in a classroom community. Frantz Fanon, Paulo 
Freire, bell hooks, and others have shown that we need to con- 
sider what Henry Giroux has referred to as “the productive mean- 
ings that students, in all of their cultural and social differences, 
bring to classrooms as part of the production of knowledge” 
(Giroux 17). In teaching texts written by Native Americans about 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 






I A 



- 193 - 



KAREN LEE OSBORNE 



Native Americans, the teacher must also consider how these texts 
and their audiences have reinforced or countered damaging ste- 
reotypes. It is not enough to teach the text as a great “literary” 
text or to teach it from a politically astute but oversimplified 
Indian-good, white-bad revisionist agenda. While Krupat believes 
that Native American critics should dominate the field of Native 
American literature, he also points out that this literature does 
not benefit from a reductively essentialist perspective, that one 
should “be wary of the tendency to essentialize difference” 
(Ethnocriticism 243). Ethnocriticism, Krupat says, “rejects all 
forms of manichean discourse whether of a traditional and neo- 
colonial or of a revisionist, ‘victimist’ kind” (26). The challenge 
is to be “concerned with differences rather than oppositions” 
and to “replace oppositional with dialogical models” (26; em- 
phasis added). 

Such an approach, derived partially from the work of Mikhail 
Bakhtin, is valuable when examining gender and sexuality as axes 
of analysis in Native American texts. Many postructuralist les- 
bian-feminist critics, such as Diana Fuss and Judith Butler, would 
probably reject, with Krupat, the tendency to reduce subjects to 
a singular position or to presume that all subjects who share a 
particular identity speak with a unitary voice. Our culture has 
difficulty with those who speak from multiple positions, and yet 
it is precisely when we move away from totalizing views of race, 
gender, and sexuality that explorations of difference become most 
illuminating. We must remember, however, that one can still honor 
a distinct axis of identity while speaking from multiple positions. 
Emma Perez’s advocacy of a “strategic essentialism” for Chicana 
lesbians has important implications for Native American lesbi- 
ans as well. Although Perez complains of the “invasionary poli- 
tics” women of color in the academy face who are “essentialized 
from above” (110) when asked to speak as women of color, she 
affirms the need for lesbians of color to create their own ''sitios y 
lenguas, spaces and languages, sites and discourses, apart from 
male-defined and/or Eurocentric arenas” (109). While potentially 
confining, these spaces and languages are necessary parts of “the 
process for finding and expressing one’s multiple voices” (Perez 
109). Indeed, identities tend to be multiple and distinct, yet si- 
multaneously fluid. As Biddy Martin has pointed out, lesbianism 



ERIC 




- 194 - 



''Swimming Upstream:” Recovering the Lesbian in Native American Literature 



no longer constitutes “total political and self-identification, and 
yet it figures no less centrally. ... It remains a position from 
which to speak, to organize, to act politically, but it ceases to be 
the exclusive and continuous ground of identity or politics” (289). 
Acknowledging the position of the lesbian as central but not ex- 
clusive in defining identity is helpful in examining texts about 
Native American lesbians. Otherwise, we impose and perpetuate 
the same limitations bell hooks writes of in Teaching to Trans- 
gress when she is expected to discuss feminism without honestly 
confronting the issues affecting black women, or when she is asked 
to discuss race while checking her feminism at the door. 

The role of lesbian and gay characters and themes in Native 
American literature has not been fully explored. Many of our 
classrooms are silent about lesbians and gays both in general and 
within Native American literature in particular. Doubly 
marginalized, this sizable minority suffers from invisibility at best, 
and at worst from stereotypes and discrimination. Teachers of 
Native American literature have been inspired by Paula Gunn 
Allen’s The Sacred Hoop to recognize how the male heroes of 
novels by Leslie Silko, N. Scott Momaday, and others achieve 
personal and communal healing through a feminine agency con- 
nected with the land. Yet most critics and teachers are less com- 
fortable exploring lesbian and gay issues. Had, for example, Tayo, 
the male protagonist of Silko’s Ceremony, been a woman, the 
response would have been far different, as it was originally to 
Paula Gunn Allen’s own novel The Woman Who Owned the 
Shadows. 

Annette Van Dyke, Vanessa Holford, and Tara Prince-Hughes 
have since recovered the lesbian in The Woman Who Owned the 
Shadows. “Critics and historians of American Indian women’s 
literature and culture,” writes Holford, “are often uneasy with 
the issue of homosexuality, some even going so far as to claim 
conspiracy amongst non-Indian gays and lesbians to appropriate 
Native American spiritual beliefs toward their own political ends” 
(108). But indeed the lesbianism is there, and throughout the 
novel those who hurt or thwart the heroine Ephanie’s self-devel- 
opment and self-recovery also forbid or punish her lesbian ten- 
dencies. “Distrust of lesbianism is fear of women’s renewed 
strength, self-value, and unity” (Holford 105). Because lesbians 




O ^ n 



- 195 - 



KAREN LEE OSBORNE 



exist “outside of phallic patriarchy,” they and their utterances 
are generally “incomprehensible to the male master discourse” 
(Luce Irigaray, qtd. in Moi 126). Ephanie and her childhood girl- 
friend were happy together until forced apart. They were linked 
to the creation story of Uretsete and Naotsete, double woman. 
“With each other they were each one doubled. They were thus 
complete” (Allen, 'Woman 22). Through her relationship with 
another woman later in the novel, Ephanie begins to recover her 
own history and her spirituality. Allen’s novel, Van Dyke argues, 
“is an important offering to Native American lesbians” (351). 

Native American writers such as Chrystos, Janice Gould, 
Vickie Sears, Anne Waters, and Beth Brant have also recovered 
the lesbian in their stories and poems. These texts cannot be 
treated as though they are exactly the same as all other Native 
American texts, nor can they be approached as if they are prima- 
rily or only lesbian texts. Whereas some critical work has chal- 
lenged narrative conventions in texts that are nonetheless informed 
by heterosexist assumptions, these women writers further em- 
power the voices of the oppressed by speaking in resistance to 
multiple oppressions, thus reinventing language in new ways. Beth 
Brant’s story “Swimming Upstream” is worthy of close examina- 
tion because it is a site where several subjectivities intersect. The 
story raises important questions and offers alternatives to exist- 
ing practices of teaching Native American literature. It is helpful 
to teachers who wish to avoid sentimentalizing the presentation 
of Native Americans as victims and who wish instead to focus on 
threads of resistance, subversion, and strength that are neither 
masculinized nor heterosexist. The text affords an opportunity 
for engaged dialogues in which students can discuss and interro- 
gate their own experiences of and assumptions about difference. 
Anna May, the protagonist, is an open lesbian who lives with 
another woman in a stable relationship. There is no ambiguity 
about this. She is treated unfairly by the white, patriarchal legal 
system, yet she is more than a victim, and the presentation of her 
character counteracts stereotypes about lesbians and about Na- 
tive Americans. 

One stereotype used to portray both lesbians and Native 
Americans is that of the alcoholic. Popular images of lesbians in 
general were until recently influenced by outdated definitions of 




- 196 - 



''Swimming Upstream:” Recovering the Lesbian in Native American Literature 

pathology and perversion. For many years, the primary opportu- 
nities for women to meet other lesbians were in the bar culture. 
Lesbians also frequently faced poverty, discrimination, and ha- 
rassment, all conditions often associated with alcoholism. Much 
of that has changed, though not completely and not everywhere. 
Lesbians in general now have higher visibility, greater acceptance, 
and more opportunities for building community apart from the 
bar culture. Lesbian characters in recent Native and non-Native 
texts are no longer as likely to be depicted as victims, with drunk- 
enness or suicide their likely outcomes. 

Unfortunately, the stereotype of the Native American alco- 
holic has continued to haunt literature, persisting since the nine- 
teenth century, when the European American view of Native 
Americans as “savages” and the construction of “Indian nature” 
were used to justify expansion into Native territories. A signifi- 
cant part of this construction was the “drunken Indian.” Many 
communities were “virtually destroyed” by alcohol. Nineteenth- 
century federal laws prohibiting the sale of alcohol to Native 
Americans were nearly impossible to enforce, and the belief that 
the liquor trade could not be stopped helped build support for 
the removal of Indians from their lands (Davis 216). The stereo- 
type of the drunken Indian has continued to depersonalize and 
depoliticize the image of the Native American. If the Indian were 
not drunk, what then would he or she do? Even Native Ameri- 
can authors seem to have had difficulty imagining this, although 
living examples of activists, artists, teachers, writers, and busi- 
nessmen and businesswomen are all around them. Although many 
works by Native Americans have underscored the problem of 
alcoholism on the reservations, few have escaped the tendency to 
reinforce stereotypes. Novels by D’Arcy McNickle, James Welch, 
N. Scott Momaday, Leslie Silko, Louise Erdrich, and others show 
us the devastation wrought by alcoholism. Only rarely do we see 
recovery, and often it is only implicit at the end of long narratives 
about drinking. 

Beth Brant, a Bay of Quinte Mohawk, is one of the few writ- 
ers who has not only imagined the sociopolitical factors of In- 
dian alcoholism, but also has focused on Indian political agency 
and what Indians do when they do not drink. She also creates 
lesbian characters situated as Natives within white culture and 




§28 



- 197 - 



KAREN LEE OSBORNE 



as outlaws within heterosexist patriarchy. In Brant’s collection 
Mohawk Trail, “A Long Story” offers two, parallel plots. In an 
1890s narrative thread based on historical fact, Native children 
are taken and put on trains to schools in other states, where they 
are assimilated. Their hair is cut and they are given new names. 
They are not allowed to retain their former language or their 
former identities. Brant links the parents’ powerlessness to pre- 
vent the theft of their children to alcoholic despair. “I see this. 
My husband picks up the braids, wraps them in cloth; he takes 
the pieces of our son away. He walks outside, the eyes of the 
people on him. I see this. He will find a bottle and drink with the 
men. Some of the women will join him” (“A Long Story” 78). 
But one of the women “tried to board the train and search for 
my babies. The white men tell my husband to watch me. I am 
dangerous. I laugh and laugh. My husband is good only for tip- 
ping bottles and swallowing anger” (83). This woman is called 
crazy because she does not allow her children to be taken away 
without a fight. Rather than “swallowing anger,” she expresses 
her outrage and is therefore considered both “crazy” and “dan- 
gerous.” The character is dangerous because she resists the patri- 
archal control of the white government that has engineered the 
kidnapping of Native children. Throughout this and other pieces 
in Mohawk Trail, Brant explores the tensions between the mas- 
ter narrative of patriarchy and the feminine. By the “feminine” I 
refer to the determination to go beyond the norms of the legal 
system, defined in the patriarchal language of the oppressor, to 
create a new language, a subversive action necessary to healing 
and survival. The character’s defiance and outrage are actually 
signs of finding her speaking voice, and through that, finding 
political agency, an alternative to alcoholic self-destruction in the 
face of oppression. Alcohol abuse is self-destructive, and like other 
self-destructive actions (such as violence against the self or against 
the fellow oppressed), prevents effective resistance. 

The other plot of “A Long Story” takes place in the 1970s, 
when a father uses the patriarchal legal system to take a daugh- 
ter from her mother and the mother’s lesbian lover. This story 
also interrogates the dialectics of oppression and explores the 
development of voice and political agency as an alternative to 
self-destruction. This emphasis on voice against silence and re- 





- 198 - 



''Swimming Upstream:** Recovering the Lesbian in Native American Literature 

jection of the language and structure of patriarchy informs most 
of Brant’s narratives. Marilyn Farwell has argued that “the les- 
bian body is the ultimate transgressor of narrative limits because 
even when absent it is the silent threat behind the excess attrib- 
uted to the female body not under male control. . . . [T]he lesbian 
body terrifyingly ruptures the distinction on which male, hetero- 
sexual power depends” (Farwell 163). The legal system seeks to 
silence lesbians, to keep them out of the story. Alcoholism is an- 
other great silencer, creating passivity instead of active resistance. 

In a story from the collection Food and Spirits^ “Swimming 
Upstream,” set along the shore of Lake Huron, Brant reconstructs 
both alcoholism and lesbianism while disrupting stereotypical 
expectations of narrative. This is a story about a lesbian recover- 
ing alcoholic in which the recovery, rather than the intoxication, 
is the central focus. 

In “Swimming Upstream,” Anna May’s father was an alco- 
holic known as “Injun Charley” and “Good-time Charley.” Her 
mother was a white orphan. She and her siblings were targets of 
ridicule as mixed bloods and the children of a “drunken Indian.” 
Anna May felt abandoned by both her parents. She grew up an- 
gry with her father for “going away” into his intoxication and 
angry with her mother for never complaining. This frustration 
echoes that of the woman in “A Long Story” who in 1891 criti- 
cized her husband for drinking instead of trying, as she did, to 
keep the white people from taking her children. 

Like her father, Anna May became an alcoholic herself, but 
she stopped drinking when she became pregnant with her son, 
Simon. By the time the action in the story begins, she has stayed 
sober for more than six years. Her sobriety does not stop the 
white judge from awarding custody to Simon’s father. The judge, 
representative of white patriarchy, punishes her for her past his- 
tory with alcohol and for her present lesbian relationship, a pain- 
fully ironic condemnation, because the Mohawk traditionally 
were a matriarchal and matrilineal tribe. The mother was the 
center of power; the lineage and identity of the mother often 
determined the child’s future. The judge’s actions in the story 
show how much the white legal system has infringed upon tradi- 
tional tribal values. This forced removal of the child from the 
mother echoes “A Long Story,” which juxtaposes the historical 





- 199- 



KAREN LEE OSBORNE 



practice of kidnapping Native American children during the nine- 
teenth century with the action of a 1970s father who takes his 
daughter away from her lesbian mother. In “A Long Story,” Brant 
suggests that those who use the power of the white legal system, 
then and now, to remove children from their mothers are blind 
to the destruction they cause. 

In “Swimming Upstream,” the same intractable blindness and 
heterosexism directly or indirectly causes harm to both mother 
and child. By the time the narrative begins, Anna May’s self-es- 
teem has already been damaged. She has felt the sting of racism 
for being an Indian and further disapprobation as a result of 
being a mixed breed, a recovering alcoholic, and a lesbian, not 
necessarily in that order. To be a mixed-blood lesbian recovering 
alcoholic is to be excluded from the dominant, privileged group 
and also to be perceived with some suspicion in the Native Ameri- 
can community. (Interestingly enough, Beth Brant’s Mohawk 
name, Degonwadonti, translates as “several against one.”) In 
“Swimming Upstream,” these contradictory subject positions 
create dual sites of narrative tension. It is a measure of Anna 
May’s determination that she has managed to stay sober and to 
resist a victim identity. Yet the reader senses the fragility of her 
self-esteem and her sobriety. 

Anna May associates her sobriety with her son, Simon. Even 
though she only sees him on weekends, she still believes that 
Simon’s existence is what keeps her from drinking. “She had no 
need for alcohol. There was Simon” (“Swimming Upstream” 118). 
She lives for Simon more than for her lover Catherine, more than 
for herself. After Simon dies in a boating accident while out with 
his father, Anna May struggles against an overwhelming grief. 

“Swimming Upstream” goes a bit further than “A Long 
Story” and much further than most lesbian fiction in portraying 
lesbians neither strictly as victims of an unjust legal system nor 
as romanticized saints. Anna May and Catherine are not perfect, 
and they are not — per the lesbian romance — “all” to each other 
either. Anna May does not live for Catherine, although theirs is a 
strong, loving relationship. Her lesbianism is part, but not all, of 
Anna May’s identity; she is also the mother of a son. She has to 
experience her grief alone, and Catherine respects Anna May’s 
need to go away. This respect for the partner’s needs is evident in 





'Swimming Upstream:” Recovering the Lesbian in Native American Literature 



“A Long Story” also, when Ellen offers to leave Mary “if it will 
make it better” (82). In “Swimming Upstream,” Catherine makes 
no effort to stop Anna May from going away, even though she 
may have guessed (as the reader has) that Anna May is planning 
to drink. 

Catherine has, however, suggested that Anna May needs to 
forgive Tony, her ex-husband. The reader senses that Anna May 
cannot forgive Tony for the accident because she has not for- 
given herself. Anna May tells herself at one point that she “should 
have placated” Tony, that “she should have lived alone; she should 
have pretended to be straight; she should have never become an 
alcoholic; she should have never loved; she should have never 
been born” (“Swimming Upstream” 122). These are the mes- 
sages she has received from the world, and in her grief they begin 
to insinuate themselves into her psyche. She cannot locate herself 
as a speaking subject. Like Ephanie in The Woman Who Owned 
the Shadows, she has forgotten her own strength and value. 

These internalized messages amount to what Janice Gould 
calls the injunction against speaking the truth, the injunction 
against knowing oneself as a lesbian and as an American Indian. 
Disobedience for Gould means revealing the fact of one’s lesbi- 
anism and establishing what it means to be Indian (41). In “A 
Long Story,” Mary worries that her ex-husband will teach her 
daughtei; Patricia, “to hate us” (79). Brant links the racism Na- 
tive Americans face with the homophobia lesbians encounter, and 
like Gould, suggests that those oppressed by racism and homopho- 
bia must fight to preserve their identities. Just as the kidnapped 
children of 1890 assumed new identities and became strangers to 
their parents, so Mary nearly a century later fears that Patricia 
will forget her life with her mother. Mary finally recognizes, as 
did her ancestor, the “crazy woman” who fought unsuccessfully 
in 1890 to save her children, that “they want our power. They 
take our children to remove the inside of them. Our power. They 
steal our food, our sacred rattle, the stories, our names. What is 
left?” (“A Long Story” 84). At the end of the story, Mary is de- 
termined not to give in, despite the pressure to destroy herself: 
“The word lesbian. Lesbian. The word that makes them panic, 
makes them afraid, makes them destroy children. The word that 
dares them. Lesbian. 1 am one. Even for Patricia, even for her, I 




232 



- 201 - 



KAREN LEE OSBORNE 



will not ceasB to be!” (85). By disobeying the dangerous injunc- 
tion, Mary challenges the misconception that one can be a good 
mother only by sacrificing herself for her children. She continues 
the tradition of defiance she has inherited from her “crazy” an- 
cestor and sounds a clarion call of sanity for all lesbian mothers. 
Her disobedience allows her to transform the external hatred 
into a stronger self-acceptance. Resisting silence and claiming her 
position as a speaking subject empowers her. As Giroux reminds 
us, “To be able to name one’s experience is part of what is meant 
to ‘read’ the world and to begin to understand the political na- 
ture of the limits and possibilities that make up the larger soci- 
ety” (7). By repeating the word lesbian Mary is naming her 
experience and interrupting the narrative of the homophobic 
world that would prefer to write her out of existence. 

Mary is not a recovering alcoholic, however, and her daugh- 
ter, while absent, is still very much alive. In “Swimming Up- 
stream,” the injunction against lesbianism is further complicated 
by alcoholism and the death of the son. Anna May has suffered a 
far more profound loss in the death of her son. It is as though 
Brant raised the stakes in the more recent story. The reader won- 
ders whether the injunction can be disobeyed in such a context, 
under such pressure. Anna May’s name evokes the name of a 
historical person who questioned unjust authority and who is 
believed to have been murdered by white authority in the form 
of the FBI.^ Through complicating the character’s identity as not 
only Native American, not only mother, but also alcoholic, Brant 
explores lesbian identity as one of several intersecting 
subjectivities. 

In “Swimming Upstream,” Anna May drives north along the 
shore of Lake Huron with her bottle of wine, planning yet post- 
poning her plan to destroy her sobriety. In this tension lies much 
of the story’s power. She has viewed her son Simon as the coun- 
terweight to all the forces, including her father’s genetic legacy, 
that threaten her own recovery. Now that Simon is gone, she 
feels there is nothing to stop her from fulfilling this doomed legacy. 
Although she pauses to attend an AA meeting, she does not speak 
up and say what’s on her mind. For a moment, the narrative 
offers a slight tease of hope, when a woman comes up to Anna 
May and tells her she knows what she is planning. “Don’t do it,” 




'Swimming Upstream:'' Recovering the Lesbian in Native American Literature 



the woman says, and offers to help (120). But Anna May refuses 
to let herself be helped. Thus the reader expects the character to 
drink, to act true to the stereotype. After all, who could possibly 
blame her, given the tragedy of losing a son? Brant critiques the 
stereotype of the tragic Indian both here and in her poem “Her 
Name Is Helen” in Mohawk Trail-. “She’s had lots of girlfriends./ 
White women who wanted to take care of her,/who liked Indi- 
ans,/ who think she’s a tragedy” (62). As Anna May nears the 
Bruce peninsula, she stops again at Sauble Falls. This is to be her 
last stop before going on to drink. 

At Sauble Falls, Anna May sees a small crowd of people 
watching the salmon make their way to their spawning grounds. 
She notices one fish in particular and names him “Torn Fin” be- 
cause of his wounds. This scarred salmon becomes the symbolic 
equivalent of her dead son, and his journey becomes her own 
symbolic journey of death and renewal. The title “Swimming 
Upstream” announces the symbolic connection of the journey of 
the salmon with that of the alcoholic, the lesbian, the Native 
American, and the mixed blood. To carry all of these labels is to 
be scarred many times by forces that impede a life’s journey. It is 
not surprising that a character who is a lesbian. Native American 
recovering alcoholic would identify with such a struggle. To ac- 
knowledge only this aspect of the symbolism, however, is to miss 
perhaps the most important thread of the story, that of death and 
rebirth. 

In several Native American tribal stories, salmon figure promi- 
nently, and in many stories it is also common for humans and 
animals to exchange shapes. Transformation is frequently key. In 
one story, a young man ponders the ancient mystery of the salmon. 
Why did the salmon return so joyously to the river when there 
was only death waiting? Surely they must know. By becoming a 
salmon and traveling with other fish, the young man learns about 
the gift that salmon make of themselves for the renewal of life 
(Harris 44). In another salmon story. Swimmer the Salmon says 
that he is “covered by scars.” He is followed by nets, traps, and 
hooks “wherever I go as I look for my home” (Hausman). He is 
looking for home — that is, looking for his own death — knowing 
he will die as he spawns, but also knowing that he will give life 
and will live again in the salmon he spawns. The stories in Brant’s 



O A 



o 



- 203 - 



KAREN LEE OSBORNE 



collections Mohawk Trail and Food and Spirits reprise this theme 
of return, rebirth, coming home. In “This Place,” a mother tells 
her gay son who has just called to tell her he has AIDS, “Come 
home to us” (49). Salmon are the perfect example of the instinc- 
tive drive to find home. Swimmer the Salmon doesn’t think of 
stopping until he reaches the spawning grounds. “Now I am 
swimmer who dies, with the water reborn.” He announces that 
he always returns (Bruchac). 

Anna May’s son has literally drowned in Lake Huron, dying 
in the water, as the salmon die. She sees the bleeding bodies of 
dead fish on the rock slabs, salmon that did not make it, even as 
the other fish keep leaping, battered by the rocks. She watches 
the fish she has named Torn Fin struggle as she calls out to him to 
go on, to fight, to survive. She waits for him to make it past the 
next barrier. This salmon is both a real fish and a spirit. “By the 
Indian view, everything that exists is spiritual. Every object — 
plants, rocks, water, air, the moon, animals, humans, the earth 
itself — has a spirit. The spirit of one thing (including a human) is 
not superior to the spirit of any other” (Williams 21). After the 
other people leave, Anna May stays to watch. Torn Fin, like Swim- 
mer the Salmon, must always return to his home spawning wa- 
ters, must always go to his own death, which is the place of his 
birth. Salmon die in the process of affirming life. This tremen- 
dous push for life, this sacrifice of the torn and bleeding body of 
the fish, cannot be interpreted as an excuse for complicity in her 
own death. The mystery of her son’s death can never be explained, 
but as Anna May enters into the mystery of the salmon, the trans- 
formation of Torn Fin into her son becomes definite. She chants 
her son’s name: “Simon. Simon. Anna May rocked and put her 
hands in the water, wanting to lift the fish over the dam and to 
life” (“Swimming Upstream” 124). She does not actually touch 
the fish, just as she cannot actually touch her dead son. But when 
“the fish turned a complete circle and made it over the dam” 
(124), she calls out her son’s name again. Unable to locate herself 
as a speaking subject, she speaks somehow. Anna May watches 
as the fish “slapped his tail one last time and was gone, the dark 
body swimming home. She thought ... she saw her son’s face, 
his black hair streaming behind him, a look of joy transfixed on 
his little face before the image disappeared” (124-25). Parallel to 





- 204 - 



"Swimming Upstream:” Recovering the Lesbian in Native American Literature 

the transformation Anna May imagines of the fish into her son is 
her own transformation, a transformation that involves a rene- 
gotiation of her own identity through shifting subject positions. 

Anna May had believed that Simon was the only thing keep- 
ing her from drinking and that with his death her connection to 
him was gone. She failed to realize that her relationship with 
Simon continues even after his death and that Tony and she are 
connected through both the shared creation of life and their shared 
grief. In failing to forgive both Tony and herself, Anna May had 
failed to understand how inescapable these connections are. Ul- 
timately, “Swimming Upstream,” like many other Native Ameri- 
can texts, is about healing. Through her epiphany, her connection 
with the salmon, Anna May realizes the full meaning of her other 
connections. She recognizes that she, like Torn Fin, is wounded 
in a way that makes direction and progress difficult. Torn Fin’s 
successful motion demonstrates that the wound is part of the 
journey. In naming the fish, in saying her son’s name, Anna May 
has begun to move, to take her place in language instead of obey- 
ing the injunction not to be. Instead of her earlier silence at the 
AA meeting, Anna May has decided, like Mary in “A Long Story,” 
to reject silence, to refuse complicity in her own destruction. 

When Anna May leaves her wine bottle untouched, the ste- 
reotype of the drunken Indian is shattered. We see that grief and 
homophobia do not necessarily construct a binaristic universe 
wherein the heroine must either triumph or fall. Rather, Brant’s 
narrative suggests that the thread of transformation utilizing both/ 
and is a more effective structure. The recovering alcoholic is both 
an alcoholic and sober. Simon’s struggle, his joyful life, and the 
joy he brought Anna May help to enact her own transformation 
from death to life. This does not mean that she will be free of her 
grief. Just as Torn Fin/Simon could not give up, so Anna May 
must struggle toward recovery, toward renewed life. Like the 
salmon she has just watched turn in a complete circle in order to 
push himself over the dam, she turns the car south, turns toward 
home. The salmon’s mission, his gift to his community, was his 
death. Part of Anna May’s mission, like that of her mother and 
her grandmother before her, is to fight for survival. Her commu- 
nity includes both her lover and her ex-husband. In constructing 
the story of Torn Fin for herself, she has begun to transform her 



O 

ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 



- 205 - 



O • > 



KAREN lee OSBORNE 



world. If “the spoken word flows from our reading of the world” 
(Freire and Macedo 35), then Anna May has begun to read the 
world differently, including the meaning of death. Like Mary’s in 
A Long Story,” Anna May’s story is really the continuation of a 
very old story, repeating itself over many generations. The sto- 
ries never end, according to Native American beliefs, yet they 
constantly undergo change. These women are part of a tradition 
of women who fight oppression, who refuse to read or write 
themselves out of the larger story. As N. Scott Momaday, Leslie 
Silko, and Paula Gunn Allen have all shown in their novels, the 
healing of the individual is always already inextricably connected 
to the healing and survival of the community. These stories of 
healing, of allowing readers “to participate in the curing cer- 
emony” of the novels and stories themselves, can help to “re- 
store balance to the community-at-large” (Van Dyke 351). 

The ending gesture of “Swimming Upstream” involves the 
speaking voice, this time a voice seeking dialogue. When Anna 
May stops to make a phone call, the reader assumes she will call 
Catherine, her lesbian lover. This call further signals her disobe- 
dience of the injunction not to be, a disobedience essential to 
recovery. The final image of the story is that of the sober lesbian 
who survives by claiming her voice, her identity, and her connec- 
tion to others. She will complete the circle and return home. Now 
she has her story and her place in the world, established through 
her transgression of injunctions imposed by a world that has 
sought to exclude her. But she will remain a mother who has lost 
her only child. She will remain an alcoholic, although a recover- 
ing one. There is no absolute redemption from fallen to saved, 
only a contingent recovery, constantly negotiated through the 
shifting positions of the speaking subject. The world will remain 
complicated for Anna May; heterosexism, racism, and stereo- 
types are not likely to disappear. 

Because of the nature of the transformative process and the 
theme of community so important in Native American literature, 

I would argue that Anna May’s ex-husband, Tony, is crucial in 
the story. The process of reading the world with a lesbian/recov- 
ering alcoholic/mother in it must involve her voice(s) as part of a 
dialogue with voices such as his. Ultimately, if the limitations of 
patriarchal language and the imposed silences on lesbians are to 

ERIC 



237 



''Swimming Upstream:'* Recovering the Lesbian in Native American Literature 



be transgressed, the heterosexual male must become part of the 
collective transformation of the world. Catherine tells Anna May 
to forgive Tony because Catherine knows that the loss is their 
shared experience and not Anna May’s alone. Tony’s own expe- 
rience of loss and grief may help lead him to critical conscious- 
ness and enable him to hear Anna May’s voice as part of his 
community, his larger world. But the story refuses to lead us to 
this all by itself. Instead, it leaves us with the possibility of this 
connection. I would argue that this open-endedness enables read- 
ers themselves to address the question and empowers them to 
enter into the completion of that transformative process, both in 
the text and, ultimately, in the world. 

Inviting students to rewrite the story from Tony’s point of 
view, or to compose a letter from Tony to Anna May, can be a 
productive avenue for exploring the different worlds students 
themselves bring to the story. Students who are sexist or homopho- 
bic should not themselves feel silenced in the classroom. But their 
positions may be interrogated and thus may become part of the 
larger story of meaning the class constructs together. 

The classroom, with all its limitations, remains a location of 
possibility. In that field of possibility we have the opportunity 
to labor for freedom, to demand of ourselves and our com- 
rades, an openness of mind and heart that allows us to face 
reality even as we collectively imagine ways to move beyond 
boundaries, to transgress. This is education as the practice of 
freedom (hooks 207). 

If the purpose of multicultural pedagogy is not to reduce all 
differences toward some notion of universality or to show how 
other cultural productions are like those of the dominant cul- 
ture, then it is important for readers to consider identities as fluid, 
as multivoiced, and as constituted by difference. We must also 
critically examine how these identities operate contextually within 
larger narrative frames and the larger world. Discussion of such 
complications by students and teachers who speak in different 
voices from a wide range of experiences and positions is one start- 
ing point. While many texts emphasize only one aspect of iden- 
tity and remain crucial to our curriculum, texts such as 
“Swimming Upstream” — those that decenter subjectivity, chal- 



207 




KAREN LEE OSBORNE 



lenge overdetermined stereotypes, and radically revise the narra- 
tive expectations of the reader — are also necessary to a truly 
multicultural education. 



Notes 

1. For a more thorough discussion, see Chris LaLonde’s “New Stories 
and Broken Necks: Incorporating Native American Texts in the Ameri- 
can Literature Survey.” Much of Krupat’s work also discusses this topic. 

2. Julie La May Abner asks: “Is any document that an ‘Indian’ writes 
considered American Indian literature, or is a text that a ‘non-Indian’ 
writes using Indian themes and following certain accepted techniques 
... an Indian text?” (2). While many feminist theorists question catego- 
ries such as “male” and “female” and insist that gender is constructed, 
not biological, many Native and non-Native theorists of American In- 
dian literature and cultural studies insist that some degree of essential- 
ism is necessary when studying Native American culture and literature 
(see Williams 272-73). I tend to agree. As recently as 1998, I heard a 
white colleague defend his choice to teach such books as The Education 
of Little Tree rather than texts written and respected by Native Ameri- 
can writers and scholars. 

3. The name “Anna May” could be a coincidence. Although Brant spells 
“May” with a “y” and not an “e,” she dedicated a previous book, A 
Gathering of Spirit, to Anna Mae Aquash, a Micmac activist killed and 
mutilated in South Dakota in 1976. The story of Anna Mae Aquash is 
well known in Native American communities, where it is widely be- 
lieved the FBI was responsible for her murder. 



Works Cited 



Abbott, Lawrence. “Introduction.” Studies in American Indian Litera- 
ture (SAIL) 3:2 (1991): 1-5. 

Abner, Julie La May. “The Fusion of Identity, Literatures, and Peda- 
gogy: Teaching American Indian Literatures.” Studies in American 
Indian Literature (SAIL) 8:2 (1996): 1-6. 

Alexie, Sherman. Indian Killer. New York: Atlantic Monthly, 1996. 

Allen, Paula Gunn. The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in Ameri- 
can Indian Traditions. Boston: Beacon, 1992. 




- 208 - 



'Stvimming Upstream:” Recovering the Lesbian in Native American Literature 



. The Woman Who Owned the Shadows. San Francisco: Spin- 
sters, 1983. 

Brant, Beth. “Her Name Is Helen.” Mohawk Trail. Ithaca: Firebrand, 
1985: 61-65. 

. “A Long Story.” Mohawk Trail. Ithaca: Firebrand, 1985: 77- 

85. 

. “Swimming Upstream.” Food and Spirits. Ithaca: Firebrand, 

1991: 117-25. 

. “This Place.” Food and Spirits. Ithaca: Firebrand, 1991: 49- 

66 . 

Bruchac, Joseph. “Salmon Boy.” Keepers of the Animals: Native Ameri- 
can Animal Stories. Audiocassette. Golden, CO: Fulcrum, 1992. 

Davis, Randall C. “Fire-Water in the Frontier Romance: James Fenimore 
Cooper and ‘Indian Nature.’” Studies in American Fiction 22 (1994): 
216-31. 

Dorris, Michael, and Louise Erdrich. The Crown of Columbus. New 
York: HarperCollins, 1991. 

Fanon, Frantz. The Wretched of the Earth. New York: Grove, 1963. 

Farwell, Marilyn R. “The Lesbian Narrative: ‘The Pursuit of the Ined- 
ible by the Unspeakable.’” Professions of Desire: Lesbian and Gay 
Studies in Literature. Ed. George E. Haggerty and Bonnie 
Zimmerman. New York: MLA, 1995: 156—68. 

Freire, Paulo, and Donaldo Macedo. Literacy: Reading the Word and 
the World. Westport, CT: Bergin, 1987. 

Giroux, Henry. “Introduction.” Freire and Macedo 1-27. 

Gould, Janice. “Disobedience (in Language) in Texts by Lesbian Native 
Americans.” Ariel: A Review of International English Literature 
25:1 (1994): 32-43. 

Harris, Christie. The Prince Who Was Taken Away by the Salmon. New 
York: Atheneum, 1973. 

Hausman, Gerald. Swimmer the Salmon. Audiocassette. Santa Fe: Sun- 
set /Lotus, 1989. 

Holford, Vanessa. “Re-Membering Ephanie: A Woman’s Recreation of 
Self in Paula Gunn Allen’s The Woman Who Owned the Shadows. 
Studies in American Indian Literature (SAIL) 6:1 (1994): 99-113. 





KAREN LEE OSBORNE 



hooks, bell. Teaching to Transgress: Education as the Practice of Free- 
dom. New York: Routledge, 1994. 

Krupat, Arnold. Eth no criticism: Ethnography, History, Literature. Ber- 
keley: U of California P, 1992. 

. The Turn to the Native: Studies in Criticism and Culture. Lin- 
coln: U of Nebraska P, 1996. 

. The Voice in the Margin: Native American Literature and the 

Canon. Berkeley: U of California P, 1989. 

LaLonde, Chris. “New Stories and Broken Necks: Incorporating Na- 
tive American Texts in the American Literature Survey.” Studies in 
American Indian Literatures (SAIL) 8:2 (1996): 7-20. 

Lauter, Paul. Canons and Contexts. New York: Oxford UP, 1991. 

Martin, Biddy. “Lesbian Identity/Autobiographical Difference[s].” The 
Lesbian and Gay Studies Reader. Ed. Henry Abelove, Michele Aina 
Barale, and David M. Halperin. New York: Routledge, 1993 274- 
93. 

Moi, Toril. Sexual/Textual Politics: Feminist Literary Theory. London: 
Routledge, 1985. 

Perez, Emma. “Irigaray’s Female Symbolic in the Making of Chicana 
Lesbian Sitios y Lenguas.'' The Lesbian Postmodern. Ed. Laura 
Doan. New York: Columbia UP, 1994. 

Van Dyke, Annette. “The Journey Back to Female Roots: A Laguna 
Pueblo Model.” Lesbian Texts and Contexts: Radical Revisions. 
Ed. Karla Jay and Joanne Glasgow. New York: New York UP, 1990 
339-54. 

Williams, Walter L. The Spirit and the Flesh: Sexual Diversity in Ameri- 
can Indian Culture. Boston: Beacon, 1986. 





- 210 - 



Ill 



The Politics of Culture 



o 

ERLC 



^42 



Chapter Twelve 






Reading Gender, Reading 
Sexualities: Children and the 
Negotiation of Meaning in 
“Alternative^^ Texts 



Debbie Epstein 

Institute of Education, University of London 



D uring the 1995-96 school year, I carried out a small-scale 
research project in a primary school in north London, which 
I shall call Edendale School.^ I spent most of my time with one 
Year 5 class (of nine- to ten-year-olds) in the classroom, in the 
playground, and at lunch. I was interested in how these children 
constituted themselves in relation to gender and sexuality both 
in class and through their play. I was already familiar with the 
school through the class teacher, Mr. Stuart,^ and prior to the 
project we had discussed what we both hoped to gain from it. 

My purposes were partly to begin the exploration of gender 
and sexuality at this age, an area which is both unresearched and 
controversial because of “common sense” (that is, what seem to 
be obvious and unquestionable) assumptions that young children 
neither know about nor are interested in sexuality. This so-called 
common sense runs alongside the notion that if children do know 
about or show any interest in sexuality, they are somehow tainted 
and perhaps even seductive — and that their very innocence is part 
of the seduction (seeKitzinger, “Defending Innocence” and “Who 
Are You Kidding?”). Indeed, the front page banner headline in 
the Daily Mail on March 6, 1996 reading “5-Year-Olds to Get 
Gay Lessons” (Halpin), which ran across three columns and oc- 
cupied four and a half inches of prime space a third of the way 
down the page, was illustrative of this discourse of childhood 



-213 - 




DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



innocence (for further discussion of this topic, see Epstein, “Too 
Small to Notice” and “Cultures of Schooling/Cultures of Sexual- 
ity”). For Mr. Stuart, an out and politically active gay teacher, 
the opportunity was to have a researcher in the classroom to 
help him understand and analyze how children in his class made 
sense of and understood issues of gender and sexuality, and how 
they performed gender (see Butler, Gender Trouble and Bodies 
That Matter), What, he wanted to know, did the texts he used in 
the classroom signify for the children with regard to the perfor- 
mance of gender? 

Throughout the research, it was clear that, while these young 
children were not sexually active or aware in the ways that sec- 
ondary school pupils often are, they nevertheless knew a great 
deal about (hetero)sexuality, which was part of the stuff of ev- 
eryday life in their playground and classroom in a number ways: 

♦ through imagined futures, particularly as heterosexual women 
in couples and families, which tend to dominate the fantasies of 
adulthood expressed by girls in their play and storytelling/writ- 
ing 

♦ through traditional games and rhymes, particularly those asso- 
ciated with skipping and newer games based particularly on 
popular television scenarios 

♦ through versions of games involving running and catching, which 
become transmuted into arenas of sexualized chasing 

♦ through the sexual/sexist harassment of girls by boys and sexu- 
ally charged, frequently homophobic, insult exchange between 
children, often of the same sex 

♦ through early assays into the world of “going out,” “dating,” 
“two-timing,” and “dumping” of some of the children 

♦ through the gossip networks of playground, staff room, and class- 
room 

Here my focus will be on the children’s cultures, including 
the formations and significance of their quasi-romantic relation- 
ships, on Mr. Stuart’s use of particular “alternative” texts about 
family and how the children read them, and on significant si- 
lences in which the children actively engaged around Mr. Stuart’s 
gayness. I argue that the children had complex and contradictory 




- 214 - 



Reading Gender, Reading Sexualities 

responses to Mr. Stuart’s attempted normalization of homosexu- 
ality, sometimes rejecting and at others working with it, in ways 
which were strongly influenced by “master narratives” of com- 
pulsory heterosexuality as the inevitable and happy outcome of 
growing up. 

Shereen Benjamin, writing about her work as a feminist 
teacher and researcher challenging hegemonic masculinities in 
her class, comments: 

Not surprisingly, one of my key challenges was in working with 
resistance. I found myself in a paradoxical situation. I was ask- 
ing the boys to identify with me, an authority figure, probably 
perceived by them as middle-class, in resistance to a constella- 
tion of hegemonic and working-class masculinities that I had 
identified as oppressive. The boys could work out and choose 
from a variety of ways of working “with me” or “against me,” 
but whichever way they decided to act they could not avoid 
being involved in resistance. (43) 

Similarly, the pupils in Mr. Stuart’s class were required either 
to resist his push toward a counterhegemonic discourse in which 
heterosexuality is not assumed and homosexuality is not con- 
demned, or to resist dominant discourses presumptive of hetero- 
sexuality and dismissive of or hostile toward lesbian, gay, or 
bisexuality. This essay traces some of the strategies that the pu- 
pils and their teacher used in negotiating this particular discur- 
sive field. In so doing, I examine the ways in which an openly gay 
teacher like Mr. Stuart may both embody possibilities, especially 
for the boys in his class, of different ways of being a man (or 
performing masculinity) even before he makes any conscious in- 
tervention (see and cf. Redman and Mac an Ghaill) and, at the 
same time, be constrained by dominant discourses of compul- 
sory and assumed heterosexuality, whose myths pervade the spaces 
of both classroom and playground. 



A Teacher and His Class: A Thumbnail Sketch 



Mr. Stuart was in his early thirties. Over six feet tall, he appeared 
at first sight to exemplify the male teacher who can exert power 
in class through his size and his voice. His body language and 




9 ^ r 



- 215 - 



DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



soft-spoken manner, however, gave this the lie. Rather than stand- 
ing over the children, he tended to crouch, to get down to their 
level. His voice was seldom raised in class,^ and he was more 
likely to display disappointment than anger in dealing with mis- 
behavior or poor work. He was well organized and prepared in 
detail for each day’s work, with immaculate record keeping, his 
pedagogic style mixing the formal and informal. For some les- 
sons, he taught from the front of the classroom, with the chil- 
dren sitting quietly in neat rows in desks which had been assigned 
to them. At other times, they worked in small groups, chatting 
quietly as they did so. Barrie Thorne shows how: 

[i]n managing almost thirty lively children within relatively small 
spaces, Mrs. Smith, like other teachers and aides, drew on the 
general power of being an adult, as well as on the more institu- 
tionalized authority of her official position. She claimed the 
right to regulate the students’ activities, movement, posture, 
talking, possessions, access to water, and time and manner of 
eating. ( 31 ) 

Similarly, Mr. Stuart claimed the rights of the adult-as-teacher 
to control, regulate, and survey his class and the children’s indi- 
vidual behaviors. Foucault’s description of the panopticon as a 
prison, in which the prisoner can always be seen by the warder 
but cannot be sure when he [sic] is under observation and there- 
fore modify his own behavior, could equally be a description of 
any classroom, and Mr. Stuart’s was no exception. From his po- 
sition at the desk or walking round the classroom, he could at a 
glance see any child, and there were certain children, typically 
boys rather than girls, who drew his attention (often through 
disruptive behavior) more frequently than others. He was pro- 
foundly aware of gender relations in his class and worked hard 
to encourage the girls to speak out, especially in “circle time” 
when every child had an opportunity to contribute to the discus- 
sion as a selected small object (often a shell) was passed from 
hand to hand. Mr. Stuart took his turn in the circle along with 
the children and, on the rare occasions when he interrupted (for 
example, to reprimand someone), he apologized to the class. Circle 
time was when class members could talk about a range of events 
and, in particular, when feelings could be expressed. Mr. Stuart 





- 216 - 



Reading Gender, Reading Sexualities 



modeled this by speaking about his own feelings whenever he 
felt it was appropriate. The children loved him and loved being 
in his class. When, in July 1997, he gave up teaching,'^ the par- 
ents in this working-class, ethnically mixed, inner-city school set 
about raising enough money to pay for him to work part-time at 
the school teaching music and working with children who have 
special educational needs. They raised over £300 within the first 
few days, and Mr. Stuart returned to teach one day a week at the 
school, a year after he had left. 

Edendale School had a large ethnic minority pupil intake. 
The area it served had large, settled Cypriot populations, both 
Greek and Turkish, although many Greek Cypriots seemed to be 
moving further north into more suburban neighborhoods. More 
recently there had been an influx of Kurdish and Somali refu- 
gees. There were also children whose families originated in the 
Indian subcontinent, Africa, and the Caribbean, and children of 
Travellers. For the last dozen years at least, more people have 
emigrated from the UK than have come to live in the country 
from elsewhere. There is almost no primary immigration (that is, 
immigration by people who are the first members of their nuclear 
families to become residents in the country, as opposed to spouses 
and children joining those who had previously migrated and 
settled or had been born in the UK). This means that very few 
young children have migrated themselves, or have parents who 
have done so. Unusually, then, Edendale’s roll included many 
children who were themselves fairly recent immigrants (refugees), 
often with horrendous experiences of persecution and war. There 
were over twenty different mother tongues spoken at the school 
and at least fourteen in Mr. Stuart’s class. The largest single eth- 
nic/language group was Turkish. Classes were kept quite small, 
usually between twenty and twenty-five pupils in each class, and 
many of the pupils were transient, spending a few weeks or months 
in the school before moving on to a more permanent setting, and 
their places taken by others. The London Borough, where the 
school was situated, was one of the poorer boroughs/Local Edu- 
cation Authorities in London and there was high unemployment 
within it. There was also a growing professional middle class 
and mainly white population buying up houses (which are sig- 
nificantly cheaper than in some other areas of London). Conse- 




O , 

I 



- 217 - 



DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



quently, there were a few middle-class children in the school, but 
only one in Mr. Stuart’s class when I was doing my research. 

The class was roughly evenly divided between girls and boys, 
and I use the term “divided” advisedly. When left to their own 
devices, the boys and the girls hardly ever mixed in the class- 
room (even though there was some mixing in the playground, 
which I will discuss in more detail below). Mr. Stuart therefore 
made it a rule that, for circle time at least, boys must sit next to 
girls and vice versa. A small group of girls and boys seemed to be 
positioned by the other children (and to position themselves) as 
the class leaders. These children were not necessarily the most 
successful academically, though they were all fluent in English. It 
seemed that, for the most part, the “leading boys” were lively, 
noisy, and often quite troublesome, even rough, in their behav- 
ior. They were also the boys most likely to be at the center of the 
daily football games (U.S. soccer) during lunch recess and most 
likely to become involved in physical fights to prove their tough- 
ness. Indeed, it could be said that these boys occupied subject 
positions of hegemonic masculinity within a school context in 
which it was definitely not common (or even acceptable by the 
peer group) for boys to be seen to exert themselves over their 
schoolwork. They were much more likely to be working extremely 
hard at being boys, or performing “boyness.” 

In contrast, the girls in leadership positions in the class tended 
to be hard working and eschewed the kinds of horseplay the boys 
enjoyed. They were neither timid nor submissive, however, being 
strongly opinionated and ready to express themselves freely in 
front of the whole class. They were quite confident about school- 
work and, during play time, either chatted to each other in small 
groups or played in a mixed group with the boys in particular 
heterosexualized games, which I will discuss shortly. Indeed, one 
of the most striking aspects of the gendered dynamics of the class 
was that the children who seemed to be most attractive to the 
others and who, therefore, occupied the more dominant posi- 
tions, were those who engaged in considerable talk about boy- 
friends/girlfriends, dating, dumping, “two-timing,” and so on. 

There are two particular children, one boy and one girl, who 
exemplify this group of leading children and were, indeed, at its 
center. 




-218 - 



Reading Gender, Reading Sexualities 



Elias was an outgoing boy of Greek Cypriot working-class 
origin. He had significant problems with his schoolwork, par- 
ticularly reading, and Mr. Stuart paid him a great deal of atten- 
tion. He was often charming but was also often in trouble for 
fighting or otherwise misbehaving. He was frequently the first to 
voice an opinion which seemed to be prejudiced (for example, 
“They’re taking over London, the Turkish people are”), but was 
equally quick to withdraw such statements in favor of liberal 
sentiments (for example, “They’re just people. Like Greeks, some 
people think that’s not nice. Turkish, some people think that’s 
not nice. We’re all the same people.”). He could be sensitive, 
even touchy, quick to take offense and quick to lash out when he 
did, but he was also eager to please and could be careful about 
other people’s feelings. 

Louise was the only child in the class whose background could 
be said to be middle class in terms of her parents’ educational 
and professional qualifications. She was a tall girl of mixed Turk- 
ish/English origin and was easily the most articulate child in the 
class, able to present an opinion with great fluency, a confident 
reader, and generally academically able. She would frequently 
help other children with their work, particularly her girlfriends, 
but also Elias, with whom she had an ambivalent relationship. 
On the one hand, she found him irritating, particularly when he 
became involved in episodes of sexual harassment, invading the 
girls’ changing-rooms during swimming sessions when Mr. Stuart 
was away from school on jury service and the class was being 
taught by a substitute teacher. On the other hand, she found him 
attractive, and the two of them declared themselves to be “boy- 
friend” and “girlfriend,” although she had mixed feelings about 
this. She was an extremely perceptive child, both about other 
children and about the adult world. 



Normalizing Heterosexuality: The Playground Context 

Barrie Thorne uses the term “gender play” to describe the ways 
in which elementary school children in the United States insert 
themselves into gendered (and heterosexist) discourses. The play- 
ground was a major arena for this kind of play at Edendale. Girls 



ERIC 




A. ‘id 



- 219 - 



DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



particularly were often enthusiastic in performing gendered, het- 
erosexual parts through skipping and other rhymes (for a collec- 
tion of children’s playground rhymes, see Opie and Opie). 
Whereas boys’ playground games often involved running and ball 
games (usually football), the girls were much more frequently to 
be seen chatting or skipping to particular rhymes or playing clap- 
ping games which, more often than not, were about boyfriends, 
marriage, and children. Of course, girls can and do indulge in 
verses of this kind without thinking of their meaning, enjoying 
the rhythm and the skipping. Nevertheless, it is an activity through 
which heterosexuality is normalized/naturalized (even if not 
thought about reflectively). The fantasies developed through such 
rhymes, while not necessarily about sex as such, are certainly 
reproducing part of a culture of heterosexuality in which girls 
grow up to be women who marry men, go on a honeymoon, 
have babies, and otherwise perform their gendered, heterosexual 
feminine roles. 

Other skipping and clapping rhymes performed by the girls 
gave particular pleasure to the players because they were sexu- 
ally suggestive and somewhat risque, and they were normally 
performed to gales of laughter. While skipping and clapping were 
almost exclusively girls’ games, other games were played by both 
girls and boys. These were variants of chasing and catching games, 
in which gender was strongly marked and sexual connotations 
were introduced. One such game was based on the popular UK 
television show Blind Date, In this game, three girls stood be- 
hind a wall and numbered themselves from one to three. The boy 
then chose a number (the question-and-answer session of the 
original show having been dispensed with). The game finished 
with the chosen girl coming out from behind the wall, the boy 
running away, and all three girls chasing after him. When they 
caught him, as they invariably did, the “chosen” girl would kiss 
him on the cheek. This game, like “kiss, cuddle, torture,” de- 
scribed and discussed below, could be seen as a reversal of the 
usual gendered power relations of the school playground. The 
fact that the boy was always younger and smaller placed him in 
a less powerful position than the girls he was playing with (and it 
is perhaps significant that no boy in their own year group would 




-220 - 



Reading Gender, Reading Sexualities 



play this game with them). The chasing and catching of the boy 
by three girls provided the girls with an opportunity to display 
their own power, including the power to humiliate a boy. The 
fact that this took place literally on the margins of a playground 
dominated by bigger boys playing football is a paradox. So too is 
the fact that the power developed through playing this game could 
simultaneously be seen as helping to embed girls within the power 
relations of heterosexuality. 

Blind Date as played here was a version of the ever popular 
“kiss-chase,” usually seen in infant playgrounds (that is, amongst 
children aged four to seven). At Edendale School, the children 
had evolved another version of “kiss-chase” which they called 
“kiss, cuddle, torture.” This was the subject not only of play- 
ground activity but also of much discussion in the classroom. 
When I interviewed the children, this was one of the key subjects 
of discussion. Samantha and Louise’s account of the game was 
that the boys would nearly always choose “torture” rather than 
“kiss” or “cuddle” when the girls caught them. The girls, on the 
other hand, were most likely to choose “cuddle,” since being 
kissed was embarrassing and being “tortured” unpleasant. As in 
Blind Date, gender difference was strongly marked, indeed exag- 
gerated, as a binary and heterosexual opposition. Boys and girls, 
at least according to the girls, chose differently and, indeed, from 
my discussions with both boys and girls and from my playground 
observation, it seems that the girls literally never chose “torture,” 
whereas the boys frequently did. 

It is interesting to reflect on the signification of these gendered 
choices by the girls and boys involved in the game. The choice of 
“torture” by the boys seemed to signify that they were “real men” 
who could put up with being kicked (which, the girls explained, 
was what torture entailed) rather than being soft enough to be 
kissed by a girl. Connell suggests that masculinities are, at least 
in part, achieved through a circuit of production of cultural mean- 
ing related to bodily experiences. He argues that bodily experi- 
ences (in his particular example, of men enjoying sex with each 
other) are understood through the lens of what they signify in 
the culture, and then similar bodily experiences are entered into 
again with these culturally rich expectations (62). For both boys 







.A 

1 



- 221 - 



DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



and girls, “kiss, cuddle, torture” involved developing a reper- 
toire of culturally interpreted bodily experiences. Rather than 
just being painful (which it is), the experience of “torture” (being 
kicked, as Elias explained to me, “in some place that’s not nice”) 
is inscribed into the boys’ “boyness.” What is more, being tor- 
tured seemed to be more a marker of “proper” (i.e., macho) male 
heterosexuality than being kissed. Indeed, kissing (of girls by 
boys), because it was seen as feminized, also became an indica- 
tion of being a sissy, which was immediately conflated with be- 
ing gay (or, in the children’s most common nomenclature, a 
“poofter”). In fact, Elias appeared to be the only boy involved in 
the game who could get away with choosing “kiss,” possibly 
because he was well established as a “real boy” and one who 
was heterosexually attractive. Indeed, within classroom and play- 
ground gossip, his heterosexual attractiveness was legendary — 
“everyone wants to go out with Elias,” as one girl told me. 

Girls too entered into a circuit of “bodily reflexive” experi- 
ence. In the context of the game, they empowered themselves/ 
were empowered through their ability to “torture” and to choose 
not to be “tortured.” Of course, the terms of their power were 
constrained by the more general relations of gendered power 
within the school. As pointed out earlier, the playground, espe- 
cially during lunchtime play, was completely dominated by boys 
playing football, and this was frequently a subject of complaint 
from the girls. Moreover, the choice of “cuddle” rather than “kiss” 
was definitely related to the potential for a kiss given in the play- 
ground to be mythologized in classroom gossip, to the point that 
it came to stand for excessive sexuality: the whore side of the 
Madonna/whore binary. Engaging in the game but choosing 
“cuddle” for the girls did establish their feminine/feminized het- 
erosexual credentials, but without the danger of being identified 
as, in some sense, “loose.” Another constraint on the girls’ abil- 
ity to develop power in the gender dynamic of the playground 
was that the hetero/sexist harassment^ of girls by boys was a 
constant presence, either in the girls’ constantly retold narratives 
of what it meant to be a girl or because it was actively taking 



place. 



- 222 - 



ERIC 




Reading Genden Reading Sexualities 



Signifying Mothers/Signifying Heterosexuality 

This was the context for the year-group topic adopted by Mr. 
Stuart and the other Year Five teacher, Ms. Allen (who, as it hap- 
pened, was a lesbian), on “Me, My Family, and My History.” 
This topic was intended to be an opportunity for antiracist, anti- 
sexist, and antiheterosexist work as the children explored differ- 
ent aspects of the topic, including their connections with other 
parts of the world, their own family histories and differing fam- 
ily formations, biology, and sex education. It was Mr. Stuart’s 
intention that, should the opportunity arise within the topic, he 
would come out to his class (and, indeed, he hoped and intended 
that the topic would give rise to just such an opportunity). This 
was not a sudden decision; he had been out among the staff for a 
long time and had met with the school’s governing body during 
the previous year and obtained their support for the idea that; 
should it be appropriate, he would come out to the children in 
the school. I discuss what happened when he did come out in the 
next section of the essay. In this section, I focus on the way chil- 
dren used and made sense of two particular texts introduced for 
their potential to show alternative family formations to the 
nuclear, heterosexual family, which, in popular culture if not in 
the children’s lives, is usually represented as white and middle 
class. These texts were a Canadian children’s picture book titled 
A$ha*$ Mums (Elwin and Paulse) and a photopack titled What Is 
a Family? (Development Education Centre). 

Bronwyn Davies shows how many children read feminist fairy 
tales in ways that recuperate the patriarchal gender order. The 
children’s readings of Asha's Mums and of the photographs from 
What Is a Family? were somewhat more contingent on the par- 
ticular context than those of Davies’ subjects. Asha's Mums tells 
the story of a little girl who is required to get the permission of 
her parents to go on a class outing to the Science Museum. When 
she brings the permission note back to school signed by two 
women, the teacher says that no one can have two mothers and 
that permission must be given in a note signed by Asha’s mother 
and father. The next day, both her mothers visit the teacher to 



O 



- 223 - 



253 



DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



explain their familial situation, and Asha is allowed to visit the 
Science Museum. Along the way, there is a discussion amongst 
the children in Asha’s class about whether or not it is possible to 
have two mothers. The book is attractively illustrated and, though 
it is a little obvious in its righteous intentions, it did hold the 
children’s interest. 

Asha's Mums was one of several books available for small 
groups of children to do an activity in which they mapped the 
central characters’ relationships to others in the story. Mr. Stuart 
had given each group a sheet of paper on which he had already 
drawn a set of concentric circles. The task was to read their cho- 
sen story together and to write the main character’s name in the 
central circle and the names of the other characters elsewhere on 
the sheet within circles closer or nearer to the center, depending 
on the closeness of that character to the story’s protagonist. Mr. 
Stuart suggested that they start by writing the characters’ names 
on small pieces of paper, which they could move around on the 
larger sheet until the group agreed about the relative positioning 
of each, at which time they could transfer the names to the big 
sheet. Mr. Stuart moved around the classroom talking to the small 
groups as they worked. The group using Asha's Mums consisted 
of three girls (Christina, Aysegul, and Nadia). Much of their 
conversation about the book revolved around the question of 
how Asha came to have two mums, and the girls decided to place 
the names of both mums equally near to Asha. These names were 
followed by the names of Asha’s baby brother and her best friend, 
then her teacher and the other children in the class. In this con- 
text, and in discussion with Mr. Stuart, they decided that Asha’s 
two mums loved each other, and Nadia supplied the word les- 
bian when Mr. Stuart asked if they knew a word to describe 
women who loved other women. At the end of the session, how- 
ever, when each group of children was asked to explain to the 
rest of the class what they had done, this explanation of Asha’s 
parents vanished from use, and any number of other explana- 
tions, no matter how unlikely, was offered in preference: 

Mr. Stuart: So why d’you think that Asha has two mums? 

Levi: [to laughter] They might have had, one of them 

might have had a sex change. 




- 224 - 



Reading Gender, Reading Sexualities 



EliaS: Might have a stepmum. 

Louise: Maybe the kids are orphans and came to live with 

these two ladies. 

Christina: I think they adopted the children. 

[General puzzlement in the class] 

Mr. Stuart: Do you think they might be two women who 

loved each other? 

Edward: [gasping, in a very shocked voice] Lesbians! 

Levi: How d’you know which one’s pregnant? 

Christina: No. Maybe they’re sisters. 

(Conversation as noted in research diary, 29 September. 1995) 



It is worth noting that neither Nadia nor Aysegul contrib- 
uted to the discussion despite the fact that Nadia had supplied 
the word lesbian when talking in the small group with Mr. Stuart. 
Moreover, Christina, who had been involved in the previous dis- 
cussion, offered a new explanation of Asha’s relationship with 
her two mums, which had been explicitly rejected by her small 
group earlier. 

This raises two important questions. First, why were the girls 
either silent or unable to present the suggestion that Asha’s mums 
might have been lesbian when they moved from their small group 
to the whole class situation? It seems that the presumption of 
heterosexuality within the class as a whole was overwhelming 
and that the explanation that there were lesbian mothers felt risky 
to the girls. Since the very term “mother” signifies heterosexual- 
ity in commonsense terms (Kaplan; VanEvery), the girls seemed 
to feel that using the term “lesbian mother” was in itself an ad- 
mission of illegitimate knowledge. Effectively defying the nor- 
mative definition of mothers as heterosexual by offering the 
explanation of lesbian motherhood identified the girls as them- 
selves possible “lezzies,” a term sometimes used within the play- 
ground as a form of abuse. Edward’s shocked gasp of “Lesbians! ” 
when Mr. Stuart suggested the possibility of two women loving 
each other was an indication of the reception the girls might have 
experienced if they had used the word themselves or implied its 
concept. As Sue Lees has shown in relation to older girls in sec- 
ondary schools, the use of the epithet “lesbian” as a term of abuse 



DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



is commonplace and applied to girls who do not conform to the 
status quo, socially or intellectually. Acceptance of lesbians (or 
lesbian mothers) as “normal” would, potentially, associate the 
girl using it with the (stigmatized) status of the lesbian. 

Second, what was the difference for the girls between the 
small group and the whole class. ^ I would suggest that for the 
three girls, all of them friends, working together in a small group 
constituted a kind of private space. In this context, transgression 
(or knowledge of transgression) of the myth that all mothers are 
inevitably heterosexual could be allowed without the danger of 
appearing to have been contaminated. But the whole class was a 
public space, no longer consisting of girls only or of chosen friends 
with whom one could risk, as Nadia did, using the word and 
concept lesbian in a noncondemnatory way. Edward, within the 
whole class context, knew the word but distanced himself from 
it by demonstrating his shock through the exaggerated expres- 
sion in his voice. 

When the children worked with the pictures in the What Is a 
Family? photopack, they also resisted reading a particular pic- 
ture as depicting one of lesbian mothers. 






- 226 - 



Reading Gender, Reading Sexualities 



The photograph shows two women, both smiling, one of them 
holding a baby on her lap as a cat climbs out of her hands, and 
the other sitting very close and stroking the cat. Both women are, 
to my (adult, lesbian) eye at least, coded as lesbian in their dress 
and self-presentation. Given the context of all these pictures be- 
ing about “families,” the preferred reading of the picture would 
seem to be that it is of a lesbian couple with their baby (and their 
cat). The children had been given several questions to address as 
they discussed their chosen photographs in pairs. One of these 
questions was, “How are the people in the picture connected to 
each other?” Elias and Brendan, who had chosen this photograph, 
were steadfast in refusing to admit the possibility of lesbian moth- 
erhood in their discussion of it, even when Mr. Stuart suggested 
this to them. They insisted instead that the picture showed two 
mums who were friends and one had come to visit the other, 
even though there was only one baby to be seen in the photo- 
graph. So, whereas the girls were prepared to entertain the possi- 
bility that Asha’s mums might be lesbians while they were within 
the relative privacy and safety of their small group, the boys were 
not willing to do so even when working in a pair. This may be an 
illustration of boys’ greater unwillingness to take risks, particu- 
larly the risk of appearing not to be “real boys,” even (perhaps 
especially) with their closest friends and allies. 

Given the children’s abilities to read against the grain, which 
Bronwyn Davies discusses and I have traced in rather a different 
form here, it seems important that progressive teachers think 
about how they use “alternative” texts in the primary (and sec- 
ondary) classroom. This is not to suggest that such texts are use- 
less: after all, the girls did some important thinking in relation to 
Asha's Mums, and even the boys were asked to confront the pos- 
sibility of a different way of being mothers, however resolutely 
they refused it. Nevertheless, language arts teachers in particular 
may wish to give some thought to the necessity of facilitating 
small-group work and classrooms in which they are able to talk 
with children in small groups about such texts. This is almost 
certainly more effective than relying on the texts themselves to 
do the work of providing “positive images” of groups of people 
normatively seen in negative ways or in stereotyped positions. 



O 

ERIC 



0 ( 



- 227 - 



DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



"Some Grown-Ups Aren’t Very Grown Up”: 

Coming Out in Class 

In another activity for this project, Mr. Stuart asked the children 
to work in small groups to write down three “facts” about girls 
and three about boys. All the groups came to the conclusion fairly 
quickly that the only “facts” they could write down would be 
biological ones like “girls can have babies” and “girls have vagi- 
nas.” When they came back to the whole class, Mr. Stuart went 
around the circle, asking each child to offer one “fact” their group 
had written down. After a few along the lines of “boys can stand 
up to go to the toilet” and “girls can have babies,” Aysegul of- 
fered: 



Aysegul: [very embarrassed, looking down at her feet and 

whispering] Girls can marry, girls can’t get married 
to girls. 

Mr Stuart: It’s true that girls can’t get married to girls because 

of the law, but girls can fall in love and live 
together. 

Edward: Maybe they’re lesbians. 

[Lots of giggles] 

Levi: I know a man, I think it’s disgusting. 

Mr Stuart: Well, I’m gay and I’m not disgusting. 

[Lots of giggles] 

Mr Stuart: The person I happen to love is a man. 

Elias: A man is a man and a woman is a woman. 

Louise: Everyone says you’re not gay and Ms. Allen is your 

girlfriend. 

Mr Stuart: Everyone is wrong. Ms. Allen is a very good friend, 

but I don’t love her. . . . 

Samantha: But we saw you and you were in the greengrocer’s, 

laughing. 



Clearly, the gossip networks had been active and the two 
teachers had been paired off in the children’s minds. After all, 
shopping for fruit and vegetables is a domestic act, and laughing 
while doing so may well signify romantic, heterosexual involve- 




258 



- 228 - 



Reading GendeVy Reading Sexualities 



ment! What seemed to be operating here was the development of 
a narrative around these two popular teachers whereby linking 
them romantically worked as a potent enactment of the myth of 
“happy heterosexuality.” The fact that the two teachers were 
evidently happy in each other’s company (laughing while they 
shopped) was worked up into a kind of mythical, romantic, al- 
most fairy story in which the two were destined to have the in- 
evitable happy ending. 

Much to my surprise (and indeed to Mr. Stuart’s), his being 
gay did not spread around the school. Two weeks later, for ex- 
ample, a child in the other Year 5 class was in trouble for using 
homophobic insults and had no inkling that Mr. Stuart was gay. 
When I interviewed Samantha and Louise, I asked them about 
gossip and they told me that, although they did gossip about and 
at school, they did not gossip about Mr. Stuart because: 

Samantha: Yeah. Maybe, if he told us and then he might not want 

the whole school to know. 

Louise: We wouldn’t have done it. 

Throughout this conversation (and the transcript of this sec- 
tion of it is several pages long), the girls refused to say that what 
they were not gossiping about was Mr. Stuart’s coming out to 
them. Neither they nor I used the term “gay,” and the girls were 
insistent that Mr. Stuart would not want “it” spread about: 



Samantha: 


Yeah, but, he doesn’t want, really, everyone at the 
school to know. 


Louise: 


Maybe he does but, I don’t know, I wouldn’t really 
spread it because . . . 


SaMANTI-IA: 


’Cos people go a bit funny in this school about . . . 


Louise: 


Yeah and then they’d go, they’d jump around and 
tell ... 


Samantha: 


Their mum and dad . . . 


Louise: 


. . . and then they’d say “is it true?” or something. 
And maybe their mum and dad will think that he’s a 
bad teacher and then they’ll think that “oh no, my 
son is going to be, like, urn, don’t want my daugh- 
ter, he’s going to be like that, so I’m going to take 



O 

ERIC 




- 229 - 



DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



my kid away from the school” and tell Mr. Snowden 
about him and he could be sacked. 

DE: D’you think that would happen.^ 

Samantha: No. 

Louise; No, not really, ’cos, most grown-ups are, um, 

grown-up about it but some aren’t really. Some are. 

We all knew what we were talking about. It was, in Eve 
Sedgwick’s terms, the “open secret.” Furthermore, the children 
were absolutely aware of homophobia as a feature of society that 
they had to negotiate. They knew that “most grown-ups are 
grown-up about it, but some aren’t really” and seemed to have 
made a conscious (or semiconscious) decision to build a kind of 
closet around the classroom in order to protect their teacher, but 
maybe also to protect themselves from the contamination of hav- 
ing a gay teacher. If being gay seemed to them to be dangerous 
because of the reactions of adults, then maybe being taught by a 
gay man was dangerous because of the reactions both of adults, 
who might remove you from the class of a teacher you liked, and 
of other children, who might tease you and accuse you of being 
gay or lesbian yourself. 

Conclusion 



In the context of Mr. Stuart’s teaching and, in particular, of his 
coming out to the class, opportunities were opened up for some 
radical shifts in the narratives by which these children had learned 
to understand gender and sexuality. But these possibilities were 
constrained in several ways. Talk about romance, dating, dump- 
ing, and going out, in which the most popular children were keenly 
involved, was an important aspect of the way the class as a whole 
made sense of heterosexual gender relations. The involvement of 
this particular popular group of children in games, in which both 
heterosexuality and gender were heavily marked, took place in 
ways that reinforced the hegemonic gender order: macho men 
and cuddly, caring women were enacted through the conduct of 
“kiss, cuddle, torture.” The way that motherhood is made to 
signify heterosexuality was difficult to shift, especially in whole- 





- 230 - 



Reading Gender^ Reading Sexualities 



class discussions of the “alternative” texts provided by Mr. Stuart, 
although the girls (unsurprisingly) showed more signs of shifting 
the narrative than the boys. Finally, the mythology of “happy 
heterosexuality” was perpetuated in the legend of Mr. Stuart’s 
romance with Ms. Allen. 

Nevertheless, the impact of Mr. Stuart’s attempts to shift the 
master narrative and rewrite the myths of family and of happy 
heterosexuality should not be underestimated. Some of the girls 
in his class were able to articulate opinions about homophobia 
and heterosexism, even if they could not name them as such, and 
even for the boys he offered alternative ways of being masculine, 
thereby disrupting the heterosexual matrix which insists on fixed 
notions of gender. Coming out to the class, in a context in which 
the very term “family” was under consideration, constituted a 
radical challenge to these children, one which some of the boys 
initially responded to by making homophobic comments. Even 
Elias and Levi, however, were later (and, significantly, in private 
to me) moved to insist that they thought there was nothing wrong 
with being gay. In a way, it did not matter whether this was sim- 
ply a version of trying to please the teacher, for as the boys took 
up an antihomophobic stance, they momentarily inhabited this 
alternative worldview and thus created, for themselves, the pos- 
sibility of inhabiting it again in the future. 



Notes 



1. This project was a pilot for the Economic and Social Research Coun- 
cil-funded project (ROOO 23 7438) on “Children’s ‘Relationship Cul- 
tures’ in Years 5 and 6,” which began on 1 January 1998 and lasted for 
two years. 

2. All names have been altered to retain anonymity for the school. Par- 
ticipants in the study were asked to choose their own pseudonyms. In 
some cases, children chose names that do not reflect their ethnicity. 

3. This was characteristic of the school culture at Edendale. I had spent 
three full days in the school before I heard any adult (including lunch 
supervisors) raise their voice to a child. Those who are familiar with 
schools will recognize such an atmosphere as unusual. 




-231 - 



O. 



G1 



DEBBIE EPSTEIN 



4. The end of the 1996-97 school year saw an unparalleled level of 
resignations from school teaching in the United Kingdom. This appears 
to have been, in part, the culmination of years of what Jane Kenway, 
writing in an Australian context, labeled “discourses of derision” (see 
also Ball), combined with ever-increasing pseudo-accountability through 
paperwork and punitive inspection by the Office for Standards in Edu- 
. cation (OFSTED). It was also due to alterations in superannuation rules 
introduced by the previous Conservative government, which made July 
1997 the last opportunity for teachers to take early retirement with 
enhanced pensions. Edendale School was one among many that were 
hard hit by this: the head and four other teachers (including Mr. Stuart) 
left. For a small junior school (with two classes in each year group from 
Year three through Year six), this constituted almost half the staff. 

5. See my essay “Keeping Them in Their Place” for a discussion of the 
reasons for moving from use of the term “sexual harassment” to using 
the term “hetero/sexist harassment,” and see “Cultures of Schooling/ 
Cultures of Sexuality” for a discussion of harassment at Edendale School. 



Works Cited 



Ball, Stephen J. Politics and Policy Making in Education: Explorations 
in Policy Sociology. London: Routledge, 1990. 

Benjamin, Shereen. “Fantasy Football League: Boys in a Special (SEN) 
School Constructing and Re-Constructing Masculinities.” MA the- 
sis. University of London Institute of Education, 1997. 

Butler, Judith. Bodies That Matter: On the Discursive Limits of ''Sex. ” 
New York: Routledge, 1993. 

. Gender Trouble: Feminism and the Subversion of Identity. New 

York: Routledge, 1990. 

Connell, Robert W. Masculinities. Cambridge: Polity, 1995. 

Davies, Bronwyn. Frogs and Snails and Feminist Tales. St. Leonards, 
NSW: Allen, 1989. 

Development Education Centre. What Is a Family? Photographs and 
Activities. Birmingham, Eng.: Development Education Centre, 1990. 

Elwin, Rosaniund, and Michele Paulse. Asha's Mums. Ulus. Dawn Lee. 
Toronto: Women’s, 1990. 

Epstein, Debbie. “Cultures of Schooling/Cultures of Sexuality.” Inter- 
national Journal of Inclusive Education 1.1 (1997): 37-53. 




- 232 - 



Reading Gender, Reading Sexualities 



. “Keeping Them in Their Place: Hetero/Sexist Harassment, Gen- 
der and the Enforcement of Heterosexuality.” Sexualising the So- 
cial. Ed. Lisa Adkins and Janet Holland. Basingstoke, Eng.: 
Macmillan, 1996. 

. “Too Small to Notice? Constructions of Childhood and Dis- 
courses of ‘Race’ in Predominantly White Contexts.” Curriculum 
Studies 1 (1993): 317-34. 

Foucault, Michel. Discipline and Punish: The Birth of the Prison. Trans. 
Alan Sheridan. Harmondsworth, Eng.: Penguin, 1977. 

Halpin, Tony. “5-Year-Olds to Get Gay Lessons.” Daily Mail 2 Mar. 
1996: 1,4. 

Kaplan, E. Ann. Motherhood and Representation : The Mother in Popu- 
lar Culture and Melodrama. London: Routledge, 1992. 

Kenway, Jane. “Left Right Out: Australian Education and the Politics 
of Signification. of Education Policy 2.3 (1987): 189-203. 

Kitzinger, Jenny. “Defending Innocence: Ideologies of Childhood.” Fam- 
ily Secrets, Child Sexual Abuse. Spec, issue of Feminist Review 28 
(1988): 77-87. 

. ‘“Who Are You Kidding?’ Children, Power and Sexual Assault.” 

Constructing and Reconstructing Childhood. Ed. Alison James and 
Alan Prout. London: Palmer, 1990. 

Lees, Sue. Sugar and Spice: Sexuality and Adolescent Girls. London: 
Penguin, 1993. 

Opie, Iona, and Peter Opie. Childrens Games in Street and Playground: 
Chasing, Catching, Seeking, Hunting, Racing, Duelling, Exerting, 
Daring, Guessing, Acting, Pretending. Oxford: Clarendon, 1969. 

Redman, Peter, and Mairtm Mac an Ghaill. “Educating Peter: The 
Making of a History Man.” Border Patrols: Policing the Bound- 
aries of Heterosexuality. Ed. Deborah Lynn Steinberg, Debbie 
Epstein, and Richard Johnson. London: Cassell, 1997. 162-82. 

Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. Epistemology of the Closet. Berkeley: U of 
California P, 1990. 

Thorne, Barrie. Gender Play: Boys and Girls in School. Buckingham, 
Eng.: Open University P, 1993. 

VanEvery, Jo. “Heterosexuality and Domestic Life.” Theorising Het- 
erosexuality. Ed. Diane Richardson. Buckingham, Eng.: Open Uni- 
versity P, 1996. 



Chapter Thirteen 




Fault Lines in the Contact 
Zone: Assessing Homophobic 
Student Writing 



Richard E. Miller 
Rutgers University 



W hat is the place of unsolicited oppositional discourse, 
parody, resistance, critique in the imagined classroom com- 
munity?” Mary Louise Pratt asks in “Arts of the Contact Zone” 
(39), In Pratt’s essay, this question is occasioned by the fact that 
her son, Manuel, received “the usual star” from his teacher for 
writing a paragraph promoting a vaccine that would make school 
attendance unnecessary. Manuel’s teacher, ignoring the critique 
of schooling leveled in the paragraph, registered only that the 
required work of responding to the assignment’s questions about 
a helpful invention had been completed and, consequently, ap- 
pended the silent, enigmatic star. For Pratt, the teacher’s star la- 
bors to conceal a conflict in the classroom over what work is to 
be valued and why, presenting instead the image that everything 
is under control — students are writing and the teacher is evaluat- 
ing. It is this other strategy for handling difficult material— namely, 
ignoring the content and focusing only on the outward forms of 
obedient behavior — that leads Pratt to wonder about the place 



I want to thank Scott Lankford for making this student essay available for 
discussion, Jean Ferguson Carr for providing me with materials related to 
this panel, and Mariolina Salvatori for introducing me to the idea of the 
“position paper” that appears here, in modified form, in my discussion of 
my students’ responses to Gloria Anzaldua’s essay. An earlier, unabridged 
version of “Fault Lines in the Contact Zone” appeared in College English 
56 (1994): 389-408. See permissions page. 





- 234 - 



Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student 'Writing 

of unsolicited oppositional discourse in the classroom. With re- 
gard to Manuel’s real classroom community, the answer to this 
question is clear: the place of unsolicited oppositional discourse 
is no place at all. 

Given Pratt’s promising suggestion that the classroom be re- 
conceived as a “contact zone,” which she defines as a social space 
“where cultures meet, clash, and grapple with each other, often 
in contexts of highly asymmetrical relations of power” (34), this 
example of the kind of writing produced in such a contact zone 
seems oddly benign. One might expect that the writing Pratt’s 
students did in Stanford University’s Culture, Ideas, Values course, 
which she goes on to discuss, would provide ample evidence of 
more highly charged conflicts involving “unsolicited oppositional 
discourse, parody, resistance, critique.” Unfortunately, however, 
although Pratt avows that this course “put ideas and identities 
on the line” (39), she offers no example of how her students 
negotiated this struggle in their writing or of how their teachers 
participated in and responded to their struggles on and over the 
line.” Instead, Pratt leaves us with just two images of writers in 
the contact zone — her son, Manuel, and Guaman Poma, author 
of a largely unread sixteenth-century bilingual chronicle of Andean 
culture. Both, to be sure, are readily sympathetic figures, obvi- 
ously deserving better readers and more thoughtful respondents, 
but what about those who parody or critique the notion that we 
ought to value individual and cultural differences? And what 
exactly are we to say or do when the kind of racist, sexist, and 
homophobic sentiments now signified by the term “hate speech” 
surface in our classrooms? What “Arts of the Contact Zone” are 
going to help us learn how to read and respond to voices such as 
these? 

By attending to a student essay that is much less likely to 
arouse our sympathies than Manuel’s inventive critique, my con- 
cern in what follows is to examine the heuristic value of the no- 
tion of the contact zone when applied not only to student writing, 
but also to our own academic discussions of that writing. The 
student essay I begin with was so offensive that when it was first 
mentioned at an MLA workshop on “Composition, Multi- 
culturalism, and Political Correctness” in December 1991, pro- 
visions were quickly made to devote an entire panel to the essay 



O 

ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



O ( ' r* 

<-00 



- 235 - 



RICHARD E. MILLER 



at the Conference on College Composition and Communication 
(hereafter 4C’s) in 1992, and this in turn led to a follow-up work- 
shop on “The Politics of Response” at 4C’s in 1993. Thus I would 
hazard to guess that this student essay, titled “Queers, Bums, 
and Magic,” has seized the attention of more teachers, taken up 
more institutional time, and provoked more debate than any other 
single piece of unpublished undergraduate writing in recent 
memory. Before beginning my discussion of “Queers, Bums, and 
Magic,” I should note, however, that in the ensuing discussion I 
have intentionally allowed the content of the student’s essay and 
the wider sweep of its context to emerge in fragments, as they 
did in the contact zone of the national conferences, where com- 
peting modes of response served alternately to reveal and ob- 
scure both the text and information about its writer. This partial, 
hesitant, contradictory motion defines how business gets trans- 
acted in the contact zones of our classrooms and our conferences, 
where important questions often do not get heard, are ignored, 
or simply do not get posed in the heat of the moment, with the 
result that vital contextual information often is either never dis- 
closed or comes to light very late in the discussion. I believe that 
following this motion provides a stark portrait of the ways in 
which dominant assumptions about students and student writ- 
ing allow unsolicited oppositional discourse to pass through the 
classroom unread and unaffected. 

The essay I will discuss, “Queers, Bums, and Magic,” was 
written in a pre-college-level community college composition class 
taught by Scott Lankford at Foothill College in Los Altos Hills, 
California, in response to an assignment taken from The Bedford 
Guide for College Writers that asked students to write a report 
on group behavior. One of Lankford’s students responded with 
an essay detailing a drunken trip he and some friends made to 
“San Fagcisco” to study “the lowest class . . . the queers and the 
bums.” The essay recounts how the students stopped a man on 
Polk Street, informed him that they were doing a survey and 
needed to know if he was “a fag.” From here, the narrative fol- 
lows the students into a dark alleyway where they discover, as 
they relieve themselves drunkenly against the wall, that they have 
been urinating on a homeless person. In a frenzy, the students 
begin to kick the homeless person, stopping after “30 seconds of 



ERIC 




Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student Writing 



non-stop blows to the body,” at which point the writer says he 
“thought the guy was dead.” Terrified, the students make a run 
for their car and eventually escape the city. 

It is a haunting piece, one that gave Lankford many sleepless 
nights and one that has traveled from conference to conference 
because it is so unsettling. When Lankford discussed it at 4C’s in 
his paper titled “How Would You Grade a Gay-Bashing?” the 
engaged, provocative, and at times heated hour-long discussion 
that followed provided a forum for a range of competing com- 
mitments to, as Pratt might say, “meet, clash, and grapple” with 
one another. What was clear from this interchange was that part 
of what makes “Queers, Bums, and Magic” so powerful is that it 
disables the most familiar kinds of conference presentations and 
teacher responses. Here is writing that cannot easily be recuper- 
ated as somehow praiseworthy despite its numerous surface flaws, 
writing that instead offers direct access to a voice from the mar- 
gins that seems to belong there. The reactions given to Lankford’s 
request to know how those present “would have handled such a 
situation” (5) varied considerably, both in intensity and in detail, 
but most of them, I would say, fell into one of three categories: 
read the essay as factual and respond accordingly; read the essay 
as fictional and respond accordingly; momentarily suspend the 
question of the essay’s factual or fictional status and respond 
accordingly. 

In the first category, by far the most popular, I place all sug- 
gestions that the student be removed from the classroom and 
turned over either to a professional counselor or to the police. 
Such a response, audience members argued repeatedly, would be 
automatic if the student had described suicidal tendencies, in- 
volvement in a rape, or having been the victim of incest. To sub- 
stantiate this point, one member of the audience spoke 
passionately about Marc LeClerc, saying that the Canadian gun- 
man had revealed his hatred of women to many of his college 
professors prior to his murderous rampage. As compelling as such 
examples were at the time, it is important to realize that this line 
of argument assumes that the described events really occurred 
and, therefore, that the essay contains evidence either of a seri- 
ous crime or of a vivid and potentially dangerous fantasy life. 
This assessment of the student essay is striking because the audi- 



ERIC 




RICHARD E. MILLER 



ence members had little to go on beyond the kind of brief outline 
that has been provided here. In other words, although no one in 
the audience had actually read the student essay, many felt quite 
confident recommending that, based on brief excerpts and a sum- 
mary of the essay’s content alone, the student ought to be turned 
over either to the legal or psychological authorities! These re- 
spondents, starting with the assumption of a stable and unified 
subjectivity for Lankford’s student, went on to construct a stu- 
dent writer incapable of dissimulation. Within such a paradigm, 
the actual text the student produced was of secondary impor- 
tance at best in relation to a hasty and, as we will see, partial 
summary of the student text’s contents. 

Lankford chose another route entirely, electing “to respond 
to the essay exactly as if it were a fictional short story” (4). What 
this meant in practice was that he restricted himself to comment- 
ing on the student’s word choice, querying the student about his 
imagined audience, acknowledging the text’s “reasonable detail,” 
and “favorably comparing the essay to A Clockwork Orange in 
its straightforward depictions of nightmarish ‘megaviolence’ and 
surrealistic detail” (4). According to these criteria, Lankford de- 
termined the essay merited a low B. Although this strategy pro- 
voked the wrath of a large portion of the audience, Lankford 
argued that it was not without its virtues: by focusing only on 
the formal features of the essay and its surface errors, Lankford 
was able to successfully deflect the student writer’s use of his 
writing to “bash” his professor, with the unexpected result that 
the student not only stayed in the course, but actually chose to 
study with Lankford again the next semester. Thus, despite 
Lankford’s own assessment of his approach as “spineless,” he 
was in a position to insist that it was nevertheless a “qualified 
success,” since the student in question “learned to cope with an 
openly gay instructor with some measure of civility” (5). 

Among those present who had access to the student’s paper, 
there were those on the panel who agreed with Lankford’s ap- 
proach but disagreed with the grade assigned. These respondents 
spoke of the essay’s faulty organization, the problems evident in 
its plot development, the number of mechanical errors. On these 
grounds alone, one panelist assured the audience, the paper ought 



ERIC 



268 



- 238 - 



Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student Writing 

to have received a failing mark. If the first category of response 
displays a curious willingness to dispense with the formality of 
reading the student’s essay, Lankford’s strategy asks teachers to 
look away from what the student’s writing is attempting to do — 
at the havoc it is trying to wreak in the contact zone — and re- 
strict their comments to the essay’s surface features and formal 
qualities, affixing the “usual star” or black mark as the situation 
warrants. Such a strategy itself invites parody: would changing 
the word choice/spelling errors/verb agreement problems/orga- 
nization/etc. really “improve” this student’s essay? Would such 
changes help inch it toward being, say, an excellent gay-bashing 
essay, one worthy of an A? 

I intend this question to verge on being offensive. The prob- 
lem, however, is not that this approach is “spineless.” To the 
contrary, in Lankford’s hands this kind of response made it pos- 
sible for both the teacher and the student to remain in the con- 
tact zone of his classroom, allowing them to negotiate the difficult 
business of working with and through important issues of cul- 
tural and sexual difference. By suggesting that his difficulty in 
responding to the student essay is a personal problem, that it 
revolves around a question of “spine,” Lankford obscures the 
ways in which the difficulty that confronted him as he struggled 
to find a way to respond to “Queers, Bums, and Magic” is the 
trace of a broader institutional conflict over what it means for a 
teacher to work with student writing. Lankford and the others 
who spoke of responding to the essay as “a piece of fiction” did 
not suddenly invent this curiously decontextualized way of re- 
sponding to writing that can imagine no other approach to dis- 
cussing a piece of writing than to speak of how it is organized, 
the aptness of the writer’s word choice, and the fit between the 
text and its audience. Such an approach to writing instruction 
has been proffered in the majority of grammars, rhetorics, and 
readers that have filled English classrooms since before the turn 
of the century; it has been around for so long that, despite the 
grand “turn to process” in writing instruction, it continues to 
suggest itself as the most “natural” or “reasonable” way to de- 
fine the work of responding to student writing. All of which leaves 
us with this profoundly strange state of affairs in which a disci- 



O 

ERIC 

MMyiliiTifaij 



2G9 ■ 



- 239 - 



RICHARD E. MILLER 



pline explicitly devoted to studying and articulating the power of 
the written word gets thrown into crisis when a student produces 
a powerful piece of writing. 

To sum up, then, these two lines of response to the student 
essay — the one recommending the removal of the offending writer 
from circulation, and the other overlooking the offensive aspects 
of the student text in order to attend to its surface and structural 
features — taken together dramatize how little professional train- 
ing in English studies prepares teachers to read and respond to 
the kinds of parodic, critical, oppositional, dismissive, resistant, 
transgressive, and regressive writing that gets produced by stu- 
dents writing in the contact zone of the classroom. This absence 
of training, I would argue, actually comes into play every time a 
teacher sits down to comment on a student paper: it’s just that 
the pedagogical shortcomings of restricting such commentary to 
the surface features and formal aspects of the writing are not as 
readily visible in a response to an essay on a summer vacation as 
they are in a response to an essay about beating up the homeless 
and bashing gays. Unfortunately, recent efforts to reimagine the 
work of responding to student writing provide little guidance for 
addressing this particular problem. Edward White’s Teaching and 
Assessing Writing, for instance, argues for holistic scoring but 
offers no suggestions on how to go about holistically scoring es- 
says that are racist, homophobic, misogynistic, and so forth. And, 
similarly, Anson’s Writing and Response: Theory, Practice, and 
Research, which asserts that “real, substantive response is in one 
form or another fundamental to language development” (4), never 
gets around to the business of discussing how to produce a “real, 
substantive response” to the kind of unsolicited oppositional dis- 
course discussed here. Since this is uncharted territory, it is not 
surprising that we often find ourselves at a loss, not knowing 
what to do, where to go, what to say. 

And yet, granting this, one has to wonder why it is that, at a 
time when almost all of the current major theories on the rise 
celebrate partial readings, multiple subjectivities, marginalized 
positions, and subjugated knowledges, nearly all student essays 
remain essentially illegible, offered forth more often than not as 
the space in which error exercises its full reign, or, as here, the 
site where some untutored evil shows its face. There seems, in 





- 240 - 



Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student Writing 

other words, to be little evidence of what one might call 
“poststructural” or “postcolonial” trickle down, little sign that 
the theoretical insights that carry so much weight in our journals 
actually make themselves known in the pedagogical practices 
deployed in classrooms across the country. There were, howevei; 
a few respondents to Lankford’s presentation who saw a way to 
smuggle some of these insights into the classroom and thereby 
propose more fruitful responses than either expelling the student 
or ignoring the content of his essay. In proposing that “Queers, 
Bums, and Magic” be reproduced alongside legal definitions of 
hate speech for the entire class to read and discuss, one panelist 
found a way to pull the paper out of the private corridor running 
between the student writer and the teacher and move it into the 
public arena. This approach turns the essay into a “teachable 
object,” enabling an investigation of the writing’s performative 
aspect — how it does its work, what its imagined project might 
have been, and who or what might be the possible subjects of its 
critique. By situating the essay in relation to legal definitions of 
hate speech, this approach also puts the class in a position to 
consider both how words can work in the world and how and 
why that work has been regulated. 

The prospect of having such a discussion would no doubt 
frighten some, since it would promise to be an explosive, tense, 
disturbing interchange. Some students would undoubtedly agree 
with the treatment meted out to the disenfranchised; others might 
speak of it as being funny; others might point to the references to 
“Elm Street,” “nightmares,” and “magic” in the essay to argue 
that it was a piece of fiction; and still others might be horrified 
by the essay and express their feelings to the class. Such a discus- 
sion would, in other words, place one squarely in the act of teach- 
ing in the contact zone where, as Pratt says, “No one [is] excluded, 
and no one [is] safe” (39). The point of having such discussions, 
however, is neither to establish a community where a simple plu- 
ralism rules and hate speech is just one of its many voices, nor is 
it to create an environment that is relentlessly threatening, where 
not feeling safe comes to mean the same thing as feeling terrified. 
Pratt, in fact, is careful to maintain the importance of establish- 
ing “safe houses” in the curriculum, courses in which a different 
kind of talk is supported and sustained. But for those courses 





- 241 - 



RICHARD E. MILLER 



that take as their subject how language works in the world, the 
central concern should be to provide students with moments taken 
from their own writing as well as from the writing collected in 
published texts where the written word is powerful. In such class- 
rooms, “teaching the conflicts” is not simply an empty slogan 
plastered over a practice that means “business as usual,” but an 
actual set of practices whereby the conflicts that capture and con- 
struct both the students and their teachers become the proper 
subject of study for the course. 

This third category of response argues for the necessity of 
seeing the way we structure our courses and the kinds of texts we 
read with our students as potential resources for commenting on 
the writing our students produce. Thinking along these lines, 
another member of the audience suggested responding to this 
essay with a revisionary assignment that required the student to 
rewrite the story from the perspective of either the gay man whom 
the students had harassed on Polk Street or the homeless person 
whom the students had beaten in the alleyway. This strategy of 
having the student do more writing about this event seems par- 
ticularly appropriate in a discipline that believes in the heuristic 
power of the composing process, and the further requirement to 
have the student shift perspective provides a meaningful avenue 
for re-seeing the described events. As useful as I believe it is to see 
the assignment of revision as a way of responding to student 
writing, though, I think the response called for in this instance is 
so obvious that it is most likely to solicit a seamless parody, one 
of those acts of hyperconformity regularly produced by those 
writing in the contact zone. In other words, while producing a 
writing situation in which the student is advised to mime the 
teacher’s desired position would probably succeed in sweeping 
the most visible manifestations of the student’s hateful thoughts 
and actions out of the classroom, it would not, I think, actually 
address the roots of that hatred. That hatred would simply curl 
up and go underground for the duration of the course. 

At this point, it may seem that in assessing the range of reac- 
tions to “Queers, Bums, and Magic” I am holding out for some 
magical form of response that would not only make this student 
stop writing such things, but would actually put an end to his 
thinking them as well. My central concern, however, is not with 




272 



- 242 - 



Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student Writing 

this particular student essay or with what the student writer as 
an individual thinks, but with what this student essay and the 
professional activity that surrounds it can tell us about the cul- 
tural, political, and pedagogical complexities of composition in- 
struction. With this distinction in mind, I would go so far as to 
argue that adopting any classroom strategy that isolates this es- 
say and treats it as an anomaly misreads both the essay’s cultural 
significance and its pedagogical possibilities. As the debate over 
military service’s “don’t ask, don’t tell” policy made abundantly 
clear, Lankford’s student has not expressed a unique and private 
hatred of gays, nor, to be sure, has he voiced a peculiar antipathy 
for the homeless. Rather, the homophobia this student articu- 
lates and the violence he describes as perpetrating against the 
disenfranchised are cultural commonplaces, drawn from the na- 
tional symbolic imaginary. For these reasons, it seems much more 
important to me to produce a classroom in which part of the 
work involves articulating, investigating, and questioning the 
affiliated cultural forces that underwrite the ways of thinking 
that find expression in this student’s essay — a classroom, in short, 
that studies the forces that make such thoughts not only permis- 
sible but prevalent. 

From this perspective, one could say that the only truly sur- 
prising thing about “Queers, Bums, and Magic” is that it voices 
this particular set of cultural commonplaces in the classroom, 
since most students practiced in the conventions of reading teacher 
expectations know not to commit themselves to positions their 
teachers clearly oppose. In this regard, the following facts are 
not insignificant: the student writer grew up in Kuwait; English 
is his second language; he was writing during the onset of the 
Persian Gulf War. An outsider himself, Lankford’s student al- 
most certainly did not understand what was intended by the ex- 
amples that accompanied the assignment in the Bedford Guide 
to: “Station yourself in a nearby place where you can mingle 
with a group of people gathered for some reason or occasion. 
Observe the group’s behavior and in a short paper report on it. 
Then offer some insight” (Kennedy and Kennedy 41). Following 
these instructions, the student is informed that one writer “did 
an outstanding job of observing a group of people nervously 
awaiting a road test for their driver’s licenses”; another observed 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 






-243 - 



RICHARD E. MILLER 



a bar mitzvah; another an emergency room; and another a group 
of people looking at a luna moth on a telephone pole “including 
a man who viewed it with alarm, a wondering toddler, and an 
amateur entomologist” (42). Unschooled in the arts of reading 
the textbook, this student failed to pick up on the implicit direc- 
tions: when you write this essay, report only on the behavior of a 
group that is of no particular interest or importance to you. Had 
the student been able to read the cues in the suggested examples, 
he might well have selected a less explosive topic and thereby 
kept his most familiar ways of knowing the world out of view. 

If the assignment’s examples direct students to topics guar- 
anteed not to provoke offense, the assignment, by refraining from 
using any kind of critical terminology, encourages students not 
to wander beyond the business of reporting their immediate ex- 
periences. In lieu of inviting students to work with any of the 
central terms taken from anthropology, sociology, or cultural stud- 
ies, say, the assignment merely informs the students that, after 
observing the behavior of their selected group, they are “to form 
some general impression of the group or come to some realiza- 
tion about it” (Kennedy and Kennedy 42). They can expect, the 
assignment concludes, that it will take at least two written pages 
“to cover” their subject. Grasping the import of these directives, 
Lankford’s student did even more than was required, performing 
the kind of hyperconformity I suggested earlier characterizes one 
of the arts of the contact zone: he wrote, as required, for his 
“fellow students” (41); he handed in not two but four typed pages; 
and he made sure his essay concluded with “some realization.” 
His final paragraph reads as follows: 

Although this night was supposed to be an observation on the 
people of the streets, it turned out that we were walking on 
“Elm Street,” and it was a “nightmare.” I will always remem- 
ber one thing, next time I see bums and fags walking on the 
streets, I will never make fun of them or piss on them, or any- 
thing like that, because they did not want to be bums or fags. It 
was society that forced them out of their jobs and they could 
not beat the system. Now when I think about that bum we 
beat up I can’t understand how he managed to follow us the 
whole time, after being kicked and being down for so long. I 
think it was one of two things; he is either psychic or it was just 
plain magic. 




-244 - 



Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student 'Writing 

In miming the requisite better understanding that is supposed to 
come from studying groups, the student’s essay concludes by dis- 
rupting all that has come before: did the beating actually take 
place or has the writer simply fabricated it, recasting the assign- 
ment within the readily available narrative frame of the film Night- 
mare on Elm Street} Is the student having one over on the system, 
manufacturing both the material for his response and his conse- 
quent realization, and thus, in one fell swoop, parodying, resist- 
ing, and critiquing the values that hold the classroom community 
together? Or — and this is obviously the more frightening possi- 
bility — is his conclusion some kind of penitential confession for 
events that really did happen? 

These questions, slightly rephrased, are of central importance 
to any writing classroom: How does a writer establish authority? 
How does one distinguish between fact and fiction in a written 
document? What does it mean to read and to write dialogically? 
And yet it is important to realize that, had the assignment worked 
as it was supposed to, these questions would never have surfaced 
with the urgency they have here. That is, had Lankford’s student 
been a better reader of classroom norms and textbook proce- 
dures, he might well have written about beekeepers or people at 
hair salons and left the surface calm of the educational commu- 
nity undisturbed. If we step back from “Queers, Bums,' and 
Magic” for a moment and consider the fact that the mixture of 
anger, rage, ignorance, and confusion that produced this student 
essay are present in varying degrees on college and secondary 
school campuses across the country, what is truly significant about 
this event is not that it occurred, but that it occurs so rarely. This, 
surely, is a testament to the immense pressures exerted by the 
classroom environment, the presentation of the assigned read- 
ings, the directions included in the writing assignments, and the 
range of teaching practices which work together to ensure that 
conflicts about or contact between fundamental beliefs and preju- 
dices do not arise. The classroom does not, in other words, auto- 
matically function as a contact zone in the positive ways Pratt 
discovered in the Stanford course, where, she asserts: “Along with 
rage, incomprehension, and pain there were exhilarating moments 
of wonder and revelation, mutual understanding, and new wis- 
dom — the joys of the contact zone” (39). As the conclusion of 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaii 



r\ r**# 



-245 - 



RICHARD E. MILLER 



Pratt’s article makes clear, and the foregoing discussion of 
“Queers, Bums, and Magic” vividly illustrates, there is still a great 
deal of work to be done in constructing the “pedagogical arts of 
the contact zone.” Thus, having acknowledged that, from this 
distance, we will never be able to resolve the question of whether 
or not “Queers, Bums, and Magic” is a factual or fictional ac- 
count, I would like to turn now to my own efforts to create a 
place where more contact between the competing interpretive 
systems of the classroom and the worlds outside the classroom 
occurs and is made available for discussion. 

There is a paradox, of course, in trying to establish a class- 
room that solicits “unsolicited oppositional discourse.” There is 
also an attendant danger of a kind of “intellectual slumming,” 
whereby investigating the disjunction between the ways of know- 
ing fostered inside and outside the classroom might result in stu- 
dents deeming the former kind of knowledge “artificial” and the 
latter “authentic.” Rather than perish in the abyss created by 
this killer dichotomy or put myself in the pedagogically ques- 
tionable position of inviting my students to vent on the page so 
that we can discuss their feelings afterward, I have tried to de- 
velop a pedagogical practice that allows the classroom to func- 
tion as a contact zone, where the central activity is investigating 
the range of literate practices available to those within asym- 
metrical power relationships. My primary concern as a composi- 
tion instructor, in other words, is with the kinds of issues raised 
in Pratt’s article and Lankford’s student’s essay insofar as they 
shape the ways of reading and writing that occur inside and out- 
side the classroom. And, given the heightened racial tensions fol- 
lowing the O. J. Simpson verdicts, the ongoing fear and ignorance 
about AIDS and the means of its transmission, the backlash 
against feminism, and a climate of diminished expectations and 
violence, it should come as no surprise that students bring to our 
classrooms the ill-formed, irrational, and even dangerous ideas 
fostered by the surrounding environment. The challenge, for teach- 
ers who are interested in teaching rather than indoctrinating their 
students, is to learn how to respond when such potentially threat- 
ening material makes its way into the classroom. 

I would like to turn to one such instance, drawn from my 
own classroom, that emerged when my students set out to re- 





- 246 - 



Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student 'Writing 



spond to Gloria Anzaldua’s “Entering the Serpent.” Now, for 
many of the students in my class, the introduction of this text 
was itself perceived as a threatening act: in “Entering the Ser- 
pent,” excerpted from Anzaldiia’s Borderlands/La Frontera, 
Anzaldiia shifts back and forth between Anglo-American English, 
Castilian Spanish, Tex-Mex, Northern Mexican dialect, and 
Nahualt, writing in a melange of languages to express the diver- 
sity of her heritage and her own unique position as lesbian, femi- 
nist, Chicana poet, and critic. While Anzaldiia’s multilingual text 
places special — and many of the students argued, unfair — lin- 
guistic demands on its readers, it also makes relatively unique 
generic demands, moving between poetry and prose, personal 
narrative and revisionist history. Thus Anzaldiia occupies a range 
of positions, some of them contradictory, as she relates her ef- 
forts to reclaim the Aztec goddess Coatlicue, the “serpent god- 
dess,” split from the goddess Cihuacoatl by the “male dominated 
Azteca-Mexica culture” in order to drive “the powerful female 
deities underground” (26-27). After the Spanish Conquest, 
Cihuacoatl was further domesticated by the Christian Church 
and transformed by stages into the figure now known as the Vir- 
gin of Guadalupe. While Anzaldiia admires La Virgen de 
Guadalupe as “the symbol of ethnic identity and of the tolerance 
for ambiguity that Chicanos-mexicanos, people of mixed race, 
people who have Indian blood, people who cross cultures, by 
necessity possess” (29), she nevertheless insists on the importance 
of regaining access to Coatlicue, “the symbol of the dark sexual 
drive, the chthonic (underworld), the feminine, the serpentine 
movement of sexuality, of creativity, the basis of all energy and 
life” (33). Recovering this contact with the supernatural provides 
one with “la facultad . . . the capacity to see in surface phenom- 
ena the meaning of deeper realities, to see the deep structure be- 
low the surface” (36). Anzaldiia concludes this section by asserting 
that “[t]hose who are pounced on the most have [la facultad] the 
strongest — the females, the homosexuals of all races, the 
darkskinned, the outcast, the persecuted, the marginalized, the 
foreign” (36). 

Here’s how one of my students described his experience read- 
ing “Entering the Serpent”: 




( 7 



- 247 - 



RICHARD E. MILLER 



Even though I had barely read half of the first page, I was 
already disgusted. I found myself reading onward only to stop 
and ask “What is she trying to prove?” Scanning the words 
and skipping over the ones that were not english, I went from 
an egocentric personal story to a femo-nazi account of central 
american mythology that was occasionally interrupted by more 
poems. . . . 

From what I gather, she is trying to exorcise some per- 
sonal demons. Her feelings of inadequacy and insecurity drove 
her to project her own problems not only onto the world, but 
into history and mythology. Pm surprised she didn’t call his- 
tory “herstory.” It seems that she had no sense of self or worth. 

To overcome this, she fabricated a world, a past, and a scape- 
goat in her own image. Although her accusations do hold some 
truth, her incredible distortion of the world would lead me to 
believe that she has lost touch with reality and is obsessively 
driven by her social psychosis. She views herself as a gallant 
and brilliant member of a great culture that has been oppressed 
by the world. Her continuous references to females, sex, and 
the phallic symbols of snakes is most likely brought out by the 
lack of a man in her life. Rather than admit her faults, she 
cherishes them and calls them friends. 

This was not an uncommon response to my assignment that be- 
gan by asking the students to discuss the difficulties they encoun- 
tered reading Anzaldua’s essay. This student, having made his 
way past the language barrier of the text, confronts the descrip- 
tion of a world and a way of being in that world that he finds 
personally repugnant. Beginning with a variant of the Rush 
Limbaughism, “femo-nazi,” the student then proceeds to docu- 
ment the many ways that “Entering the Serpent” offended him: 
it contains Anzaldua’s effort to “exorcise some personal demons”; 
it includes “her incredible distortion of the world”; the writer 
claims to be “a gallant and brilliant member of a great culture” 
of which the student is not a part. Given this reading, it is not too 
surprising that the student concludes that all the faults in the text 
are produced by “the lack of a man in [Anzaldua’s] life.” 

Taking offense with this response to Anzaldua’s essay strikes 
me as being exactly the wrong tactic here. It is of paramount 
importance, I believe, to begin where students are, rather than 
where one thinks they should or ought to be, and this student, by 
my reading, is trapped between the desire to produce a stereo- 

278 




- 248 - 



Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student Writing 

typical critique of any feminist text (“I’m surprised she didn’t 
call history ‘herstory’”) and the necessity of responding to this 
particular feminist text. He negotiates the tension between this 
desire and this necessity by producing a fairly detailed outline of 
Anzaldua’s essay and, simultaneously, mocking its argument 
(“Rather than admit her faults, she cherishes them and calls them 
friends.”). However rudimentary or sophisticated one deems this 
kind of multivocalic writing to be, it is, as I have said, only a 
starting point for beginning more detailed work with Anzaldua’s 
text. For this reason, the assignment that elicited this response 
does not simply ask the students to revel in the difficulties they 
experienced reading Anzaldua’s essay; it also requests that they 
outline “a plan of action for addressing the difficulties [they] 
encountered.” The goal, thus, is not to invite students simply to 
record their various levels of rage, incomprehension, and despair 
with an admittedly difficult text, but rather to have them reflect 
on how they might adjust their own ways of reading to meet the 
text halfway. 

The results of having the students read their own readings 
and chart alternative ways of returning to the text can be star- 
tling indeed. Although this writer began by accusing Anzaldua of 
being a “femo-nazi,” he concluded by reflecting on what he had 
done with her text in the following way: 

If not for searching for her hidden motives and then using them 
to criticize/bash Anzaldua and her story, I would not have been 
able to read the story in its entirety. Although my view is a bit 
harsh, it has been a way that allows me to counter Anzaldua’s 
extremities. In turn, I can now see her strategy of language and 
culture choice and placement to reveal the contact zone in her 
own life. All of my obstacles previously mentioned, (not liking 
the stories, poems, or their content) were overcome by “bash- 
ing” them. Unfortunately, doing that in addition to Anzaldua’s 
ridiculous disproportionism and over-intense, distorted beliefs 
created a mountain which was impossible for me to climb. This 
in effect made it impossible to have taken any part of her work 
seriously or to heart. I feel I need to set aside my personal val- 
ues, outlook and social position in order to escape the bars of 
being offended and discouraged. Not only must I lessen my 
own barriers of understanding, but I must be able to compre- 
hend and understand the argument of the other. It is these dif- 




-249 - 



279 



RICHARD E. MILLER 



ferences between people and groups of people that lead to the 
conflicts and struggles portrayed and created by this selection. 

This strikes me as being an extraordinarily astute assessment of 
the strengths and weaknesses of this writer’s initial reading strat- 
egy: “bashing” Anzaldua enabled a certain kind of work to be 
accomplished (the reading was completed, the writing assignment 
could be fulfilled), but it also prevented the writer from taking 
“any part of her work seriously or to heart.” Thus, by “bashing” 
Anzaldua, the student inadvertently ended up showing himself 
that her description of her trying experiences within the straight 
white world was, at least partly, accurate. The writer’s proposed 
solution to this problem — setting aside his “personal values, out- 
look and social position” — attests to the magnitude of the chal- 
lenge Anzaldiia’s position holds for him. Whether this proposed 
solution proves, in practice, to be a workable plan can only be 
known when the writer returns to Anzaldua’s essay to begin his 
revision. What is important to notice here, however, is that the 
writer’s plan does make returning to her text an imaginable ac- 
tivity with an unforeseeable outcome. Given the way this student’s 
essay began, this is no small accomplishment. 

Required self-reflexivity does not, of course, guarantee that 
repugnant positions will be abandoned. At best, it ensures only 
that the students’ attention will be focused on the interconnec- 
tions between the ways they read and the ways they write. This 
can be a salutary experience, as in the previous example, where it 
provided the student with an avenue for renegotiating a relation- 
ship with a difficult text and the wide range of concerns affili- 
ated with that text, but it does not mean that this approach wields 
sufficient power to transform the matrix of beliefs, values, and 
prejudices that students (and teachers alike) bring to the class- 
room. This kind of wholesale transformation (or, to be more pre- 
cise, the appearance of this kind of wholesale transformation) is 
only possible in classrooms where the highly asymmetrical rela- 
tions of power are fully reinstated and students are told either 
implicitly or explicitly (as I was during a course in graduate 
school), “No language that is racist, sexist, homophobic, or that 
degrades the working class will be allowed in our discussions.” 





- 250 - 



Fault Lines in the Contact Zone: Assessing Homophobic Student Writing 

Reimagining the classroom as a contact zone is a potentially pow- 
erful pedagogical intervention only so long as it involves resist- 
ing the temptation either to silence or to celebrate the voices that 
seek to oppose, critique, and/or parody the work of constructing 
knowledge in the classroom. Scott Lankford achieved the kind of 
partial, imperfect, negotiated microvictory available to those who 
work in the contact zone when he found a way to respond to his 
student’s essay that not only kept the student in his course, but 
eventually led to the student signing up to work with him in an- 
other course as well. By having my students interrogate literate 
practices inside and outside the classroom, by having them work 
with challenging essays that speak about issues of difference from 
a range of perspectives, and by having them pursue this work in 
the ways I have outlined here, I have been trying to create a course 
that allows the students to use their writing to investigate the 
cultural conflicts that serve to define and limit their lived experi- 
ence. 

In the uncharted realms of teaching and studying in the con- 
tact zone, the teacher’s traditional claim to authority is thus con- 
stantly undermined and reconfigured, which, in turn, enables the 
real work of learning how to negotiate and to place oneself in 
dialogue with different ways of knowing to commence. This can 
be strangely disorienting work, requiring as it does the recogni- 
tion that in many places what passes for reason is not something 
separate from rhetoric, but rather one of many rhetorical de- 
vices. This in turn quickly leads to the corollary concession that, 
in certain situations, reason exercises little or no persuasive force 
when vying against the 'combined powers of rage, fear, and preju- 
dice, which together forge innumerable hateful ways of knowing 
the world that have their own internalized systems, self-sustain- 
ing logics, and justifications. For teachers who believe in educa- 
tion as a force for positive social change, the appropriate response 
to these new working conditions is not to exile students to the 
penitentiaries or the psychiatric wards for writing offensive, an- 
tisocial papers. Nor is it to give free rein to one’s self-righteous 
indignation and call the resultant interchange a “political inter- 
vention.” The most promising pedagogical response lies, rather, 
in closely attending to what our students say and write in an 



ERIC 

MMJyiiiTifaJ 



O o t 



-251 - 



RICHARD E. MILLER 



ongoing effort to learn how to read, understand, and respond to 
the strange, sometimes threatening, multivocal texts they pro- 
duce while writing in the contact zone. 



Works Cited 



Anson, Chris, ed. Writing and Response: Theory, Practice, and Research. 
Urbana, IL: NCTE, 1989. 

Anzaldua, Gloria. “Entering into the Serpent.” Ways of Reading. Ed. 
David Bartholomae and Anthony Petrosky. Boston: Bedford, 1993. 
25-38. 

Kennedy, X. J., and Dorothy M. Kennedy. The Bedford Guide for Col- 
lege Writers. Boston: Bedford, 1990. 41-42. 

Lankford, Scott. “‘Queers, Bums, and Magic’: How Would You Grade 
a Gay-Bashing?” Myths of Correctness: Approaches to Grammar 
and Politics. Conference on College Composition and Communi- 
cation. Cincinnati. 19 Mar. 1992. 

Pratt, Mary Louise. “Arts of the Contact Zone.” Profession 91 (MLA 
1991): 33-40. 

White, Edward M. Teaching and Assessing Writing. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass, 1985. 




- 252 - 



2S2 



Chapter Fourteen 



0 ©^ 

Queer Pedagogy and Social Change: 
Teaching and Lesbian Identity in 
South Africa 

Ann Smith 

University of the Witwatersrand, Johannesburg 



[My] deepest impulse was the desire to make learning 
part of the process of social change itself. 

Raymond Williams 



I n 1976 the Nationalist Party government overcame its Calvin- 
istic dread of the evils of television viewing and permitted South 
Africans to watch, in the late afternoon and early evening, on 
one channel only, a few hours of strictly censored material on the 
small screen. Eight years later, on the first program ever to deal 
with what the producers agreed to call “gay rights” — lesbian still 
being the unspeakable word — I appeared on prime time in a few 
million homes arguing with a fundamentalist minister of religion 
and a patronizingly condescending medical doctor (both male) 
against the view that homosexuality was a sin and a disease (see 
Charlewood). I did not get to say much about rights — the em- 
phasis was very much on how wrong it was. I was in no way 
prepared for this — expecting, in my naivete, a rational discus- 
sion, a polite interchange of views. In my muddled and inelegant 
anticipation of Jeffrey Weeks’s excellent discussion of how ho- 
mophobic models of the etiology of homosexuality, especially 
around pathology, have become naturalized — whereby “you can 
be born with [it], seduced into [it] and catch [it] all at the same 
time” (qtd. in Sedgwick 146) — I came across, predictably enough. 




-253 - 



283 



as angry and frustrated. I was described, equally predictably, in 
the print media as having been aggressive and strident. It was a 
disempowering event for me, but only years later was I able to 
articulate why. I was ostensibly given the space in which to present 
a case for the recognition of “gay rights” but was simultaneously 
denied that space. Although the show was conceptually 
antihomophobic, the dominant discourse ensured that it was 
anything but, and the results were predictably patriarchal, 
(hetero)sexist, and homophobic. Caught in the crossfire between 
the forces of “socially responsible television” and government 
censorship, I was a clay pigeon (mis)represented as a token spokes- 
person. Coming out to the nation in the repressive and often 
violent mid-1980s was difficult enough without the additional 
complication of having a persona imposed upon me; I recall viv- 
idly the terrible frustration of being forced to play out the stereo- 
type of the aggressive man-hating lesbian-feminist and lacking 
the skills to resist it. 

Subsequent appearances on television were much easier to 
handle, but as a lesbian activist and a founding member of the 
first national gay association in this country — The Gay Associa- 
tion of South Africa (GASA) — I inevitably became more and more 
aware of different manifestations of oppression in the public and 
private arenas. While the overwhelmingly racist agenda of the 
apartheid regime tended to make less visible to observers, both 
here and abroad, the extent of its homophobia and misogyny, 
lesbians and gay men in South Africa contended with the oppres- 
sive effects of this on a daily basis. I seized the opportunity to use 
this experience of lesbian activism openly and explicitly in my 
teaching when, as part of our engagement with the debate on the 
issues of the literary canon, the Department of English at the 
University of the Witwatersrand in 1995 increased the number 
and range of options available to students studying toward the 
English major. Among these was the first course in the history of 
the university curriculum to use the dreaded “L” word unequivo- 
cally: I offered a course titled The Lesbian in Literature as a se- 
mester-long open elective. 

When I planned this course, I knew that I could incorporate 
my own experiences as a lesbian activist during those particu- 
larly vicious years of the apartheid era and at the same time po- 




- 254 - 



Queer Pedagogy and Social Change 



sition myself relative to the emerging “New” South Africa. This 
was a unique historical moment: the old homophobic laws were 
still in place but there was reason to hope that lesbian and gay 
rights would be protected under the new Constitution (as they 
now are). I knew that trying to ensure that the discursive space I 
created would be free from all personal uncertainties and politi- 
cal ambiguities was neither possible nor pedagogically desirable. 
For instance, I did not need to discount the part played by my 
own revulsion toward the authoritarianism evident in the insis- 
tence of my TV opponents that they, in their respective religious 
and secular heteronormative guardianship of the morality of the 
South African population, were indisputably right. Neither was 
it necessary for me to suppress the sense of failure that afflicted 
me then. I could use this, along with an account of the process of 
later empowerment, to illustrate the pragmatic importance of lived 
experience and the desirability of being able to locate the per- 
sonal within specific historical and political contexts. I saw that 
what I could do was to foreground, within a cultural studies ap- 
proach, the inevitability of ambiguities and conflicts of various 
sorts within a pedagogical context. If I planned to use what hap- 
pened in the everyday world as a way into teaching a course on 
literature, linking experiences of ambiguity and conflict as re- 
lated to lesbian identity, lived and fictional, why not extend this 
explicitly to transformative pedagogical practice? In (the “New”) 
South Africa, the constituencies which now, quite rightly of course, 
“demand a say in how culture will be defined” are no longer part 
of a “relatively homogeneous class with a relatively common 
background,” and these newly recognized constituencies now 
include blacks as well as lesbians and gay men among others. 
Here was an arena in which to dramatize, through a “less ‘ca- 
nonical’ faculty [member] and student body . . . [and] a less ca- 
nonical curriculum[,] . . . the fact that culture itself is a debate, 
not a monologue” (Graff 8). 

This course was scheduled for the first semester of 1995 
(which runs from mid-February until the end of May). During 
this time, the National Coalition for Gay and Lesbian Equality 
was heavily involved in lobbying support for the retention of the 
phrase “sexual orientation” in the Equality Clause of the new 
Constitution. Preparation for the course coincided with my help- 



ANN SMITH 



ing with the organization of a campaign of letter and postcard 
writing to the Constitutional Assembly. The Equality Clause read: 
“No person shall be unfairly discriminated against on the grounds 
of race, gender, sex, ethnic or social origin, colour, sexual orien- 
tation, age, disability, religion, conscience, belief, culture,* lan- 
guage, birth or marital status.” But the Constitution was not due 
to be signed into law until May 1996. Feelings were running 
high in the country over this controversial inclusion: white church 
groups allied themselves in principle to the African Christian 
Democratic Party, and opposition to the inclusion was aggres- 
sive and vociferous, but so was support for it. There were radio 
and television talk shows, letters to the editor, press articles, pub- 
lic meetings and debates, and street parties. In contrast to my 
experience in that TV studio, where my voice had to be defensive 
and aggressive in order to be heard, gay voices were now being 
legitimated. We won, but I did not know that as I prepared this 
course. 

My concerns about the course and the Equality Clause were 
similar in some ways: both were highly contentious, and the fail- 
ure of either to get beyond the lobbying and planning stage would 
mean a setback. If the movement in favor of the Equality Clause 
did not prevail, it would be a great reversal for the lesbian and 
gay rights movement in South Africa; if the course did not run, it 
would be a blow, not only to me but to the lesbian and gay com- 
munity within the university. The University of the Witwatersrand, 
an urban campus in Johannesburg, the largest city in South Af- 
rica, had long prided itself on working toward social change and 
fostering anti-establishment political practices during the years 
of apartheid. The successful implementation of The Lesbian in 
Literature course would demonstrate two things: the commit- 
ment of those who were directly involved in it as an academic 
course, and the commitment of the university itself to progres- 
sive, material change at the levels of teaching, learning, and cur- 
riculum. A great deal of publicity surrounded the inception of 
the course, and it became apparent to me that its success was 
important beyond the English department and that more than 
just academic change was at stake. Here was an opportunity for 
the university, long celebrated for its stand against racism, to 
indicate its opposition to forms of oppression which were be- 





- 256 - 



Queer Pedagogy and Social Change 



coming less “invisible” in the light of the emergent political change 
based on democratic accountability and the growing awareness 
that if one form of oppression is legitimated, all other forms are, 
by implication, made permissible. Through this course, the heady 
combination of the aims of political advocacy and transforma- 
tive pedagogy could result in real social change, in however small 
a way. 

Allied to the issue of social change was that of academic 
change: I had to remain aware of and combat the tendency in 
conservative academic circles to view lesbian and gay studies, 
along with women’s studies, as suspect and unscholarly. As Tamsin 
Wilton, with wry humor, accurately observes: “Homophobia is 
the most respectable of prejudices, and it remains a majority view- 
point that a set of execrated, criminalised sexual practices is an 
inadequate foundation for an academic discipline” (11). 

It seemed clear to me that in the context of what we were 
emerging from in South Africa, and the unfolding democratic 
process, a course in lesbian studies must concern itself with “the 
most respectable of prejudices,” Far from being “an inadequate 
foundation for an academic discipline,” it provided the perfect 
opportunity to begin to enact the proposition that educators can 
“transform how educational institutions, teachers and students 
define themselves as political subjects capable of exhibiting criti- 
cal sensibilities, civic courage, and forms of solidarity rooted in a 
strong commitment to freedom and democracy” (Giroux 201), 



In planning the course, I wanted to consider how I could put into 
practice a pedagogy in which the emphasis would not be on “the 
transmission of a particular skill, body of knowledge, or set of 
values” but would be “ a cultural practice engaged in the pro- 
duction of knowledge, identities and desires” (Giroux 202), In 
addition, I needed to articulate some points in relation to the 
presentation of myself in this course that I thought needed care- 
ful consideration. It seemed to me that being unreservedly “out” 
as a lesbian and fairly well known locally as a lesbian activist 







- 257 - 



ANN SMITH 



might need to be negotiated in relation to the group as a whole. 
I know what being a lesbian is for me, but I do not have lived 
knowledge of what it means for any other woman. Although I 
had come out to the public on TV and in the press, I knew that 
coming out is never done once and for all: it has a constant 
performative component to it. I wondered what it would be like 
to stand in front of the class in those first few minutes, no longer 
“hovering at that threshold of indecision where the benefits of 
being out can be swiftly weighed against the liabilities” 
(Malinowitz xv). In the more typical university classroom, my 
primary role is that of educator, and I may only incidentally be 
seen as a lesbian activist. In this course, my role as activist would 
be foregrounded and inseparable from my role as teacher. For all 
of us as learners, this course would be unlike any other in which 
we had participated. In some teaching situations, pedagogical 
strategies developed earlier are often replicated: here I could not 
take any such repertoire for granted. 

In addition to allowing fully for the multiplicity of positions 
held by the students according to race, ethnicity, social class, re- 
ligion, age, and sexual identity, I knew I also would have to ad- 
dress the perception so common (perhaps inevitable?) among men 
who find themselves in seminar discussions on feminism and think 
that they are being targeted as the enemy, as representatives of 
patriarchy. I knew it would be a challenge to deal with the pos- 
sible manifestation of patriarchal attitudes and beliefs some men 
(and some women) may bring to the course without seeming to 
attack the socialized individual transgressor and without seem- 
ing to hold all males responsible, given that being male in a course 
on lesbianism may in itself be a threatening scenario. The fact 
that male students choose such an option does not necessarily 
prepare them for the demands made by full participation in the 
course, or for the sociopolitical implications of their choice. The 
endorsement by women of various patriarchal beliefs and prac- 
tices, particularly those women who are well served by them, 
would need to be handled just as carefully if I was to encourage 
students to see the course as interrogative of homophobia and 
sexism and not as antimale or antiheterosexual propaganda. 

In the interests of parity with other courses being offered at 
that time, I assigned four primary texts. Since I wanted to offer 




- 258 - 



Queer Pedagogy and Social Change 



the students a range of responses to lesbianism and to include 
different genres of text, I decided on two novels, a play, and a set 
of interrelated short stories. I chose texts which would be ame- 
nable to the investigation of how theoretical positions can be 
seen to be worked out in fictional practice. Instead of theoretical 
works on the etiology or the social and psychological construe- 
tion of lesbianism, I wanted to use fictional texts in which these 
notions are textually represented and dramatized. Also, I hoped 
to show how representations of lesbian identity and experience 
have altered over the years in keeping with changing societal at- 
titudes and norms. It was important, I felt, that the texts should 
not be drawn from the traditional canon of English literature, 
since, it seems to me, changes in societal attitude are reflected 
more readily and more accessibly in more contemporary, less 
canonized texts. 

Radclyffe Hall’s The Well of Loneliness (1928) offered a use- 
ful starting point given its status as a famous (infamous?) early 
novel of lesbian experience. Although its position within lesbian 
literary history is debatable, the controversy surrounding its pub- 
lication ensured a mass audience for the work. In this novel. Hall 
situates herself squarely within the then current prevailing domi- 
nant discourse around lesbianism — that of the pathology of in- 
version, in place of the earlier model of criminality — so it seemed 
to me to be appropriate to use this novel to locate perceptions of 
homosexuality within the etiological model of homosexuality as 
disease. Although the historical trajectory was not the most im- 
portant part of the course, I did want students to have some sense 
of it and of the importance of such contextualization. 

The ways in which past suffering can be recognized and vali- 
dated (as seen, for instance, in the South African Truth and Rec- 
onciliation Committee hearings) are of immediate concern in 
postapartheid South Africa, and many fear that subsequent en- 
franchisement may well result in institutionalized forgetting of 
the costs of the struggle that led to such enfranchisement within 
improved economic and political conditions. The opposing ar- 
gument is based on the belief that only in forgetting the past and 
in forgiving the oppressors can new beginnings be made. For me, 
the institutionalized forgetting of past suffering is an appalling 
insult to those who have paid so dearly for this victory. Further- 




- 259 - 






ANN SMITH 



more, such forgetting allows us to see the struggle as having been 
won, whereas remembering what it cost forces us into the real- 
ization that, in terms of reparation and redress, the struggle is 
only just beginning. Likewise, I think that the entrenchment of 
lesbian and gay rights in the new Constitution marks not only 
the end of one particular aspect of the struggle but also the be- 
ginning of another battle, in that legislation does not straightfor- 
wardly ensure a concomitant change in attitude and certainly 
not in practice, unless, of course, such practice is publicly ob- 
servable. Lesbians and gay men in South Africa have been 
recategorized; we are citizens with equal rights and are no longer 
seen as deviant criminals, but this does not in itself recognize and 
validate the cost of past and present struggles against homopho- 
bia. 

Through an investigation of Hall’s use of what Raymond 
Williams calls “reverse discourse,” in which the oppressed use 
the language of their oppressors to shape their identity, I wanted 
to foreground what Henry Giroux and Paulo Freire refer to as 
the ways in which institutionalized “forgetting” works to make 
it “more difficult for those who [are] victimized by such oppres- 
sion to develop an ontological basis for challenging the ideologi- 
cal and political conditions that produced such suffering” (xi). In 
other words, I wanted to explore the debate around Hall’s repre- 
sentation of lesbian subjectivity: did she do lesbian existence a 
disservice in her apparently unquestioning use of the very dis- 
course of lesbianism as disease, as pathological inversion, or did 
she offer hope and comfort to lesbian readers in her location of 
her text within a discourse that was perhaps preferable to the 
earlier one based on lesbianism as criminally deviant? I wanted 
to direct discussion to the implications of Hall’s use of the etio- 
logical model of disease as the basis for her plea for the accep- 
tance of lesbianism in society — such women, for Hall, could not 
help being what they were, and they both needed and deserved 
to be pitied and tolerated — since it could be seen to have been 
based on the institutionalized forgetting of the suffering of lesbi- 
ans under the earlier model of criminality in favor of a slightly 
more tolerant model of pathology. Hall’s use of Stephen as a 
Christ-like martyr to the (seemingly lost) cause of lesbianism 
raises further questions about the validation of previous 




290 



-260 - 



Queer Pedagogy and Social Change 



suffering.Through such an investigation, I hoped to encourage 
my students to discuss the significance of remembering and/or 
forgetting the forms of oppression they suffered under the old, as 
well as the new, government in order to further establish the con- 
nections between Hall’s fictional world and the one in which my 
students and I live. Practical action directed at overcoming op- 
pression must, I believe, include remembering and recounting the 
suffering so that the struggle for change in the classroom, as well 
as in the world outside of it, is “forged through human commu- 
nities and forms of solidarity”(Giroux and Freire xi). 

Lillian Heilman’s play The Children's Hour (1934) was cho- 
sen as an illustration of the deep and troubling ambivalence felt 
toward female teachers who are suspected of having lesbian de- 
sires. I wanted to explore what is for me the central concern of 
this play: the power of popular prejudice, such as that which sees 
a necessary connection between lesbianism and the corruption 
of children, somewhat analogous to the popular belief that there 
is a direct relation between homosexuality in men and pedophilia. 
It was this belief which underlay many of the arguments submit- 
ted in favor of dropping what was then referred to as the “sexual 
orientation category” from the Equality Clause of the new Con- 
stitution. Letters appearing in the daily newspapers and other 
print media obsessively stressed the danger in which children 
would be placed if homosexual activity were to be decriminal- 
ized. Street protests around this issue saw fundamentalist group 
members carrying placards warning of the same danger, and ra- 
dio talk shows gave a great deal of time to discussions of this 
point. Although most of the fear expressed had to do with ho- 
mosexual male teachers molesting and raping boys, extrapola- 
tion to the corruption of children by lesbian teachers and 
caregivers was fairly frequent. This of course gave Heilman s play 
an immediate relevance to recent political attempts in South Af“ 
rica to legislate against the enactment of similar homophobic 
prejudice and belief. 

I planned to use this play, set as it is in a school, to provide 
the springboard for discussion of the significance of transforma- 
tive pedagogy to social change, particularly in relation to the so- 
cial construction of what counts as knowledge. I wanted to draw 
attention to the power of the dominant discourse — based in this 



ANN SMITH 



case on what were seen as respectable heterosexist norms — to 
destroy the careers of two women and end the life of one of them 
because one woman desired another. I intended to introduce a 
collection of cuttings from recent newspapers and magazines, from 
South Africa and abroad, which dealt with the loss of jobs and 
lives of lesbians and gay men under similar circumstances of ho- 
mophobic hatred, whether legislated or not. 

The next text was Audre horde’s Zami: A New Spelling of 
My Name (1982), which served the purpose of presenting a 
celebratory view of a woman’s self-identification as lesbian and 
which could function to counter the model of medical pathology 
presented in Hall’s work. Given horde’s semiautobiographical 
investigation of the poststructuralist notion of identity as unfixed 
and amenable to personal choice, her representation of Zami as 
primarily a woman capable of great love who chooses a lesbian 
identity for herself only after exploring her heterosexual poten- 
tial, would provide the opportunity for my students to consider 
the implications of lesbianism as an individual political choice. 
While for Hall lesbianism is both pathological and unavoidable, 
for horde it is a political position, and I hoped to use this huge 
difference to illustrate the shift in thinking about what consti- 
tutes lesbian subjectivity over the slightly more than fifty years 
that separate these novels. 

Another reason behind this investigation of lesbianism as a 
subject position had to do with the then current discussion of the 
political and social significance of the global commodification of 
lesbianism that was becoming highly topical in South Africa be- 
cause of the Equality Clause debate. I wanted my students to 
understand the political dangers of seeing the choice of a lesbian 
lifestyle as chic and fashionable, as well as the possible social 
advantages of such a standpoint. This, I thought, would relate 
well to the earlier consideration of the power that the institution- 
alized forgetting of past pain and suffering wields when a once 
forbidden aspect of identity becomes trendy. 

Furthermore, horde’s refusal to validate Western myths, such 
as the Sapphic tradition, as an explanation for black African and 
African American same-sex desire could serve to introduce alter- 
native cultural perspectives on the historical and social construc- 
tion of lesbianism — an important consideration given the cultural 




292 



- 262 - 



Queer Pedagogy and Social Change 



diversity of our students in South Africa 3nd one th^t has particular 
relevance to nationalist propaganda, which sees homosexuality not 
as part of African culture but as a white colonial import. 

I selected Gloria Naylor’s The Women of Brewster Place 
(1980) because it investigates different kinds of relationships be- 
tween women, ranging from an overtly lesbian relationship to 
the “female friendship and comradeship” which, for Adrienne 
Rich, is part of “a lesbian continuum” which locates the “erotic 
. . . as . . . unconfined to any single part of the body or solely to 
the body itself” (53), regardless of the sexuality of the women 
concerned. The well-known debate about Rich s controversial 
formulation centers on the notion that to universalize lesbian 
existence as informing and structuring all interactions between 
women” is to deny the “minoritizing view that ‘lesbian’ refers to 
a specific, delineated population” which seeks its explicit defini- 
tion in terms of genital sexuality (Jagose 11-12). The interesting 
ambivalence in this work regarding the only sexually defined les- 
bian couple in the stories could, I believed, be used as a spring- 
board into further exploration of this debate. A text which raises 
questions about the implications of defining a couple as lesbian 
in specific terms appeared to me to have significant political rami- 
fications, particularly in a country such as South Africa, which is 
obsessed with labels and taxonomies. This work could serve to 
show, as Eve Kosofsky Sedgwick puts it, “how preposterous is 
anybody’s urbane pretense at having a clear, simple story to tell 
about the outlines and meanings of what and who is homosexual 
and heterosexual” (146). An exploration of the different ways in 
which Naylor has the two lesbians, Theresa and Lorraine, con- 
struct themselves in terms of their sexuality and the ways in which 
their neighbors construct them would, I thought, demonstrate 
just how preposterous this attempt to define what it means to be 
homosexual or heterosexual actually is. 



As it turned out, many of my anxieties in planning the course 
were groundless: of the 139 students who had to choose from 



ANN SMITH 



five open electives, 33 opted for The Lesbian in Literature, mak- 
ing it by far the most popular course on offer. In 1996 and 1997, 
this enrollment pattern was repeated, and student response con- 
tinues to be affirming, encouraging, and constructively critical. 
If student comment is any indication, the desire to effect social 
change through learning seems to have been realized, at least to 
some extent, as the later discussion of excerpts from student jour- 
nals and other writings suggests. 

Around that time, the Department of English was beginning 
an institutionalized reassessment of its pedagogical principles and 
practice as well as its curricular content. Consequently, for most 
students the experience of student-centered teaching and learn- 
ing was new; the primary mode of teaching to which they had 
been exposed at school and at university was “transmission-style” 
teaching, in which the dominant discussion practices are 
nonegalitarian and often adversarial. This results in many stu- 
dents’ perceived need for “coverage” of a given topic and a ten- 
dency to see the number of pages of notes taken down during a 
seminar as a measure of the worth of that particular class. I saw 
it as imperative that the course The Lesbian in Literature model 
in form its revolutionary content. I sought to integrate the per- 
sonal as a vehicle for knowledge within an academic examina- 
tion of the given texts. Although, of course, I promoted 
small-group work, informal class presentations, and other learner- 
centered activities, I needed to ensure that the seminars did not 
become an excuse for self-indulgent, emotive, anecdotal outpour- 
ings. Always aware of the charge of frivolousness leveled against 
noncanonical course content, and the inclination to deride demo- 
cratic teaching practice and the use of the personal as 
pseudopsychotherapy, I tried to ensure academic rigor through- 
out the course. Class presentations, for example, had to be con- 
ceptually sound and located within a solid theoretical framework. 
I encouraged in class discussions the exploration of the connec- 
tions between personal experience and socially entrenched norms 
and attitudes, and then went on to invite students to investigate 
the ways in which dominant discursive practices and power are 
related. The students were expected, in other words, to demon- 
strate an understanding of how various kinds of texts can be 




-264 - 



Queer Pedagogy and Social Change 



seen to play out, endorse, and/or interrogate, in different ways, 
their sociopolitical theoretical underpinnings. 

Modes of assessment also needed to reflect the innovative 
nature of the course. Students accustomed only to formal exposi- 
tory essays were offered a range of possibilities for their course 
assignments. Precisely half the students chose to keep a journal 
over six weeks in which they responded to issues raised in class; 
offered personal reflections on the course; and commented on 
current TV shows and movies, media coverage of pertinent is- 
sues, cartoons, and bumper stickers, as well as other popular 
culture artifacts and phenomena, all in relation to the assigned 
texts. Others chose to write formal essays, while a few elected to 
offer presentations which included performative components. 

While the course evaluation yielded some useful information, 
the student journals proved to be a more revealing indicator of 
the extent to which the course effected change in their thinking 
and practice. At the start of the semester, I indicated that I would 
be likely to make this course the subject of an essay dealing with 
its pedagogical practice in relation to lesbian and gay rights in 
South Africa, and I sounded them out about the possibility of 
using their writings about the class for data. Not only was agree- 
ment unanimous and readily granted, but the students also in- 
sisted that their own first names be used rather than having their 
comments attributed to “fictional” respondents. They wanted to 
make explicit their involvement in a course which had so much 
to do with historical change in the university and in the world 
outside. Not surprisingly, many of the students reflected on their 
own role as participants in a groundbreaking course. For 
Genevieve, in her experience the university pays lip service to 
traditions of liberalism, and this was the only course which “had 
changed [her] life in its raising of questions around race, sex and 
gender in its attempt to raise consciousness about those things 
we hide from ourselves in an effort to fit in.” She makes explicit 
the connection between transformative pedagogy and social 
change. Ioanna and Ryan were both “thrilled to be making his- 
tory” as participants in the course in its first year, and both spoke 
of change in their lives which would always be linked to this 
historical moment. Ryan sounded a warning note in his observa- 



ERLC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



- 265 - 



O 




ANN SMITH 



tion that some students chose this option because ‘‘along with 
nose-rings, dyed hair and ‘docs,’ this course has found its place 
with the ‘trendy’ students,” but went on to say that he thought 
that those who had signed up for such “shallow reasons had 
learned more than they bargained for!” Here was evidence that 
this new course was being seen as part of an emergent and liber- 
ating new mood of political awareness in South Africa, and this 
is again apparent in Marlise’s pride in doing “probably the only 
course in South Africa and possibly the whole of Africa which 
dealt with lesbian literature.” 

Many students elaborated on the value of integrating the 
personal with the political and showed an ability to theorize the 
personal. In her assessment of the course, Ingrid wrote: “There is 
a lot of stuff I have been quietly sweeping under the heterosexist 
carpet for a long time, and this course allowed me to start re- 
claiming some of the lost stuff.” For Ashleigh, while the aca- 
demic worth of the course lay in its “not entirely rejecting the 
established tradition but encouraging an approach whereby the 
dominant and the emergent are addressed as intricately con- 
nected,” the personal value had to do with her experience of the 
course as dealing “with issues relevant to [her] own experience.” 
She saw the selected texts in relation to the dominant discourses 
of their time as analogous to the conflict between the course it- 
self and the traditional academic areas of literary investigation, 
and she expressed gratitude for “having been given the opportu- 
nity to study in such an encouraging and stimulating setting, one 
which has opened intellectual and personal space in which change 
can be effected.” 

Karen wrote about the value of being able to deal in semi- 
nars with emotional responses to a work of literature. Her mother 
felt that the course is the product of a member of the “gay minor- 
ity that wants special rights,” and a friend felt that if a course on 
homosexual literature is on offer, then a course on heterosexual 
literature should also be offered! Another friend is recorded as 
asking why “homosexual people always want to force themselves 
down other people’s throats,” and her father wanted to know if 
we are also going to offer a course “in the literature of left-handed 
people. Karen articulated a new awareness of how commonly 
held prejudices work to construct what is then held to be knowl- 

296 




- 266 - 



Queer Pedagogy and Social Change 



edge. Likewise, other students identified some of the ways in which 
even enrolling for a university course means having to deal with 
the pervasiveness of common prejudices and how it has helped 
them understand how marginalization operates. Lesley Anne said 
that attending this course has shown her that her “response to 
being marginalized, ignored and suppressed [as a student within 
a patriarchal university] should be defiance.” I quote her final 
sentence: “When I informed a friend that I had opted to take a 
course in lesbian writing he responded by saying that maybe I 
would become lesbian. While I was quick to respond in the nega- 
tive, I now wish I could have the conversation over, so that this 
time I could say that if it means embracing empowerment, strength 
and fortitude in [this] society then it certainly appears to be a 
reasonable option.” 

Parental attitudes play an even greater role in students’ course 
choices than is customary when, as in South Africa, most young 
people are educated at their parents’ expense. There is no free 
tertiary education in South Africa, and bursaries are scarce and 
difficult to obtain. Jennifer’s father bought all the books she needed 
for her other courses, but he refused to purchase the texts for this 
option and she spoke of the extent to which being thus 
“marginalized for choosing this course has made [her] more aware 
of how oppression functions in the real world.” Marlise’s father 
was concerned though considerably less extreme; she says, “I 
suspect that my father had his reservations.” 

Societal and personal responses to homophobia found ex- 
pression in many journal entries. Colin mentioned that “Fridays 
at Wits [University of the Witwatersrand] have taken on a new 
meaning,” and he speaks of how liberating it has been to be able 
to speak so comfortably about the “forbidden subject of homo- 
sexuality.” He also related stories of fellow student disgust and 
horror at his taking such a course but said he felt compelled to 
discuss the course as often as possible because of this antago- 
nism. Significant change occurred in Anthony’s thinking: he re- 
lated how he was “signed up for the course in error by a friend” 
and how he “was too lazy to change course” and was determined 
to be a disruptive element, “a thorn in the side of the class.” He 
acknowledged having been a “homophobe from hell” who after 
three weeks “began to look forward to the classes” as his “ho- 



ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



297 



- 267 - 



ANN SMITH 



mophobic tapestry was slowing unweaving itself.” He spoke of 
his homophobia being “subtly attacked by a lecturer who was 
having an amazing influence on [him]” and of “beginning to face 
his inner demons” by a teacher and fellow students who made 
him think about things long after the classes had ended. His jour- 
nal ends thus: “Thank you Ms Smith, I owe you one.” 

One powerful example of how the academic can make room 
for and foster the personal lies in the fact that two students found 
the courage to come out in their journals: Thandiswe and Mat- 
thew spoke of how liberating it was to be free and to have a safe 
space in which to pursue the connection between the academic 
and the personal. Thandiswe used a commercially printed illus- 
trated journal for her entries and signaled her coming out by 
crossing out the drawing of a heterosexual couple and pasting 
next to it a photograph of two women. Furthermore, this photo- 
graph was taken from the publication of a student group called 
Activate, which deliberately describes its agenda as “anti-ho- 
mophobic” rather than “gay and lesbian” because it wishes to 
draw in as members all people opposed to homophobic beliefs 
and practices. Thandiswe used her academic investigation of the 
assigned texts of the course to help her deal with a personal con- 
frontation with her father, whose attitude to lesbianism was that 
it was not only “un-African” but also “unnatural” — a widely 
held and culturally specific prejudice with which black lesbians 
and gay men in South Africa have constantly to contend. Her 
final entry told me that she had been a student at this university 
for four years and never had “a learning experience like this”; 
she told me too that “nothing [she] has learned has ever had any 
impact on [her] life apart from this course.” Matthew thanked 
me for the “wonderful experience” and spoke of having been 
empowered “to grapple with concepts and apply them to the set 
texts and to [his] own life. ” He said that he “had thought it would 
be interesting to take such an ‘unconventional’ course so as to 
open [his] mind a little” but he concluded that “little did [he] 
know that it would have presented a whole new world to [him].” 
In South Africa, as the TV program in 1984 made clear, a 
strongly Calvinist, deeply conservative Christian tradition un- 
derlay apartheid policies and the exercise of power based on them. 
Two very conservative, fundamentalist Christian women were 





- 268 - 



Queer Pedagogy and Social Change 



brave enough to take this course, and they struggled hard with 
serious conflicts between their religious beliefs and practices and 
their academic commitments against the oppression of the Other. 
Both were hesitant at first to say anything they thought I might 
construe as homophobic and therefore hurtful to me personally, 
but they began to take great risks and emerged with a recogni- 
tion of the ambiguities inevitably part of the attempt to reconcile 
their religious beliefs with their academic position. Debbie con- 
cluded thus: “I honestly feel that Fve learned more about myself 
in this experience than in any other university assignment. I val- 
ued being challenged to think more deeply . . . and it saddens me 
that this is my last entry. This journal has become part of my life 
. . . thank you for your honesty and understanding.” Bronya 
spoke of her longing to “have heterosexual children so as not to 
have to face the conflict with [her] religious beliefs.” She was 
grateful to have learned to be unafraid of “expressing her conser- 
vative beliefs,” which the journal writing allowed her to do in 
safety. 

I needed to recognize that gratifying comments which 
complimented me as a teacher and paid tribute to the success of 
the course should be regarded warily, since even in the context of 
a democratically constituted classroom, power is not evenly dis- 
tributed. This power dynamic is demonstrated by the fact that all 
assignments had to be graded according to externally determined 
departmental conventions and requirements. Nonetheless, not all 
students felt a need to be complimentary: some raised issues sur- 
rounding the pedagogical problems related to maintaining a free, 
open space for student interaction and participation while still 
exercising enough control to keep the classes academically rigor- 
ous — a balancing act which, as I have indicated, was an anxiety 
of my own from the start. Ingrid mentioned “the difficulty of 
reconciling the need for structure and intellectual rigor” in the 
course with what she described as my “friendliness, accessibility 
and generally relaxed and informal vibe.” As she put it, “You 
maintained an open approach to things and pointed out ambigu- 
ities and problems rather than answers . . . and I just can’t stand 
seeing people take advantage of the fact that you are not aloof 
and intimidating by not doing very much work. Know what I 
mean?” Clint made similar points in his observation that “in a 

269 - 

299 



o 

ERIC 

MMMliiTifaiJ 



ANN SMITH 



course of this nature where the very binaries of constructed iden- 
tity are challenged, any hegemonic teaching presence would ne- 
gate the course at its most basic level, yet it was frustrating to 
find a few people slacking off because there was no penalty for 
doing so.” 

In addition to the student responses about the changes in 
their lives, I believe that the success of the course can be mea- 
sured, at least in part, in the encouragement it has given to some 
of my departmental colleagues to offer their own courses in gay 
and lesbian studies. In 1997 four courses, all of which use in 
their titles some of those formerly unprintable, if speakable, 
words — lesbian, homosexual, and queer — were outlined in the 
publicly available University of the Witwatersrand Arts and Hu- 
manities Prospectus for 1998: on offer as open electives from 
two colleagues were The Homosexual Predicament and Lesbian 
Modernism, along with my The Lesbian in Literature, and, in 
addition to this, a new course from me entitled An(other) Read- 
ing: Queer Politics and Postmodernism (or, I Can See Queerly 
Now!). Of particular significance, though, is the way in which 
my new course marks a significant shift in departmental think- 
ing: it takes the form of a series of lectures which are a compo- 
nent of the final year undergraduate core course and are therefore 
compulsory for all students. This demonstrates that gay and les- 
bian studies is becoming an integral part of our curriculum. As 
South Africa moves toward meaningfully implementing what has 
been hailed as the most progressive Constitution in the world, 
this course on The Lesbian in Literature will continue to provide 
a significant academic site from which the challenges of social 
change can be explored. I do believe that at least some of these 
students, with their awareness of the pervasiveness and ubiqui- 
tousness of politically and socially oppressive structures, will 
continue to work toward personal and social change long after 
they have left the university. 

Works Cited 

Charlewood, Carole. Viewpoint, SABC TVl. Gay and Lesbian Archives 

Collection. University of the Witwatersrand Libraries. 4 Sept.1984. 



270 





Queer Pedagogy and Social Change 



Giroux, Henry. “Resisting Difference: Cultural Studies and the Discourse 
of Critical Pedagogy.” Cultural Studies. Ed. Lawrence Grossberg, 
Cary Nelson, and Paula Treichler. New York: Routledge, 1992. 199- 
212 . 

Giroux, Henry, and Paulo Friere. Series Introduction. Critical Pedagogy 
and Cultural Power. Ed. David W. Livingstone. South Hadley, MA: 
Bergin, 1987. xi-xvi. 

Graff, Gerald. Beyond the Culture Wars: How Teaching the Conflicts 
Can Revitalize American Education. New York: Norton, 1992. 

Grossberg, Lawrence, Cary Nelson, and Paula A. Treichler, eds. Cul- 
tural Studies. New York: Routledge, 1992. 

Hall, Radclyffe. The Well of Loneliness. 1928. London: Falcon, 1949. 

Heilman, Lillian. The Childrens Hour. 1934. New York: Modern Li- 
brary, 1942. 

Jagose, Annemarie. Lesbian Utopics. New York: Routledge, 1994. 

Lorde, Audre. Zami: A New Spelling of My Name. Freedom, CA: Cross- 
ing, 1982. 

Malinowitz, Harriet. Textual Orientations: Lesbian and Gay Students 
and the Making of Discourse Communities. Portsmouth, NH: 
Heinemann, 1995. 

Naylor, Gloria. The Women of Brewster Place. London: Hodder, 1982. 

Rich, Adrienne. Blood, Bread and Poetry: Selected Prose 1979-1985. 
London: Virago, 1986. 

Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky. “Pedagogy in the Context of an Antihomopho- 
bic Project.” South Atlantic Quarterly 89.1 (1990): 139-56. 

Wilton, Tamsin. Lesbian Studies: Setting an Agenda. New York: 
Routledge, 1995. 



- 271 - 




Chapter Fifteen 





The Straight Path to Postcolonial 
Salvation: Heterosexism and the 
Teaching of English in India Today 

Ruth Vanita 
University of Montana 



O f all the schools of critical theory that have developed in 
academic studies in the West over the last fev^ decades, 
postcolonial studies is the one that has been most eagerly em- 
braced in the Indian academy and lesbian and gay studies the 
one most systematically avoided. This selection is not fortuitous. 
The proponents of postcolonial studies in India range from or- 
thodox Marxists to right-wing nationalists, and what these ap- 
parent antagonists share is a stance of opposition to a monolith 
known as “the West,” which, when deconstructed, turns out to 
be England in the role of a lesser Satan and the United States in 
the role of the archfiend himself! Given that postcolonial theory 
was imported from precisely this Western hell, the relationship 
with Satan becomes fraught, as relationships with Satan are wont 
to be. Scholars often seek to resolve this tension by wedding 
postcolonial studies to straight feminist theory and erasing any 
suggestion of lesbian and gay theory. 

In India, the politics of canon formation — expressed in syl- 
labi, choice of dissertation topics, works included in or excluded 
from bibliographies and hence bought or not bought for librar- 
ies — is based on a few unexamined assumptions derived from an 
undigested mix of feminism, deconstructionism, postcolonialism, 
and theories of popular culture. These assumptions include the 
following: 



302 



- 272 - 



The Straight Path to Postcolonial Salvation 

1. Any canonical text, especially if written by a white male, is bound 
to be patriarchal and conservative, and the less we read of such 
texts the better. 

2. Anything written by an American (even a white woman and per- 
haps even an African American man) is written in a neo-imperi- 
alist context and hence is suspect. African American women 
writers are usually an exception. 

3. Writing is determined by the writer’s subject position; conse- 
quently, the writer’s nationality is crucial. That the writer may 
happen to be explicitly critical of his or her country or govern- 
ment is irrelevant. 

4. Nothing is adequately radical unless it is adequately postcolonial. 



What are the consequences of these assumptions ? First, vir- 
tually all homoerotically charged writing in English literature that 
could provide lesbian and gay students with a sense of ancestry 
disappears. Critical work in lesbian and gay studies and queer 
theory is also almost entirely absent. In attempts to reframe En- 
glish literature syllabi in India today, a case can be made for the 
inclusion of virtually any Indian or other postcolonial writer, a 
weaker case for a white female writer, but no case at all for a 
white male writer. Since same-sex desire is rarely ever mentioned 
in the Indian academy, its oppositional aspect is not acknowl- 
edged as a viable site of inquiry in literary studies. Thus a couple 
of years ago, in a debate around syllabus change for the B.A. 
Honours degree in English literature at a leading Indian univer- 
sity, The Color Purple was deemed unfit for undergraduate study 
because of its explicit descriptions of lesbian sex, and Emily 
Dickinson and Tennessee Williams were summarily dismissed 
because they were American. 

Third, postcolonial and black writers are not considered suf- 
ficiently radical unless they assert their postcolonial or black iden- 
tity. Assertion of a lesbian or gay identity by these writers is 



RUTH VANITA 



considered irrelevant. For example, one teacher of English at an 
Indian university who, in a dissertation on James Baldwin, had 
characterized Baldwin as a sell-out to white culture, had not even 
considered that Baldwin’s foregrounding of homosexual themes 
might be potentially radical, and was surprised when I suggested 
this to him. The puritanical and hegemonic insistence on 
postcolonialism as the sole criterion of radicalism was demon- 
strated by one graduate student/teacher of English literature who 
remarked during an M.Phil. oral exam that the only English text 
he had ever read which was adequately radical and therefore sat- 
isfying to him was Ngugi’s Devil on the Cross, because it was 
written by Ngugi in his own language and later translated into 
English and hence was, in his view, truly decolonized. 

One time-tested strategy used to build a sense of identity and 
community by homosexually inclined people such as Wilde and 
Pater in Victorian England and lesbians and gays in the twenti- 
eth century has been the reclaiming of well-known historical fig- 
ures.' This strategy is still very useful in societies where most 
homosexuals are invisible and silent. I have found that in the 
course of a debate, whether in the classroom or with family mem- 
bers, a gay reference to Plato, Shakespeare, Michelangelo, Vir- 
ginia Woolf, or others incites much argument because most people 
are unwilling to denounce as unnatural or sick artists they con- 
sider “geniuses.” In the Indian academy today, this strategy and 
the subsequent debates that surround it are undermined by an 
anticanonical approach that ignores artistic excellence, privileg- 
ing instead texts that focus on victimization and resistance. 

The Indian left, however, including dominant Indian femi- 
nism (when it says anything at all on the subject, which is rarely), 
tends to take, at best, the position that homosexuals are not and 
never have been persecuted in India, and that such persecution 
was imported from the West; at worst, it takes the position that 
homosexuality itself is a Western perversion imported through 
the capitalist free market.^ The silence and invisibility of homo- 
sexuality, and the relentless glorification of heterosexuality, mar- 
riage, and childbearing, are neither acknowledged as problems 
nor characterized as oppressive. Instead, the focus of dominant 
Indian feminism is on the reform of marriage, the redressal of 
abuses within marriage, and the support of motherhood. The 



- 274 - 



The Straight Path to Postcolonial Salvation 

editor of India’s leading feminist journal recently told me that 
since Indian homosexuals are not victimized, they have “no rea- 
son to make a fuss.” Following this logic, since we are disquali- 
fied from victim status, we have nothing to resist and hence texts 
produced by us cannot be radical. At best, such texts are irrel- 
evant; at worst, they are decadent and self-obsessed. It is no acci- 
dent that in the last twenty years, not a single text by Oscar Wilde 
has figured in any undergraduate or graduate course in English 
at Delhi University. 

In contrast to the situation in most western countries, the 
Indian academy is far behind the media in its ostrichlike approach 
to the subject of homosexuality. Gay people are highly visible in 
the urban India theater, the performing arts, and fashion and 
design.^ The Indian mass media tend to take a generally sympa- 
thetic, even celebratory, view of those who dare to come out. The 
oppressive silence in the academy, however, ensures that in a huge 
university such as Delhi University, perhaps one or two faculty 
members are somewhat openly gay, while homosexuality is rarely, 
if ever, built into an academic discourse. 

This silence has roots in the history of South Asian studies 
and has been reinforced by the heterosexist biases of postcolonial 
theory. There is a wealth of material relating to same-sex love in 
Indian languages, literatures, visual arts, and modern mass me- 
dia. Without any extended history of overt persecution in 
precolonial India, same-sex love and romantic friendship have 
existed in various forms at different times and places on the sub- 
continent, tolerated if not always approved. Nineteenth-century 
British administrators and educationists imported their generally 
antisex and specifically homophobic attitudes into already 
heterosexist Indian society. The antisodomy law was put on the 
statute book in India in 1860 and remains in place today as Sec- 
tion 377 of the Indian Penal Code, even though homosexuality 
between consenting adults was decriminalized in England in 1967. 

Indian nationalism inherited this new homophobia, which 
remains unexamined by postcolonial theorists. Even before the 
advent of postcolonial theory. South Asian scholarship, both in 
India and in the West, either ignored precolonial materials relat- 
ing to same-sex desire or interpreted it as heterosexual. In the 
course of research for our recent collection of Indian writings on 





- 275 - 



RUTH VANITA 



same-sex love, Saleem Kidwai and I have found that many such 
writings have been bowdlerized and even erased from the canon."^ 
For instance, poems that openly describe sex between women 
are often missing in modern Indian editions of collected works of 
major medieval Urdu poets. In one case, the only edition that 
included these poems was published in Italy. The Indian histori- 
ans who invented subaltern studies never considered that homo- 
sexuals might be a subaltern group. These attitudes have helped 
foster the popular belief in modern India that homosexuality is 
an aberration imported from Europe or West Asia and was non- 
existent in ancient India. The well-known tendency of postcolonial 
theorists in the Indian diaspora to ignore same-sex desire as a 
viable site of intellectual, literary, or cultural inquiry thus com- 
fortably reinforced, rather than unsettled, the already well-es- 
tablished heterosexism of the Indian academy. 

Of contemporary Indian writers in English, those who fore- 
ground and stress their “Indian-ness” are most often regarded as 
representative of postcolonial and/or popular culture. Given the 
political context I have outlined, any foregrounding of homo- 
sexuality runs the risk of being automatically disqualified as not 
indicative of “Indian-ness.” This is compounded by the fact that 
most gay, lesbian, and bisexual Indian writers need to keep at 
least one foot in the West, and many of them emigrate, for the 
simple reason that they need an openly gay culture in order to 
live with some degree of freedom. Emigrant writers are viewed 
with suspicion in the Indian academy because they are consid- 
ered to have sold out to the West; they are thought less pure than 
the supposedly truly nationalist writers who remain in India.^ In 
this debate, the relation between nationalism and heterosexism 
remains untheorized. When academics and creative writers choose 
to return to India after an education abroad, this choice is often 
tied to the choice to marry and raise children. The simultaneity 
of the two choices is so heavily normalized that scholarship in 
postcolonial studies on/in India has not theorized them as re- 
lated. An unacknowledged heterosexism does ensure, however, 
that the choice to return to India constitutes a powerful subtext 
in the constitution of these writers as more “authentically” Indian. 

I will try to demonstrate the way this normalizing process 
works by looking at the recent fortunes of two Indian women 





- 276 - 



The Straight Path to Postcolonial Salvation 



writers — Shobha De and Suniti Namjoshi — both of whom have 
frequently represented lesbian subjects, but in contrasting ways. 
Shobha De, known as Shobha Kilachand before her marriage, 
was a writer of film gossip columns. She then took to writing 
novels, the titles of which adequately indicate their contents — 
Socialite Evenings, Starry Nights, and Strange Obsession. These 
novels deal with the sexual escapades of highly affluent people 
and present extended descriptions of their bodies, clothing, food 
and drink, and sexual activities. The novels are always sold and 
reviewed with photographs and accounts of the author pack- 
aged like one of her characters — a beautiful and fashionable 
member of the jet set, accompanied by inevitable references to 
her pride in being a wife and the mother of six children. This mix 
is crucial. Everything about the text and the author is highly 
Westernized except — and it is a crucial exception — the impec- 
cable focus on marriage and prolific childbearing, which is con- 
stituted as a stamp of Indian-ness. All of this is not surprising. 
What is surprising is that novels by Shobha De have been in- 
cluded in courses on popular culture at the University of London 
and in the English department at Bombay University. At a recent 
seminar on Jane Austen, a Delhi University English Honours 
undergraduate student, well trained in postcolonial discourse, 
asked me why students have to study Austen and Dickens rather 
than something more relevant. When I asked what she would 
like to study instead, she named Shobha De and Khushwant Singh 
(De’s admirer and collaborator on a book on Indian sexuality; 
read: heterosexuality). 

What about De’s postcolonial texts is “more relevant”? One 
important feature is their overt heterosexism. Lesbian episodes 
occur quite frequently in her novels, as do stereotyped lesbian 
characters, frequently portrayed negatively. Her most extended 
portrayal of a lesbian occurs in her novel Strange Obsession, where 
the title refers to a lesbian passion. In my reading of the novel, I 
focus on its use of animal imagery. There are powerful traditions 
in Indian literatures of using animals as sites for ungendering 
and for the development of alternative emotional engagements 
and eroticisms. There are also traditions in English literature of 
animals as stand-ins for the homosexual beloved and for the 
hunted, persecuted, but innocent woman or homosexual. In the 



RUTH VANITA 



work of contemporary Indian writers such as Suniti Namjoshi 
and Vikram Seth, these traditions encounter and enrich one an- 
other, and I will examine examples of this in Namjoshi’s work 
later. Shobha De’s writing, on the other hand, uses animal imag- 
ery in a completely stereotyped and homophobic way, character- 
izing homosexuality as bestial. In the context of her flaunting of 
Indian-ness, it is worth pointing out that Indian philosophical 
traditions do not generally take such a view of animals. In Hindu 
tradition, there is no essential difference between human and 
nonhuman beings since the soul can inhabit human and nonhu- 
man bodies in different births. Animals in Hindu texts, both writ- 
ten and oral, participate as agents in the action, speak rationally 
as a matter of course (rather than by miracle), and are often cher- 
ished allies and friends of humans as well as models for humans 
to imitate. 

Shobha De’s heroine Amrita (the name means “heavenly nec- 
tar”) is introduced as “the most beautiful woman in the world” 
(2). The excitement in India following the winning of the Miss 
World and Miss Universe titles by two Indian women in 1994 
suggests the sort of nationalism De is appealing to here. Amrita 
is “no more than an average student” but makes up for this by 
her “magnificently structured body, with its long toast-brown 
legs, narrow waist, and breasts that stood out — proud, high and 
firm” (2). In Chapter 2, Amrita encounters the lesbian Meenakshi, 
“buying a pack of imported cigarettes” (5), The action is signifi- 
cant — on Amrita ’s first date with her future husband Rakesh, he 
will forbid her to smoke, telling her that smoking is a “foul habit” 
(143), Meenakshi’s nickname, by which she is known through- 
out the novel, is “Minx.” Minx has short hair, always dresses in 
black, almost always wears men’s clothes, and operates in the 
Bombay underworld as the only woman amongst men. She uses 
all the weapons of the mafia, from blackmail, to acid throwing, 
to staged street accidents and shoot-outs. Amrita sees Minx as 
“ugly,” with a “flaky, mottled skin that gave her a reptilian ap- 
pearance” (30). She WOOS Amrita aggressively, loading her with 
expensive gifts and warding off all rivals with violence. Amrita 
responds by telling her repeatedly that she is “abnormal,” 
“weird,” and “sick” (22, 42). 

o 308 ■ - 278 - 

ERLC 



The Straight Path to Postcolonial Salvation 



Amrita’s perception is soon reinforced for the reader by Minx’s 
penchant for sheidding the blood of animals. She slaughters a 
piglet in Amrita’s sink, leaves a dead calf’s heart in her fridge, 
and sacrifices a goat to the goddess after Amrita first sleeps with 
her. Explicit descriptions of sex between the two women all rep- 
resent Minx in the active role and Amrita passively moaning with 
the pleasure of multiple orgasms. Apart from making love to 
Amrita, Minx is shown masturbating, but there is no indication 
that Amrita makes love to Minx until, very near the end of the 
novel when the affair is over and Amrita is married to a man. 
Minx tells Amrita after abducting her: “Use your fingers . . . like 
you used them on me” (199). Minx throws acid on one of Amrita’s 
professional rivals and also mutilates this female fashion model 
by knifing her in the vagina. She forces Amrita into a wedding 
ceremony with her and undergoes surgery to reduce the size of 
her own breasts. 

Pursued, threatened, and fascinated by Minx, Amrita suc- 
cumbs, and they live together for six months. During this period. 
Minx continues to pamper Amrita and shower her with expen- 
sive gifts but keeps close watch over her and goes into jealous 
rages if Amrita so much as looks at a man. In debates over the 
validity of their relationship. Minx argues persuasively that her 
love is genuine and not abnormal. Amrita persists in calling theirs 
“an unnatural, relationship” (204) that is “kinky,” “crazy,” 
“wrong,” and the product of Minx’s “lunacy” (109-110). 
Amrita’s homophobic views are bolstered and Minx’s arguments 
undercut by the novel’s representation of Minx as indeed a rav- 
ing lunatic who reacts to Amrita’s. having coffee with a man by 
tying Amrita down and singeing her pubic hair with a lighted 
cigarette and, later, after Amrita’s marriage, abducting her hus- 
band and nearly killing him as well as Amrita and herself. 

Homophobic prejudices expressed by heterosexual charac- 
ters are heavily reinforced by the action. Amrita’s friend Partha, 
presented as an intellectual and the editor of a newsmagazine, 
sums up the debate in his contemptuous comment: “I get it — 
she’s one of those. I won’t call her a lesbo. The correct term these 
days for them is, I believe, people who practise alternative sexu- 
ality” (113). The reason for this contempt becomes evident in 




279 - 



309 



RUTH VANITA 



Amrita’s ultimate challenge, delivered when Minx desperately 
offers to undergo a sex change operation. In a variant of Angela 
Crossby’s question “Could you marry me, Stephen?,” Amrita 
demands: “Will you be able to fill my womb with a child? An- 
swer me” (110). When Amrita finally deserts Minx for an ar- 
ranged marriage with Rakesh, a New York-based industrialist 
who is Indian enough to touch his mother-in-law’s feet and to 
seek his parents’ blessings before finalizing the match, he proves 
his credentials by filling her womb. The last pages of the novel 
tell us: “Her enormous belly had begun to get in the way already. 
And it wasn’t even five months yet. Twins? Everybody seemed to 
think so” (207). 

But the birth of more Amritas and Rakeshes is not enough. 
The death of the lesbian is also necessary. So, after Minx has 
attempted suicide, kidnapped Rakesh, tortured him and Amrita, 
and tried to burn them and herself to death, she is taken into 
custody by her father. Early in the novel. Minx had won Amrita’s 
sympathy by telling her that she had been beaten and raped by 
her father when she was a child and subsequently rejected by her 
mother. This is the only passage in the novel in which Minx is 
sympathetically represented; we are told that “she was less wary 
and almost feminine at that moment” (46). This is the only ex- 
tenuating circumstance offered throughout the novel for Minx’s 
behavior. And right at the end, it is withdrawn. Amrita meets 
Minx’s father, who is horrified when told about Minx’s accusa- 
tion. It turns out that Minx had inherited her madness from her 
mother, who was in a mental institution. “God almighty knows 
the truth. The psychiatrist who treated her mother knows it too” 
(203), he tells Amrita, who apologizes. Two years later, the preg- 
nant Amrita reads Minx’s obituary in a newspaper and the novel 
ends: “She felt herself shiver involuntarily. Amrita was free at 
last” (208). The moral of the story: the good Indian woman can 
only be freed into normative heterosexuality when the bestial 
lesbian dies. 

Minx’s animality is an important theme in the novel. Apart 
from her name, her black cat, and her killing of animals, she is 
also referred to as a loathsome animal. Amrita sees her as a rep- 
tile; Rakesh says “we’ll pick her up like a stray rat and chuck her 
into the dustbin” (157); and when she kidnaps Rakesh, the local 





- 280 - 



The Straight Path to Postcolonial Salvation 

rustics remark that human beings don’t hurt each other in this 
rural area but “who can say anything about wild animals?” (179). 
When they find a pool of Rakesh’s blood, it is clear who the wild 
animal is. A strong link is thus established between homosexual- 
ity and animality. Amrita’s first lover, who turns out to be bi- 
sexual, is named “Rover” and sleeps with her in the presence of 
his dog. In contrast to Rover’s unimaginative lovemaking, Rakesh 
is described as doing to Amrita everything Minx did but in “a 
new” way “she’d never experienced before” (160). In addition, 
on his honeymoon Rakesh develops the trait, unique to him in 
the novel, of referring to men whom he dislikes as “eunuchs” 
and “buggers” (176-77). 

Women’s organizations in India frequently protest what they 
see as obscene, pornographic, or degrading representations of 
women in books, film, television, and popular culture, including 
a World Beauty Pageant held in Bangalore in 1996. Feminist or- 
ganizations, however, have not protested De’s viciously homopho- 
bic text. On the contrary, De is increasingly acquiring intellectual 
respectability, nationally and internationally, as an icon of so- 
called popular culture. On the other hand, Suniti Namjoshi, who 
is an ideal candidate for syllabus inclusion as a postcolonial femi- 
nist writer, working creatively as she does with several traditions 
and genres such as fables, utopian fantasies, and poetry, is virtu- 
ally ignored in the Indian academy. Her positive foregrounding 
of lesbian themes seems to me the only possible reason for this. 
Namjoshi lives with and often writes in collaboration with Gillian 
Hanscombe. Indian editions of her books rarely carry her picture 
and merely state cryptically that “she lives and writes in Devon.” 

One of the secrets of De’s success is that she says nothing at 
all unexpected. She reheats and serves up the lukewarm leftovers 
from agony aunt columns, fashion spreads, and magazine sto- 
ries. Suniti Namjoshi also rewrites the old, but in such a way as 
to make more explosive its already explosive potential. One set 
of images her work frequently engages with is that of beasts. In 
her fable “A Moral Tale,” she deconstructs the narrative of the 
monstrous beast in love with beauty and shows how the ancient 
idea of metamorphosis may contain both tragedy and utopia. 
The tale begins: “The Beast wasn’t a nobleman. The Beast was a 
woman. That’s why its love for Beauty was so monstrous” {Femi- 




< -i ^ 






- 281 - 



RUTH VANITA 



nist Fables 23). Rejected by her female beloved and ridiculed by 
society, the Beast finds refuge in books and realizes: “I know 
what’s wrong: I am not human. The only story that fits me at all 
is the one about the Beast. But the Beast doesn’t change from a 
Beast to a human because of its love. It’s just the reverse. And the 
Beast isn’t fierce. It’s extremely gentle. It loves Beauty, but it lives 
alone and dies alone” (23). 

In Namjoshi’s fable “A Quiet Life,” the unnamed female pro- 
tagonist is described as not exceptional in any way and as having 
“kept her sufferings largely to herself, the nature of her pain not 
being admissible” (Feminist Fables 51). When asked what she 
wants, she replies, “I don’t want to be a woman.” She is then 
asked, “Do you want to be a man?” and replies “No.” Finally, 
she says, “I want to hide, to live in the bushes, be a rabbit or a 
squirrel or a mythical animal . . . when there’s nobody about, be 
what I am; and when people are present, disguise myself.” “As 
what?” “As a fake woman.” (51). The text here engages with 
that aspect of imagination, individual and collective, which re- 
sists compulsory heterosexuality. The mixture of fascination, fear, 
amusement, awe, and ludic attraction with which hijra, or eu- 
nuch communities, are viewed in India indicates the tensions at 
work. More than one older Indian woman friend has told me, 
half playfully, half seriously, “Fm a hijra,'' which reminds me of 
Virginia Woolf’s statement that she was neither a man nor a 
woman. Indian lesbian friends have expressed to me feelings simi- 
lar to my own, to the effect that they do not think of themselves 
as women or as men. As an experiment, I have asked many 
nonfeminist Indian women friends of differing class, age, and 
sexuality whether they would like to be reborn as men or as 
women, and have almost invariably received the answer, “Not as 
a woman.” Some have said they would like to be birds. 

In Namjoshi’s work, animal tropes suggest crossings of the 
boundaries of race, gender, culture, nationality, and sexuality. 
Her beasts, with their capacity to transform themselves and to 
live at ease in more than one skin, are less containable than hu- 
man beings already positioned in categories of nationality and 
gender. The beasts often reveal the surprising commonalties of 
apparently distinct traditions and mythologies. Thus the donkey 
in both Western and Eastern folk traditions has a reputation for 




312 



- 282 - 



The Straight Path to Postcolonial Salvation 



Stupidity. But in the Biblical tradition (which can be considered 
both Middle Eastern and European), it is meek and humble, and 
it is also the only beast that speaks to give its master good advice. 
Blue is a heavenly color in both European and Indian iconogra- 
phy — it is the color of the Virgin’s mantle and also of Sri Krishna’s 
complexion. Namjoshi’s wise, unheroically heroic, and self-pa- 
rodic blue donkey appropriates and plays with these, among other, 
traditions. 

Even more interesting are her cows. Used in the West to put 
down women (“stupid cow”), Hindus (“cow worshippers”), and 
India generally (“cows wandering on the streets”), and used in 
India to express horror against non-Hindus (beef eaters), the cow 
is a symbol of many kinds of prejudice. Namjoshi’s cow 
Bhadravati, in The Conversations of Cow, recalls the mythologi- 
cal cornucopian cow Kamadhenu, fulfiller of all wishes. In Hindu 
tradition, Kama is one of the four aims of life and the third stage 
in the achievement of self-realization or liberation. Kama means 
“wish” and dhenu means “cow”; another meaning of kama is 
“work” and yet another meaning is “eroticism” or “sex,” as in 
Kamasutra. Bhadravati is therefore quite appropriately a lesbian 
who has the disconcerting ability to turn herself into anything — 
a white man, an Indian woman, and, in a comic transformation 
of Indian omnivorous scavenger cows, a devourer of the uni- 
verse. This last incarnation is somewhat alarming to the narra- 
tor, Suniti, since Bhadravati naturally objects to beef eating and 
reflects in an ecologically sound manner that a change in the diet 
of cows would “change the world balance” (22). Scavenger cows 
on streets in India today travel in all-female groups, accompa- 
nied by calves, and are often to be seen licking, caressing, and 
playing with each other at traffic intersections and other conve- 
nient spots. Bulls, on the other hand, roam alone. So Namjoshi’s 
community of separatist lesbian cows has a material base in ur- 
ban India as well as in Western feminism! 

Namjoshi’s latest work. Saint Suniti and the Dragon, attempts 
to confront the frightening dragon within the self, that which is 
hated as ugly and reptilian. Her earlier attempts to demystify the 
Other, in poems such as “Among Tigers,” dwell on keeping an 
uneasy distance from the “massive jaws” of that “lordly race” 
(The Blue Donkey Fables 70). In another early poem titled “If 




^ X o 



- 283 - 



RUTH VANITA 



somehow I might . . . she wishes she had the “vision” that 
would enable her to see “some strutting and well-nourished male” 
as merely a “beautiful animal” and treat this as “occasion to feel 
blessed and bless” (56). In Saint Suniti and the Dragon, the nar- 
rator encounters the monstrous oppressor’s humanity, even as 
expressed in his greed and violence, and is forced to recognize in 
herself elements that mirror both him and his equally monstrous 
female parent. In the last section “On the Extinction of Drag- 
ons,” Suniti and the dragon are both bleeding to death. The 
dragon writes a beautiful elegy for her, and the text closes with 
the dragon’s unanswered question: “But wouldn’t the extinction 
of dragons be very sad?” (Feminist Fables 183). 

Namjoshi arguably makes far more creative use than Hoes 
De of Indian literary conventions, as of Western literary conven- 
tions, not only in her use of beast tropes but also in her narrative 
strategies and allusions. De’s narrative predictably follows the 
conventions of the realistic English novel. It would seem that the 
inclusion of De in a course at Bombay University is based on a 
postcolonialism that in practice gets reduced to nationalism, which 
in turn is heavily invested in heterosexism. 

If the beast metaphor indicates the potential of lesbian and 
gay texts to cross boundaries of gender, nationality, and culture, 
the metaphor of aggressive male sport indicates the dominant 
direction of postcolonial theory in India today. In his concluding 
remarks in a recent collection of essays on postcolonialism, Harish 
Trivedi proposes a strategy of “combative engagement” by In- 
dian critics with postcolonial theory that originates in Euramerica. 
The metaphor he uses to advocate this strategy is that of boxing: 
“this would mean neither a craven throwing-in of the towel by 
us, nor a knock-out victory over the rival which is in any case 
too wishful to come true, but rather, after many rounds of short- 
armed jabs and much close body punching while locked together 
in a clinch which may look like an embrace but is still combat, a 
decision finally on points” (245). One unintended irony here is 
that boxing is an extremely bloody and masculinist sport which 
originated in imperialist Rome and was revived in imperialist 
England in the eighteenth century. Its rules were codified by the 
Marquis of Queensberry, notorious for his persecution of his son’s 
lover, Oscar Wilde. To suggest this sport as a metaphoric model 

- 284 - 

314 " 




w Vi. 



The Straight Path to Postcolonial Salvation 

for Indian postcolonial theorists is to unwittingly evoke the 
heterosexist homosociality of both the sport and the theory: “a 
clinch which may look like an embrace but is still combat.” 

The metaphor is an apt one for the hidden agenda of 
postcolonial theory in the Indian academy today. Postcolonial 
theory functions to legitimize the praxis of nationalism, which in 
modern India is heavily masculinist and heterosexist. This legiti- 
mation occurs in such enterprises as syllabi formation, wherein 
writers ostensibly chosen for their Indian-ness are generally those 
whose writings foreground normative heterosexuality. Indian 
postcolonial theorists’ ignoring of queer studies ensures that the 
equation of Indian-ness with heterosexuality has become so nor- 
malized that it remains almost completely unexamined. 

Recently, however, a number of scholars outside the ambit of 
postcolonial theory and outside the Indian ‘academy have begun 
to research same-sex desire in India. Amongst the works reflect- 
ing this interest are Jeffrey KripaPs biography of Sri Ramakrishna; 
Giti Thadani’s short book on lesbianism, Sakhiyani, which is 
flawed by an unaccountable erasure of medieval, especially Mus- 
lim materials; and Serena Nanda’s study of hijras. In addition, 
there are a few essays by scholars such as Michael Sweet and 
Leonard Zwilling on some ancient texts. 

Much more important than importing queer theory into In- 
dia, however, is the need to develop theories that arise out of 
research on South Asian texts on same-sex attachment. Kidwai 
and I hope that our anthology will provide materials for a new 
generation of scholars in India to conduct extended research into 
different Indian languages and literatures, including Indian writ- 
ings in English (see Vanita and Kidwai). Some patterns we dis- 
covered that are significantly different from patterns of 
representation in Western texts relate to indigenous literary tra- 
ditions and belief systems; for example, the belief in rebirth often 
works in texts, as in life, to legitimize same-sex attachment by 
making gender appear fluid and changeable from one birth to 
another. We also found several instances, in both medieval and 
ancient Indian texts, of linguistic terms being used to categorize 
persons by sexual preference. This suggests that Foucault’s thesis 
regarding the invention of homosexual identity in the nineteenth 
century, which has been challenged even in the West, is certainly 




o ^ 

OlO 



- 285 - 



RUTH VANITA 



not true for the entire world. Taking into account South Asian 
perspectives will enrich lesbian and gay studies in the West, which 
has hitherto almost altogether ignored them. Research by young 
Indian scholars, some of whom will go on to become teachers of 
English at Indian universities, will hopefully make it increasingly 
difficult for the Indian academy and its postcolonial theorists to 
perpetuate the normalization and norma tivization of heterosexu- 
ality. 



Notes 



1. Walter Pater, in his collection of essays titled The Renaissance (1.873), 
used this strategy to homoeroticize famous figures, such as Michelangelo 
and Leonardo da Vinci,’ as did Oscar Wilde in his essay on Shakespeare’s 
sonnets, “The Portrait of Mr. W. H.” and Edward Carpenter in his lolaus: 
An Anthology of Friendship. For detailed analyses of these texts and of 
the tradition of constructing a homosexual literary ancestry, see my 
Sappho and the Virgin Mary: Same-Sex Love and the English Literary 
Imagination, especially Chapters 3, 4, and 7. 

2. The Communist Party of India’s women’s front. The National Fed- 
eration of Indian Women, issued through its spokeswoman, Vimla 
Farooqui, newspaper statements making this claim, recently asking the 
government to ban a gay conference in Bombay. 

3. Many plays focusing on lesbian and gay issues have been staged in 
the urban centers of India over the last two decades. The Importance of 
Being Earnest remains a perennial favorite with theater groups, includ- 
ing dramatic societies at colleges. 

4. An anthology of such materials from the earliest times to the present, 
translated from Indian languages and edited by Ruth Vanita and Saleem 
Kidwai, was recently published by St. Martin’s Press. 

5. For further elaboration of this argument, see Makarand Paranjape’s 
“Coping with Post-Colonialism,” in Trivedi and Mukherjee. 





The Straight Path to Postcolonial Salvation 



Works Cited 



Carpenter, Edward. lolaus: An Anthology of Friendship. London: Allen, 



De, Shobha. Strange Obsession. New Delhi: Penguin, 1992. 

Kripal, Jeffrey. KalPs Child: The Mystical and the Erotic in the Life and 
Teachings of Ramakrishna. Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1995. 

Nanda, Serena. Neither Man nor Woman: The Hijras of India. Belmont, 
CA: Wadsworth, 1990. 

Namjoshi, Suniti. The Blue Donkey Fables. New Delhi: Penguin, 1991. 

. The Conversations of Cow. London: Women’s, 1985. 

. Feminist Fables; Saint Suniti and The Dragon. New Delhi: Pen- 
guin, 1995. 

Paranjape, Makarand. “Coping with Post-Colonialism.” Trivedi and 
Mukherjee 37-48. 

Pater, Walter. The Renaissance: Studies in Art and Poetry. Ed. Adam 
Phillips. Oxford: Oxford UP, 1985. 

Sweet, Michael, and Leonard Zwilling. “The First Medicalization: The 
Taxonomy and Etiology of Queerness in Classical Indian Medi- 
cine.” Journal of the History of Sexuality 4 (1993): 590-607. 

Thadani, Giti. Sakhiyani: Lesbian Desire in Ancient and Modern India. 
New York: Cassell, 1996. 

Trivedi, Harish, and Meenakshi Mukherjee, eds. Interrogating Post- 
Colonialism: Theory, Text, and Context. Simla: Indian Inst, of Ad- 
vanced Studies, 1996. 

Vanita, Ruth. Sappho and the Virgin Mary: Same-Sex Love and the 
English Literary I?naginatio7t. New York: Columbia UP, 1996. 

Vanita, Ruth, and Saleem Kidwai, eds. Same-Sex Love in India: Read- 
ings from Literature and History. New York: St. Martin’s, 2000. 

Wilde, Oscar. “The Portrait of Mr. W. H. ” Complete Works of Oscar 
Wilde. 1966. Ed. Vyvyan Holland. London: Collins, 1983. 



1902. 



- 287 - 




Chapter Sixteen 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 

Marcia Blumberg 

The Open University, Milton Keynes, England 



[W]e have no alternative but to involve ourselves and 
mire ourselves in what we are calling the textuality of 
the socius. The real task here is to displace and undo that 
killing opposition between text narrowly conceived as 
the verbal text and activism narrowly conceived as some 
sort of mindless engagement, 

Gayatri Chakravorty Spivak, “The Intervention Interview” 

AIDS activists know that silence equals death, but we 
also know that this cannot be said, it must be performed, 

Cindy Patton, Inventing AIDS 

The quilt works as a symbol, but it also works as rheto- 
ric, , , ,[It] quite literally invites a reading — the panels 
are the leaves of an enormous textile text. Speaking its 
complex visual, verbal, and nonverbal language, the 
Names Project quilt sets about claiming power for people 
with AIDS by creating a story of their own making, 

Judy Elsley, “The Rhetoric of the NAMES 
Project AIDS Quilt: Reading the Text(ile)” 

It is essential to put a human face on this epidemic, , , , 
We can talk about statistics or money, but this quilt is 
about people, person by person, panel by panel, 

Anthony Turney, “The Power of a Single Pebble” 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



M y epigraphs address the fluid yet vital relations between 
art and lived experience, between text and context, be- 
tween pedagogical theory and praxis, between the performativity 
of activism and the activism of performance. What informs the 
dynamic when these linkages are situated within a time-space of 
AIDS? Reading the densely woven text of the AIDS Memorial 
Quilt, I examine different approaches, agendas, positionings, and 
responses to the Quilt display that was last performed in its en- 
tirety from October 11 to 13, 1996, in Washington, D.C. These 
readings investigate the conditions of representation, the sites of 
struggle, and the imperatives for readers/spectators to engage with 
the complexities at the nexus of AIDS: the arts, class, race, gen- 
der, and sexual identity, as well as other issues. 

The AIDS Memorial Quilt came into being in the United States 
out of a sense of desperation at the growing numbers of deaths 
from AIDS-related causes, and anger at'the disease of prejudice 
and the resulting marginalization that rendered these deaths in- 
visible. Cindy Ruskin asserts: “As a nation, we have struggled 
not only against a disease, but also against the equally destruc- 
tive enemies of ignorance, hysteria, and bigotry” (157). The origi- 
nator of the Quilt, Cleve Jones, a gay rights activist from San 
Francisco, was planning a candlelight memorial march in 1985 
for San Francisco officials Harvey Milk, the gay city supervisor, 
and mayor George Moscone, both of whom had been murdered 
seven years earlier. Noticing a headline in the San Francisco Ex- 
aminer, “1,000 AIDS Deaths in S.F.,” Jones was disturbed to re- 



I would like to honor the memory of South African activist Simon Nkoli, 
who died of AIDS-related causes on November 30, 1998. His warmth, vi- 
tality, gentleness, and resolute commitment touched me, as did his life and 
legacy of activism, which will continue to make a difference in interna- 
tional venues and throughout South Africa, particularly in Johannesburg 
and Soweto, where he founded GLOW (Gay and Lesbian Organization of 
the Witwatersrand), TAP (Township AIDS Project), and PAMP (Postive Af- 
rican Men Project). 

My thanks to Ed Nyman for reading an earlier version of this essay. I 
owe a special debt of gratitude to Stephen Barber for his inspiration and an 
ongoing engagement with my work. My sincere appreciation to William 
Spurlin for his detailed and constructive editing of this essay and to the 
Social Sciences and Humanities Council of Canada for a postdoctoral fel- 
lowship supporting my work. 




-289 - 




MARCIA BLUMBERG 



alize that many of these people were acquaintances or friends 
who lived nearby; yet, as he expresses it: “There was no evidence 
we were standing at Ground Zero. ... If this were just a field 
with a thousand corpses lying in the sunlight . . . then people 
would see it and understand and be compelled to respond” (“Blan- 
ket Judgment” 32). Jones raises an important concern regarding 
activist and pedagogical methodologies: How can statistics, es- 
pecially numbers of deaths, be rendered metaphorically concrete 
and potentially imaginable yet still be finally inexplicable? Can 
art ever adequately realize both the immensity of loss in general 
and the value of each specific individual who constitutes one unit 
of the mass? These and many other questions raised throughout 
this essay should be asked when teaching the Quilt in literature, 
cultural studies, language arts, or other arenas. The planning and 
actualization of the Quilt attempts to address these issues, no- 
where more effectively than when displayed and performed in its 
entirety. 



How do we conceptualize the art of quilting? According to the 
Oxford English Dictionary^ the word is both “the action of pad- 
ding, sewing together” and the “material for making a quilt.” 
We often read quilting as a performative process and a product 
that are gendered female and signify a pleasurable collaboration. 
Writing on American quilts, Patsy Orlofsky and Myron Orlofsky 
accord the activity a significance when viewed as part of a gen- 
der-stereotyped process anticipating future events: “When a girl 
gained proficiency, she would embark on a series of quilts for her 
own hope chest, to be completed by the time she was engaged” 
(27). Other quilts signified death: the Mourning Quilts, black 
and white or grey with a black border, were used during a be- 
reavement; Memory Quilts were “made of pieces of material taken 
from the clothing of a deceased member of a family or friend. . . . 
The center of the block . . . [was] embroidered with the name of 
the deceased, the date of death and sometimes a sorrowful verse” 
(226). At the close of the twentieth century, quilting retains its 

320 




- 290 - 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



traditional connotations; yet in the AIDS Memorial Quilt, quilt- 
ing simultaneously employs and displaces the conventional art 
form in a postmodern performance of mourning that celebrates 
lives, creates healing narratives, challenges and refuses elitism, 
values creativity, raises awareness, and inspires action. Pedagogi- 
cal methodologies can emphasize these aspects by reading with 
the Quilt as text; at the same time, reading against the text(s) 
problematizes the universalizing impetus behind the Quilt and 
its panels, the apparent heterogeneity of individuals memorial- 
ized in panels, and the economic and political questions raised or 
elided in this powerful interventionary vehicle. 

The first display of the AIDS Memorial Quilt, organized by 
the NAMES Project in 1987, comprised under two thousand 
panels and formed one of the events of the March on Washing- 
ton for gay and lesbian rights. Displays thereafter focused on the 
Quilt, which comprised an ever-increasing number of panels: 
approximately eight thousand in 1988, ten thousand in 1989, 
twenty thousand in 1992, and a staggering forty thousand pan- 
els containing seventy thousand names in 1996. Over the years, 
these changing figures affected the mode of the Quilt’s reception, 
which is also intricately related to medical knowledge about the 
pandemic and the particular positioning of the spectator within 
the time-space of AIDS. For Jones the fulfillment of his dream 
bears testimony to the cooperation of thousands of diverse people, 
whose shared devastating grief and healing are performed and 
realized in the Quilt in a personal and concomitantly highly po- 
litical public celebration of mourning. This project emphasizes 
individual and collective loss while insisting on the ceremonial 
manifestation of valuing and remembering people’s lives rather 
than their data. The making of the three-by-six-foot quilt panels, 
evocative of graves, usually involves collaboration by lovers, 
friends, co-workers, and sometimes family in private venues, but 
groups of strangers often pool resources in specially organized 
public “Quilt shops.” Participants share mourning, solace, and 
even joy as they realize the special attributes of those remem- 
bered in ways that range from simple panels featuring just a name, 
or name and dates, to the most elaborate and artistic panels that 
also incorporate, in an often vibrant splash of colors, sequins, 
buttons, lace, fur, leather, red ribbons, jewelry, photographs, news- 



id 

ERLC 



- 291 - 



Q o t 



MARCIA BLUMBERG 



paper reports, documents, passports, credit cards, items of cloth- 
ing, masks, silk flowers, teddy bears, toys,' poems, badges, pen- 
nants, flags, letters, maps, shoes, hats, and even pouches with 
ashes. Presentation of the individual panel to the project forms 
another difficult stage of separation; thereafter, the stitching of 
eight panels into a quilt twelve feet by twelve feet, which is then 
placed on public view, rehearses the memorial performance. 

The massive spectacle, performed at different locales and 
occasions using thousands of panels separated by “walkways,” 
constitutes a portable cemetery, a Foucauldian heterotopia (Fou- 
cault 22). This temporary site of mourning is a “real unreal place” 
and performs another version of the concept of cemetery, which 
Foucault argues changes location from the city center site, with 
its accent on resurrection and immortality, to the outskirts of the 
city in the nineteenth century, when corrosion of faith empha- 
sized body rather than soul and recoded the cemetery as a place 
of death from illness. The Quilt as portable cemetery deemphasizes 
religion and refuses to be limited to the spectre of illness and 
decay so often portrayed in death from AIDS; instead, it per- 
forms a postmodern ritual of memorial to celebrate life in a shared 
community festival that, like a theatrical performance, is set up, 
packed away, and remounted in these periodic large displays, 
while twelve-by-twelve blocks of eight stitched panels travel to 
different continents in varying formats for disparate audiences — 
hospitals, theaters, and schools — to accompany a vibrant educa- 
tion program. 

The National High School Quilt Program founded in 1995 
provides on request to high schools up to four of these twelve- 
by-twelves specially chosen for their relevance to teenagers. Jerry 
Roberts argues that “displaying panels of the quilt, particularly 
those made for young adults who died of AIDS, increases aware- 
ness of the causes of the epidemic among teenagers in a way that 
no lecture — whether about abstinence or how to put on a con- 
dom — could ever do” (E8). The panels are accompanied by les- 
son plans, student guides, posters, books, and videos. Further 
sessions conducted by teachers may include discussions with in- 
vited doctors, social workers, community activists, and people 
living with HFV/AIDS, as well as visits to relevant plays, movies, 
or art installations. The Quilt in and of itself is a rich pedagogi- 




- 292 - 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



cal vehicle providing critical links to social issues. Anthony Turney, 
the executive director of the Quilt Foundation, foregrounds the 
significance of this school project: “There’s a role for this Quilt 
at a time when it seems that AIDS is slipping off the radar screen, 
that its place in the national consciousness is slipping. It is be- 
coming ordinary, it is becoming a fact of life . . . like cancer. We 
believe that that is something the Quilt can help to turn around, 
by its very presence (qtd. in Eiioicaras 19). 

Open discussions on various aspects of AIDS and HFV trans- 
mission form the basis for attaining knowledge about preven- 
tion, since teenagers and young adults compose approximately 
25 percent of the new cases of HIV infections recorded in the 
United States. While prevention of HIV transmission is the pri- 
mary aim of this program, ethical pedagogical strategies will call 
attention to the scope and complexity of HIV/AIDS issues and 
should include not only a discussion of sexual practices and vari- 
ous options for safer sex, but also call attention to the detrimen- 
tal effects of media misinformation and cultural myths that 
perpetuate stereotyping and homophobia. If health promotion is 
a primary aim of the program, then prevention of disease should 
operate within the parameters of bodies, as well as practices and 
attitudes. Pedagogical sessions should always acknowledge and 
be sensitive to the diversity of participants’ subject positions and 
cultural baggage; the latter, Susan Bennett remarks in another 
context, is “not an optional extra; it must be carried everywhere” 
(108). Important too is the humanization and deconstruction of 
statistics. Michael Shower’s speech read on the first World AIDS 
Day, December 1, 1988, is instructive when considering the sig- 
nificance of the school Quilt program and the value of the Quilt 
itself: “Numbers are numbing. They tell us of the masses but 
they do not tell us of people. They allow us to avoid the reality 
with which people throughout the world are confronted: people 
do not die as masses; they die one by one” (qtd. in Williams 5). 
Most important, when viewing the Quilt it is necessary to call 
attention to the many thousands of people, especially those in 
the developing countries, whose names and lives are not remem- 
bered in quilt panels. 

Although only the twelve-by-twelves in the quilt are perma- 
nently joined panels, there is no guarantee of an eternal memo- 





- 293 - 



MARCIA BLUMBERG 



rial of quilts even though restorative needlework lovingly keeps 
memories alive. An important new initiative addresses the neces- 
sary impermanence of cloth panels and is also an invaluable edu- 
cational resource: The AIDS Memorial Quilt Archive Project has 
undertaken the mammoth task of photographing and document- 
ing every panel of the world’s largest funerary art installation so 
that a full record of electronic images of the Quilt is available on 
the World Wide Web. At present some panels are displayed ac- 
cording to categories. Each name page displays the individual 
panel and its location within the twelve- by-twelve. Some pages 
also include quotations from letters that accompanied the panel. 
For example, the category “Gay and Lesbian” shows a range of 
panels and people. Marvin Feldman’s panel is accompanied by a 
comment: “Marvin wouldn’t approve; he would have wanted 
something to be displayed at the Museum of Modern Art, or in 
Bloomingdales windows.” Panels are included for well-known 
personalities such as filmmaker Marlon Riggs, whose 1989 movie 
Tongues Untied offered for the first time the voices of black men 
through a collage of music, dance, poetry, and the spoken word. 
The panel for pop artist Keith Haring, who melded icons and 
activism, cartoons and chalk drawings in venues as disparate as 
the New York subway, streets, and art galleries, is accompanied 
by a letter that asks the viewer to respond: “Don’t just watch. Do 
Something! ” In a different vein, the panel for Sergeant Matlovich, 
a hero of the Vietnam War, is informative and politically power- 
ful since he was discharged on the grounds of his sexual orienta- 
tion and won his court case against the U.S. military. Group panels 
feature twelve-by-twelves devoted, for example, to the Sisters of 
Perpetual Indulgence, a group of drag activist nuns with fellow 
sisters in Australia, Britain, and the United States, who promul- 
gate universal joy and expiate stigmatic guilt. Members of the 
order work to raise funds, provide HIV/AIDS education, and ser- 
vices. Here multiple names speak of the loss of groups within the 
“community.” This small sampling of panels, in its diversity and 
valuing of lives, refuses stereotypical homophobic representations 
of gay men and serves as another means of resisting bigotry. 

Large performances of the Quilt are constructed according 
to specific methods of folding/unfolding. The lotus fold, used for 
the opening ritual, transforms the usually flat object into the shape 




- 294 - 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



of a lotus, a plant well known in Greek mythology for its fruit 
which, when eaten, produced states of forgetfulness, contentment, 
and pleasure. For me, however, these evocative images were in- 
stantly replaced by the harsh reality of the scene I witnessed when 
I arrived at the Washington Mall long before the arrival of the 
crowds for the three-day display in 1996 — huge areas of grass 
were dotted with what from afar appeared to be crumpled bod- 
ies. The resulting overwhelming sense of devastation and loss 
was the most difficult moment of the entire event and in retro- 
spect has rendered concrete for me Cleve Jones’ wished-for im- 
age: I saw what appeared to be many “thousand[s] of corpses 
lying in the sunlight . . . and [felt] compelled to respond” (“Blan- 
ket Judgment” 32). In the opening ritual, the lotus fold engen- 
ders a slow and deliberate ceremonial performance that anticipates 
the disclosure of the individual quilt panel and its reconnection 
with mourners and other spectators, while the simpler closing 
fold more quickly enacts each quilt panel’s farewell. In contrast, 
the emergency-rain-fold procedure, if properly executed, enables 
the entire massive Quilt to be closed in forty-five seconds and 
then wrapped in plastic. 

Although the panels are treated with reverence, one organizer’s 
instructions to volunteers demonstrate the complex physical and 
emotional involvement in the process: “You’re laying people’s 
possessions — parts of people — on the ground . . . but you can’t 
be afraid of the Quilt. In order to fold it up you have to walk on 
it” (Ruskin 112). Taking physical care of the panels and showing 
concern for the emotional healing process experienced by the 
makers and other spectators are vital aspects of the performance. 
Special volunteers known as Hand Maidens of the Quilt tend the 
twelve-by-twelves; they move around the entire display making 
repairs or refastening individual quilts so that the panel remains 
as originally submitted in order to achieve a stability and a de- 
gree of permanence ultimately dictated by the materials of con- 
struction. The very organization of the performance reflects 
concern about the healing quality of the Quilt. Boxes of tissues 
placed around the perimeter of each twelve-by-twelve are practi- 
cal markers that demonstrate that the organizers recognize the 
value of expressions of sorrow. Most important. Emotional Sup- 
port volunteers, a designated category of people professionally 




o .o *- 

04 0 



- 295 - 



MARCIA BLUMBERG 



trained in grief counseling who also have particular experience 
with AIDS, provide comfort for quilt makers, mourners, specta- 
tors, and other volunteers alike. A culture of caring operates within 
the NAMES Project that attempts to transform an artwork into 
a powerful force for emotional well-being at the same time that 
it demonstrates, on an immense scale, the enormity of the prob- 
lem and the necessity to be informed and engaged. Volunteers, 
while instructed never to be intrusive, are available to hear ex- 
pressions of emotion, answer questions, or just provide a hug. 
This caring component is only one aspect of the multivalent per- 
formance of the Quilt. 

The ritualized reading of a litany of names initiates the open- 
ing ceremony and continues until the final moments of the clos- 
ing ceremony. Huge amplifiers placed strategically at many 
locations within the immense expanse of the display relay the 
names as an integral part of the experience of the Quilt wherever 
one is positioned. This performance of reading foregrounds the 
significance of the public recitation of names of those who have 
died as one of many possible readings of the Quilt, both in its 
component panels and as a whole. Tellingly, Cleve Jones begins 
and ends with the name of Marvin Feldman, the friend memori- 
alized in the first quilt panel. In so doing, Jones frames and en- 
capsulates the very history of the Quilt and the determination 
never to forget those who died from AIDS in years past and in 
recent times. Readers include prominent political figures, artists, 
and personalities from popular culture as well as service provid- 
ers, care providers, activists, and those infected and affected by 
HFV/AIDS. The continuous reading of names — in 1996 seventy 
thousand over three days — corroborates Peter Hawkins’s view 
that “the Quilt in any of its forms is most profoundly about the 
naming of names. ... As with the Vietnam Veterans Memorial, 
the names themselves are the memorial” (760). Mourners, mak- 
ers of the Quilt, volunteers, and visitors celebrate the dynamism 
of the lives behind the names that are realized in a range of mate- 
rials and modes, from solemn panels to those with riotous colors 
and an infinite variety of decorations and memorabilia. Elinor 
Fuchs argues that the Quilt is “cemetery as All Fool’s Day, a car- 
nival of the sacred, the homely, the joyous and the downright 
tacky, resisting even in extremis, the solemnity of mourning” (17). 





- 296 - 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



In a challenge to the stigma and disinformation constructed 
through the complex discourse of AIDS, the Quilt celebrates 
mourning and actively politicizes and renders problematic the 
AIDS epidemic “with its genuine potential for global devasta- 
tion — [which] is simultaneously an epidemic of a transmissible 
lethal disease and an epidemic of meanings or signification” 
(Treichler 32). The public celebration of mourning performed in 
the display of the massive Quilt thus comprises both ritual and 
consciousness-raising to enact the AIDS slogan, Silence = Death. 
White lettering on a black background, accompanied only by an 
upturned pink triangle, situates early activism within the gay 
community and represents gay pride and a challenge to the si- 
lence and oppression of the down-turned pink triangle of the 
Nazi regime. The Quilt can, therefore, also form a healing narra- 
tive when its mammoth presence and ramifications represent a 
catalyst to lessen the impact of the disease of prejudice. Another 
strategy employed in the display is the use of blank twelve-by- 
twelves, known as signature squares. Here spectators remove their 
shoes to reach a central place on the blank square and record in 
colored markers their message of hope or pain. This spontane- 
ous act of expression is inclusive and at the same time comfort- 
ing and upsetting; furthermore, it makes the writer a small part 
of what the organizers term “the Quilt family.” This nomencla- 
ture gives a homely feeling to bolster what Hawkins argues is 
‘The primary strategy ... to create a consensus, a myth of inclu- 
sion” (777). 

Yet, further analysis offers a much needed opportunity to 
problematize the notion of family, assumed in heteronormative 
structures to be the traditional nuclear family; since the begin- 
ning of the AIDS pandemic, this family has often distanced itself 
from or abandoned a relative living with AIDS. The dynamic of 
denial is evident in veiled or deliberately misleading obituaries 
and in the panels in which names have been deleted out of shame. 
These families have not only robbed the individual of what was 
central to his or her life but have also attempted an erasure in 
death. All too often, when birth families have totally rejected a 
person living with HIV/AIDS, this relative has chosen a new family 
of lovers and friends who, at the appropriate time, together with 
support workers become caregivers. In the case of gay men, this 



- 297 - 




MARCIA BLUMBERG 

revisioning of ‘‘family” has often occurred if their coming out 
was greeted with disapproval or ostracism. The reading of the 
Quilt performance, therefore, demands an awareness of presence, 
absence, voicing, silence, and the nuances of the in-between, all 
of which constitute material for interrogation when speaking 
about or teaching the Quilt. 

For Cindy Patton, “the narrative of AIDS overdetermines the 
virus, HIV” (Inventing AIDS 128), yet she cautions against what 
she categorizes as silence: “the unspeakable, the perceived but 
best not said, the ignored, the safely tucked away, the camou- 
flaged” (129). The Quilt as memorial speaks eloquently of loss, 
love, and healing in its individual panels and enormous scope. 
Despite Reverend Fred Phelps’s egregious, homophobic designa- 
tion of the Quilt as “that filthy fag blanket” (qtd. in Jones, “Blan- 
ket Judgment” 32), it resists the simplistic equation of AIDS with 
gay men since the multiplicity of panels of men, women, and 
children emphasizes the nexus of gender, race, class, religion, 
sexual identity, and ethnicity. Yet, particularly in the context of 
the apparently heterogeneous community evidenced by the Quilt, 
further mention should be made of the many gay men who have 
suffered loss in this pandemic on an unprecedented scale; this 
“community,” however problematic a term in its reductiveness 
and apparent homogeneity, has, despite ongoing stigmatization, 
resisted apathy, insisted on improved research and facilities, chal- 
lenged heterosexist norms, imbued the term “activism” with new 
vitality, and demanded that attention be paid. Douglas Crimp 
acknowledged the situation of his constituency in 1989: 

Seldom has a society so savaged people during their hour of 
loss. . . . The violence we encounter is relentless, the violence of 
silence and omission almost as impossible to endure as the vio- 
lence of unleashed hatred and outright murder. Because this 
violence also desecrates the memories of our dead, we rise in 
anger to vindicate them. For many of us, mourning becomes 
militancy. (“Mourning” 8-9) 

The added ramification of an inherently militant performance of 
mourning intricately and urgently combines the threads of me- 
morial, celebration, activism, and healing. Refusing, both physi- 
cally and semiotically, to be “safely tucked away,” the Quilt 




Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



demands explicitness, education, research, and reevaluated he- 
gemonic power and priorities. 

People with AIDS who care less about the beneficial aspects 
for quilt makers of making the Quilt and concentrate on the per- 
son behind the name may regard the Quilt as a sentimentalizing 
of an individual’s struggle with AIDS. Derek Jarman, the British 
artist and filmmaker, reacted vehemently when he saw a display 
of panels: 

When the AIDS quilt came to Edinburgh during the film festival, 

I attended just out of duty. I could see it was an emotional work, 
it got the heartstrings. But when the panels were unveiled a truly 
awful ceremony took place, in which a group of what looked 
like refrigerated karate experts, all dressed in white, turned and 
chanted some mumbo jumbo — horrible, quasi religious, false. I 
shall haunt anyone who ever makes a panel for me. (91) 

This discomfort at the performance of the ritual provides one 
objection. Some activists also rail against the Quilt as a distrac- 
tion from the weightier issues of accessibility to medication, bet- 
ter care and services for people with HIV/AIDS, and an 
intensification of various avenues of research. Not only do they 
feel that attention is deflected from these matters, but they also 
consider the sponsorships and fund-raising efforts for the Quilt a 
financial drain and a diversion from needs which they deem more 
valuable for the use of these funds. Other criticisms point to the 
paucity of panels memorializing black people with AIDS and an 
absence of panels for IV drug users who have died from AIDS- 
related causes. This observation foregrounds the element of luxury 
associated with the time and energy to devote to quilt making, 
let alone having the money for materials. Here the differentials 
of marginality play a part in the Quilt, as they do in life, and 
emphasize how much more needs to be accomplished. Another 
imperative in reading or teaching the Quilt as text is the acknowl- 
edgment of these apparently silent subtexts. The nexus of work- 
ing-class pressures, poverty, and racial marginalization constitutes 
a trajectory of exclusion from these activities when mere survival 
heads the agenda. 

Hal Rubenstein’s decision not to see the Quilt again stems 
from the emotional lacuna that develops when someone deeply 



ERIC 




MARCIA BLUMBERG 



affected within the pandemic has experienced multiple loss on a 
scale usually experienced only in times of war. Except, here the 
dead are all loved ones, close friends, and acquaintances; in short, 
they represent his entire world: 

Tve had enough of feeling devastated by its acreage. . . . Tm 
tired of being almost too exhausted to remain still by the time 
I find the crafted tombstones of my friends and lovers. I don’t 
want to be surprised anymore by the sudden appearance of a 
patch of fabric embroidered with a name of someone I hadn’t 
known had passed away. I don’t want to be beat up anymore. 
Been there. Done that. . . . Flippant? No. How can you be if 
you’ve been there from the beginning and are still standing? 

It’s just that now there’s hope. And I want to believe it. I don’t 
want things to remind me that besides the glass’s being half full 
or half empty, it can also shatter. ... I want to remember. I 
have to. I’ve no choice. But I don’t want to be overwhelmed 
anymore. . . . When the heart wants to be touched, it goes 
down the list of those who aren’t here, one by one. (57) 

This eloquent personal statement signifies a limit situation wherein 
the sheer extent of numbers, the degree of one individual’s loss, 
precludes a healing narrative; here, onlookers as well as the so- 
called “community” of mourners only foreground the distance 
between their experience and the trauma of Rubenstein’s “com- 
munity” scattered amongst the seventy thousand names in vari- 
ous locales within the huge expanse of panels covering the Mall 
in Washington. For Rubenstein the haphazardly separated pan- 
els of friends intensify the disjunctions and emotional disloca- 
tions that spell one actuality in his volatile existence — the certainty 
of loss. The difference in positionality and perspective between 
the infected, the affected on an individual scale, and those af- 
fected by immense and seemingly unstoppable loss translates into 
very different experiences of the world in this time of AIDS. It is 
instructive to recall Douglas Crimp’s 1991 explication of “the 
incommensurability of experience [CJertain people are expe- 

riencing the AIDS crisis while the society as a whole doesn’t ap- 
pear to be experiencing it at all” (Caruth and Keenan 539). This 
excruciating disjunction between the suffering of people experi- 
encing the AIDS crisis (both those infected and affected) and a 
general societal inaction is compounded and rendered more ur- 

Q - 300 - 

ERIC O O n 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



gent by a situation described by Cindy Patton at the Acting on 
AIDS Conference in London in March 1996 as an “epidemic of 
discrimination.” Even for those who may disagree with Jarman 
or be positioned differently from Rubenstein and praise the Quilt, 
Michael Musto’s caveat that “the Quilt should always come with 
a warning sticker that reads, ‘Don’t feel that by crying over this, 
you’ve really done something for AIDS’” (46), raises valid prob- 
lems of catharsis and passivity and deserves ongoing discussion. 
In ancient Greece, the ritual performances of tragedy achieved, 
according to Aristotle, the purgation of fear and sorrow. This 
very criterion has been read by feminist dramatists and others as 
a problematic position. After all, when emotions have been height- 
ened and then released, there seems to be a closure and thus little 
incentive to continue an engagement with the problem. Critics of 
the Quilt consider that the emotional release expended during 
the performance of the Quilt engenders passivity and a missed 
opportunity to continue active engagement not only with the Quilt 
but, most important, with the issues it raises. Certainly the prob- 
lems of catharsis and ensuing passivity generate implications ap- 
plicable to the teaching of the Quilt or literature on AIDS, both 
of which can be moving, sad, or even tragic. Since passive re- 
sponses bring no social transformation, it is imperative that peda- 
gogical approaches to the Quilt and/or literature on AIDS be 
ethically responsible and foreground the necessity for ongoing 
engagement in the classroom and in society at large. 

Various related events occurred during the three-day display 
in Washington, D.C. that attempted to mitigate against catharsis 
and passivity. The 1996 gathering heralded a series of perfor- 
mances, from dance and choral benefit evenings, to an interfaith 
religious service, to a cycle race for AIDS. “The Rage against the 
Dying of the Light,” the candlelight vigil supported by Elizabeth 
Taylor, attracted thousands of marchers. In a series of short pre- 
sentations, they emphasized the diversity of people infected with 
or affected by HFV/AIDS, providing glimpses of the lives of people 
who defy that hated term “AIDS victim”; each speaker ended 
with the phrase, “I am the face of AIDS.” While these projects 
raised money and awareness of HIV/AIDS, another event posi- 
tioned volunteers around the perimeter of the Quilt to hand out 
buttons exhorting wearers to “Remember Them with Your Vote”; 




MARCIA BLUMBERG 



the proximity of the quilt panels, juxtaposed with the direct link- 
age of an individual's responsibility to choose political candi- 
dates based on their platform and record, provided a reading of 
the Quilt that spoke clearly of cause and effect in the 1996 U.S. 
elections, as well as of the former lack of political will and the 
inactivity to the point of negligence, so clearly visible in the thou- 
sands of panels. Cleve Jones articulates this massive goverrimen- 
tal neglect: 

The Quilt ... is terrible evidence of the consequences of our 
government’s failure. For fifteen years the struggle against AIDS 
has been sabotaged by outright bigotry, political cowardice and 
mind-numbing stupidity from Congress and the White House. 

The cost of this failure is incalculable, although now measured 
in thousands of American lives. (“Blanket Judgment” 33) 

At other times, demonstrations by ACT UP, the AIDS Coalition 
to Unleash Power, attended by members from different parts of 
the United States, used the occasion of the Quilt display to target 
the pharmaceutical companies and the American president. In 
the first demonstration, protesters .staged a die-in outside the 
sumptuous offices of one pharmaceutical company and named 
other companies, indicting them for causing unnecessary death 
through the relentless pursuit of profits. Two issues were and 
still are pertinent: first, extended periods of drug testing exclude 
people who are terminally ill and who cling to any opportunity 
to participate in trials; second, another exclusionary practice con- 
cerns the exorbitant prices charged for many commonly used 
drugs as well as for the new antiviral cocktails that are making a 
startling difference to some people living with AIDS and who, 
thanks to these cocktails, are now experiencing what is called 
“The Lazarus Syndrome” — a seemingly miraculous improvement 
in health and T-cell levels — and the apparent “disappearance” of 
the virus. Since the 1996 Quilt display, as ever more effective 
drug cocktails are developed, new aspects cause ongoing con- 
cern, such as the development of immunity to the new cocktails 
by some people living with AIDS, and viral latency (the probabil- 
ity that the seemingly eliminated virus lurks in certain organs). 
The Quilt reminds all spectators/readers not to succumb to com- 
placency. The second ACT UP demonstration involved a march 




Q O 

O O ^ 



- 302 - 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



to the White House to scatter ‘‘cremains” on the lawn of the 
presidential home; those who had left explicit instructions for 
the disposal of their ashes regarded this action as a way of draw- 
ing attention to the urgency of certain issues, such as universal 
health care. 

Since the 1987 showing of the Quilt, which was expressly 
initiated to draw attention to the existence of the AIDS pandemic, 
subsequent displays maintain this consciousness-raising compo- 
nent as well as generate healing narratives. The context, how- 
ever, is vital: as the number of panels and deaths increased and 
the hoped-for cure never materialized, the Quilt display — espe- 
cially that of 1992 — emphasized that the performance of mourn- 
ing and private healing often gives way to a sense of hopelessness. 
The 1996 Quilt realized a markedly different performance. The 
healing of personal grief and the confrontation of the enormity 
of loss continues, but now the normalization of AIDS places the 
issues within a panoply of social problems and thereby denies its 
urgency. Another vital aspect of the 1996 Quilt display follows 
from the newly discovered antiviral cocktails just mentioned, 
which have initiated dramatic health reversals and concomitantly 
engendered enormous anger because of subject exclusion, usu- 
ally on financial grounds. Cleve Jones articulated that “the chal- 
lenge of displaying the Quilt [in 1996] ... is to attempt to 
transform what has been a symbol of grief and loss into a symbol 
of hope and determination” (qtd. in Raine C8). Anthony Turney 
further extrapolated this notion: “Our mission ... is to put our- 
selves out of business” (qtd. in Roberts E8). At this time, how- 
ever, while the pandemic still rages, the healing narratives of the 
Quilt do provide something tangible. Robert Rankin articulates 
what he considers the “miracle of the Quilt”: “[I]t allows us to 
come to terms with our grief, and at the same time inspires us to 
greater compassion, commitment, and strength for those who 
need us” (17). The penultimate words about this Quilt perfor- 
mance belong to two men deeply committed to the project. Cleve 
Jones, the Quilt’s founder, makes a plea: 

Those of us battling AIDS did not watch in silence as the quilt 

grew. Through education and activism, we fought against ig- 
norance and prejudice. . . .We have cared for the sick, com- 




-303- 333 



MARCIA BLUMBERG 



forted the dying, built hospices, joined speakers’ bureaus, writ- 
ten checks, signed petitions, demonstrated, testified, been ar- 
rested, worn red ribbons, sewn quilts for our dead and raised 
our candles against an ever-darkening sky. And yet, none of 
these actions will save my life or the life of any other person 
already infected with HIV. The plain truth is only one thing 
can: Research — and more of it. (“AIDS Quilt” E8) 

Anthony Turney addresses the immensity of the task by quoting 
a Zen proverb: “When you pick up a pebble on the beach, you 
disturb the ocean. . . .We must use every means and every oppor- 
tunity to keep disturbing that ocean regardless of its size, be- 
cause every pebble has the potential to be the one that makes the 
difference” (5). These impassioned statements influence our read- 
ings of the Quilt and make it imperative to ask: “How many 
pebbles will we pick up, what will we disturb?” 

In choosing to teach the Quilt as a text in a gay and lesbian 
studies/English studies environment, my question raises two im- 
peratives: that we pick up pebbles, thus becoming more actively 
involved in the time-space of HIV/ AIDS, and that we seize any 
opportunity to disturb the heteronormative status quo. In a class- 
room space explicitly made safe by openness and respect for dif- 
ference, the Quilt functions as a vehicle for examining the specifics 
of the Quilt’s materiality and the multiplicity of issues relevant to 
society at large that intersect with questions arising from its per- 
formance as an event. In asking if there is a queer pedagogy, 
Deborah Britzman issues a caveat — “Stop reading straight” — 
and questions whether the “educational apparatus and its 
pedagogies [can] exceed their own readings” (164). By asking 
new questions, conventional binaries can be rethought. In identi- 
fying the attributes of a queer pedagogy, Britzman foregrounds 
its “refusal of normalcy” and calls for an. “ethical concern with 
one’s own reading practices” (165). The teaching of the Quilt, 
especially in the context of English studies and language arts, 
demands an emphasis on political connections of the performance 
of art — the inextricability of politics in language, iconography, 
and culture. The structure of these elements is never immutable 
but rather is contingent upon the spatio-temporal context, the 
perspective and positioning of the reader/spectator, and the dif- 
fering sites of struggle. Henry Giroux identifies the main chal- 




- 604 - 



334 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



lenge for educators as redefining “the central relationship be- 
tween culture and politics in order to deepen and extend the ba- 
sis for transformative and emancipatory practice. . . . [T]he 
political side of culture must be given primacy as an act of resis- 
tance and transformation by addressing issues of difference, iden- 
tity, and textuality within rather than outside of the problematics 
of power, agency, and history” (30). This essay offers readings of 
the Quilt from perspectives that are inextricably related to the 
politics of culture; however, the context of gay and lesbian stud- 
ies offers a specific focus which addresses queer issues as an ethi- 
cal obligation. Although I have already addressed some of these 
within other readings of the Quilt, more specific attention should 
be paid to a range of questions. 

At the outset, no assumptions should be made regarding the 
sexual identity of students participating in English studies or, more 
important, in a gay and lesbian studies course within that pro- 
gram, or about their levels of knowledge and experience with 
HFV/AIDS. Peter Bowen offers his perspective on teaching AIDS: 
“[It] becomes a practice of unlearning, of untangling the compli- 
cated ideological weaving of cultural misconceptions, media mis- 
representation, and medical misinformation so that students can 
begin to recognize their relation to AIDS as both frighteningly 
real and discursively constructed” (141). Particular sensitivity 
should be exercised in accordance with an awareness of different 
subject positions, not only those of the infected and the affected, 
but those spectators/readers/students with an HIV-negative sero 
status as well. Walt Odets has documented survivor guilt, 
overprotectiveness, fear of sero conversion, and multiple loss: 
“The AIDS epidemic has spawned an epidemic of denial” (220). 
The Quilt panels are understandably silent about the trauma ex- 
perienced by these gay men even while they offer powerful repre- 
sentations of those who have died. The Quilt replicates the greater 
prominence accorded to gay issues through the larger number of 
panels for gay men — which is in line with the death statistics; 
women appear on fewer panels, and little attention has been paid 
to lesbians in particular and women in general who are living 
with AIDS. Cindy Patton problematizes the categorization of 
women in the pandemic: “Women’s position in the epidemic is 
understood radically differently depending on whether women’s 




MARCIA BLUMBERG 



concerns are posed by governments of developed or developing 
countries, by gay groups, by women influenced by the women’s 
health movement or by women influenced principally by AIDS 
activism” (Last Served 2). Moreover, the different positions and 
agendas of gay men and lesbians need to be deconstructed in 
relation to the Quilt and societal structures. HIV/AIDS issues do 
not impinge in the same way on everyone, and classroom prac- 
tices require sensitive analyses that acknowledge the complexity 
of a range of subject positions and the differentials of marginal- 
ity, which may shift according to the specifics of a situation. For 
example, while gays and lesbians are often marginalized in ju- 
ridical terms and repeatedly face discriminatory practices in in- 
stitutional life, they have mobilized as a political force and voice 
for HFV/AIDS issues and achieved many goals. Most important, 
this emphasizes the empowerment of an activist stance and the 
refusal in many instances by people living with HIV/AIDS to en- 
tertain the notion of victimhood. 

Another phenomenon evident in a close reading of the Quilt 
distinguishes between “innocent” and supposedly “guilty” sce- 
narios surrounding death. According to what he terms “cemeterial 
apartheid,” Timothy Murphy notes that certain panels state the 
“route of infection” (317), such as blood transfusions, artificial 
insemination, or mother to baby transmission, to dissociate the 
deceased from any connection to the gay community. This prac- 
tice calls for a reiteration of the fact that guilt has no place in the 
transmission of a virus; yet Douglas Crimp reminds us that Kim- 
berly Bergalis “spoke not as a person with AIDS ... but as the 
‘victim’ of people with AIDS” (“Right On” 303). Furthermore, 
contrary to homophobic pronouncements that equate AIDS with 
the “curse” of being gay, there are no risk groups, only risky 
practices. Cindy Patton argues that this “blaming ethos was 
reorientated by promoting safe sex not only as an individual risk 
reduction, but as a practice of community-building through re- 
sistance” (“Visualizing” 381). Further questions can be raised 
about the complexity of safe-sex practices and the necessity of 
carefully choosing a target audience for efficacious advertising. 

In seeking greater awareness of the problematics of AIDS, 
British gay activist Simon Watney cautions against the implica- 





- 306 - 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



tions of generally accepted practices such as “AIDS awareness” 
and points toward different agendas: 

Vast bonfires of money have been squandered in the name of 

“AIDS awareness” in [Britain] [Ejducation campaigns have 

been targeted at those at least risk of contracting HIV, as if the 
priority of preventing an epidemic amongst heterosexuals had 
been established at the expense of halting the epidemics that 
are actually raging throughout the developed world. (Practices 
263) 

His objections are spelled out in an article in which he argues 
against the “generalist outlook,” which equates the possible risk 
of infection for anyone with a supposedly equal risk to everyone; 
“the globalisation of AIDS,” which elides the specificities of lo- 
cal issues; and “the de-gaying of AIDS,” which regards the syn- 
drome from the perspective of the heterosexual population and 
relegates to the margins the needs of the gay community, which, 
in terms of pro rata percentage, represents the highest statistic of 
people infected with HIV in North America and Europe. Watney 
also protests “highly individualistic” approaches to AIDS, which 
range from its designation as a “tragedy” — with the subtextual 
implication that it was predestined — to “glibly optimistic ap- 
proaches that dismiss the enormity of medical and other prob- 
lems, and the “normalizing” of AIDS in the calls for tolerance 
that do not examine how prejudice is meted out (“AIDS Aware- 
ness” 8-9). In all of these arenas, Watney requires of us a more 
careful analysis of interest groups and perspectives. His convic- 
tion that “HIV is not an ‘Equal Opportunities’ virus[; i]t does 
not affect everybody equally, and least of all does it do so at the 
global level” (“Signifying” 202), is a reminder that positionings 
within race, class, gender, and sexual identity formulations vari- 
ously intersect with homophobia, racism, and poverty. 

By reading the AIDS Memorial Quilt as a process of 
rememoration, we bring the past into the present and foreground 
the history of gay and lesbian communities since the 1980s, a 
period inextricably and complexly linked to the trajectory of HIV/ 
AIDS; remembering individual and community losses and lives is 
part of the performative structure of the Quilt, as is the govern- 





MARCIA BLUMBERG 



mental neglect and violence. At a time when some term this a 
post-AIDS” era, the Web site of the NAMES Project Founda- 
tion offers a mid-1997 article titled “AIDS Is Not Over,” which 
combines cautious optimism about some responses to new drugs 
with cautionary tales about the increasing global pandemic, de- 
creasing funds, and the effects of complacency. In response, 
through our readings of the Quilt inside and outside of the class- 
room, we should also continue to ask an old question: “How 
many pebbles will we pick up, what will we disturb?” 



Works Cited 



Bennett, Susan. Mother Xongue: Colonized Bodies and Performing 
Cultures.” Contemporary Theatre Review 2.3 (1995): 101-09. 

Bowen, Peter M. “AIDS 101.” Writing AIDS: Gay Literature, Lan- 
guage, and Analysis. Ed. Timothy Murphy and Susanne Poirier. 
New York: Columbia UP, 1993: 140-60. 

Britzman, Deborah. “Is There a Queer Pedagogy? or. Stop Reading 
Straight.” Educational Theory 45.2 (1995): 151-65. 

Caruth, Cathy, and Thomas Keenan. “The AIDS Crisis Is Not Over’: A 
Conversation with Gregg Bordowitz, Douglas Crimp and Laura 
Pinsky.” American Imago 48.4 (1991): 539-56. 

Crimp, Douglas. “Mourning and Militancy.” October 51 (1989)- 3- 
18. 



. “Right On, Girlfriend.” Fear of a Queer Planet: Queer Politics 

and Social Theory. Ed. Michael Warner. Minneapolis: U of Minne- 
sota P, 1993. 300-19. 

Elsley, Judy. “The Rhetoric of the NAMES Project AIDS Quilt: Reading 
the Text(ile).” AIDS: The Literary Response. Ed. Emmanuel S. 
Nelson. New York: Twayne, 1992. 187-96. 

Enoicaras, T. X. “The AIDS Memorial Quilt Travels to D.C.” San Fran- 
cisco Frontiers 15.7 (1 Aug. 1996): 18-22. 

Foucault, Michel. “Of Other Spaces.” Diacritics 16 (Spring 1986): 22- 

Fuchs, Elinor. “The Performance of Mourning.” American Theatre 9 9 
(Jan. 1993). 14-17. 




- 308 - 



Rememorating: Quilt Readings 



Giroux, Henry A. “Living Dangerously: Identity Politics and the New 
Cultural Racism.” Between Borders: Pedagogy and the Politics of 
Cultural Studies. Ed. Henry A. Giroux and Peter McLaren. Lon- 
don: Routledge, 1994. 29-55. 

Hawkins, Peter S. “Naming Names: The Art of Memory and the NAMES 
Project AIDS Quilt.” Critical Inquiry 19.4 (1993): 752-79. 

Jarman, Derek. Derek Jarman’s Garden. London: Thames, 1995. 

Jones, Cleve. “AIDS Quilt: A Call for Research.” San Francisco Exam- 
iner 30 Nov. 1995: E8. ■ . 

. “Blanket Judgment.” POZ (Oct. 1996): 32-33. 

Murphy, Timothy. “Testimony.” Writing AIDS: Gay Literature, Lan- 
guage, and Analysis. Ed. Timothy Murphy and Suzanne Poirier. 
New York: Columbia UP, 1993. 306-20. 

Musto, Michael. “La Dolce Musto.” Village Voice 25 Oct. 1988: 46. 

Odets, Walt. In the Shadow of the Epidemic: Being HIV-Negative in 
the Age of AIDS. Durham: Duke UP, 1995. 

Orlofsky, Patsy, and Myron Orlofsky. Quilts in America. New York: 
McGraw-Hill, 1974. 

Patton, Cindy. Inventing AIDS. New York: Routledge, 1990. 

. Last Served: Gendering the HIV Pandemic. London: Taylor, 

1994. 

. “Visualizing Safe Sex: When Pedagogy and Pornography Col- 
lide.” Inside/out: Lesbian Theories, Gay Theories. Ed. Diana Fuss. 
London: Routledge, 1991. 373-86. 

Raine, George. “Man behind Quilt Winning Own AIDS Battle.” San 
Francisco Examiner 15 Sept. 1996: C8. 

Rankin, Robert. “The Quilt Remembrance.” Reform Judaism 17.4 
(1989): 16-17. 

Roberts, Jerry. “The AIDS Quilt Comes of Age.” San Francisco Exam- 
iner-Chronicle. 3 Dec. 1995: E8. 

Rubenstein, Hal. “Quilt Guilt.” The Advocate 3 Sept. 1996: 57-58. 

Ruskin, Cindy. The Quilt— Stories from the NAMES Project. New York: 
Pocket, 1988. 



- 309 - 



Q o p, 



MARCIA BLUMBERG 



Spivak, Gayatri Chakravorty. “The Intervention Interview.” The Post- 
Colonial Critic: Interviews, Strategies, Dialogues. Ed. Sarah 
Harasym. New York: Routledge, 1990. 113-32. 

Struck, Doug. “Visitors Marvel, Grieve over a Living Monument to the 
Tragedy of AIDS.” Washington Post 13 Oct. 1996: A33. 

Treichler, Paula A. “AIDS, Homophobia and Biomedical Discourse: An 
Epidemic of Signification.” AIDS; Cultural Analysis, Cultural Ac- 
tivism. Ed. Douglas Crimp. Cambridge: MIT P, 1988. 

Turney, Anthony. “The Power of a Single Pebble.” Namesletter 8.3 
(1995): 2+. 

Watney, Simon. “AIDS Awareness? — Some Reflections on the Debates 
about AIDS and Representation.” Oxford 1 (1995): 6-9. 

. Practices of Freedom: Selected Writings on HIV and AIDS. 

Durham: Duke UP, 1994. 

. Signifying AIDS: ‘Global AIDS,’ Red Ribbons and Other Con- 
troversies.” Random Access: On Crisis and Its Metaphors. Ed. P. 
Buchler and N. Papastergiadis. London: Rivers Oram, 1995- 193- 
211 . 

Williams, Scott. “Pennies from Heaven.” Namesletter 8.3 (1995): 5. 




- 310 - 



— 

Index 



Abbott, C. C., 82 
Abbott, Lawrence, 192 
Adams, Kate, 71 
Adolescent literature, 118-28 
examination of the Other in, 
119-22 

narrative authority in, 122-23 
social change in, 123-28 
Agamben, Giorgio, 72 
AIDS 

art and, 290 

awareness of, 292-93, 301-4, 
306-7 

children’s books addressing, 118 
families affected by, 297-98 
homophobia and, 293 
politicization of, 297 
teaching about, 304-8 
AIDS Memorial Quilt, 288-308 
aim of, 293 
caring for, 295 
impetus for, 289-90 
in lesbian and gay studies, 
304-8 

performances of, 294-95 
range of people represented on, 
294 

reading names on, 296 
as text, 291 

Alcoholism, as Native American 
stereotype, 196-200 
Aldrich, Anne, 4-5, 8 
Take a Lesbian to Lunch, 5 
Alexie, Sherman, 193 
“Allegory of the Cave” (Plato), 
30-33 



Allen, Katherine R., 116 
Allen, Paula Gunn, 195 
Woman Who Owned the 
Shadows, The, 195-96 
Almendros, Nestor, Mauvaise 
conduit, 42 

Am I Bluef (Bauer), 119-21, 
126-27 

Anderson, Sherwood, Beyond 
Desire, 6 
Ang, len, 84 

Annie on My Mind (Garden), 127 
Another Mother Tongue (Grahn), 
12 

Antigay rhetoric, in elementary 
and secondary schools, xx 
Anzaldua, Gloria, “Entering the 
Serpent,” 247-50 
Aristotle, view of women of, 
80-81 

Asha's Mums (Elwin and Paulse), 
113-15, 223-26 



Bad Boy (Wieler), 124 
Bakhtin, Mikhail, 97, 194 
Baldwin, James, 274 
Bannon, Ann, 4, 8 
Bare Naked Book, The (Stinson), 
117 

Barnes, Djuna, Nightwood, 10 
Bauer, Marion Dane, Am I Blue?, 
119-21, 126-27 
Beach, Richard, 142 
Becoming a Man (Monette), 46 
Belevan, Harry, 38 



ERLC 

MMMliiTifaii 



-311- 3^1 



Index 



Bellow, Saul, 44 
Benjamin, Jessica, 85, 86 
Benjamin, Shereen, 215 
Bennett, William J., xvii 
Berlant, Lauren, 73 
Beyond Desire (Anderson), 6 
Bhaba, Homi K., 47 
Biculturalism, 116 
Bishop, Anne, 123 
Bishop, Elizabeth, 118 
Blackmer, Corrine, 118 
“Blame It on the Weatherman” 
(Lorenz), xxiii, 36-53 
Bleich, David, 134 
Bloom, Harold, xvii 
Blumberg, Marcia 

(“Rememorating”), xxx, 
288-310 

Blumenthal, Amy, 55 
Boutlier, Nancy, 127-28 
Bowen, Peter, 305 
Bowers v. Hardwick, 158 
Braidotti, Rosi, 84 
Brant, Beth 

“Her Name Is Helen,” 203 
“Long Story, A,” 198-99 
“Swimming Upstream,” 
196-208 

Bred beck, Gregory W, 153 
Britzman, Deborah, 112, 113, 304 
Brooks, Cleanth, 80, 81 
Bruchac, Joseph, 203 
Brunette, Peter, 145 
Butler, Judith, xvii, 87, 194, 214 



Cady, Joseph, 158 
Canon 

defenders of, 44-45, 152 
in India, 272-73 
Shakespeare’s place in, 151-52 
Capote, Truman, Other Voices, 
Other Rooms, 88-91 
Caruth, Cathy, 300 
Catcher in the Rye, The, 142—43 
Catholic Church, 15-16 



Celluloid Closet, The (Russo), 140 
Chandler, Kurt, 163 
Children's Hour, The (Heilman), 
261-62 

Children’s literature, 113-18 
exploring gender and sexuality 
with, 223-27 
Clark, Danae, 72 
Closet, 28-33 
ajar, 22 
as cave, 30-33 
suspicion and fear of, 19-22 
Cohen, Ed, 154, 155 
Come Sit by Me (Merrified), 118 
Coming out, 22 
in classroom, 168-89, 228-30 
difficulties of, 177 
effect of, on students, 183-87 
identity and, 168-69 
as nonsalient feature of 
pedagogy, 54-75 
political incitement for, 55 
as process, 179-83 
scholarly writing as process 
for, 41 

“Coming Out and Creating 
Queer Awareness in the 
Classroom”(de la tierra), 
xxvi-xxvii, 168-190 
Commodification, 72-74 
Connell, Robert W, 221 
Contact zone, classroom as, 235 
Conversations of Cow, The 
(Namjosi), 283 
Cornell, Drucilla, 84 
Courvoisier, Erika, 114-15, 117 
“Creating a Place for Lesbian 
and Gay Readings in 
Secondary Classrooms” 
(Reese), xxv, 131-46 
Crew, Louie, 150 
Crimp, Douglas, 298, 300, 306 
Cronenberg, David, They Came 
from Within, 48 

“Cruising the Libraries” (Lynch), 
xxii, 3-13 




-^312 - 



342 



Index 



Cultural studies, 150 
Culture, experience as expression 
of, 58 

Curriculum, sexuality’s place in, 
152 



Dabbs, Thomas, 152 
D’Augelli, Anthony, 38-39 
Davies, Brownwyn, 223, 227 
De, Shobha, Strange Obsession, 
277-81, 284 
de la Roche, Mazo, 9-10 
de la tierra, tatiana (“Coming 
Out and Creating Queer 
Awareness in the Classroom”), 
xxvi-xxvii, 168-90 
Deliver Us from Evie (Kerr), 
123-24 

Demo, David H., 116 
Desert of the Heart, The (Rule), 
11,13 

Development Education Centre, 
What Is a Family f, 223, 
226-27 

Deviancy, 17-18, 25 
Difference 

binary model of, 85—88 
in feminist criticism, 83-85 
DiGangi, Mario (“Shakespeare’s 
Sexuality”), xxvi, 147-67 
Dobkin, Alix, 182 
Doris, Michael, 193 
Dowd, Maureen, 152 
Drowning of Stephan Jones, The 
(Greene), 123, 124 
D’Souza, Dinesh, xvii 
Dyer, Richard, 41 

Elliott, Mary, 16, 177, 179 
Elwin, Rosamund, Asha's Mums, 
113-15, 223-26 
Emery, Kim, 71 
English studies 
gender in, 79-102 



history of, 79 

imperatives for teachers in, 
87-88 

in India, 272-86 
representation of women in, 
79-102 

in South Africa, 253—70 
Enoicaras, T. X., 293 
“Entering the Serpent” 
(Anzaldua), 247-50 
Epstein, Debbie (“Reading Gender; 
Reading Sexualities”), xxviii, 
213-33 

Erdrich, Louise, 193 
Escoffier, Jeffrey, 150 
Ethnocriticism, 191-94 
Ewings, The (O’Hara), 6 
Experience, 36, 47-48 
as expression of culture, 58 
integrating into classroom, 
253-57 



Faderman, Lillian (“The Uses of 
History”), xxv, 109-11 
Fairy tales, 3 
Fanon, Frantz, 193 
“Fault Lines in the Contact Zone” 
(Miller), xxviii, 234-52 
Feinberg, David, Spontaneous 
Combustion, 159-60 
Felski, Rita, 83 
Feminist criticism 
difference in, 83-85 
and English studies, 79-102 
Ferguson, Margaret W., 151 
Fernie, Lynne, Forbidden Love, 
42 

Film studies, 39-51 
Fish, Stanley, 163 
Fisher, Will, 151 
Fiske, John, 126 
Forbidden Love (Fernie and 
Weissman), 42 

Foucault, Michel, 57, 59, 61, 70, 
90,216,292 



O 



-Hits 



Index 



Freire, Paulo, xv, 171, 193, 260-61 
Fuchs, Elinor, 296 
Fuoss, Kirk, 122 
Fuss, Diana, xix, 194 



Gallop, Jane, 66, 83 
Garber, Marjorie, 160 
Garden, Nancy, Annie on My 
Mind, 127 

Gay and lesbian studies. See 
Lesbian and gay studies 
Gender 

binary model of, 85-88 
connotations of, 79-80 
as creative play, 86-87 
dynamics of, 218-19 
in popular discourse, 86 
in primary school children, 
213-32 

Gender performance, and sexual 
orientation, 37 
Gender play, 219 
Gilbert, Sandra, 82 
Girls in Three-B, The (Taylor), 8 
Giroux, Henry, 39, 172, 193, 
257, 260-61, 304-5 
Gloria Goes to Gay Pride 
(Newman), 116-17 
Goldberg, Jonathan, 151, 153, 
158, 162 

Gonzalez, Deena J., 177 
Gould, Janice, 201 
Graff, Gerald, 150, 255 
Grahn, Judy, Another Mother 
Tongue, 12 

Greene, Bette, The Drowning of 
Stephan Jones, 123, 124 
Greene, Thomas C., 148 
Grosz, Elizabeth, 73 
Gubar, Susan, 82 



Haggerty, George, 48, 55, 148 
Hairston, Maxine, 170-71, 174 
Hall, Radclyffe, 4, 7, 12 



The Well of Loneliness, 4, 5, 7, 
259-61 

Halperin, David, 45 
Halpin, Tony, 213 
Harbeck, Karen, 15, 132 
Hardiman, Rita, 115 
Harper, Phillip Brian, xix 
Harris, Christie, 203 
Hate crimes, 172 
Hausman, Gerald, 203 
Hawkins, Peter, 296, 297 
Heart Is a Lonely Hunter, The 
(McCullers), 4 

Heilman, Lillian, The Children's 
Hour, 261-62 
Herford, C. H., 155, 156 
“Her Name Is Helen” (Brant), 203 
Heterosexism, in India, 272-86 
Heterosexuality, normalization 
of, 219-22 
Hirsch, Marianne, 83 
Hitchcock, Alfred, Rope, 45-46 
“Holding” (Lowry), 121 
Holford, Vanessa, 195 
Homophobia, xvii-xviii 
AIDS and, 293 
in cold war era, 49, 149 
as hate speech, 241 
hidden curriculum of, 39 
and homosexuality of canonical 
authors, xviii 
in India, 275-76 
institutionalization of, xviii, 132 
in “Queers, Bums, and 
Magic,” 236-46 
responding to, 237-43, 248-51 
in secondary schools, 132-33 
in South Africa, 253-70 
in student writing, 234-52 
in The Catcher in the Rye, 143 
Homosexuality 
awareness of, 133, 168-89 
Catholic Church’s view on, 16 
as deviancy, 17-18 
discourse community examining, 
112-13 




- 314 - 




Index 



in Elizabethan England, 157-58 
as legitimate classroom subject, 
160-64 

in McCarthy era, 49 
as modern phenomenon, 160 
as pathology, 253 
policing of, 22 
in postcolonial India, 275 
“unspeakable,” 19, 28-33 
hooks, bell, xx, 193, 207 
Hopkins, Gerard Manley, 82 
Hough, Barrie, Vlerdkans (In 
Full Flight), 124-26 
Hughes, Langston, 42 
Hunter, J. Paul, 81 



Identity 

coming out and, 168-69 
as process beyond categories, 59 
Identity scholarship, 57 
Inclusion, 133-36 
India, teaching of English in, 
272-86 

Ingebretsen, Edward J. (“When 
the Cave Is a Closet”), xxii, 
14-35 

In Youth Is Pleasure (Welch), 
91-92 

Irigaray, Luce, 196 
Iser, Wolfgang, 97 
Isitt, Larry, 149 



Jackson, Bailey W., 115 
Jarman, Derek, 159, 299 
Jauss, Hans Robert, 97 
Jay, Karla, 150 
Jennings, Kevin, 113 
Jimenez- Leal, Orlando, Mauvaise 
conduit, 42 

Jones, Cleve, 289-90, 295, 296, 
298, 302, 303 

Jones, Toeckey, Skindeep, 122 
Julien, Isaac, Looking for 
Langston, 42 



Kaplan, E. Ann., 225 
Karamcheti, Indira, 57, 72 
Katz, Jonathan Ned, 150, 155 
Keenan, Thomas, 300 
Kempton, Murray, 23 
Kennedy, Dorothy M., 243-44 
Kennedy, X. J., 243-44 
Kerr, M. E. 

Deliver Us from Evie, 123-24 

“We Might as Well All Be 
Strangers,” 120-21 
Khayatt, Madiha Didi, 60, 71, 113 
Kidwai, Saleem, 185 
Kimball, Roger, xvii 
King Lear (Shakespeare), xiii-xv 
Kissen, Rita, 113 
Kitzinger, Jenny, 213 
Kripal, Jeffrey, 285 
Kritzman, Lawrence D., 70 
Krupat, Arnold, 192, 193, 194 



Lacan, Jacques, view of women 
of, 81 

Lacquer, Thomas, 81—82 
Ladder, The, 10-11 
Lankford, Scott, 236-40, 244 
Lauter, Paul, 191 
Lees, Sue, 225 

Lesbian and gay literature, 4-13, 
112-13 

for children, 113-18 
in secondary curriculum, 
131-45 

for young adults, 118-28 
Lesbian and gay studies 
AIDS Memorial Quilt and, 
304-8 

backlash against, xvii, 148-49 
as consumer discipline, 72-74 
as fad, 147-50 
film studies and, 39-51 
politicization of, 157-59 
in postcolonial India, 272-86 
problem of authority in, 45 
use of history in, 109-11 




Index 



Life and Death of Radclyffe Hall, 
The (Troubridge), 6, 12 
Litvak, Joseph, 71 
Livingston, Jennie, Paris Is 
Burnings 159 

“Long Story, A” (Brant), 198-99 
Looking for Langston (Julien), 42 
Lorde, Audre, 41 
Zami, 262-63 

Lorenz, Jay Kent (“Blame It on 
the Weatherman”), xxiii, 
36-53 

Lowry, Lois, “Holding,” 121 
Luhrmann, Baz, 136 
Lukes, C. A., 116 
Lynch, Lee (“Cruising the 
Libraries”), xxii, 3-13 



Mac an Ghaill, Mairtm, 215 
Macedo, Donaldo, xv, 206 
Madonna, 42 
Malinowitz, Harriet, 258 
Malone, Edmond, 154 
Manglesdorf, Kate, 182 
Martin, Biddy, 194 
Mauvaise conduit {Improper 
Conduct) (Almendros and 
Jimenez-Leal), 42 
McCann, Richard, “My 

Mother’s Clothes,” 92-94 
McCullers, Carson, xxii, 4, 6, 9 
Heart Is a Lonely Hunter, The, 
4 

Member of the Wedding, The, 
xxii, 4 

McLaren, Peter, 172 
McNaron, Toni, 54, 63 
Member of the Wedding, The 
(McCullers), xxii, 4 
Merrifield, Margaret, Come Sit 
by Me, 118 
Miller, Nancy K., 83 
Miller, Richard (“Fault Lines in 
the Contact Zone”), xxviii, 
234-52 



Mitchell, Claudia (“‘What’s Out 
There’?”), xxv, 112-30 
Mittler, Mary L., 55 
Moi, Toril, 196 
Momaday, N. Scott, 195 
Mom and Dad Dont Live 
Together Any More 
(Stinson), 116 

Monette, Paul, Becoming a Man, 
46 

Monster, queer teacher as, 28-33 
“Moral Tale, A” (Namjosi), 
281-82 

Morton, Donald, 56 
Multiculturalism, xvi, 150 
backlash against, xvii 
commodification of, 57 
selection of classroom readings 
for, 173-76 
Murphy, Timothy, 306 
Musto, Michael, 301 
“My Mother’s Clothes” 
(McCann), 92-94 



Namjosi, Suniti, 277, 278, 281 
“Moral Tale, A,” 281-82 
“Quiet Life, A,” 282-83 
Conversations of Cow, The, 283 
Nanda, Serena, 185 
National Conference of Catholic 
Bishops, 15 
Nationalism, 171-72 
in India, 275-76 
Native American literature, 
191-208 

Naylor, Gloria, The Women of 
Brewster Place, 263 
Newman, Leslie 

Gloria Goes to Gay Pride, 
116-17 

Saturday Is Pattyday, 1 15-16 
Newton, Esther, 42 
Nightwood (Barnes), 10 
Nkoli, Simon, 289 
Norton, Jody 



ERIC 



346 



Index 



(“(Trans)Gendering English 
Studies”), xxiv, 79-106 
Norton, Rictor, 150 
Nursery rhymes, 3 

Odets, Walt, 305 
O’Hara, John, The Ewings, 6 
“On Not Coming Out” 

(Talburt), xxiii-xxiv, 54-78 
Opie, Iona, 220 
Opie, Peter, 220 
Orgel, Stephen, 153 
Orlofsky, Myron, 290 
Orlofsky, Patsy, 290 
Osborne, Karen Lee (“‘Swim- 
ming Upstream’: Recovering 
the Lesbian in Native 
American Literature”), xxvii, 
190-210 

Other Voices, Other Rooms 
(Capote), 88-91 
Otto, Maryleah, Tom Doesn't 
Visit Us Anymore, 118 



Packer, Vin, 4-5, 8, 12 
Spring Fire, 8 

Palumbo-Liu, David, 56-57 
Paris Is Burning (Livingston), 159 
Parsons, Les, 118-19 
Partridge, Eric, 155, 156, 157 
Pater, Walter, 274 
Patton, Cindy, 298, 305-6 
Paulse, Michele, Asha's Mums, 
113-15, 223-26 
Pedagogy 

current state of, 15-16 
ideological pressure on, 15-16 
personalization of, 55-57 
queer. See Queer pedagogy 
Perez, Emma, 194 
Phillips, Kathy J., 148 
Pinsker, Sanford, 143 
Plato, “Allegory of the Cave,” 
30-33 



Popular culture, 36-51 
Porter, Joseph A., 151; 162 
Posey, Evelyn Riggs, 182 
Postcolonial studies, 272-86 
Poststructuralism, 150 
Pratt, Mary Louise, 44, 234-35, 
241,245 

Pratt, Minnie Bruce, “Stripped,” 
94-95 

Priest, 29-30 
Primary school students 
coming out before, 228-30 
gender and sexuality of, 213-32 
ideas about lesbians of, 223-27 
normalization of heterosexuality 
in, 219-22 

use of “alternative” texts with, 
223-27 

Prince-Hughes, Tara, 195 



Queer pedagogy 
activism and, 253-57 
Anglo orientation in, 41-42 
anxiety of students and, 20 
legislation against, 44 
responses to term queer and, 
48-49 

Shakespeare’s sexuality and, 
160-64 

social change and, 253—70 
spontaneity and, 69-70 
“Queer Pedagogy and Social 
Change” (Smith), xxix, 
253-71 

“Queers, Bums, and Magic” 
(student essay), 236-46 
“Quiet Life, A” (Namjosi), 
282-83 

Quilligan, Maureen, 151 
Quilting, 290-91 



Radel, Nicholas E, 151 
Raine, George, 303 
Rankin, Robert, 303 



- 317 



'347 



Index 



Reader-response theories, 134-36 
“Reading Gender, Reading 

Sexualities” (Epstein), xxviii, 
213-33 

Redman, Peter, 215 
Reese, Jim (“Creating a Place for 
Lesbian and Gay Readings in 
Secondary Classrooms”), 

XXV, 131-46 

“Rememorating” (Blumberg), 
XXX, 288-310 
Roberts, Jerry, 292, 303 
Roman, David, 39, 60, 73 
Romo-Carmona, Mariana, 176 
Roof, Judith, 56, 57, 72 
Rope (Hitchcock), 45-46 
Rose, Jacqueline, 81 
Rosenblatt, Louise, 134-35, 142, 
143-44 

Rubenstein, Hal, 299-300 
Rule, Jane, Desert of the Heart, 
11, 13 

Ruskin, Cindy, 295 
Russo, Vito, The Celluloid 
Closet, 140 

Sand, C., 116 

Saturday Is Patty day (Newman), 

116- 17 

Scandal, 28-29 

Schweickart, Patrocinio, 135, 144 
Secondary schools, 
homophobia in, 132-33 
lesbian and gay readings in, 
131-45 

racism and sexism in, 133-34 
Sedgwick, Eve Kosofsky, xviii, 

37, 39, 230, 253 
Sexuality 

academic scrutiny of, 14-34 
of children, 213-32 
children’s books addressing, 

117- 18 

discourse community examin- 
ing, 112-13 



of historical figures, 109-11 
as nonessential to identity, 62 
place of, in English curriculum, 
152 

and political position, 55-56 
prominence of, 64 
regulation of, xvii 
in Shakespeare, 147-65 
Sexual orientation, and gender 
performance, 37 
Shakespeare, William, sexuality 
in, xiii, 147-65 

homoerotic aspects of, 153-54 
King Lear, xiii-xv 
in last two hundred years, 
151-57 

in 1990s, 157-60 
place of, in English curriculum, 
151-52 

politicization of, 157-59 
queer pedagogy and, 160-64 
social change and, 160-64 
Sonnets, 153-54 
“Shakespeare’s Sexuality” 
(DiGangi), xxvi, 147-67 
Shepherd, Simon, 151, 155, 157 
Shewey, Don, 39 
Silko, Leslie, 195 
Skindeep (Jones), 122 
Smith, Ann (“Queer Pedagogy 
and Social Change”), xxix, 
253-71 

Smith Bruce R., 153, 157-58 
Social change 

queer pedagogy and, 253-70 
Shakespeare’s sexuality and, 
160-64 

in South Africa, 253-70 
in young adult literature, 

118-28 

Sodomy laws, 158-59, 275 
Sommers, Nancy, 49 
Sontag, Susan, 140-41 
South Africa, social change in, 
253-70 

Southern Gothic literature, 9 




-318 - 



Q 



48 



Index 



Spontaneous Combustion 
(Feinberg), 159-60 
Spring Fire (Packer), 8 
Spurlin, William J., xvii 
Staiger, Janet, 140 
Stally brass, Peter, 151, 154 
Stewart, Susan, xvi 
Stinson, Kathy 
Bare Naked Book, The^ 117 
Mom and Dad Don^t Live 
Together Any More^ 116 
“Straight Path to Postcolonial 
Salvation, The” (Vanita), 
xxix-xxx, 272-S7 
Strange Obsession (De), 277—81 
Strauss, Valerie, 152 
Strictly Ballroom, 131, 136-38 
gay reading of, 138-41, 144-45 
“Stripped” (Pratt), 94-95 
Students 

creating queer awareness 
among, 168-89, 257-70 
homophobia in writings of, 
234-52 

journal writings of, 265-70 
lesbian and gay, psychosocial 
adjustments of, 132, 141-42 
reactions of, to teacher’s 
coming out, 183-87 
sexual identity of, 305 
Sullivan, Andrew, 27 
Sweet, Michael, 185 
“Swimming Upstream” (Brant), 
196-208 

“‘Swimming Upstream’: Recover- 
ing the Lesbian in Native 
American Literature” 
(Osborne), xxvii, 191-210 



Whisper Their Love, 5-6 
Teachers, lesbian and gay 
activism of, 253-57 
coming out of, 168-89 
as monsters, 17-18 
scandal and, 27-28 
scrutiny of, 14-34 
in secondary schools, 134-36 
social responsibility of, 171-76 
as tour guides, 23-28 
Teena, Brandon, 94-95 
Thadani, Giti, 285 
They Came from Within 
(Cronenberg), 48 
Thomson, Rosemarie Garland, 17 
Thorne, Barrie, 216, 219 
Tobin, Joseph Jay, 113 
Tom Doesn't Visit Us Anymore 
(Otto), 118 

“(Trans)Gendering English 
Studies” (Norton), xxiv, 
79-106 

Transgenders, 79-102 
Transitioning, 92 
Traub, Valerie, 153, 158 
Treichler, Paula A., 297 
Trivedi, Harish, 284 
Troubridge, Una, The Life and 
Death ofRadclyffe Hall, 7, 
12 

Turney, Anthony, 293, 303, 304 



Uncle What-Is-It Is Coming to 
Visit, 118-19 
Uribe, Virginia, 132 
“Uses of History, The” 

(Faderman), xxv, 109-11 



Take_ a Lesbian to Lunch Van Dyke, Annette, 206 

(Aldrich), 5 VanEvery, Jo, 225 

Talburt, Susan (“On Not Coming Vanita, Ruth (“The Straight Path 
Out”), xxiii— xxiv, 54—78 to Postcolonial Salvation ), 

Taylor, Valerie xxix-xxx, 272-87 

Girls in Three-B, The, 8 Van Sant, Gus, 159 







Index 



Vickers, Nancy, 151 
Vlerdkans {In Full Flight) 
(Hough), 124-26 



Walker, Kate, 119 
Walkerdine, Valerie, 118 
Warner, Michael, xviii 
Warren, Robert Penn, 80, 81 
Watney, Simon, xx, 15, 306-7 
Weeks, Jeffrey, 253 
Weissman, Aerlyn, Forbidden 
Love, 42 

Welch, Denton, In Youth Is 
Pleasure, 91-92 

Well of Loneliness, The (Hall), 4, 
5, 7, 259-61 

“We Might as Well All Be 
Strangers” (Kerr) 120-21 
What Is a Family f (Development 
Education Centre), 223, 
226-27 

“‘What’s Out There?”’ 

(Mitchell), XXV, 112-30 
“When the Cave Is a Closet” 
(Ingebretsen), xxii, 14-35 
Whisper Their Love (Taylor), 5-6 
White, Edward, 240 
Wiegman, Robyn, 56, 57 



Wieler, Diane, Bad Boy, 124 
Wilde, Oscar, xvii, 154-55, 156, 
274, 275 

Willhoite, Michael, Uncle 
What-Is-It Is Coming to 
Visit, 118-19 
Williams, Patricia J., 40 
Williams, Scott, 293 
Williams, Tennessee, 9 
Williams, Walter L., 204 
Winnicott, D. W, 86 ‘ 

Wittig, Monique, 87 
Women 

Aristotelian view of, 80-81 
in English studies, 79-102 
Lacan’s view of, 81 
Women of Brewster Place, The 
(Naylor), 263 



Young, Allen, 150 

Young adult literature, 118-28 



Zami (Lorde), 262-63 
Zavarzadeh, Mas’ud, 56 
Zimmerman, Bonnie, 48, 148 
Zwilling, Leonard, 185 




350 



- 320 - 



Editor 




William J. Spurlin has co-edited The New 
Criticism and Contemporary Literary 
Theory: Connections and Continuities 
(1995) and Reclaiming the Heartland: 
Lesbian and Gay Voices from the Midwest 
(1996). His essays on queer studies, Ameri- 
can literature and culture, and critical 
theory have appeared in numerous jour- 
nals and anthologies, most recently in De- 
Centring Sexualities (2000); Mourning 
Diana: Nation, Culture and the Perfor- 
mance of Grief (1999); ]ames Baldwin 
Now (1999); Coming Out of Feminism f 
(1998); and Reconceptualizing American 
Literary /Cultural Studies: Rhetoric, His- 
tory, and Politics in the Humanities 
(1996). He has lectured on queer studies 
at academic conferences and symposia, 
and as an invited speaker, in Europe, Af- 
rica, Asia, and across North America. 
Spurlin is presently working on his book 
“Imperialism within the Margins: The 
Cultural Politics of Queer Identity in 
Postcolonial Contexts,” and he teaches 
twentieth-century literature, critical and 
cultural theory, and queer studies at 
Cardiff University. 








gS" 

Contributors 



Marcia Blumberg is visiting research fellow at the Open University, 
Milton Keynes, England. She has taught drama courses at York 
University, Toronto, and theater courses at the festival for Edinburgh 
University. She has co-edited South African Theatre asfand Inter- 
vention with Dennis Walder (1999) and she is completing her book 
Engendering Intervention in South African Theatre. Her articles 
on contemporary theater appear in Staging Resistance, Hollywood 
on Stage, New Theatre Quarterly, Performance Research, Theatre 
Research in Canada, South African Theatre Journal, and in other 
anthologies and journals. The essay in this volume forms part of a 
larger project tentatively titled “Making AIDS Visible: Theatre as/ 
and Activism.” 

tatiana de la tierra is a bilingual, bicultural writer and activista. She has 
taught English composition at the University of Texas at El Paso, 
where she obtained her M.F.A. in creative writing in 1999. She is 
former editor of the Latina lesbian publications esto no tiene nombre, 
conmocion, and el telaranazo. Her fiction, poetry, and creative non- 
fiction have appeared in journals and anthologies such as Cimarron 
Review, Chasing the American Dykedream, Hot & Bothered, Jour- 
nal of Internal Medicine, Mid-American Review, Tropic Magazine, 
Queer View Mirror, Perral, Companeras, and Gay and Lesbian 
Poetry in Our Time. She is currently in residence as a reference 
librarian at the State University of New York, Buffalo, where she 
obtained an M.L.S. degree in 2000. 

Mario DiGangi is assistant professor of English at Lehman College, 
City University of New York, where he teaches courses in 
Shakespeare and Renaissance culture. He is the author of The 
Homoerotics of Early Modern Drama (1997) and of articles in 
Shakespeare Quarterly, ELH, English Literary Renaissance, Tex- 
tual Practice, and GLQ. His work also appears in the anthologies 
MLA Approaches to Teaching: Shorter Elizabethan Poetry; 
Marlowe, History, and Sexuality; and Essays to Celebrate Richard 
Barnfield: Four Hundred Years of The Affectionate Shepheard. He 
is currently working on a study of sexuality, gender, and work in 
early modern England. 




- 323 - 




Contributors 



Debbie Epstein is reader in education at the University of London’s In- 
stitute of Education, vs^here she teaches women’s studies, cultural 
studies, and research methodologies. Her scholarship addresses the 
shaping of inequalities, particularly in relation to gender, race, and 
sexuality, in schooling and in popular culture. Recent books in- 
clude Schooling Sexualities, co-authored with Richard Johnson 
(1998), and a number of co-edited volumes, including Failing Boysf 
Issues in Gender and Education (1998), Border Patrols: Policing 
the Boundaries of Heterosexuality (1997), and A Dangerous Know- 
ing: Sexuality, Pedagogy, and Popular Culture (1999). 

Lillian Faderman is the author of several books of lesbian history, in- 
cluding Surpassing the Love of Men: Romantic Friendship and Love 
between Women from the Renaissance to the Present (1981; reis- 
sued with a new introduction, 1998), Odd Girls and Twilight Lov- 
ers: A History of Lesbian Life in Twentieth -Century America (1991), 
and To Believe in Women: What Lesbians Have Done for America — 
A History (1999). She is professor of English at California State 
University, Fresno. For her outstanding contributions to gay and 
lesbian studies, she was the 1998 recipient of the Monette/Horowitz 
Award. 

Edward J. Ingebretsen is associate professor of English at Georgetown 
University. He is the author of Robert Frost: A Star in a Stone-Boat 
(1995) and Maps of Heaven, Maps of Hell: Religious Terror as 
Memory from the Puritans to Stephen King (1996). His essays have 
appeared in The Journal of Gay, Lesbian and Bisexual Identity; 
Journal of American Culture; Religion and American Culture; 
Thought; and The International Journal of Sexuality. He is cur- 
rently finishing a study of American political gothic titled Making 
Monsters: Politics and Persuasion (forthcoming 2001). 

Jay Kent Lorenz is a doctoral candidate in visual culture at the Univer- 
sity of California, Irvine. He holds an M.A. from Georgetown Uni- 
versity in English, where he also taught cultural studies. His writing 
on cinema has appeared in Film Quarterly, Film and History, 
Psychotronic, and the Miami Herald; he has been a commentator 
on film for Britain’s Channel Four and is co-editing an anthology 
on global sex. 

Lee Lynch has written eleven books, among them Cactus Love (1994) 
and The Swashbuckler (1985). Her column “The Amazon Trail” 
appears in over a dozen newspapers in the United States. She lives 
with Akia Woods on the Oregon coast, where she earns her living 
in social service work. Akia and Lee co-edited Off the Rag: Lesbi- 
ans Writing on Menopause (1996), and Lynch’s most recent book 




Contributors 



is the novel Rafferty Street (1998), the third volume in the Morton 
River Valley trilogy. 

Richard E. Miller is associate professor of English and associate direc- 
tor of the Writing Program at Rutgers University. He is the author 
of As If Learning Mattered: Reforming Higher Education (1998). 
His essays have appeared in College English, CCC, JAC, and Cul- 
tural Studies. 

Claudia Mitchell is associate professor of education at McGill Univer- 
sity, Montreal, where she teaches and conducts research in the ar- 
eas of childhood as a cultural space, literacy, gender, popular culture, 
teacher education, and gay and lesbian literature for children and 
young adults. She has co-authored with Sandra Weber Thats Funny, 
You Don’t Look Like a Teacher: Interrogating Images of Identity 
in Popular Culture (1995) and Reinventing Ourselves as Teachers: 
Beyond Nostalgia (1999). 

Jody Norton is a lecturer in English language and literature and in 
women’s studies at Eastern Michigan University. S/he is the author 
of Narcissus Sous Rature: Male Subjectivity in Contemporary Ameri- 
can Poetry (2000) and is currently writing a book on the cultural 
origins of transphobia. S/he has published in Centennial Review; 
Women and Language; College Literature; Contemporary Litera- 
ture; The Journal of Gay, Lesbian, and Bisexual Identity; Journal 
of Medical Humanities; Sulfur; The American Poetry Review; The 
Journal of the Midwest Modern Language Association; Sexuality 
and Culture; Twentieth Century Literature, and other journals and 
collections. 

Karen Lee Osborne is the author of the novels Carlyle Simpson (1986) 
and Hawkwings ( 1991 ), the editor of The Country of Herself: Short 
Fiction by Chicago Women (1993), and co-editor, with William J. 
Spurlin, of Reclaiming the Heartland: Lesbian and Gay Voices from 
the Midwest (1996). Her essays have appeared in American Book 
Review, The Denver Quarterly, and The Literary Review. She teaches 
at Columbia College of Chicago, where she was narned,1996 Teacher 
of the Year, and where she developed and teaches the courses Intro- 
duction to Native American Literature and The Contemporary Na- 
tive American Novel. 

Jim Reese is head of high school English at the International School of 
Brussels, Belgium; he has also taught at the British School of Brus- 
sels and at Oakton High School in Virginia. He currently serves as 
coordinator of Project Safe Place, a teacher-led effort to educate his 
school community on issues affecting lesbian and gay youth and 




- 325 - ‘ ‘ 

Q - 

O 



Contributors 



adults. He published articles in English Journal and the Interna- 
tional Schools Journal in 1995 and 1998, respectively. 

Ann Smith teaches literature at the University of the Witwatersrand, 
Johannesburg, South Africa. Her research is in the areas of queer 
studies, gender studies, and young adult literature; her essay “Teach- 
ing as a Feminist in South Africa: Some Aspects of the Politics of 
Gender, Race and Education” appeared in Textual Studies in 
Canada: Canada's Journal of Cultural Literacy (1996). 

Susan Talburt is assistant professor of educational policy studies at 
Georgia State University, where she teaches courses in anthropol- 
ogy of education, curriculum and higher education, poststructuralist 
and feminist theory, and women’s studies. She has published essays 
on queer theory and ethnographic research, identity politics in higher 
education, and curriculum and pedagogy in the Journal of Curricu- 
lum Theorizing, the International Journal of Qualitative Studies in 
Education, and Review of Education/Pedagogy /Cultural Studies, 
as well as a book. Subject to Identity: Knowledge, Sexuality, and 
Academic Practices in Higher Education (2000). 

Ruth Vanita, formerly reader in English at Delhi University, is now as- 
sociate professor of liberal studies at the University of Montana. 
She is author of Sappho and the Virgin Mary: Same-Sex Love and 
the English Literary Imagination (1996) and A Play of Light: Se- 
lected Poems (1994). She was a founder and co-editor ol Manus hi, 
India’s first feminist journal, from 1979 to 1990, and she recently 
co-edited an anthology, Same-Sex Love in India: Readings from 
Literature and History (2000), with Saleem Kidwai. 



o 

ERIC 



355 



- 326 - 






This book was typeset in Adobe Sabon by Electronic Imaging. 
Typefaces used on the cover include variations of Esprit. 
The book was printed on 50-lb. Husky Offset 
by IPC Communication Services. 




356 



L esbian and Gaij Studies and the Teachin/j of 

English is a wide-ranging, international collec- 
tion that provides a contemporary overview 
of issues of sexual identity as they relate to teaching and 
learning in English from elementary through university 
levels. Editor William J. Spurlin has pulled together a 
remarkably eclectic set of essays, from the personal — such 
as the dearth of literature for lesbian and gay youth — to the 
practical — books to use in class to introduce the concept of 
alternative families — to the political — a gay Catholic priest 
teaching in a Catholic university negotiates the rigors of 
teaching a course on Unspeakable Lives: Gay and Lesbian 
Narrative. From classrooms in India to North America to 
South Africa to Europe, these and other teachers theorize 
lesbian, gay, and transgendered positions in the classroom, 
offer pedagogical strategies for teaching lesbian and gay 
studies, and examine the broader social and political con- 
texts that shape classroom discourse and practices. 

▼ ▼▼▼▼▼▼ 




Natio^l Council of Teachers of English 

Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois, 61801-1096 
|-6283 or 217-328-3870 • http://www.ncte.org 



ERIC 





U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

rf.produc tton basis 



This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
O (Blanket) form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 




EFF-089 (9/97) 




