Title: Remapping Englishness: The Impact of Globalization on College English 
Instruction in Taiwan 

Author’s name: Jade Tsui-yu Lee 

Affiliation: Assistant Professor, National Kaohsiung Normal University (Taiwan) 
i adelee @ nknu . edu . tw 
Publication Date: Sept. 16. 2008 



1 



Abstract 



The purpose of this paper is to examine the impact of globalization upon the 
college- level instruction of English/American literature in Taiwan. The examination will 
be centered upon the subject of Englishness as demonstrated in the courses of 
English/American Literature taught in Taiwan. By focusing on the term "Englishness," the 
paper broadly discusses the institutionalization of the term, addressing its acquired 
implications, and delineates its constructive and transformative possibilities and 
problematics. The paper consists of three parts: (1) English studies and the impact of 
globalization: definition, phenomenon, influence on English education; (2) Englishness: 
then and now, evolution, definition, perceptions; and (3) A curriculum design of 
American literature instruction at NKNU: language & culture. A specific concern of this 
research is to show how the global awareness informs an innovative mode which has 
reflected or constructed the changing structure, identities and social relations. Results 
show that in a classroom project called "American Literature: To Think and Act Locally," 
the learners are able to formulate independent thinking and fulfill a mission with their 
own knowledge base grounded a comparatively cross-cultural awareness. Non-native 
English educators need to adopt a "culture package" in the teaching of English/ American 
Literature and stress the importance for training of critical and local thinking and acting. 



Keywords: Englishness, College English Education, Teaching of English/ American 
Literature, globalization, imperialism 



2 




Remapping Englishness: 

The Impact of Globalization on College English Instruction in Taiwan 

Jade Tsui-yu Lee 

This paper examines the new instructional pedagogies of English/American 
literature that have appeared at National Kaohsiung Normal University (NKNU) in 
Taiwan as a consequence of global awareness and technological innovation. On a 
general level, it aims to explore the impacts of Globalization upon the instruction of 
English/American literature at NKNU. The impact, however, is neither local nor 
insignificant. It helps us to reconsider the meaning of globalization; that is, in this 
global village where globalization becomes an inevitable trend, how do educators 
encounter or respond to the epidemic wave of globalization. A specific concern of this 
research is to show how the global awareness informs an innovative mode which has 
reflected or constructed the changing structure, identities and social relations. 

The examination will be centered upon the subject of Englishness as 
demonstrated in the courses of English/American Literature taught at NKNU. By 
focusing on the term “Englishness,” the paper will broadly discuss the 
institutionalization of the term, addressing its acquired implications, and delineate its 
constructive and transformative possibilities and problematics. 

The paper consists of three parts: (1) English Studies and the Impact of 
Globalization: definition, phenomenon, influence on English education; (2) 
Englishness: then and now, evolution, definition, perceptions; and (3) A curriculum 
design of American literature instruction at NKNU: language & culture. 

I. English Studies and the Impact of Globalization 

In 1826 a University College in London was founded to award degrees and in 



3 




1828 English was offered as a subject of study. In 1831, English literature was 
included in the curriculum at King’s College, London (Barry 2002, p. 13). Ever since 
the 19 th century when the studies of English were established as an academic subject 
in universities in Britain, the studies have been combined with intricately political, 
ideological and cultural missions, along with its original and secularized attempts to 
replace classics. Matthew Arnold argues that function of literary criticism is to “learn 
and propagate the best that is known and thought in the world” (Arnold 1 864, p. 
1526), suggesting that the practice of literature should be in service of political and 
social purposes. In F. D. Maurice’s 1840 Professorial inaugural lecture at Kings, he 
claims that the education of English literature is essential to middle-class education, 
as English literature would serve “to emancipate us . . . form the notions and habits 
which are peculiar to our own age,” informing eternal values, and providing a 
stronghold for the middle class to maintain the political stability (Barry 2002, p. 13). 
The teaching of English in England in the nineteenth century provided an opportunity 
in cultural matters to the populations who had no access to education. The thinking 
was reaffirmed and highlighted in the Newbolt Report on the Teaching of English in 
England in 1921 whose rhetoric was to “[save] high culture in an age of mass 
civilization” (Engler 2000, p. 341). 

The English education was later enveloped with a nationalist agenda. Engler 
(2000) stresses that tensions occurred between England and Germany intellectuals in 
terms of the different attitudes of seeing English and its shared Germanic origin (p. 
340). Despite the shared heritage between English and German, the English would 
prefer understanding themselves as part of Anglo-Saxon cultures, whose struggles 
with the French-speaking Normans were reinforced by historical romances and 
accounts (p. 341). 

The nationalist rhetoric was merged into colonial form of imperialism in the 



4 




nineteenth century. Gauri Viswanathan argues for an ideological nature of English 
education by saying that “British colonial administrators. . . discovered an ally in 
English literature to support them in maintaining control of the natives under the guise 
of a liberal education” (quoted in Ashcroft et al. 1989, p. 3). Ashcroft et al. note that 
English education and the growth of Empire have been intricately tied with each other 
in their historical development, however consciously or unconsciously. Yet, what is 
significant is the way in which the coupling leads to a naturalizing process of 
constructed values which established a “privileged norm” as a template to deny the 
native, primitive and savage as marginal, uncanonized or peripheral: “Literature was 
made as central to the cultural enterprise of Empire as the monarchy was to its 
political formation” (Ashcroft et al. 1989, p. 3). Even more subtly, the marginalized 
and the excluded will be incorporated into the center when the former starts to 
threaten the center, a process termed by Edward Said as that of conscious “affiliation” 
in the guise of “filation” (Ashcroft et al. 1989, p. 4). 

As Aschcroft et al. (1989) have noted, many post-colonial societies, knowing the 
complexities of ideological power and cultural incorporation, have been devoted to 
deconstructing or dismantling the link. Ngugi wa Thiong’o in his 1972 work claims 
for the abolition of English department in Africa. John Docker addresses the issue 
from the Caribbean and Indian contexts in his essay “the neocolonial assumption in 
the university teaching English,” arguing that the power networking involving 
literature, language and the imperial culture resists the dismantling of the institution 
on the one hand and on the deeper level, becomes even more influential in the cultural 
formation (Ashcroft et al 1989, p. 4). 

Nevertheless, it is an undeniable truth that English language has increasingly 
acquired its world supremacy. Particularly since the twentieth century, the English 



5 




language has become the linga franca of a global language. The British Council once 
gave an account of the population speaking English in the world, 

World- wide, there are over 1,400 million people living in countries where 
English has official status. One out of five of the world’s population speak 
English to some level of competence. Demand from the other four-fifths is 
increasing. . . By the year 2000 it is estimated that over one billion people 
will be learning English. English is the main language of books, newspapers, 
airports and air-traffic control, international business and academic 
conferences, science, technology, diplomacy, sport, international 
competitions, pop music and advertising. 

(British Council, English 2000 press release, 23 March 1995) 

Umberto Eco (1995), an Italian novelist and cultural theorist, has explained why 
English has acquired the prominence: 

The predominant position currently enjoyed by English is a historical 
contingency arising from the mercantile and colonial expansion of the 
British Empire, which was followed by American economic and 
technological hegemony. Of course, it may also be maintained that English 
has succeeded because it is rich in monosyllables, capable of absorbing 
foreign words and flexible in forming neologisms, etc.; yet had Hitler won 
World War II and had the USA been reduced to a confederation of banana 
republics, we would probably today use German as a universal vehicular 
language, and Japanese electronics firms would advertise their products in 
Hong Kong airport duty-free shops (Zollfreie Waren) in German. 



6 




(Eco, 1995, p. 331) 



II. Englishness then and now 

The above review of historical development of English studies as a subject 
provides a point of reference for us to reconsider the role of English education in 
Taiwan. Though not a former colony of British Empire, Taiwan cannot be immune to 
the prevailing influence of English as language and culture. On the linguistic level, for 
many people who do not speak English as a first language in Taiwan, a good 
command of English ability means opportunity, which will help improve an 
individual’s status or economic development. Also, because of the importance of 
English in international trade and technological research, learning English and 
speaking English well are considered an important stepping stone for the career 
success and personal growth. An “English fever” occurs, according to Stephen 
Krashen, refers to a phenomenon of “an overwhelming desire to learn English (and 

make sure your children learn English).” 

Despite the pervasive and ubiquitous “English fever” in Taiwan, and the fact that 
English Department has been often ranked as the top choice in the humanities, it is 
undeniable to say that most college students in Taiwan are not motivated to study 
English/ American literatures for several reasons. First, for the majority of English 
majors, English and American literatures are simply some of many required college 
literature courses. Although many students have acquired experience reading English, 
literature classes are often thought to be difficult because they require students to 
struggle with complex semantic and syntactic structures. Second, the instructor, 
basing on their own experiences of learning literature, often requires students to read 
hundreds of pages in thick anthologies It is principally this classroom activity that 
forms the perceptions of Taiwan students about English/American letters, particularly 
the instruction they receive and the assigned readings they complete. 

Another aspect needs to be taken into consideration; that is, the cultural 
implications of English education in Taiwan, along with the possible positive and 



7 




negative views of English cultural traditions. If English education was (and still is) 
essentially ideological and political, how do we the “third- world” educators discern 
the power networking, avoid duplicating the imperialistic rhetoric and locate our own 
identities and positions become all urgent issues to address. In other words, when we 
design a course such as English/American literature, educators should take into 
accounts many important questions: (1) how the assigned readings adequately 
represent the canonized norm which reflects literary and aesthetic merits; (2) how the 
chosen works help the non native speakers to relate the materials to their personal 
vernacular experiences, and eventually formulate critical thinking; a sense of “Think 
Globally, Act Locally” and (3) how the learning of English cultural and literature, and 
the awareness of “western” and “global” framework help them construct their 
worldviews. 

These questions revolve upon several crucial concerns. The first concern is the 
questioning of authenticity as represented by the canon. The selection of assigned 
readings will reveal how the Taiwanese societies continue to engage with or mediate 
with English (imperial) experiences. By reading canonical works, we will have a 
better understanding as regards how the imperial center maintains its cultural 
hegemony and the Eurocentric standard of judgment, and also by reading them can we 
“write back” to the center by calling the standardized into question. The cross-cultural 
reading is necessitated as it allows the “center” and the “margin” to both realize what 
is overtly manifest or “silenced.” Such cultural revelation or silence requires a gap, a 
distance and a new perspective. Quite understandably, the Taiwanese students, if 
well-informed and trained, can offer their perspectives when approaching the texts, 
bringing forth possible dialogues with the cultural messages behind the texts. Rather 
than fixed or unified, Englishness should be understood as slippery, changing, or even 
always contradictory to the native expressions. In this vein, as Ashcroft et al. argue, 
we realize that the “authentic” experiences can be false or validating the center, but 
also that the “inauthentic” and “marginal” are real (Ashcroft et al. 1989, p. 41). 

The second concern is the technologies to be employed for the mediation. We 
now live in a world in which human communication relies heavily on technology. 
Technological advancement has drastically changed our perception of the world, from 
daily practices to academic research. Educators need to ask as to how students can 
benefit from the advantages of internet technology, i.e. more accessible and readily 
available resources, while minimizing the possible disadvantage, i.e. superficial and 




sketchy information of little substance or significance. 

Next, one should also note the changing nature of text. Originally and in a strict 
sense, text refers to verbal or linguistic signs, whereas drawings or visual signs used 
to be considered to be different from, if not secondary to, the verbal text. However, 
since the late twentieth century, developments in technology have brought about a 
return of visual semiotic. The increasing availability of visual texts (making photos by 
cameras, or cell phones), and the means to disseminate them globally — have changed 
the status of the visual signs. Subsequent to the return of the visual semiotic to in the 
postmodern age, one has to be aware that words, typography, pictures, animation and 
films are woven together into English texts to form multimodal texts. 

As mentioned from above, the noted feature of the postmodern world is the 
blurring of boundaries — not just geographical, cultural, generic boundaries but also in 
social identities. The privilege of English — the language of capitalism- informs a 
thesis of globalization in which one cannot neglect that the conditions of social and 
economic inequality are assisted by the hegemonic power of the English language. 
Hence, while knowing and using the language as a tool, one has to locate one’s 
position and construct one’s own identities from the positioning. 

III. English/American Literature Courses at NKNU in Taiwan: 

It is high time now to think of modifying the curricular planning for Literature 
Courses in English Department at NKNU in Taiwan. Teaching English and American 
literature in Taiwan during the 21st century requires striking a balance between 
traditional and (post)modem instruction, between the foreign and the native, between 
the global and the local, which involves the continuous negotiations between 
curricular requirements, social demands, and personal interests. I urge that a 
multicultural perspective be introduced for the new curriculum. To achieve this, the 
following concerns— with canonicity, curriculum, and pedagogy- need to be 
addressed: 

First, in terms of canonicity, the instructor should be keenly aware of and 
sensitive to the canonical transformation of English/American literature during recent 
years. In the case of American Literature, throughout the past decades, the definition 
and function of the literary canon has been challenged in the United States. In 1992, a 
vigorous debate in America focused on the historical significance of Ferdinand 
Columbus and his "discovery" of America. Likewise in English Literature, given the 



9 




fact that the term “English” has triggered the controversy over what “standardized” 
English should be adopted and what “englishness” signifies. On top of this, the 
reconstruction of academic institutions, the emergence of feminism, minority 
discourses, and human concerns for ecology, cyberspace, and cultural issues have 
markedly affected the way that humans perceive the world. It is not an exaggeration to 
assert that peoples live within multicultural societies within which perspectives differ 
among individuals. Accordingly, traditional classical literature that has been taught in 
Britain and/or in the U.S. classroom no longer seems representative of ever-changing 
social conditions. Hence, the understanding of the critical inquiry about the expansion 
of canon may provide new instructional perspectives, and also inform the students of 
the continuous transformation of the canonical works. 

The second concern is with curriculum planning. The curriculum syllabi in 
literature classrooms provide a means to define, transmit, and reproduce the literary 
boundaries of literature. It is important that college English professors present 
multiculturally informed literary texts to students. Take American Literature as an 
example. In the preface to the fifth edition of the Norton Anthology, Nina Baum, its 
editor, acknowledges a revision to the traditional canon “in response to teachers who 
found that the traditional canon was insufficiently representative of American literary 
history” (xxiii). The result is the inclusion of writers such as Anne Bradstreet, Mary 
Rowlandson, Sarah Kemble Knight, Edith Wharton, and W. E. B. Du Bois, among 
others. Baum states: 

As every teacher of American literature knows, over the last two decades the 
American literary canon has become still more extensive and diverse than it 
was in the mid- seventies. In each successive edition, we have adjusted our 
selections in response to detailed suggestions from many teachers, (xxiii) 

The innovative changes Baum describes include (a) the enhancement of “Literature to 
1620” with a “much-requested section of Native American trickster tales from the 
Navajo, Clatso Chinook, Koasati, Winnebago, and Okanogan tribes” (xxiii); (b) the 
inclusion of “requested female writers” in the section “American Literature 
1820-1865” such as Catharine Maria Sedgwick and Louisa May Alcott; (c) the 
addition in vol. 2 of Black writers to represent “American Literature During 
1856-1914,” a period that included the Harlem Renaissance; and (d) the inclusion of 
writers in the section “American Prose Since 1945” from different ethnic backgrounds, 
“with an emphasis on ethnic diversity and experimental writing." Baum describes the 



10 




revised anthology as “a testimony to the continuing richness of American literary 
traditions” (xxvi), which is believed to be a response to the trenchant challenge from 
the new rival — the Heath Anthology. 

Introduced proudly by its editorial board, the publication of the Heath challenges 
successfully the dominance of the perennially reigning Norton Anthology, fostering a 
dynamic dialogue and debate of canon formation. Heath editor, Paul Lauter, admits 
that the revision of the anthology began during the 1970s, a period during which he 
was organizing a project called “Reconstructing American Literature.” The Project 
originated in 1982 at an MLA Conference, leading to the publishing of The Heath 
Anthology of American Literature nine years later. In the first edition Lauter sets forth 
the agenda inherent in the publication: 

First, scholars documented the fact that the canon of American literature 
had changed substantially over time. ... A new anthology would necessarily 
be different from its predecessors for as Emerson had put it, “the experience 
of each new age requires a new confession, and the world seems always 
waiting for its poet.” (xxxiii). 

Second, scholars in the late 1960s, recognizing the richness and diversity 
of American culture, began to seek out the large number of lost, forgotten, or 
suppressed literary texts that had emerged from and illustrated that 
diversity. . . . Anthologies were even slower to change; they continued to 
focus on a canon little different from that established half a century ago. The 
problem came to be how to provide teachers and students with a textbook 
that truly displayed the enormous richness of the cultures of America. 

(xxxiv) 

We believe that reading this range of writers offers opportunities for 
drawing stimulating comparisons and contrasts between canonical and 
noncanonical figures, between female and male, between one ethnic writer 
and another. It allows us to study the diverse and changing cultures of 
America, not only a narrow group of authors. It is not that heretofore 
noncanonical texts provide, so to speak, the landscape of “minor” writing 
from which the great monuments of American literature rise. Rather, 
studying and comparing these differing works will enlarge our 
understanding of — even help us fundamentally redefine — the literature that 
has in fact been produced in the United States. This comparative process 



11 




may thus play a key role in changing the traditional foci and contexts for the 
study of American literature and bring into the classroom the energy and 
excitement generated by the new scholarship on women and minorities, 
(xxxv) 

In addition to its expansive selections written by female writers and authors from 
minority groups, the Heath Anthology differs from the Norton Anthology. 

Hence, American Literature should not be limited to literatures produced in the 
U.S. only; Native American literatures, Northern American (Canadian), Chicano 
literatures, Caribbean literatures should be also included. Also, texts written by writers 
of minority groups, Asian American, African American writers should be taught in an 
appropriately proportional manner. More than a few students of American literature in 
Taiwan find it interesting to read works written by writers of Chinese ancestry. David 
Henry Hwang, Maxine Hong Kingston, Amy Tan, Gish Jen, Cathy Song, and 
Li- Young Lee provide access for Chinese readers to understand immigration 
experiences and Chinese communities in America. 

English Literature presents an even wider spectrum. Traditionally, English 
Literature in Taiwan’s universities focuses on the Great Britain and is hence 
“anglocentric.” Almost all the syllabi will start with Beowulf, which is 
unexceptionally and chronologically followed by Medieval, Renaissance, Classicists, 
Romanticists, Victorian, Modernist works, setting up a “norm” for the teaching of 
English Literature. One cannot help but question the validity of the “norm” now in 
Taiwan in the Twentieth-first Century. It is debatable as to whether the selection of 
readings can help a Taiwanese student to formulate a vantage point from Asia. After 
all, students are expected to learn how to be a global citizen instead of being a British 
subject. Hence, I argue that the assigned reading for English Literature should not be 
limited to read “British” writers only. Instead, it should contain literatures written in 
English in order to introduce different perspectives, questioning and challenges on the 
notion of Englishness. 

Finally, classroom teaching can make a lot of differences. As is well known, a 
bad teacher can make interesting materials deadly boring; and a good teacher can give 
an insipid text a spirit and life, thus making it fascinating. Teachers nowadays should 
be aware of the fact that the students they have are those who grew up in a world of 
myriad graphic signs. If they find words boring and less appealing, it is mainly 
because they have not yet been trained to read extensively or to decipher the written 



12 




signs. Reading is essentially important; no doubt for that. However, the offering of 
supplementary teaching aids such as recorded sounds, pictures, maps, graphics, realia, 
costumes, films, will certainly be helpful for students to “imagine” and understand the 
texts. Overall, I argue for a “culture package” in the teaching of English/ American 
Literature and stress the importance for training of critical and local thinking and 
acting. In a project called “American Literature: To Think and Act Locally,” (as 
shown in the Appendix), I emphasize the connectedness of thinking and acting, as 
well as the importance of personal interests and local issues. The underlying 
principles are that learners are able to formulate independent thinking and fulfill a 
mission with their own knowledge base grounded a comparatively cross-cultural 
awareness. It is hoped that a well-designed package in a literature classroom will not 
only motivate, engage the students, inform the students of the contexts, but also 
eventually help them construct their own identities. 



13 




Appendix I 



American Literature 



A “TO THNK & ACT LOCALLY” Project 

Instructions: This is a project to incorporate American literary materials into your 
personal knowledge base and experiences. You are supposed to finish the project by 
demonstrating your ability of critical thinking of the issues and fulfilling a DIY 
mission. Your work should be presented on a webpage with copyrighted pictures, 
music or materials. 

1 . What might be William Cullen Bryant’s zodiac sign? Imagine you were Bryant, 
a eighteen-year-old poet who was about to write a love poem. What might you 
write about? Compose or find the background music to fit your poem. 

How has Bryant changed or maintained his essential view of life/death between 
the different versions of “Thanatopsis”? Identify a friend or relative who has the 
experiences of attending the funeral and conduct an interview with him/her. How 
do you think of the funeral and if condition allows, how do you improve the 
funeral? 

2. Witchcraft Belief in evil forces such as witches, and diabolical spirits was 
widespread in America and Europe during and before the 17th Century-indeed, all 
the way back to the beginning of time. Thousands of innocent people were 
accused of witchcraft and put to death. 

Discuss the witchcraft in Hawthorne’s “Young Goodman Brown” and identify any 
contemporary film adapting the theme of “witch” that are occurring in Japanese 
animation and/or Asian (Japanese, Korean, Chinese or Taiwanese) TV soap operas 
today. Discuss situations and circumstances that cause people in today’s society to 
enter a “dark forest,” as Young Goodman Brown did. 

3. You are a film producer who is interested in documenting Thoreau’s life in 
Walden Pond. Write a script and shoot a film clip (less than 15 minutes) that 
faithfully but originally reflects how a modern person gets inspired from what 
Hawthorne saw and thought during his residence in Walden Pond. 

4. You are a detective and you hope find out the cause for Lenore’s death. Based on 
the clues from Edgar Allan Poe’s “The Raven,” what would you do and say? 

Write a script about the prequel and the sequel of the poem “The Raven.” 

Also, we do not usually see ravens in Taiwan. If you are asked to rewrite the poem 
into a dramatic form in a Taiwanese context, what would you take out or add? 

5. You are an attorney and you always win the case. If you were to defend Bartleby 
or Billy Bud, what would you do and say? Write a script of the trials, in which 
the judge, the jury, the accused, the plaintive, the witness and the attorney are all 
present for cross-examination. 

6. It’s said that Whitman’s Song of Myself (Particularly No. 21) has influenced Van 

Gogh’s most famous painting Starry Night. Compare the poem, the painting, 



14 





and the well known song “Starry Starry Night” by Don McLean. Find another 
Whitman’s poem, draw your own painting and make a song for it. 

(The following passage is quoted from a website, for your reference.) 



It is admittedly a stretch to label 
Vincent Van Gogh a Whitmanian 
painter, but there is irrefutable 
evidence that Walt Whitman’s poetry 
influenced Van Gogh's most famous 
painting. But Whitman’s influence is 
clear from Van Gogh's mindset in 
late- 1888 to mid- 1889, when he 
painted Starry Night. The fact that 
Van Gogh not only admired 
Whitman but was avidly reading him 
during this time surfaces in a letter to 
his younger sister Wilhelmina: 

Have you read the American poems by Whitman? [his italics] I am sure Theo 
has them, and I strongly advise you to read them, because to begin with they 
are really fine, and the English speak about them a good deal. He sees in the 
future, and even in the present, a world of healthy, carnal love, strong and 
frank — of friendship — of work — under the great starlit vault of heaven a 
something which after all one can only call God — and eternity in its place 
above this world. At first it makes you smile, it is all so candid and pure; but it 
sets you thinking for the same reason. The "Prayer of Columbus" is very 
beautiful (Van Gogh 445). 

Following the above question, can you identify the theme of star gazing in any of 
Chinese classical poems or paintings? If yes, please discuss the si mi larities and 
differences. 




15 




Works Cited 



Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffiths and Helen Tiffin. The Empire Writes Back: Theory and 
Practice in Post-colonial Literatures. London & New York: Routledge, 1989. 
Barry, Peter. Beginning Theory: An Introduction to Literary and Cultural Theory. 

Manchester & New York: Manchester UP., 2002. 

Baum, Nina. The Norton Anthology of American Literature. Vols. 1 & 2. Fifth Edition. 
New York: W. W. Norton, 1998. 

Engler, Balz. ‘Englishness and English Studies.’ European English Studies: 

Contributions towards the History of a Discipline. Ed. Balz Engler and Renate 
Haas. Leicester: The English Association for ESSE, 2000, 335-348. 

Lauter, Paul, ed. The Heath Anthology of American Literature. Vols 1, 2. 1 st , 2 nd , and 
3 rd editions. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 

Matthew Arnold. “The Function of Criticism.” 1864, 1865. Reprinted in The Norton 
Anthology of English Literature. Seventh Edition. M. H. Abrams et al. New York 
& London: Norton, 2000. 1514-1528 

Ngugi wa Thiong’o. Homecoming: Essays on African and Caribbean Literature, 
Culture and Politics. London: Heinemann, 1972. 



16 




