DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 321 952 rC 017 679 



AUTHOR Kleinfeld, Judith; Nelsoa, Patricia 

TITLE /Adapting Instruction to Native Americans' "Learning 

Styles": An Iconoclastic View. 
PUB DATE 88 
NOTE 21p. 

PUB TYPE Information Analyses (070) 

EDRS PRICE MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS Achievement Gains; ^American Indian Education; 

^Cognitive Style; Cross Cultural Studies; Cultural 
Differences; ^Educational Research; Elementary 
Secondary Education; "Instructional Development; 
Theory Practice Relationship; "Visual Learning 

IDENTIFIERS "Native Americans 



ABSTRACT 

This paper examines the claim that instruction 
specially adapted to the "visual learning styles" of Native American 
students results in improved learning. Substantial cross-cultural 
research suggests that Native American children have special 
strengths in spatial abilities and visual memory ana tliat 
observational learning is an important cultural orientationo However, 
an extensive computerized literature search yielded only three 
studies that empirically tesw-d the proposition that the instruction 
adapted to Native Americans' learning styles increases achievement, 
and it was found after a careful review which this paper reports that 
virtually none of the results substantially demonstrates the 
educational benefits of adapted instruction. Nonetheless, the concept 
of "Native American learning styles" continues to enjoy considerable 
popularity. It is speculated that the idea persists for the following 
reasons: (1) educators prefer to avoid "deficit" language; (2) the 
concept is useful for obtaining funding for culturally oriented 
programs; and (3) the concept is useful for summarising a variety of 
instructional adaptations necessary in a cross-cultural context. The 
paper concludes that future research might demonstrate some 
educational benefits from visually-oriented instruction but the lack 
of progress in the broader area of aptitude-treatment interactions 
offers no basis for optimism. It is suggested that researchers 
interested in improving Native American education might better direct 
their investigations elsewhere. This document includes a 26-item 
bibliography . ( TES ) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



Learning Styles 

1 



rH 

CO 



Adapting Instruction to Native Americans' "Learning Styles" 

An Iconoclastic View 

Judith Kleinfeld and Patricia Nelson 

University of Alaska 
Fairbanks. Alaska 99775 



1> 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERlCV 



us DEPARTMF.iT OF EDUCATION 

OHice ot Educational .research and Improvement 
eOUCATiO M RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

/This document has ^«en repfOduceJ ac 
fcce.ved from the person of organizalion 
originnttHQ it 
O Minor changes have been (Tiadf to improve 
reproduction quality _ 



Points ot view or opi'.»ons stated m this docu 
men» do nc' necessarily represent oK'Cidl 
OEPI positio 1 o. policy 



Running head: ADAPTING INSTRUCTION TO LEARNING STYLES 



ERIC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

2 



Learning Styles 



Abstract 

This paper examines the claim that instruction adapted to the "visual 
learning styles" of Native American students results in greater 
learning. We argue that: 

1. Substantial cross-cultural research suggests that Native 
American children have special strengths in such areas as 
spatial abilities and visual memory and that observational 
learning is an important cultural orientation, but that 

2. Virtually no research has succeeded in demonstrating that 
instruction adapted to Native Americans' visual learning style 
results in greater learning. 

3. Nonetheless, the concept of "Native American learning styles" 
continues to enjoy considerable popularity due to: 

(a) educators* desire to avoid "deficit" language, (b) the 
concept's use in obtaining culturally oriented program funding, 
an- (c) the concept's use fn summarizing a variety of 
instructional adaptations necessary in a cross-cultural context. 



Learning Styles 

3 



Adapting Instruction to Native Americans* "Learning Styles": 

An Iconoclastic View 

This paper examines the claim that instruction adapted to the 
"observational learning styles" of Native American students will 
increase achievement. Many studies do suggest that certain groups of 
Native American children have special strength in such areac as 
spatial abilities and visual memory. In a review of the educational 
literature, however, we fail to find support for the common 
conclusion that adapting instruction to Native Americans' learning 
styles will increase achievement. 

Several reviews of the literature on the ability patterns and 
"learning styles.** variously defined, of Native American groups are 
already available (McShane & Plas. 1984; Osborne. 1985; Kaulback. 
1984; More. 1984; Kleinfeld. 1973; Shade. 1984). We. therefore, only 
briefly summarize this research in the first section of this paper. 
We devote the major portion of the paper to a detailed examination of 
research empirically testing the hypothesis that instruction adapted 
to Native American learning styles will result in greater learning. 
Finally, we discuss the reasons for the popularity of the learning 
style concept despite the paucity of findings showing that 
instruction adapted to Native American learning styles actually has 
educational benefits. 



Learning Styles 
4 



Research on Cognitive Ability PattiKii and Litmlni Stylei 

Pcyrhnlo^ ical Research 

The term "learning style" in research on Native American 
education is commonly used to refer to an ill-defined assortment of 
abilities and modes of processing information: spatial abilities, 
right-brain hemispheric dominance, visual memory, field-independence, 
holistic or successive rather than sequential patterns of information 
processing, preference for visual sensory modality, and so forth. As 
More (1984. p. 4) points out, "There is a confusing array of 
definitions of learning style. Indeed few studies ever define the 
term precisely. ...The semantic problem is exacerbated by confusion 
with related terms such as cognitive style, teaching style, and 
learning abilities." 

In studies o\ Inuit groups. Berry (1966. 1971) elegantly 
(develops the theoretical basis for the assertion that particular 
Native American groups may have elevated visual and spatial 
abilities. The ecological demands of a particular environment along 
with a group's cultural adaptations to that environment may press for 
the development of a particular pattern of cognitive abilities. In 
several studies. Berry (1966. 1969) found that Canadian Inuit Indeed 
scored considerably higher on various spatial and visual tests than 
either the Temne of Sierra Leone (an African agricultural society 



Learning Styles 
5 



with strict socialization practices) or Scots (a Western comparison 
group). 

Kleinfeid (1971) has also found that Yup'ik and Inuit village 
students exceeded urban students of the same ages on a modified 
version of the Memory for Designs Test. Bland (1975). using the same 
test, reported similar results in a comparative study of Navajo. 
Hopl. Jicarilla. and Caucasian school children. MacKinnon (1972). 
however, did not replicate this finding In a small study of Canadian 
Inult students. 

Comparative studies of cognitive abilities between Caucasian and 
particular Native American groups are plagued by numerous sampling 
and measurement problems that make the comparisons Inexact 
(MacArthur. 1973; Kleinfeid. 1973). Due to these kinds of probleips. 
It Is difficult to draw conclusions as to whether spatial and 
visualization abilities aie Indeed higher among Native American 
•groups than among Caucasian groups. Various studies of the 
performance of Native American groups on such tasks as the Block 
Design and Object Assembly sub-tests of the Wechsler Adult 
Intelligence Scale or the Goodenough Draw-A-Man Test have reached 
Inconsistent findings (McShane A Berry, forthcoming; Kleinfeid. . 
1973). Some studies report higher scores among Native American 
groups while others report scores about the same or slightly lower. 



6 



Learning Styles 
6 



What is clear is that visual-spatial abilities are an area of 
relative cognitive strength . Native Americans typically show a 
pattern on cognitive tests characterized by relatively high scores on 
performance measures and substantially lower scores on verbal 
measures (McShane & Plas. 1984; Kaulback. 1984; Connelly, 1983; 
Zarske & Moore. 1982; McShane & Plas. 1982; Diessnsr A Walker. 1986). 

In sum. psychological research on the performance of Nav.! 'e 
American groups on various tests indicates a cognitive ability 
pattern characterized by higher spatial and visual skills and lower 
verbal skills. 

Ethnographic Research 

A similar conclusion about the strength of visual as opposed to 
verbal skills appears to follow from ethnographic research on the 
characteristic mode of learning among Native American children 
outside the context of formal schooling. Many researchers have 
pointed out that different Native American groups share an 
orientation toward "observational learning" (Cazden & John. 1969; 
John-Steiner. 1975; Moore. 1982; Kaulback. 1984). Reviewing this 
literature. Kaulback (1984. p. 34) concludes: 

Although far from conclusive, there is a growing body of 
research to suggest that distinctively different child-rearing 
practices — one stressing observational learning and another 



Learning Styles 
7 



emphasizing learning through verbalization- -has fostered the 
development of very different styles of learning among Native 
and white children. Whereas many white children, by virtue of 
their upbringing and their linguistic exposure, are oriented 
towards using language as a vehicle for learning. Native 
children have developed a learning style characterized by 
observation and imitation. Such differences in learning styles 
have far-reaching consequences in the formal education of Native 
students, particularly in view of the fact that the formal 
educative procesiL> almost always favors those who are highly 
verbal. 

In sum, both psychological research on Native Americans' 
cognitive ability patterns and ethnographic research on Native 
Americans' observational learning style lead to the hypothesis that 
Native American children would do better in school if instruction 
were not so verbally saturated and drew more upon visual and spatial 
abilities. This conclusion seems so straightforward, so logical, and 
so compelling that it is difficult to believe it is not valid. 

Research on Instruction Adapted to **Learning Styles" 
While research on the cognitive ability patterns and learning 
styles of Native American groups has been well-summarized, we found 
no reviews of the literature on the effects of instruction adapted to 
these ability patterns and learning styles. To examine this 



8 



Learning Styles 
8 



literature, we conducted a computerized search of three databases: 
Educational Research Information Center (ERIC). Psychological 
Abstracts, and Dissertation Abstracts. We used as descriptor terms 
the various constructs used to denote this area — learning style, 
cognitive style, learning modalities, learning strategies, and 
aptitude-treatment interaction. We followed up all references to 
studies suggesting the educational effectiveness of instruction 
adapted to Native American learning styles in articles reviewing 
Native Americans* cognitive ability patterns, such as unpublished 
doctoral dissertations and qualifying papers. 

These efforts yielded only three studies testing empirically the 
proposition that instruction adapted to Native Americans* learning 
styles would increase achievement. Of these three studies, two 
studies do not show that Native American students learn more with 
visually-based instruction. Another study found support for the 
proposition in one site but not in another, and the visually-based 
instruction was even more effective for Caucasian children, thus 
calling into question the notion that the instruction was effective 
because it was "culturally adapted." 

The absence of published studies supporting the effectiveness of 
instruction adapted to Native Americans' learning styles does not. of 
course, constitute evidence that such instruction would not be 



9 



Learning Styles 
9 



effective. Nonetheless, it is curious that so little research has 
been published in this area since this issue has been discussed for 
at least twenty years. Possibly researchers (like the first author) 
have done studies of this type, found the results disappointing, and 
not bothered to publish them. 

Due to the difficulty of obtaining the unpublished material, we 
review the three available studies in detail. Before discussing them 
it is useful to make clear what would constitute an adequate test of 
the hypothesis that instruction adapted to Native Americans* visual 
learning style wUl increase learning. Such a study must contrast at 
least two instructional methods — one culturally adapted and the other 
not so adapted. Such a study should include two representative 
samples — a Native American group and a Caucasian group. To provide 
evidence for the efficacy of culturally adapted instruction, the 
study needs to do more than show that Native Americans learn more 
under the instructional strategy adapted to their characteristic 
learning style. The study needs to show as well that this culturally 
adapted strategy has greater benefits for the Native American group. 
Otherwise, the presumably "culturally adapted" instruction may just 
be better instruction—more effective for any cultural group 
regardless of its distinctive ability patterns. 



10 



Learning Styles 
xO 



St udy 1 : Donald Erickson. Verbal and diagram-supplemented 
instructional strategies and achievement for Eski mo students. 
Qualifying Paper Submitted to Harvard Graduate School of Education. 
1972. 

This study attempted to demonstrate that a visual instructional 
approach would increase school achievement among Eskimo chlld'-en. 
The basic design was a pretest-posttest randomized group comparison 
of Eskimo and Caucasian students taught a science lesson by visually- 
based versus verbal-only instructional methods. 

Two methods of instruction were developed to teach a lesson on 
the food chain and superordlnate and subordinate classification 
relationships. During the visually-based lesson, the instructor 
discussed familiar animals and showed how they could be classified as 
herbivores, carnivores, and omnlvores. By means of an overhead 
projector, the Instructor used circles to represent each animal group 
and placed the names of the exemplary animals within the circles. 
Thus, in this lesson, students had a visual representation of the 
logical class relationships. Next the Instructor visually showed the 
relationships between these classes of animals and plants, sun. soil, 
and water in a food chain. The instructor used a diagram of the food 
chain to show students visually (by wiping out links on the chain) 
what happened to animals higher up in a food chain when lower links 
were destroyed. Following the lesson, students completed a written 

11 



Learning Styles 
11 



test where the questions were similar in form to the questions the 
instructor used in the lesson (a.g. "If all the plants died, would 
herbivores be able to live?"). An important limitation of this test 
is that it did not contain questions using visual materials. The 
verbal -only lesson was identical to the visually-based lesson except 
that no diagrams or other visuals were used. 

The sample consisted of 60 fourth- through eighth-grade Eskimo 
students in two communities— a highly isolated Eskimo village which 
relied economically on subsistence hunting and fishing and a 
neighboring Eskimo village with somewhat more western contact but 
still highly traditional, in its economy, language, and social 
structure. The comparison group consisted of 89 fourth -grade 
Caucasian students from a nearby Alaskan town. 

To determine if the diagram-supplemented instruction drew upon 
visual abilities and reduced the association between verbal abilities 
and achievement, the sampled students completed a series of tests 
measuring vocabulary, memory for designs and four measures of spatial 
and visual memory abilities. 

Erickson found that the visually-based lesson led to higher 
achievement (p<.035) in the Eskimo sample, but he found even greater 
benefits for visually-based instruction in the Caucasian group. In 
addition, the difference in means for the visually-based Eskimo group 
and the verbal-only Eskimo gr^^up was educationally trivial. 



Learning Styles 
12 



Analysis of the relationship between various cognitive ability 
measures an^ learning in the visually-based and verbal -only lessons 
did not support the proposition that the visually-based method was 
drawing upon visual or spatial abilities. Scores on the visually- 
based lesson were not significantly more strongly associated with 
perceptual test scores, although a very weak trend occurred in this 
direction. 

In sum. Erickson's study found that visually-based instruction 
increased achievement for both Eskimo and Caucasian students. The 
visually-based instruction, however, did zjot make more of a 
difference for the Eskimo students than for the Caucasian students. 

Study 2 : Brian Thomas Shears. Aptitude^ c ontent and method of 
teaching word recognition with young American Indian children. 
Doctoral dissertation. University of Minnesota. 1970, 

This study compared visu il versus auditory methods of teaching 
basal reading words to American Indian kindergarten children living 
on a Minnesota reservation. The stratified sample of 12 subjects 
were placed in high, average, or low readiness groups on the basis of 
their scores on the Metropolitan Readiness tests. 

Each student was taught four sets of words with two of the lists 
drawn from the Sally. Jick and Jane reader and the other two sets 
drawn from everyday reservation experiences. In the auditory 



Learning Styles 
13 



teaching method, the instructor used a phonics method tc teach words 
listed on cards. In the visual method, pictures accompanied the 
words. In addition, the instructor drew attention to the form of the 
word by asking children to identify the longest and shortest words 
and drawing on the board the graphic shape the word made. 

The ' jsults indicated no significant difference between the 
visual versus auditory methods of teaching «ords to the American 
Indian kindergarten sample as a whole. Children at a low reading 
readiness level, however, did learn more than children at a a high 
reading r'^adiness level when the words were taught through the visual 
method. This result suggests that the critical feature in the 
effectiveness of the visual method was low verbal aptitude, not high 
visual abilities. 

Study 3 : Rosemarie McCartin and William J. Schill. Three modes of 
instruction. Journal of American Indian Education , 1977. U'-ao. 

This study compared the effectiveness of three instructional 
methods 'n teaching a lesson on the nature of cities: (1) written 
textual materials with pictures appearing in the text. (2) oral 
materials with small pictures, and (3) oral materials with large 
pictures presented on an overhead projector. The sample consisted of 
96 Native American third through eighth graders, randomly assigned to 
treatments. No significant differences were found. While the study 

14 



Learning Styles 
14 



was designed to test the hypothesis that "students who receive 
instruction using the visual communications method will do 
significantly better than the students who receive instruction in the 
same concepts orally, or through reading a text" (McCartin A Schill. 
1977. p. 18). some pictures were shown in each instructional method. 
Nonetheless, greater emphasis on visual materials did not lead to 
greater learning for this group of Native American students. 



Other Research on Learning Styles 
Tne few studies of teaching methods adapted to Native American 
students' visual learning styles provide virtually no support for the 
hypothesis that this type of culturally adapted instruction will 
increase achievement. 

While a comprehensive review of the general literature on 
learning styles is beyond the scope of this paper, It is worth noting 
that this field of research has not fared well over the last twenty 
years. This research area originated in Cronbach's (1967) conception 
of -aptitude-treatment interaction" (ATI), in which he suggests that 
learners with different styles of information processing would learn 
more effectively if the instructional method was adapted to their 
distinctive information processing style. 

Reviewing the area of adapting instruction to individual 
differences among learners in the most recent Handbook of Research on 



Learning Styles 
15 



Teaching . Corno and Snow (1986) argue that the notion of matching 
instruction to particular "aptitudes" is an oversimplification that 
has led to little educa onai progress. The field has moved away 
from studying "aptitude- treatment interactions" based on narrow 
definitions of aptitudes. Since the general field has not produced 
educationally useful findings, we doubt that further studies of 
Native American aptitude-treatment interactions will yield such 
findings. 



Continued Popularity of the "Learning Style" Constru-it 
Despite the lack of research foundation, the notion that 
instruction should be adapted to Native Americans' distinctive visual 
learning style enjoys continued popularity. Reviews of the 
literature followed by instructional suggestions appear with 
regularity. We suggest three reasons for this situation. 

First, educators and researchers use the term "learning style" 
to avoid "deficit" language in discussing Native American students- 
educational problems. The term "learning style" suggests that 
differences in school achievement are not due to "deficiencies" but 
merely to variations in the way students learn. 

Se. .id. proposal writers tell us that the "learning style" 
concept gives them a way to argue that special funding for academic 
instruction for Native Americans is justified. Major funding sources 



Learning Styles 
16 



In Native American education, such as the Indian Education Act or 
Johnson O'Malley program, require proposals showing how Instruction 
will be explicitly targeted to Native American groups. 

Third, teachers use the term "learning style" as an umbrella 
concept referring to a wide variety of adaptations they make In 
teaching certain Native American groups— adaptations in vocabulary, 
pacing of the classroom, frame-of-reference. displays of emotion, use 
of hands-on Instruction, etc. Each of these Instructional 
adaptations Is justifiable In terms of the cultural context. These 
types of adaptations, however, have little, if any. relationship to 
"learning style" as conceptualized In the psychological literature on 
cognitive ability patterns. 

Conclusion 

Despite more than twenty years' discussion of the importance of 
adapting instruction to Native American students' visual learning 
style, research has not succeeded in demonstrating educational 
benefits. Certainly future research may do so. but the lack of 
progress in the broader area of aptitude-treatment interactions gives 
us no basis for optimism. We regretfully conclude that researchers 
Interested in improving Native American education might direct 
limited energy and funds elsewhere. 



t 



Learning Styles 
17 

References 

Berry. J. W. (1966). Temna and Eskimo perceptual skills. Journal 

of International Psychology , i. 207-299. 
Berry. J. W. (1969). Ecology and socialization as factors In 

flgural assimilation and the resolution of binocular rivalry. 

International Journal of Psychology . 4. 271-280. 
Berry. J. W. (1971). Ecological and cultural factors In spatial 

perceptual development. Canada Jour nal of Behavioral Science. 

1971. 3(4). 324-336. 
Bland. L. (1975). Visual perception and re call of school-age 

Navalo. Hopl. Jlcarllla Apache, and Caucasian children of the 

Southgpst Including results from a pilo t study amonp Eskimos and 

Athabascan school-age children of North Alaska . Monograph #5. 

Kennewlck. WA: Human Environmental Resources Services. 
Cazden. C. & John. V. (1969). Learning In American Indian 

children. In Bureau of Indian Affairs (Ed.). Styles of learning 

among American Indians: An outline for research . Washington. 

D.C.. 1-18. 

Connelly. J. B. (1983). Recategorlzed WISC-R score patterns of 

older and younger referred Tllnglt Indian children. Psychology 
In the Schools . 20. 271-275. 



18 



Learning Styles 
18 



Corno, L. & Snow, R. E. (1986). Adapting instruction to individuai 
differences among learners. In M. C. Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook 
of research on teaching . New York: Macmillan, 605-629. 

Cronbach. L. J. (1967). How can instruction be adapted to 

individual differences? In R. M. Gagne (Ed.), Learning and 
individual differences . Columbus. OH: Charles Merrill. 

Diessner, R. & Walker, J. L. (1986). A cognitive pattern of the 

Yakima Indian students. Journal of American Indian Educa tion, 
25(2). 9-43. 

Erickson, D. (1972). Verbal and diagram-supplement ed instructional 
strategies and achievement for Eskimo students . Qualifying 
Paper submitted to the Harvard Graduate School of Education 

John-Steiner, V. (1975). Learning styles among Pueblo children . 
Final Report s Albuquerque: College of Education. 

Kaulback, B. (1984). Styles of learning among Native children: A 
review of the research. Canadian Journal of Native Education . 
11(3). 27-37. 

Kleinfeld. J. S. (1971). Visual memory in village Eskimo and urban 

Caucasian children. Arctic. 24(2), 132-138. 
Kleinfeld. J. S. (1973). Intellectual strengths in culturally 

different groups: An Eskimo illustration. Review of Educational 

Research , 43(4), 341-359. 



Learning Styles 
19 



MacArthur, R. (1973). Some ability patterns: Central Eskimos and 
Nsenga Africans. International Journal of Psychology . 8(4). 239- 
247. 

MacKinnon. A. A. (1972). Eskimo and Caucasian: A discordant note_on 
cognitive- perceptual abilities . Unpublished paper. Saskatoon: 
Saskatchewan Department of Health. 
McCartin. R. A Schill. W. J. (1977). Three modes of instruction. 

Journal of American Indian Education . 14-20. 
McShane. D. A. & Berry. J. Native North Americans: Indian and Inuit 

Abilities. In S. H. Irvine and J. W. Berry (Eds.). Cultural 

Context of Human Abilities . New York: Cambridge University 

Press (forthcoming). 
McShane, D. A. 4 Plas. J. M. (1982). Wechsler scale performance 

patterns of American Indian children. Psycholoev in the 

Schools. 19. 8-17. 
McShane. D. A. & Plas. J. M. (1984). The cognitive functioning of 

American Indian children. Moving from the WISC to the WISC-R. 

The School Psychology Review . 13. 61-73. 
Moore. C. G. (1982). The Navaio culture and the learning of 

mathematics . Final Report . Washington. D.C.: National 

Institute of Education. 



20 



Learning Styles 
20 

More. A. J. (1984). Learning styles and Indian students: A review 
of research . Paper presented at the Mokakit Indian Education 
Research Conference. London. Ontario, July. 1984. (ED 249028). 

Osborne. B. (1985). Research into Native North Americans* 

cognition: 1973-1982. Journal of American Indian Education . 
24(3). 9-^25. 

Shade. B. J. (1984). The perceptual process in teaching and 

learning: Cross-ethnic comparisons . Paper presented at the 

Annual Meeting of the American Psychological Association. 

Toronto. Canada. 1984. (ED252634). 
Shears. B. T. (1970). Aptitude^ content and method of teaching word 

recognition with young American Indian children . Doctoral 

dissertation. University of Minnesota. 
Zarske. J. A. & Moore. C. L. (1982). Recategorized WISC-R scores of 

learning disabled Navajo Indian children. Psychology in the 

Schools, 19, 156-159. 



21 



