DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 296 340 CS 211 347 

AUTHOR Christie, N. Bradley 

TITiE What Happened on the Inside: Women Write about 

Vietnam. 
PUB UATE Mar 88 

NOTE 19p.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 

Popular Culture Association (18th, New Orleans, LA, 
March 23-26, 1988). 

PUB TYPE Book/Product Reviews (072) 

EDRS PRICE MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS Authors; ^Fiction; ^Literature Appreciation; Oral 

History; *Womens Studies 
IDENTIFIERS Vietnam Veterans; ^Vietnam War; Womens Literature 

ABSTRACT 

Mark Baker in "NAM: The Vietnam War in the Words of 
the Men and Women Who Fought There" (1981) tells a war story, and war 
stories tend to elevate the masculine combat adventure as inherently 
more profound, and therefore more valuable, than other experiences. 
However, now that the emotional considerations of war are no longer 
being discounted, it seems appropriate that many survivor books are 
being written by, and focusing on, women. In "Casaulties: Death in 
Viet Nam; Anguish and Survival in America" (1984), Heather Brandon 
models her book on the veterans* oral histories and discourse with 
the community of families who lost one of their own in the war. Joan 
Didion in "Democracy" offers glimpses into the lives of her fictional 
"glitterati," reflecting snatches from the lives of real-life public 
figures, disclosing more personally the struggle to situate oneself 
amid the shards of contemporary American historical experience, in 
which Vietnam figures prominently. Writing from and representing the 
opposite social perspective. West Virginia native Jayne Anne 
Phillips' "Machine Dreams," which appeared, like "Democracy," in 
1984, focuses primarily on women. Phillips* subject is history and 
the passage of time, the dislocations peppering the lives of her 
characters, and she portrays the dissolution of family life as a 
reflection of individual lives fragmenting, and cultural order 
decaying. (A chronological listing of significant dates interspersed 
with a list of Selected Survivor Texts are appended.) (RAE) 



******************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 
*********************************************************************** 




U.8 OEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Otftce o< EducHtonai i^esetrch and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 




Up Against the Wall 



originating il 
O Minor Changes have b«en made to improve 
rep'oduction quality 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



Bradley Christie 



• Points ot view or op»nions stated m t his docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERl position or policy 



1 . 



In the wake of the Carter pardon for draft evaders and 
resisters, the hero's welcome for American hostages returned from 
Iran, and Ronald Reagan's sweeping promise to dispel the notion 
of post-Vietnam "malaise," a new brand of Vietnam text began to 



the war's "oral histories." Baker's NAM evolved as a project 
inspired by the changing times. Rather like a journalistic 
relative of Michael Herr, Baker aimed to re/cover the war by 
uncovering a heretofore unsounded community of discourse. "No 
one has bothered to talk to the men and women who went to Vietnam 
and fought the war," Baker could write in 1981; to that point 
their stories had largely been consigned to the "cold storage of 
statistics, history and politics," or to the "mythic realm of 
heroism or evil or rock 'n' roll madness." Like Herr, Baker 
dissociated himself from "the others" — journalists, film-makers, 
generals, diplomats, and politicians — who propagated the 
discourse of exclusion and revision •'"sm; his object was the 
something "missing . . . something personal and palpable" that 
only those who fought the war were qualified to relate. 

Two features in particular distinguish a project like NAM 
from earlier recovery pieces like Dispatches. First is the 
obvious fact that Baker himself never went to Vietnam, even as a 

^ Mark Baker, NAMj^^The^Vi etnam^War^in^t he^W 
§Qd_Wgmen_Whg_Fgught_There (New York: William Morrow, 1981; 
Berkley Books, 1983), xii. 



appear . 



In 1981 Mark Baker and Al Santoli offered the first of 



reporter, nor did he pay the war much mind while it was being 
waged by others of his own generation. A college student and 
holder of a "nice, privileged draft deferment," Baker also admits 
to being involved only peripherally with the antiwar movement: "I 
Joined the demonstrations when my idealism moved me, if it was 
convenient" (xiii). Only experiencing the war secondhand, 
chiefly in print and on television, he knows that he is hardly 
qualified to tell the whole story, though he wants to hear it and 
record it accurately. Secondly, whereas Herr uncovers the war 
from a multiplicity of perspectives (including numerous war 
stories involving ':he young grunts he feels closest to), 8aker 
focuses solely on the veteran's experience, privileging it over 
the writer's effort as the essence of the war's secret history. 
Thus, despite the fact that he interviewed some 150 veterans for 
the book. Baker offers NAM as a singular story of the war, a 
paradigm even suggested by the book's organization around the 
narrative model of one soldier's progress from initiate to 
veteran back in the World. I cannot help but think that that one 
soldier, whose experience of the war comprises the collective 
memories of any vets who will talk to him, is Mark Baker himself; 
that NAM finally represents his own vicarious tour in-country, 
and as such it testifies to the deep-seated pangs of "Viet guilt" 
that gnaw at many of his generation who stayed at home, or worse. 

Baker points to another common anxiety when he writes of tha 
war and its "cultural ramifications" as providing "the ritual 
passage to adulthood for a generation of Americans — [his] 
generation" (xvi). He is careful to keep the phrase genderless. 



but Baker must be sensitive to the predominantly male idiom of 
his narrative. NAM tells a war story, after all, and war stories 
tend to elevate the masculine combat adventure as inherently more 
profound, and therefore more valuable, than other experiences. 
War narratives then consistently rehearse and valorize a hege- 
monic male ideology that posits war as a (the?) test of manhood. 
Baker's "ritual of passage" in its proper wolf's clothing. Not 
going to fight, instead reading, writing, and occasionally 
objecting to the war — all sheepish, pacific and, by implication, 
feminine activities — Baker and thousands of others who stayed at 
home may be casualties nonetheless, suffering from a culturally 
inscribed inferiority complex because they failed their 
generation's gunslinging test. 

It was relatively easy to suppress those subtle psychic 
wounds in the face of a war clearly going wrong; as Baker hints, 
one could always channel such guilt-driven energies into a 
protest or demonstration. By the late 1970s, however, the social 
climate had changed, and a period of reflection was imminent. 
Latent feelings of self-reproach surfaced as America slogged 
through a national lassitude that President Jimmy Carter 
consistently attributed too facilely to the aftereffects of a bad 
war. Ironically, the event which most rriarkedly precipitated the 
end of the Carter presidency probably also marks the definitve 
turning-point in national outreach toward those who served, and 
especially to those who served and survived, in Vietnam. For 
frustration over the Americans held hostage for fourteen months 
in Iran pointedly recal led the country ' s vexation with the 



Indochina war; and the release and attendant rejoicing upon the 
hostages* return stirred memories of revilement and neglect for 
tens of thousands of veterans returned from Southeast Asia. 
Belated parades and monuments, more positive images on film and 
television, and most signaily the Memorial wall in the nation's 
capital count among the principal legacies of that long- 
suppressed guilt. Literary accounts like the oral histories and 
survivor novels are extending that legacy well beyond the Reagan 
eighties . 

By way of unifying his contribution to the legacy, Mark 
Baker focuses on the commonness of the men and women he 
interviewed, unexceptional people except that "they survived 
Vietnam and continue to survive" (xiv). Guilt often visits them, 
too, as they live on with the memories of so many who died 
instead of them. Survivors of every stripe, that is, have reason 
to recover the war in all of its exacting and painful detail for 
the sake of those who did not make it back. Survivor texts 
therefore tend to accentuate what Baker ident-!fies as the 
"personal equation" (xv), the kind of account not only charged 
with its own emotion , but attempting to recreate the emot ions 
which originally charged the event/s being reconstructed. 
Whereas a book like Disgatches brilliantly conveys how the war 
f^as — what it looked, sounded, smelled and tasted like on the 
outside — books like NAM disclose how the war felt, what purchase 
it claimed on the inside, where vets could seal it up and bring 
it back with them. 

It would be absurd to suggest that being and feeling were 



mutually exclusive in Vietnam, that earlier literary responses to 
the war wholly discount emotional considerations, or that recent 
memory texts do not describe the physical nature of the war. It 
simply appears that until recently the culture's obsession with 
"getting it right" dictated a focus on the war's material 
character. Perhaps we really were too close to the pain of 
defeat and deception to distinguish the war from the warriors, or 
to consider that the warriors might share that pain. Now that we 
seem to have a firmer grasp on what happened in Vietnam, we can 
afford to assess the emotional damage? the physical wreckage is 
remote enough for most of us to admit ':he notion that "getting it 
right" includes coming to terms with what happened on the inside. 

2. 

As I implied above, many of those terms are typically allied 
to the feminist project, so it seems appropriate t» Bt many 
survivor books are being written by, and focusing on, women. 
Wi t h her book Casua2t ies j^^Deat h^in^Vi et^Namj^ 

iO^America (1984), Heather Brandon offers a firsthand account 
that per'fectly exemplifies the new kind of survivor text that is 
u distinct product of Reagan-era responses to the war in Vietnam. 
Brandon models her book on the veterans' oral histories, tran- 
scribing hours of taped interviews? but her sourc&s represent 
still another previously untapped reservoir of discourse, the 
community of families who lost one of their own in the war. Al 
Santoli had gestured toward these casualties in dedicating iyer^~ 
5t!iQ3-.We_Had to "the families of the men and women who served in 




VlQtnam," but he left it to later interviewers actually to seek 

them out. Brandon did so because she counts herself among their 

number. In 1965 her cousin was reported missing in action; she 

wrote him daily until the body was found? in 1974 she finally 

cried. By 1980, she begen to talk with families "feeling as torn 

2 

apart and isolated" as her own. As Baker, Santoli, and others 
had discovered with the veterans, 3randon found that in many 
cases no one had ever asked these people to speak about their 
loss. In 1982, seventeen years after her cousin's death, she 
started to put the book together. 

Wh-^le Casualties is not the most engaging memoir of tne war, 
it is noteworthy as a personal record more familiar than the 
veterans' accounts to the millions of Americans who lived through 
the war at home. Like Mark Baker, Brandon confesses to paying 
the war little mind during the 1960s and ear^y '70s? she grieved 
over the loss of her cousin and suffered privately with her 
family, but even that intrusion into her personal life did not 
provoke a studied consideration of what the war really was or 
what it was doing to the country at large. Only years later, she 
remarks, did "Vietnam [begin] to soak into ms, both as the 
emotional experience of those who served, and as a still ill- 
defined national experience for those of us who did whatever we 
did or did not do through the long years of their struggle" (xx) . 
Despite (or perhaps because of?) media saturation coverage during 
the war, for Brandon and millions more like her, war remained "a 



Heather Brandon. Casual ties^^Death^iQ^Viet^Namx^^ 
and Survival in America (New'^York: St. Martin's, 1984), xvii. 



7 




concept; death and injury in war abstract." Conversations with 
survivors, and especially with combat veterans, have rendered 
those abstractions concrete for writers like Brandon and Baker, 
and 1n turn for their readers. Vicariously we benefit from their 
contact with *:hose who were there, in an odd way re-covering the 
war as we experienced it the first time, second- or thirdhand. 
This time, however, we willingly bring the war back inco our 
living rooms because we regret not having focused initially on 
the proper details. The surrogate memory exercised in survivor 
texts attempts in part to justify or otherwise legitimate ee^^lier 
vicarious experience . 

Brandon points' to the same missing element, the personal 
equation that becomes the focus of Baker's text. She is not 
inspired by what Vietnam looked or smelled or sounded like, but 
what it felt like to fight a war there. Like the other survivor 
journalists, she champions emotion as the neglected concrete 
matter that belies war as an abstraction for the warrior. 
"Combat veterans brought emotion to my ideas," Brandon concludes, 
echoing Baker's reminder that survival is always a matter of 
attending to the concrete (xvi). To the extant that all of our 
idea*- may benefit from emotional concretion, and inasmuch as all 
of us harbor feelings about the war, survivor texts again imply 
that we need not have been there to have a valid experience of 
Vietnam. 

Since Casualties, several other volumes have aimed to relate 
the common experience of particular parties of the haunted 
generation, most notably Wallace Terry's 81 ggds^^An^Oral ^History 




8 



Hi' 



9f-5b§-yi§£Q§iD-War_b^_Bl ack^Veterans (1984), and Kat hryn 

Marshal 1 * s In_the_Cg[nbat_Zgne2_An_0ra2_Hi§£2Cy-2 
iD-.y2etna[njt^_1966-1975 (1987). Gradually, we are even beginning 
to hear from Vietnamese victims, some of who£« stories Al Santoli 
includes in his second oral history, Io_8§ar_An^_8urden (1985). 
And finally, a collection of soldiers' letters, Qear^America 
(1985), perhaps pushes the national zeal for probing the American 
veterans' experience beyond the point of vicaricusness to the 
brink of voyeurism. 

All the while, a number of those veterans have persisted in 
translating their Vietnam memories into novels. Larry Heinemann, 
Philip Caputo» and Tim 0'3rien especially are proving themselves 
among the first-rate writers of contemporary fiction, whether 
vhey choose to write about Vietnam or not. In one sense, as I 
noted earlier, all of these works are survivor books, but as in 
the nonfictional forms, women novelists (who obviously did not 
fight in Southeast Asia) are turning to Vietnam as material for 
some of th<3 most compelling survivor texcs. 

3. 

In a rather ambi val ent notice , novel critic Frederick Kar 1 
concludes about Joan Didion that "... even as she enlarges with 
her frenzied cutting back and forth, she diminishes everything 
she touches." And Didion certainly is a virtuoso parer, with her 
characteristically terse prose cutting to the core of her 
favorite themes: cultural chaos; the disintegration of American 
morals: individual and societal fragmentation; the reflexivity of 



9 



persoiial and national dissolution. Vietnam, then, would seem to 
provide the perfect background for a Didion novel , the oppor- 
tunity she availed herself of in her fourth novel. Democracy 
(1984). The book is a curious meld of novelistic conventions — at 
once a love story, murder mystery, political narrative, novel of 
manners, and contemporary metaf i ct i on--c entered around the 
striking Inez Christian Victor, wife of a US Senator and would-be 
candidate for President. Janus-faced Harry Victor perhaps 
represents American democracy's lowest and most psrvasive life- 
form, but he is intrinsically less interesting than the 
indifferent daughter of class and privilege he married to finish 
the photo opportunf ties that shape the lives of public figures. 
That notion of a life captured in a sequence of random snBpshots 

informs the book itself, which Didion in her role as first person 

3 

narrator describes as a "novel of fitful glimpses." Indeed the 
narrator's project develops from an assortment of photographs 
snipped from the pages of 8usiness_Week , Fortune, and the New 
York Tirnes, "the shards of the novel" that she does not intend tc 
write (29). Rather, she pieces the glimpses together, fashioning 
a fictional tour H« force which provocatively mirrors the fitful 
photo-opportunity events of the last American decade or so. 
Glimpses into the lives of her fictional glitterati may well 
reflect snatches from the lives of real-life public figures whom 
Didion, like Inez Victor, has certainly had occasion to encoun-* 
ter. More signally, however, they disclose Didion 's personal 



Joan Didion, Democracy (Toronto: Lester & Orpen Dennys , 
1984), 232. 





struggle to situate herself amid the shards of contemporary 
American historical experience, in which Vietnam figures 
prominently . 

Inez Vi ct or cone ludes that the major cost of publ i c life 
(and Didion's own life is fairly public) is "Memory," losing 
track of what happened during your life (51). Lika sorting 
through photos from the past, novel writing is a senses-making 
enterprise; as she tries to situate Qemgcraa^ within a literary 
tradition embracing Trollope and Melville, Adams and Orwell, 
Hemingway and Mailer (and poets from Housman to Eliot and 
Stevens), Didion strives to order the scraps of her own memories. 
Central to those recollections are details from 1975, the year of 
the novel's climactic events, as well as the year of collapse in 
Indochina. At the time she read "only those stories that seemed 
to touch, however peripherally, on Southeast Asia," logging only 
the striking dislocations — the cost of a visa to leave Cambodia, 
for instance, the colors o1 the landing lights for helicopters on 
the embassy roof in Saigon, the code names for American evacua- 
tions from Vietnam and Cambodia (73-74). In real life, as in 
novel writing, "we go with what we have. Cards on the table" 
(17). As these memories recall for Didion the "black hole 
effect" of time toppling, folding in on itself and disintegrating 
like a house of cards, the factual collap es back into the 
fictional: the rr.urder' which marks the dissolution of the 
Christian and Victor families occurs in late March, 1975. 

Inez Victor finally sattles in Kuala Lumpur where she dines 
at the club, teaches an ovening course in American Literature at 



11 



the local un-fversity, and administers the city's dozen refugee 
camps- And Joan Di^h'on writes novels like Deniocrac^ which take 
their own course, belying "the narrative inevitability that 
usually propels a novel toward its end, the momentum that sets in 
as events overtake their shadows and the cards all fall in on one 
another ..." (232-33). She may still teach the occasional 
litera^re course -exploring the idea of democracy in the work of 
certain post-^indust rial writers (71). And she probably also 
dines at the club. 



'^Writing from and representing the opposite social perspec- 
tive. West Virginia native Jayne Anne Phillips published her 
first novel, Machine_Dreams , in the same year that Demgcracy 
appeared. Phillips adopted another conventional novelistic form, 
the family saga, which she chronicles in the voices of individual 
family members ;hrough the generations. Phillips reconstructs 
the world of rural and small-town West Virginia, as unlike 
Didion's tropic capitals and centers of international commerce as 
a place can be. Unlike Inez Victor's Hawaii and her overcrowded 
Asian isles, Bellington, West Virginia only reluctantly forfeits 
its pacific insularity to the ravages of external social forces 
beyond the townf oik's control. Gradually the Depression, World 
War II, and Vietnam — the most momentous events of the American 
twentieth century — exact their wearing toll on Bellington, and 
especially on the Hampsons , the family whose particular history 
Phillips proffers as a model of American culture on the skids. 



12 



As in Denigcracw, the novel focuses primarily on women — on 
Jean, a child of the Depression '30s, a bride of the postwar 
'40s, and her daughter, Dcinner,, a true child of th« troubled 
'60s. P\ ipji subject, like Didion's, is hiistory and the 
passage of time, the dislocations peppering the lives of her 
characters. Jean's i 1 1 -cons idered marriage to Mitch Hampson is 
not unlike Inez Victor's, che expected fulfillment of social 
custom; the Hampscns have two children, a gi.l and a boy, and the 
parents stay together until the children are grown — to make tht>m 
safe, as the Victors do in Didion's novel. Like Didion, Phillips 
portrays the dissolution of family life as a reflection of 
individual lives fragmenting, and cultural order decaying. 

In certain individual relationships, however, Phillips 
locates a binding claim which does not bond Didion's charac- 
ters. In her op'^ning "Reminiscence to a Daughter," Jean tells 
Danner, "you and I will go on and on, despite whatever differ-- 
ences, whatever quarrels. For me, we are what's left. How are 
we different? Body and soul, I know — but some things don't 
change." She has remembered how she married when her own mother 
was dying, and how her husband failed to fill that void. Finally 
she recalls her Joy at Danner's birth: "when I knew I had a 

daughter, I was so thankful — like my own mother had come back to 
4 

me." Although their girls end up leading similar lives of dis- 
location, one can hardl y imagine Inez Victor reminisc 1ng so to 
her daughter. Though she writes her once a week from Kuala 



Jayne Anne Phillips, Machine_Dreams (New York: 
Dut ton/Seymour Lawrence, 1984), 22. 

ERIC , ^ 



Lumpur, Inez and Jessie do not go on and on. 

Danner Hampson nurtures a second affirming bond, with her 
brother Billy. Though only by eighteen months or so, she is the 
older of the two, and often charged with watching over him as 
they were growing up . Despi te his sister's best efforts to 
protect him, Billy insists that he must go to Vietnam, that his 
number is up, and within two months of his arrival in-country he 
is listed as missing in action. As the novel closes, Billy has 
been missing for over two years. And Danner continues to '^^atch 
over him, in her memories and dreams. 

In the novel's closing sections, which record Danner 's 
reflections (as her' mother's opened the jook) , the memories pile 
up until the one image that occupies them all is Billy. Like the 
moon-faced Cacciato of Tim O'Brien's fantastic novel, Billy's 
young face — "his kid face" of Danner 's dreams, "more real than 
any photograph or memory" (326) — presides over the past. And 
most of Danner 's memories concern safety, the security of the 
younger Hampsons* world before war shattered both of their lives, 
as earlier wars had blasted the world of their parents. "My 
father owned a concrete plant," Danner 's recollections begin, 
suggesting from the first her fixation on the rock-solid and 
foundational. "He wore khaki shirts and work pants," she 
continues, "the same kind of clothes he wore in wartime photo- 
graphs . . ." (297). Almosc 'iristant ly this image of her father , 
the rock man, evokes a memory of riding the school bus with Billy 
"past bus shelters emblazoned with our father's name, and the 
ncme of the plant: MITCH CONCRETE." Sunk deeply into the solid 

14 




West Virginia earth, "The shelters were well built and didn't 
leak," and they still stand in 1972, well kept and newly letter- 
ed, though her father sold the plant years ago and steadily 
weak'sned in his daughter's eyes. 

But Danner recalls other safe structures, especially Fort 
Knox, where Billy went for basic training; she sees the Gold 
Vault, "a bunkertype building that looks like a two-layered 
concrete box cake with barred windows. I think about all those 
gold bars sitting inside a well-fortified silence, row after row 
of gold bars. Billy was golden, in the summer; he got that kind 
of tan" (299). To ensure Billy's refuge from the war, she takes 
out a'student loan to send him to Canada, and only ha If -joking 1 y 
proposes a marijuana bust which would land her brother in "some 
nice safe jail for first offenders for a couple of years. By the 
time you get out, Vietnam is over" (302). For all she knows, of 
course, he may be in some jail somewhere, but he 1s not likely 
safe, and the war is not over — for any of them. 

Consequently, Danne.' now muses on the past "in terms of what 
Billy knew. The information took away with him .... The 
world, so to speak. . . . What he'd practiced, what he'd 
perfected before he ever laid hands on an M-60" (325-26). Her 
reflections are titled "The World," alluding to the GI's vision 
of home in the States; "Sometimes it seems like I dreamed 
everything but this, because what I remember was in the World," 
Billy writes in his last letter to his sister. And he points her 
toward another vision, of the world (small 'w'), a shifting 
foundation of the concrete: 



15 



Not much tinne to sit on my ass here wondering is the 
war right or wrong — right is getting thru and pulling 
everyone else thru, getting bodies back if we can't get 
anything else. I*m with Luke [his helicopter crew 
chief and mentor] and the crew and we live in the 
chopper. These guys are the only country I know of and 
theyVe what I*m defending — I*m not stupid enough to 
think my country is over here. (291) 
Two years after receiving this letter, Danner comes to appreciate 
her brother's poinc. "It seems as thuugh Billy, whom I always 
tried to instruct, is instructing me. And he isn't even here, 
not right now" (299). She quits school like he did, and she 
moves to the west coast (as close to Vietnam as she can get?), 
where she learns that "my parents are my country, my divided 
country. By going to California, I'd made it to the far 
frontiers, but I'd never leave my country. I never will" (324). 
At last the novel circles back to Jean's early conclusion that 
"we are what's left." She stayed in a bad marriage, she 
confesses to Danner, only "to make you safe. It turned out I 
couldn't keep anyone safe. Not you. Not Billy" (22). Safety is 
one of the machine dreams of contemporary American culture. 

Throughout the novel Phillips intersperses the machine 
dreams which lend the book their title. Mitch Hampson's dreams 
of 1946 rehearse the bulldozing of rotting, mangled bodies — 
victims of war — into mass graves in New Guinea? he also dreams of 
going places in his polished new Pontiac Silver Streak, "shining 
and private and quiet iike the interior of a big jewel" (68). In 



16 



1957 Billy dreams of the cement mixers at the concrats company; 
by 1963 he dreams of having his own car and flying airplanes. 
Although Danner has a recurrent erotic dream of winged horses, 
she is less captivated by human devices, perhaps because she is a 
woman. In 1969 "She'd been interested in the moon landing but 
not fascinated; it was just machines." Instead, like Inez Victor 
in her curiosity about events in Southeast Asia, she "kept track 
of details the astronauts told reporters later, small things" 
the feel and smell of moon dust, Neil Armstrong's recurrent 
chilJhood dream of hovering over the ground (241). In the 
novc 's final section, thinking about the past in terms of what 
Billy knew, Danner relates a machine dream in which her magic 
horse and her brother's flying machines both appear. The 
siblings are children again; Danner stalks the winged horse 
through a deep forest while Billy imitates "with a careful and 
private energy the engine sounds of a plane that is going down. 
War-movie sounds. Eeee-yoww. ach-ack-ack. So gentle it sounds 
like a song, and the song goes on softly as the plane falls, year 
after year, to earth" (331). 

Clearly Danner's la.t machine dream signifies her grow-ing 
embittered isolation, from her own desires and their fulfillment, 
and most signally from the brother who, in the dream at least, 
keeps his three-year-old promise to "keep [his] ass in the air," 
safe above the reaches of the war (267). Walking deeper into the 
dark woods, Danoer, too, is missing in action. The dream allows 
her to keep Billy a'llve, however tenuously, and thus it bears the 
trace of the other machine dreams, all of which project emblems 



17 



of power and control , and of flighx: from z'ne shifting ground of 
contemporary existence . 

As summer begins to take hold in Bel^ington in 1972, Jean 
Hampson keeps the upstairs bedrooms in her house just as they 
were in 1969, before Billy wenx: to VietnaTi. At night now she 
makes quilts as she sits alone by the television. And when 
Danner is home Jean maintains her motherly presence as if her 
daughter had never 1 ef t . "Her admonishments are 1 ow-key and 
continuous," Danner remarks, "as though a war is coming, 
rationing, proud impoverishment, or e death: something requiring 
fortitude. Except that a thing more continual than death has 
already happened, and fortitude is an ongoing process" (305). 
That mood of apprehension pervades Machine_Dr earns , facilitating 
the smooth flow of voices over the years. One reviewer detects a 
"strong sense of foreboding* in the novel; another, fellow 
Southern novelist Anne Tyler, defines that sense as the unspoken 
possibility of war that shadows the novel's events. In Billy 
Hampson's words (recalling one of Joan Didion's favorite tropes 
in Denigcrac^), "'It's in the cards.'" "'What cards?'" Danner 
wants to know. "'Everyone's cards.' He looked over at her. 
'It'll be different for you afxrer I go'" (267). Billy speaks no 
truer words in the novel, as the future shortly bears out. 
Danner's world 1s different after Billy goes; so is the world o-^ 
their par^^nts; so, even, are their dreams. 



N. Bradley Christie 
Department of English 
^ T-nir> ^^^^ University 



Selected Survivor Texts 



1979 

[Iran hostages] ^ 
Tracers (DiFusco, et al. ) ^ 
'ihe Short-Timers* (Hasfcrd ) 



1980 



1981 

NAM (Baker) ^ 
Everything We Had (Santoll ) 

1982 

(Veterans Memorial, Washington^ D.C.] 
The 13th Valley* (Del Vecchio ) 



1983 ^ 

Chi ckenhawk (Mason ) ^ 
Home Before Horning (Van Devanter ) 
Charlie Company (Goldman and Fuller) 
Meditations in Green* (Wright ) 



1984 

Bloods (Terry) 

Payback (Klein) 

Long Time Passing (MacPherson) 

Casualties (Brandon) 

Democracy* (Didion ) 

Machine Dreams* (Phillips) 



1985 

A Vietcong Memoir (Truong Nhu Tang) 
To Bear Any Burden (Santoli ) 
Dear America (Edelman) ^ 
Carrying the Darkness (Lhrhart ) 
In Coun try* (Mason ) ^ 
The Nuclear Age* (O^Brien ) 



1986 

A Portrait of the Enemy (Chanoff and Doan Van Toai) 
The Vietnamese Gulag (Doan Van Toai and Chanoff) 
Pace's Story* (Heinemann ) [National Book Award] 



1987 

In the Combat Zone (Marshall) 
Indian Coun try* ( Caput o ) 
American Blood* (Nichols) 



* novels 

+ Vietnam veterans 



