Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


1 


Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing 
Timothy G. Weih, Ph.D. 

University of Northern Iowa, USA 
2005 


Abstract 

This article describes a research study that implemented literacy methods for the purpose of 
promoting reading comprehension with links to student writing through the practice of 
integrating reader response before, during, and following teacher read-alouds, and then extending 
the reader response into the composing process of student-created stories about Native 
Americans. The main question that guided the study was: How will the integration of direct 
instruction in story structure together with reader response to traditional literature influence 
children’s composition of self-created stories? Findings and classroom implications are 
discussed. 

Keywords 

Traditional Literature; Folktales; Primary Grade Students; Writing; Reader Response; 

Elementary Education; Language Arts; Writing Composition; Picture Books; Reading 
Comprehension; Classroom Read Alouds; Native American Folktales; Early Childhood 
Education; Culture and Literacy; Writing Processes; Narrative Stories; Narrative Writing; 
Narrative Composition 

Introduction 

It is a cold, frosty morning in February. The early sun’s light streams through windows 
that make up one entire wall in Lynne’s second grade classroom. Her students are coming in the 
door and stopping by the coat rack area to remove their winter garments. Their faces are bright 
with eyes shining, excited from the cold, snowy weather outside. They only glance at me as they 
pass by on their way to sit in a corner of the classroom bordered on two sides by low 
bookshelves filled with books and adorned on the top with picture books displaying an Arctic 
theme-rm appropriate study for this time of year, I thought. The students gather on the floor 
sitting comfortably and chatting together. When all are present, Lynne takes her seat in a large, 
maple rocking chair facing the semi-circle of students and introduces me as the university 
teacher who will be doing research in their classroom for the next 6 weeks. She tells them that I 
will be coming twice a week during their language arts time and videotaping them as they read, 
discuss, and write stories related to Native Americans from the past. The students introduce 
themselves to me and ask questions about the video camera. I demonstrate to them how it works 
to satisfy their curiosity. 

After introductions, Lynne holds up the picture book Coyote: A Trickster Tale From the 
American Southwest (McDermott, 1994), and explains to her students that they will listen to four 
Native American folktales during the coming weeks, discuss each one, and come up with their 
own, individual ideas for writing a story about Native Americans. Next, she asks the students 
what they think this first book will be about. Jacob (all children’s names are pseudonyms) said 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


2 


he thought it will be about coyotes because of the title and illustration on the front of the book. 
Sarah asks what a trickster is. Lynne explains that the story they are about to hear is a Native 
American folktale and that they sometimes have tricksters in them that try to fool other 
characters. She also explains that many Native American folktales include stories about how 
things of today have come to be, and that sometimes animals in the folktales are almost like 
humans. She explains further that the folktales are related to fiction stories and asks the students 
what they remember about fiction stories. Most of the students explain the narrative elements of 
main characters, settings, problems, events, and solutions. They are unfamiliar with the ideas of 
stories having a theme. Lynne explains theme as being the message, lesson, or moral of the story 
and that many Native American folktales have this element. She continues by drawing student 
attention to the illustrations, the illustrator, and author of the book she is about to read. 

While Lynne reads the story aloud, several students spontaneously verbalize responses to 
the story similar to a play-by-play commentary. By the intense, drea ml ike look on their faces, 
together with the content of their verbal responses, it is clear that many of the students are 
actively engaged with the story: 

Cole: Look out! 

Joe: Oh no! There ’s going to be trouble. 

All the students seem to be involved with the story. They scoot closer and closer to 
Lynne and watch and listen intently. They seem to forget that I am even in the room with my 
video camera running silently. Lynne did not stop reading to ask questions, instead, she 
continues with a smooth flow, adding voice inflection that gives vibrant life to the characters and 
a thrill of excitement to the plot. Students make spontaneous predictions during the story that 
indicate they were making sense of the story and following the unfolding plot: 

Natalie: He [the coyote] is going to fall! 

Matt: The crows are tricking him. 

The Classroom Context 

The previous vignette reveals the context of this present study that took place in Lynne’s 
second grade classroom. Lynne teaches at a university laboratory school located in a medium- 
sized, Midwestern community. She participates in a looping strand, that is, she teaches first grade 
and then moves to second grade and then loops back to first grade. During the study, Lynne had 
moved to second grade with her first grade students and was enjoying her second year with them. 

Students in Lynne’s class are seated at tables in small groups of three or four. She has 8 
boys and 5 girls. The students are from families representing several ethnic groups including: 6 
Caucasian, 5 African American, 1 Hispanic, and 1 Indian. 

Lynne’s reading program consists of several approaches, one of which is small groups 
meeting in reader’s workshop to read and discuss books together. She also has multiple copies of 
trade books for students to read which go along with her literature themes. Reading skills and 
strategies are taught with basal texts, whole language charts, small reading groups, and literature 
groups. Students work in large and small groups and go to the library once a week for free choice 
book selection. Lynne reads aloud daily to her students from a trade book related to the theme 
being studied. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


3 


Lynne’s writing instruction includes students having free choice writing where they 
create their own stories. She teaches a writing process that includes: prewriting, composing a 
rough draft, revision, editing, publishing, and reading student-created stories to the class. 

Background 

In this article, I describe the strategies that promote reading comprehension with links to 
student writing through the practice of implementing reader response before, during, and 
following read-alouds and extending the reader response into the composing process of student- 
created stories about Native Americans. The main question that guided the study was: How will 
the integration of direct instruction in story structure together with reader response to traditional 
literature influence children’s composition of self-created stories? 

Research has demonstrated the relationship between children’s reading ability and 
writing ability (Loban, 1963, 1976; Pearce, 1984; Stotsky, 1983; Templeton, 1986). The writing 
that children do many times resembles the text that they are reading. The two hold a relationship, 
which conveys a sense of story, those children, who have a strong background in literature, come 
by naturally. Many young children who have been read to as an infant start school with a sense 
of what constitutes a story and have demonstrated emergent writing as well (Teale & Sulzby, 
1986). Traditional literature has vivid characters and easy to understand plots with clear moral 
messages that are not complicated for young children to grasp. Some of the first stories that 
children hear can be categorized into this genre, so it seems quite natural to choose this genre for 
helping students compose similar stories. In addition. Native American folktales were chosen 
because Native Americans are often a topic of study in elementary classrooms. Combined with 
becoming familiar with the form, style, and content of traditional literature, students were 
immersed in a study of the rich, historical culture that influenced the creation of Native 
American fo lk lore. 

Using Genre to Teach Writing 

There has been a recent trend in literacy education to place an emphasis on incorporating 
a variety of genres into instructional practice. Literature should be an important part of any 
classroom reading program. Zecker (1999) explored children’s abilities to vary the forms of 
emergent writing as they wrote about different kinds of texts. She argued that as children learn to 
write, they experience facets of written language. Children first explore with visual or graphic 
aspects of writing. This can be seen in their scribble and creation of pseudo -letters. Within this 
process, children work with a growing awareness about directionality, letter forms, common 
letter patterns in their language, and spacing between words. Next, young children come to 
understand the symbolic nature of writing through the awareness of the relationships between 
oral language and written language including the difference between writing and other forms of 
graphic representation such as drawing. Children exploring within this phase of developmental 
writing begin to write what “it sounds like” with invented spellings and random strings of letters 
as they attempt to compose text. Children experiment with a third aspect of written language that 
takes the form of writing that is representative of certain kinds of text styles or genres. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


4 


Reader Response Prompts 

For the current study, reader response discussion prompts (Figure 1) played a crucial role 
in helping the student participants to make deep, rich connections to Native American folktales, 
therefore making it more likely that the students had the opportunity to more fully appreciate and 
comprehend the text through the social context of sharing. The social context was seen as an 
essential component of the study and was facilitated through open-ended response prompts. 
Farrel and Squire (1990) hold that research on response to literature suggests that teachers can 
enhance the quality of students’ responses by the following practices: 

• Employing informal oral or writing that encourages a tentative, exploratory stance. 

• Eliciting engagement responses. 

• Helping students relate prior texts to current texts. 

• Relating students’ attitudes to their reading. 

• Recognizing students’ “story-driven” orientations. 

• Encouraging sharing of responses to build a sense of community. 


Figure 1. Reader Response Discussion Prompts 

1. What do you think this book will be about? 

2. What did you think about while listening to book? 

3. What feelings did you experience while listening to the book? 

4. What was your favorite part of the book? 

5. What did this book remind you of in your own life? 

6. What do you think is the special meaning or message of this book? 


The Children’s Books 

Four Native American folktale picture books were chosen to read aloud to the second 
graders. These books were chosen because they had well defined events, demonstrated character 
development, clearly described settings, and had quality illustrations that enhanced 
understanding of the text, and helped to build an understanding of not only the genre, but also 
some historical aspects of the Native American culture. Native American folktales were also 
chosen because the study of Native Americans is frequently a theme in schools and students 
would be able to enrich and build upon prior knowledge if they had previously studied Native 
Americans, or extend knowledge gained from the study to future learning. The four books that 
matched these criteria are presented below: 

• Coyote: A Trickster Tale from the American Southwest (McDermott, 1994) was 
chosen for the first lesson. This book is an adaptation of a Zuni folktale. It is an 
amusing, uncomplicated read aloud, with brilliantly colored, full-page 
illustrations that add high interest. Coyote, the main character, decides he wants to 
fly with the crows. They humor him, give him feathers, and tolerate his off-key 
singing and out-of-step dancing, until he begins to boast and order them about. 
Then, as coyote struggles in midair, they take back their feathers one-by-one, and 
he plummets to the earth. His tail catches fire, and he roles in the dirt. To this day 
he is the color of dust, and his tail has a burnt, black tip. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


5 


The story was simple and easy to follow, and provided a strong model for guiding 
students’ writing. It had animals as main characters taking on human characteristics, something 
common in many Native American folktales, and children frequently enjoy stories about 
animals. It also involved the crows as tricksters, another universal genre element. 

• The second book chosen for the study was The Legend of the Bluebonnet: An Old 
Tale of Texas (dePaola, 1983). This book is a retelling of an old Comanche 
folktale that explains how the bluebonnet, the state flower of Texas came to be in 
existence. It relates the story of She-Who-Is-Alone, an orphaned Indian girl raised 
by her tribe during a time of drought and famine. This young girl is the sole 
remaining member of her family. The other members all died in the famine. The 
tribe calls upon the Shaman to commune with the Great Spirits to divine what it is 
the People must do to regain harmony with nature. The Shaman states that a 
“great sacrifice” needs to be made. She-Who-Is-Alone sacrifices her most valued 
possession, her warrior doll, made by her mother. Because of her act, the Great 
Spirits bring rain and the drought and famine are ended. 

In addition to possessing the qualities that would help to build comprehension of the 
genre, this book holds the potential to provoke deep, insightful, and emotional responses from 
children. The main character demonstrates unusual sensitivity to the well being of others through 
an incredible selfless act. 

• The third book selected for the study was The First Strawberries: A Cherokee 
Story (Bruchac, 1993). A simple, uncomplicated Cherokee folktale about the 
Sun’s healing of marital discord by a gift of ripe strawberries that magically grow 
at the feet of an angry woman as she flees her husband’s harsh words, thus halting 
her departure long enough for him to catch up and make amends. The book has 
full-page, beautiful illustrations that enhance the meaning from the text and helps 
to build an understanding of historic Native American culture by depicting homes, 
dress, utensils, and activities. The message of friendship, kindness, and 
forgiveness holds a valuable life message for young children. 

This book was also selected because of the simple story line that makes it easy to relate to 
and remember. It deals with issues that children of all ages can understand and appreciate. 

• The fourth and last book chosen for the study was Crazy Horse ’s Vision (Bruchac, 
2000). This is a biography of Crazy Horse’s boyhood, and also holds many of the 
literary elements found in traditional Native American literature, therefore, was 
chosen to use with the study. As a youth, Crazy Horse (then known as Curly) 
witnesses U.S. Army soldiers attack his people. Troubled, he embarks on a vision 
quest and sees a figure on horseback riding untouched through a storm of 
lightening, hail, and bullets. His father interprets the vision, telling him that the 
man on the horse is the man he will become and that he is destined to defend his 
people. His father also tells him that if he keeps nothing for himself, no arrow or 
bullet will hurt him. Because of his vision, Curly received the name of his father, 
Tashunka Witco, which in English is Crazy Horse. 

This book was selected because of its historical significance and relationship it holds to 
Native American studies in elementary curriculum. Children will appreciate Curly’s (Crazy 
Horse’s) acts of bravery, leadership, and selflessness as a young boy. The story line is simple and 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


6 


uncomplicated and the full-page illustrations help to build an understanding of the genre through 
depicting historical Native American life. 

Findings: Reading Events 

Work with the students took place for one hour, two times per week for 6 weeks in 
Lynne’s classroom. Lynne read aloud from each book chosen for the study and guided the 
students in discussion before reading and after reading. Students responded spontaneously during 
the reading on their own. After each book was read and discussed, Lynne asked students to talk 
about what ideas they had for their own, self-created story related to Native Americans. Students 
shared their ideas together in a discussion circle and then recorded their thoughts in a story map 
form that was provided for them. When all the stories were read and discussed and the students 
had completed four story map ideas for their own stories, the students selected one of their maps 
to develop into a complete story. All the maps they created were given back to them for their 
selection, and served as a graphic organizer to frame their completed stories. Data excerpts are 
highlighted below surrounding the third folktale read to the students for the purpose of 
illuminating the interactions between Lynne, her students, and the literature. Lynne and her 
students engaged in the following discourse during the reading of The First Strawberries: A 
Cherokee Story : 

Lynne: Look at the cover of this book and predict what the book will be about. 

Brandie: It will be about a Native American girl. 

Sarah: It will be about strawberries. 

Tom: It will be about a Native American because of the people on the cover. 

This was the third book that the students had listened to and discussed and it was 
becoming apparent that they were developing an understanding for Native American folktales as 
evident from their ability to discuss specific story elements. The students really l ik ed this book 
and asked Lynne to read it again. Some students thought that the book was about real life, not a 
traditional tale. This may be because the main characters in the folktale are a husband and wife 
who have a disagreement, and the wife leaves. While this could mirror a real life situation, there 
are elements in the book that could not happen. For example, the sun in the book talks to the 
husband. Lynne and her students engaged in the following conversation at the conclusion of the 
book: 


Lynne: What did you think about this book? 

Jon: Read it again ! Read it again! 

Logan: 1 think this could really happen. 

Matt: I think this was a true story. 

These responses signaled students’ enthusiasm for the book as they demonstrated by 
wanting the book read again. Many second graders do not separate fiction from reality, which is 
also revealed in their responses. As Lynne continued asking her students to respond to the book, 
students connected emotionally with the story, the plot and characters, and also indicated that 
they comprehended the theme or themes of the story, and did so through their individual 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


7 


interpretations. Lynne and I both laughed to ourselves as Connor commented about husbands not 
being able to cook or garden and therefore, are dependent on their wives to supply food. He was 
clearly making real-life connections through his cultural perspectives. 


Lynne: 

Joe: 

Logan: 

Natalie: 

Jenna: 

Lynne: 

Sarah: 

Jacob: 

Lynne: 

Connor: 

Tom: 

Cole: 

Kaitlynn: 

Connor: 


What feelings did you experience while listening to the book? 

I felt sad for the girl and her husband. 

I am happy they got back together. 

I felt sad when the girl went away. 

1 was happy that the girl picked strawberries for the man. 

What was your favorite part? 

I liked it when the sun helped them get back together. 

1 liked the part about the strawberries; they made me hungry. 

What special meaning or message did the story hold for you? 

Be considerate of others. 

Don ’t fight. 

Respect others, and don ’t turn your back on your family. 

Don ’t argue with others. 

Don ’t be mean to your wife or she will leave you, and you won ’t get food, 
and husbands can ’t cook or garden. [This comment was from a student 
who struggles with reading and writing, yet he was able to make personal 
connections to the folktale and understand the theme.] 


When asked what ideas they had for their own stories, the second graders further 
demonstrated that they were thinking about the literary elements of the book they had just 
listened to and discussed. It appeared that they were relating to story elements that make up a 
traditional tale, specifically, a Native American folktale, and choosing these elements to 
incorporate into their own writing. Students also remembered elements from the previously read 
folktales and wanted to incorporate elements from those folktales with elements from the book 
they heard as evidenced from the following conversation: 


Lynne: After listening to this Native American folktale, what ideas do you have for 

your own folktale ? 

Jon: / want to write about a strawberry and have Indians in my story. 

Sarah: In my story, I want to write about a boy and a girl who are poor and they 

need food. 

Jenna: I want to write about a strawberry that makes a wish. 

Matt: In my story, I want people that help each other. 

Cole: I want to have a trickster in my story, maybe the sun or a coyote that tricks 

the boy and girl. 

Findings: The Writing Events 

Prior to the students writing story maps for their own stories, Lynne reviewed the literary 
elements that make a good story: characters, setting, problem, plot, and resolution. In addition to 
these elements, Lynne asked her students to think of what the main theme or special message 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


8 


their story would hold for the reader. She then sent the students from the reading center to write 
at tables where they sat in small groups. Students discussed their ideas with each other as they 
wrote them down on the story map forms. I asked many of the students to tell me about their 
ideas they had as they were writing. From the responses I listened to, it became evident that the 
second graders were building relationships across the four Native American folktales they were 
listening to during the read aloud events, making connections to Native American folktale 
elements during the discussion events, and blending together these elements into their own 
writing. Data excerpts from the conversations with students during the writing events provided 
evidence of the influence that reading and literature discussions were having on their writing. 
These data excerpts are provided below: 


Tim (author): 
Cole: 

Jenna: 

Joe: 

Tim: 

Connor: 

Tim: 

Connor: 

Jacob: 

Natalie: 

Tim: 

Sarah: 

Tom: 

Tim: 

Connor: 

Brandie: 

Kaitlynn: 

Matt: 


Tell me about the main characters in your folktale. 

The sun is a helper in my story. 

I am writing about a strawberry that makes a wish. 

I am writing about a strawberry that is bad. He also talks. 

What do you think about first when you begin to write? 

1 think about the characters for my story. 

What kinds of characters do think about when beginning to write 
about a Native American folktale? 

1 think about people, animals, and spirits can be characters. 

Spirits are reed. 

I think about the First Native Americans and the first 
animals. 

Tell me what your folktale is about. 

1 am writing about a boy and a girl who need food. 

1 am writing about a strawberry that is bad and he talks. 

What is your theme going to be? 

My message will be to never yell at family members. 

My message is to not to argue; people get hurt when they argue. 

My message is to never leave your family. 

My message will be about how something has come to be. 


Many of the second graders had difficulty associating settings in their folktales to the 
folktales read and discussed in class, although, they appeared to understand the concept of setting 
when asked by Lynne and myself, and they included locations for their stories on the maps they 
completed, however, the locations were often places other than were described in the read- 
alouds. The following data excerpt reveals the students’ thinking about the literary element of 
setting and further substantiates this finding. 

Tim: Tell me about the setting for your Native American Folktale. 

Jacob: It is going to be in a jungle. 

Sarah: It is going to be in a park. 

Jon: It is going to be by the ocean. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


9 


Figure 2 shows a story map that Kaitlynn completed for her own story after the reading 



and discussing of The First Strawberries: A Cherokee 
Story. Her map includes a blend of elements, as did most 
of the students’ story maps, from the previously read 
folktales. The desert was a setting in the first folktale read 
Coyote: A Trickster Tale From the American Southwest. 
The rest of her story map elements are very similar to the 
folktale. The Legend of the 

Bluebonnet: An Old Tale of Texas that was read before 
The First Strawberries. Her inclusion of the tree as a 
character that helps the others could be related to the 
illustrator’s inclusion of trees in The First Strawberries, 
which are prominently shown on several full-page 
illustrations in the book. This particular student’s map is 
included because it is a typical example of the other maps 
the second graders composed lending evidence in how 
they blended literary elements from previous texts that 
they have experienced together with their own ideas for 


self-created story development. 


Discussion 


All of the data yielded from the study, i.e., the researcher’s journal, student story maps, 
student stories, and video taped classroom sessions, were analyzed using the constant 
comparison method of data analysis (Glaser & Strauss, 1967; Lincoln & Guba, 1985). Each unit 
of information was compared to all other units of information from each data source in order to 
determine the findings for the study. The books read for the study were analyzed to determine 
patterns in characters, settings, problems, solutions, and themes. The student stories that were 
completed were then compared to the books that were read to them, and I looked for recurring 
themes within the students’ stories that were similar to the books read aloud. 

Analysis of the completed stories composed by the second graders revealed that many 
integrated literary elements from the Native American folktales read and discussed into their 
own writing, and when they did so, they integrated across the texts. The analysis also indicated a 
progression of integration by the students. Through the literacy events of listening, discussing, 
and writing, the second graders continued to integrate more of the Native American literature 
into their writing. 

Using the constant comparison method of analysis, the completed folktales were also 
analyzed to reveal what patterns were evidenced in the literary elements the students were 
incorporating into their writing. These patterns were then compared to the literary element 
analysis that was completed for each book. This analysis (Table 1) suggested that many of the 
second graders had developed a schema for the Native American folktale genre which they 
implemented into their own, self-created stories. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


10 


The findings of the study suggested that providing and guiding the opportunity to discuss 
their writing with each other helped the students in the study to formulate, evaluate, and revise 
their writing, leading them closer to a well- written text and a better understanding for a specific 
genre. When the students shared ideas for writing, they developed clear thinking for their 
approach. The social interaction provided by literature discussions served to help build 
connections between the reading and the writing process. Through the literature discussions, the 
students developed a vocabulary from which they drew from for future discussions and for 
understanding Native American folktales. The discussions served as an integral component in 
linking the Native American folktales to the students’ writing. 

The findings of the study indicated that when the second graders were exposed to writing 
instruction using the same genre over repeated lessons, their writing became more and more 
similar to the genre they were being taught. The direct, specific instruction in text analysis 
helped the students to have a clear approach to analyzing their own writing. Students crafted 
from the literary elements of the folktales that they had made personal connections to, such as 
their favorite characters, settings, events, and problems. Through this selection process, along 
with the opportunity to express their creativity, the second graders developed ownership over 
their writing by creating self-made stories. 


Table 1. Patterns of Literary Elements in Second Graders’ Self-Created Stories 


Characters 

Settings 

Problems 

Resolutions 

Themes 

Chiefs 

American states 

Fighting 

The sun as helper 

Peace 

Warriors 

Plains 

Danger 

The giving of a name 

Sharing 

American animals 

Meadows 

War 

Animals as helpers 

The significance of a name 

Native Americans 

Forests 

Quest for a name 

Apologizing 

Creation 

People 


Wanting to be different 


To change oneself 

Sun 


Being killed 


Flelping others 

Stars 


Anger 


Forgiveness 

Moon 


Being tricked 


Discovery 



Needing food 





Creation 




Implications for Classroom Literacy Practices 

Building from the findings of this present study, implications for classroom practice can 
be constructed. Studying one genre in depth, helped the second graders understand how authors 
construct texts, and to be able to examine relationships across texts within a genre. The students 
in the study were unaccustomed to molding their writing to fit a specific genre. Using a genre 
they were familiar with such as traditional tales eased the tensions. As writing instruction 
became specific and routine, students became even more at ease with the writing they were 
doing. The students also enjoyed the use of picture books as models for their writing. The 
illustrations in the books helped to build deeper understanding of the genre. Based upon the data 
gathered and analyzed for the study, the following implications for classroom practice are 
presented below. 




Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


11 


Students benefit from the integration of trade books representing specific genres 
into their writing instruction. Findings from the study suggested that the second graders’ 
writing was influenced by the Native American folktales that they heard and discussed. The 
more the students enjoyed the book (as demonstrated by their responses during the teacher read 
alouds), the more literary elements were transferred into their self-created writing. Student 
writing indicated that they were able to integrate many of the genre elements into their own 
stories. Beginning with a literature genre familiar to students will help them feel comfortable in 
the reading and writing processes. As the second graders listened and discussed more books 
related to the genre, they were able to examine relationships and see patterns across the texts. 

This practice will help students develop a better understanding or schema for the genre, which 
will guide their writing. 

Literature discussions become a format for building reading and writing 
comprehension when teachers carefully integrate literacy strategies into the discussions. 

Findings from the study indicated that the second graders enjoyed hearing a high-quality book 
read aloud to them. Teachers can build upon student enjoyment that read alouds provide by 
facilitating invigorating literature discussions. The open-ended, reader response prompts used for 
the study were found to be beneficial in helping students form deeper, more meaningful 
relationships and connections to the books that they heard. Teachers can foster these 
relationships by knowing when, what, and how to encourage students to respond to a text. When 
left on their own without guidance or instruction, student discussions fall short of being 
beneficial for building reading comprehension that can be carried over into quality writing. Once 
students know how to discuss a text or their writing, they can do so with confidence, and 
moreover, they will increase their knowledge of reading and writing as they see the connections 
held between the two. Additionally, when teachers guide open-ended conversation about 
literature, students will be more accomplished at entering into discussion with knowledge and 
purpose. 

Conclusions 

As the findings implicated in this study, when students become more accomplished and 
comfortable with the writing process when teachers are clear about the expectations, model, and 
plan for frequent student engagement. It is important for teachers to have their students engaged 
in the writing processes of pre- write, draft, revise, edit, and publish frequently throughout the 
school year. If students are only following the process a few times a year, they lose track of the 
steps and become disengaged. Teachers need to demonstrate for students how to help each other 
in systematic ways so that all the revising and editing suggestions do not always come from the 
teacher. Revising and editing practice should become part of daily writing instruction, and 
students should develop some responsibility and ownership over the writing process. 

Writing instruction involving many different genres helps students build knowledge of 
how text is organized, and in turn, leads to improved writing composition. Writing in a specific 
genre will help students understand how authors create texts, and will also help students integrate 
the literary elements into their own writing. Moreover, when students write in a certain genre 
they can see how their text compares to that of published authors, and through this comparison, 
become more analytical towards their own writing. As students become accomplished at writing 
familiar genres, they can move on to more difficult texts, e.g., informational writing. 



Weih, T. G. (2005). Reading Traditional Literature Guides Story Writing. Montana State Reading Journal. 21(2), 16-27. 


12 


The findings of the study indicated that using one genre for teaching writing influenced 
second graders’ writing. As the students were exposed to more texts representing Native 
American folktales, their writing reflected more literary elements associated with the genre. 
Whole group, teacher facilitated literature discussions on text structure benefited students most 
with developing an understanding for Native American folktales. Reading a genre followed by 
discussion, and then leading into related writing of the genre proved to be a sequential flow of 
literacy instruction that helped the second graders develop direct links from their writing to the 
texts they were experiencing. The more practice students had with this procedure, the more 
confident they became. It is important for educators not to move on to fast from one unit of study 
to the next, but instead, allow students time and space to develop and hone the skills that they are 
learning, which will ultimately serve to lead them to successful outcomes. 

References 

Bruchac, J. (1993). The first strawberries: A Cherokee story. Illus. by Anna Vojtech. New York: 
Dial Books. 

Bruchac, J. (2000). Crazy Horse’s vision. Illus. by S. D. Nelson. New York: Lee & Low Books. 
dePaola, T. (1983). The legend of the bluebonnet: An old tale of Texas. New York: G. P. 
Putnam’s Sons. 

Farrell, E. J., & Squire, J. R. (Ed.), (1990). Transactions with literature: A fifty-year 

perspective: For Louise M. Rosenblatt. Urbana, 111: National Council of Teachers of 
English. 

Glaser, B., & Strauss, A. (1967). The discovery of grounded theory. Chicago, ILL: Aldinie. 
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. G. (1985). Naturalistic inquiry. Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Loban, W. (1963). The language of elementary school children. Urbana, IL: National Council of 
Teachers of English. 

Loban, W. (1976). Language development: Kindergarten through grade twelve. 

Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 

McDermott, G. (1994). Coyote: A trickster from the American Southwest. New York: Harcourt 
Brace. 

Pearce, D. L. (1984). Writing in content area classrooms. Reading World, 23, 234-241. 

Stotsky, S. (1983). Research on reading/writing relationships: A synthesis and suggested 
directions. Language Arts, 60, 627-642. 

Sulzby, E. (1986). Writing and reading: Signs of oral and written language organization in the 
young child. In W. Teale, & E. Sulzby (Eds.), Emergent literacy: Writing and reading 
(pp. 50-89). Norwood, NJ: Ablex Publishing Corporation. 

Templeton, S. (1986). Literacy, readiness, and basals. The Reading Teacher, 39, 403-409. 

Zecker, L. B. (1999). Different texts, different emergent writing forms. Language Arts, 76, 483- 
489. 



