ED482325 2003-12-00 Culturally 
Responsive Teaching for American 
Indian Students. ERIC Digest. 

ERIC Development Team 

www. eric. ed. gov 



Table of Contents 



If you're viewing this document online, you can click any of the topics below to link directly to that section. 

Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. ERIC 



Digest 1 

CONCLUSIONS 5 

REFERENCES 5 



ERIC M Digests 



ERIC Identifier: ED482325 
Publication Date: 2003-12-00 

Author: Pewewardy, Cornel - Hammer, Patricia Cahape 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools Charleston WV. 

Culturally Responsive Teaching for American 
Indian Students. ERIC Digest. 

THIS DIGEST WAS CREATED BY ERIC, THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER. FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT ERIC, CONTACT 
ACCESS ERIC 1 -800-LET-ERIC 

This Digest makes the case that culturally responsive teaching cannot be approached 
as a recipe or series of steps that teachers can follow to be effective with American 
Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) students. Instead, it relies on the development of 
certain dispositions toward learners and a holistic approach to curriculum and 
instruction. This Digest uses a five-part conceptual framework first derived from the 



ED482325 2003-12-00 Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. 
ERIC Digest. 



Page 1 of 9 



www . eri c . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



broader multicultural literature by Nawang Phuntsog (1998), and ties these concepts to 
recent research in AI/AN education. 

CULTURALLY RESPONSIVE TEACHING (1) 

Interest in culturally responsive teaching grew during the late 1980s and early 1990s as 
a result of rapidly rising diversity in U.S. classrooms and concern over the lack of 
success of many ethnic/racial minority students despite years of education reform. 
Researchers from various disciplines-anthropology, sociology, social history, 
psychology, and applied linguistics-launched various investigations, often employing 
case study methodologies (Martin, 1997). These investigations contributed to 
knowledge about the challenges minority students face and the social and linguistic 
mechanisms by which these students often are adversely affected when a discontinuity 
exists between their home languages and cultures and the schools they attend. For 
example, much was learned about student motivation, power relations, and resistance 
(Cummins, 1989; Ogbu & Simons, 1994); language and cognition (Bowman & Stott, 
1994); culture and cognition (Sue & Padilla, 1990); and motivation and learning styles 
(Wlodkowski & Ginsberg, 1 995), to mention only a small sample of this body of work. 

Translating this knowledge into improved education practice and student outcomes 
began in earnest in the mid-1990s and remains an important challenge. After reviewing 
research and several efforts at translation, Phuntsog (1998, p. 14) produced a 
framework that reflects critical elements researchers found crucial to culturally 
responsive education: (1) cultural literacy (Jackson 1994; Hudson, Bergin, & Chryst, 

1993) ; (2) self-reflective analysis of one's attitudes and beliefs (Novick, 1996; Sandhu, 

1994) ; (3) caring, trusting, and inclusive classrooms (Jackson; Wlodkowski & Ginsberg, 
1995; Novick; Hemmings, 1994); (4) respect for diversity (Wldokowski & Ginsberg; 
Novick; Hemmings); (5) transformative curriculum to engender meaning (Wlodkowski & 
Ginsberg; Hemmings; Gormley, McDermontt, Rothberg, & Hammer, 1995). Each of 
these elements has appeared in discussions of effective practice in AI/AN education 
and each is based on the "central and critical role of the teacher in creating a classroom 
that respects diversity and ensures the self-worth of all children" (Phuntsog, p. 14), as 
briefly discussed below. 

Cultural literacy. According to Smith (1991), culturally responsive teaching uses the 
child's culture to build a bridge to success in school achievement. Building such a bridge 
requires a degree of cultural literacy often absent in mainstream classrooms, where the 
vast majority of AI/AN students are taught by non-Native teachers. Some research has 
shown that where the students and teachers share the same culture, learning is 
enhanced (McCarty & Watahomigie, 1999; Erickson & Mohatt, 1982). This may be the 
result of AI/AN teachers' increased awareness of Native learning styles and their ability 
to fine-tune their teaching to their students' learning needs (Philips, 1983; Pewewardy, 
2002). A logical way to address the need for cultural literacy in U.S. schools is to 
develop a larger cohort of Native teachers (Manuelito, 2003). Another way may be to 



Page 2 of 9 



ED482325 2003-12-00 Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. 

ERIC Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eri c . ed . gov 



incorporate more American Indian studies courses into teacher education courses, 
where colleges and universities are training teachers to serve in schools with Indian 
students (Bergstrom, Cleary, & Peacock, 2003). Preservice teachers need to study the 
history and culture of Indian children including their values, stories, music, and myths, 
as well as racism (Pewewardy, 1994). 

Self-reflective analysis of attitudes and beliefs. Although Native studies courses can 
help, overcoming ethnocentric outlooks is hard work and must be viewed as an ongoing 
process. Teachers must learn to be reflective practitioners and develop observational, 
empirical, and analytical skills necessary to monitor, evaluate, and revise continually 
their respective teaching styles (Pewewardy, 1994). Phuntsog (1998) acknowledges the 
challenge of engaging teachers in this process, which entails helping them to discover 
their own negative assumptions and stereotypes. He writes, "It is crucial to provide 
teachers with powerful learning experiences designed to bring about profound personal 
transformation needed to begin the process of becoming culturally responsive teachers" 
(p. 4). Cleary and Peacock (1998) also make this point, encouraging teachers to see 
"themselves" as learners, to be open to considering differences between their own 
cultures and the cultures of the communities they serve, and to be willing to change 
their ways of teaching to give children a better chance in school. 

This transformative process is not limited to White teachers teaching Native students. 
Researchers Yamauchi, Ceppi, and Lau-Smith (2000) witnessed Native Hawaiian 
teachers undergo a transformation in their attitudes about their own Hawaiian culture 
after integrating Hawaiian language and culture into the curriculum of their school. Even 
Native teachers and community members must sometimes overcome negative attitudes 
(resulting from long-term deculturalization and colonization) toward the place of Native 
culture in the curriculum (Manuelito, 2003). 

Caring, trusting, and inclusive classrooms. Teachers need not be experts in Native 
culture to provide an inclusive atmosphere in their classrooms. As one Native student 
commented, Last year, I had ... a history teacher, and I usually don't like my history 
teachers 'cause they never teach anything about Native Americans. I walked into the 
room and all I saw on his walls were pictures of Native American people. And I think, 
"Okay, I'm going to like this guy." (Bergstrom et al., 2003, p. 162) 

Kleinfeld (1975), in her case study research, found that teachers who used a 
demanding but warm style of teaching with their Alaska Native students succeeded in 
challenging their intellectual abilities. 

Also, a collection of studies concluded that group or cooperative learning approaches 
worked well with AI/AN students (Swisher, 1992; Brancov, 1994; McCarty, Wallace, 
Lynch, & Benally, 1991; Larimore, 2000; Little Soldier, 1988). Such organizational 
arrangements are generally seen as providing a more inclusive and less individually 
competitive classroom atmosphere. Teachers act as mediators of knowledge and 



ED482325 2003-1 2-00 Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. Page 3 of 9 

ERIC Digest. 




www . eri c . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



provide assistance through the use of questions, feedback, and scaffolding--that is, 
building on students' prior knowledge. 

Respect for diversity. Ultimately, the attitudes, beliefs, and actions of the school must 
model respect for cultural diversity, celebrate the contributions of diverse groups, and 
foster understanding and acceptance of racial and ethnic plurality. In order to 
authentically model such respect, the AI/AN community served by the school must be 
seen as an important source of knowledge and expertise (Cajete, 1994; Deloria & 
Wildcat, 2001). Falling under the rubric of "place-based education," several programs 
have been under way that consciously work to connect students with Indigenous 
knowledge and ways of knowing, and help them discover the relationship of this 
knowledge to modern sciences and social studies (Lipka & Mohatt, 1998; Sorensen, 
2002). When schooling provides children with the knowledge, language, and skills to 
function in the mainstream culture but also honors and provides opportunities for 
students to learn more about their Native language and culture from elders and others 
in the community, a true respect for diversity is demonstrated. 

Transformative curriculum to engender meaning. According to Novick (1996), "at the 
heart of argument about the means and ends of schooling is the question: What kind of 
society do we want?" (p. 62; in Phuntsog, 1998). Most educators would respond that we 
want a society that continues to advance toward social justice and equality of 
opportunity; most would also recognize the role public education has been assigned in 
accomplishing those aims. Phuntsog found a great deal of consensus among educators 
and researchers writing about culturally responsive teaching that a transformative 
curriculum must be part of it because such a curriculum "promotes equity in classrooms 
as it questions the basic premises and assumptions of school knowledge. It is expected 
that a transformed curriculum will provide learning opportunities for children to enhance 
their critical thinking skills which enable them to analyze their situation and transform it 
with the language of possibility" (p. 14). In other words, it helps children become 
effective agents for social change (Banks & Banks, 1995). 

In his book "Look to the Mountain: An Ecology of Indigenous Education," Cajete (1994) 
outlines key elements of American Indian perspectives on learning and teaching. He 
advocates developing a contemporary, culturally based educational process founded 
upon traditional tribal values, orientations, and principles, while simultaneously using the 
most appropriate concepts, technologies, and content of modern education. He explains 
that environmental relationship, myth, visionary traditions, traditional arts, tribal 
community, and nature-centered spirituality have traditionally formed the foundations of 
American Indian life for discovering one's true face (character, potential, identity), one's 
heart (soul, creative self, true passion), and one's foundation (true work, vocation), all of 
which lead to the expression of a complete life. For Cajete, Indigenous education is a 
process of education grounded in the basics of human nature. It can provide new ways 
of educating for ecological thinking and environmental sustainability, and has the 
potential, not only for the transformation of what is misnamed "Indian education," but 



Page 4 of 9 



ED482325 2003-12-00 Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. 

ERIC Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eri c . ed . gov 



also for profound applications toward transforming modern American education. 

CONCLUSIONS 



Teachers in a multicultural society need to hold an attitude of respect for cultural 
differences, know the cultural resources their students bring to class, and be skilled at 
tapping students' cultural resources in the teaching-learning process. While these 
attributes have always been needed, organizing schools to provide culturally responsive 
teaching may be a powerful tool in advancing the goals of No Child Left Behind. By 
reducing alienation of minority students and improving their motivation to learn, students 
and teachers work more effectively together to improve achievement. 

It is our responsibility as American Indian parents and educators to develop educational 
settings (formal and informal) where cultural understandings (political, historical, literary, 
technological, financial, medical, legal, and others) are not transmitted accidentally, but 
by design. 



(1) During the 1980s several terms emerged in the anthropology of education literature 
that describe pedagogical strategies used by teachers in an effort to make the schooling 
experiences of American Indian students more compatible with their everyday lives. 
Those terms include "cultural congruence," "cultural appropriateness," "cultural 
compatibility," "culturally sensitive," "culturally aware," "mitigating cultural discontinuity," 
"culturally relevant," "cultural synchronization," and "cultural responsiveness." The term 
"culturally responsive" incorporates concepts embodied in all these descriptors but also 
connotes a more dynamic relationship between tribal (home or community) culture and 
school culture. 

REFERENCES 



Banks, C. A., & Banks, J. A. (1995). Equity pedagogy: An essential component of 
multicultural education. Theory into Practice, 34(3), 152-158. 

Bergstrom, A., Cleary, L. M., & Peacock, T. (2003). The seventh generation: Native 
students speak about finding the good path. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on 
Rural Education and Small Schools. 

Bowman, B. T., & Stott, F. M. (1994). Understanding development in a cultural context: 
The challenge for teachers. In B. Mallory & R. New (Eds.), Diversity and 
developmental^ appropriate practices: Challenges for early childhood education (pp. 
19-34). New York: Teachers College Press. 

Brancov, T. (1994). Cooperative learning in mathematics with middle school Indian 
students: A focus on achievement and on-task behavior (Native Americans). 



ED482325 2003-12-00 Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. 
ERIC Digest. 



Page 5 of 9 



www . eri c . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Dissertation Abstracts International, 55(11), 3396A. (UMI No. 9506443) 

Cajete, G. (1 994). Look to the mountain: An ecology of indigenous education (1 st ed.). 
Durango, CO: Kivak. 

Cleary, L. M., & Peacock, T. D. (1998). Collected wisdom: American Indian education. 
Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Cummins, J. (1989). Empowering minority students. Sacramento: California Association 
for Bilingual Education. 

Deloria, V., Jr., & Wildcat, D. R. (2001). Power and place: Indian education in America. 
Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing. 

Erickson, F., & Mohatt, G. (1982). Cultural organization of participant structures in two 
classrooms of Indian students. In G. Spindler (Ed.), Doing the ethnography of schooling: 
Educational anthropology in action (pp. 132-174). New York: Holt, Rhinehart, & 

Winston. 

Gormley, K., McDermontt, P., Rothenberg, J. & Hammer, J. (1995, April). Expert and 
novice teachers' beliefs about culturally responsive pedagogy. Paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, San Francisco, CA. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 384 599) 

Hemmings, A. (1994, April). Culturally responsive teaching: When and how high school 
teachers should cross cultural boundaries to reach students. Paper presented at the 
annual meeting of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 376 242). 

Hudson, L. M., Bergin, D. A., & Chryst, C. F. (1993). Enhancing culturally responsive 
pedagogy: Problems and possibilities. Teacher Education Quarterly, 20(3), 5-17. 

Jackson, F. R. (1994). Seven strategies to support a culturally responsive pedagogy. 
Journal of Reading, 37(4), 298-303. 

Kleinfeld, J. (1975). Effective teachers of Eskimo and Indian students. School Review, 
83(2), 301-344. 

Larimore, C. K. (2000). When worlds collide: Native American students navigating 
dominant culture classrooms. Dissertation Abstracts International, 61(07), 2932A. (UMI 
No. 9979694) 

Lipka, J., & Mohatt, G. V. (1998). Transforming the culture of schools: Yup'ik Eskimo 
examples. Sociocultural, political, and historical studies in education. Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 431 565) 



Page 6 of 9 



ED482325 2003-12-00 Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. 

ERIC Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eri c . ed . gov 



Little Soldier, L. (1988, April). Sociocultural context and language learning of Native 
American pupils. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the National Association for 
Bilingual Education, Houston, TX. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 295 
503) 

Manuelito, K. (2003). Building a Native teaching force: Important considerations (ERIC 
Digest). Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. 

Martin, B. (1997). Culturally responsive teaching: A review of research and literature. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 408 387) 

McCarty, T. L., & Watahomigie, L. J. (1999). Indigenous community-based language 
education in the USA. In S. May (Ed.), Indigenous community-based education (pp. 
79-94). Great Britain: Short Run Press. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 
432 435) 

McCarty, T. L., Wallace, S., Lynch, R. H., & Benally, A. (1991). Classroom inquiry and 
Navajo learning styles: A call for reassessment. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 
22(1), 42-59. 

Novick, R. (1996). Developmental^ appropriate and culturally responsive education: 
Theory in practice (Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory Program Report). 
Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 397 985) 

Ogbu, J. U., & Simons, H. D. (1994). Cultural models of school achievement: A 
quantitative test of Ogbu's theory (Cultural models of literacy: A comparative study, 
Project 12). (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 376 515) 

Philips, S. (1983). The invisible culture: Communication in classroom and community on 
the Warm Springs Reservation. New York: Longman. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 226 878) 

Pewewardy, C. D. (1994). Culturally responsible pedagogy in action: An American 
Indian magnet school. In E. R. Hollins, J. E. King, & W. C. Haymon (Eds.), Teaching 
diverse populations: Formulating a knowledge base. Buffalo: State University of New 
York Press. 

Pewewardy, C. D. (2002). Learning styles of American Indian/Alaska Native students: A 
review of the literature and implications for practice. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 41(3), 22-56. 

Phuntsog, N. (1998, April). The magic of culturally responsive pedagogy: In search of 
the genie's lamp in multicultural education. Paper presented at the annual meeting of 
the American Educational Research Association (San Diego, CA). (ERIC Document 



ED482325 2003-12-00 Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. 
ERIC Digest. 



Page 7 of 9 




www . eri c . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Reproduction Service No. ED 420 632) 

Sandhu, D. S. (1994). Cultural diversity in classrooms: What teachers need to know. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 370 911) 

Sorensen, B. (2002). The community-based education model: Bringing validity to 
education and careers. Winds of Change, 17(4), 60-62. 

Sue, S., & Padilla, A. (1990). Ethnic minority issues in the United States: Challenges for 
the educational system. In Bilingual Education Office (Ed.), Beyond language: Social 
and cultural factors in schooling language minority students (pp. 35-72). Los Angeles: 
California State University, Evaluation, Dissemination and Assessment Center. 

Swisher, K., & Deyhle, D. (1992). Adapting instruction to culture. In J. Reyhner (Ed.), 
Teaching American Indian students (pp. 81-95). Norman, OK: University of Oklahoma 
Press. 

Wlodkowski, R. J., & Ginsberg, M. B. (1995). Diversity & motivation: Culturally 
responsive teaching. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Yamauchi, L. A., Ceppi, A. K., & Lau-Smith, J. (2000). Teaching in a Hawaiian context: 
Educator perspectives on the Hawaiian language immersion program. Bilingual 
Research Journal, 24(4), 333-351. 



Cornel Pewewardy (Comanche-Kiowa) is an associate professor in the Department of 
Teaching and Leadership, School of Education, at the University of Kansas in 
Lawrence. 

Patricia Cahape Hammer is the director of the ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education 
and Small Schools at AEL. 

This publication was prepared with funding from the Institute of Education Sciences, 
U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. ED-99-CO-0027. The opinions 
expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of IES, the 
Department, or AEL. 



Title: Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. ERIC Digest. 
Document Type: Information Analyses— ERIC Information Analysis Products (lAPs) 
(071); Information Analyses— ERIC Digests (Selected) in Full Text (073); 

Available From: Archives at http://www.ael.org/. 

Descriptors: American Indian Culture, American Indian Education, Cultural Awareness, 
Culturally Relevant Education, Educational Environment, Educational Needs, 



Page 8 of 9 



ED482325 2003-12-00 Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. 

ERIC Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eri c . ed . gov 



Educational Strategies, Elementary Secondary Education, Holistic Approach, Student 
School Relationship, Teacher Attitudes, Teacher Expectations of Students 
Identifiers: ERIC Digests, Transformative Education 



ED482325 2003-12-00 Culturally Responsive Teaching for American Indian Students. 
ERIC Digest. 



Page 9 of 9 




