DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 371 401 



CS 214 412 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Oliver, Eileen Iscoff 

Crossing the Mainstream: Multicultural Perspectives 
in Teaching Literature* 

National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana, 
111. 

ISBN-0-8141-0972-1 
94 

241p. 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 West 
Kenyon Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096 (Stock No. 
09721-3050: $14.95 members, $19.95 nonmembers) . 
Guides - Non-Classroom Use (055) — Books (010) 

MF01/PC10 Plus Postage. 

Annotated Bibliographies; Censorship; Cultural 
Differences; *CuItural Enrichment; Higher Education; 
High Schools; Interdisciplinary Approach; 
^Multicultural Education; *North American Literature; 
Student Needs; Writing Instruction 
Literary Canon; *Multiethnic Literature 



ABSTRACT 

Intended to help literature teachers examine ways in 
which the traditional canon can be expanded to include diversity in 
curricular choices, this book invites readers to work together to 
find new and better ways to introduce an ever-changing student body 
to what has heretofore been either unacknowledged or undervalued. The 
book is divided into three sections. Part 1, "Multicultural 
Literature for Whom?* 1 develops a rationale for expanding the canon to 
include multicultural literature in every student's experience and 
also confronts the issue of censorship. Part 2, "Curricular 
Challenges: Beyond Eurocentric Values, 11 begins the task of cataloging 
the multitude of literary works that might be included in the new 
repertoire and also explores the process of learning a different kind 
of critical analysis. This section of the book also provides 
'comprehensive bibliographies of African American, Asian American, 
Jewish, Latino, Native American, and cross-cultural literatures, as 
well as bibliographies of literature addressing emotional/mental and 
physical disabilities, homelessness , homosexuality, older adults, 
teenage suicide, and Vietnam veterans. Finally, Part 3, "Teaching 
Strategies for Multicultural Literature," gives examples of how 
multicultural works can be incorporated into literature courses. Also 
included are discussions of incorporating multicultural perspectives 
within composition classes, assessing student writing, and making 
interdisciplinary connections in teaching multicultural literature. 
(NKA) 



********************************************* 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

*********************************************************************** 



Crossing 

THE 

Mainstream 

Multicultural 

Perspectives in Teaching 
Liherafure • 



Eileen Iscoff Oliver 




ERIC 



Crossing the Mainstream 

Multicultural Perspectives in Teaching 
Literature 



Eileen Iscoff Oliver 

Washington State University 



National Council of Teachers of English 

1111 W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, Illinois 61801-1096 



4 



Grateful acknowledgment is made to the Arizona English Bulletin for permis- 
sion to reprint portions of Eileen Iscoff Oliver's essay "Successful Writing Pro- 
grams and Methods of Assessment for Non-mainstream Students" (Spring 
1992). 

Grateful acknowledgment is also made to Alfred A. Knopf, Inc., for permission 
to reprint "Harlem (Dream Deferred)" from The Panther and the Lash by Langston 
Hughes. Copyright 1951 by Langston Hughes. 

Manuscript Editor: Michael Himick 

Staff Editors: Mario Welshons and Michelle Sanden Johlas 

Cover Designer: Victoria Martin Pohlmann 

Interior Book Designer: Doug Burnett 

NCTE Stock Number 09721-3050 

/ 

© 1994 by the National Council of Teachers of English. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 

It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a fo- 
rum for the open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the teaching 
of English and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any particular point of 
view does not imply endorsement by the Executive Committee, the Board of 
Directors, or the membership at large, except in announcements of policy, where 
such endorsement is clearly specified. 

Library of Congress Cataioging-in-Publication Data 

Oliver, Eileen Iscoff. 

Crossing the mainstream : multicultural perspectives in teaching 
literature / Eileen Iscoff Oliver, 
p. cm. 

Includes bibliographical references. 
ISBN 0-8141-0972-1 : $19.95 

1. American literature — Minority authors — Study and teaching. 

2. Pluralism (Social sciences) in literature — Study and teaching. 

3. Literature and society — United States — Study and teaching. 

4. Ethnic groups in literature — Study and teaching. 5. Minorities 
in literature — Study and teaching. 6. Culture in literature — Study 
and teaching. I. Title. 

PS153.M56045 1994 

807' . 1'273— dc20 94-14634 

CIP 



5 



In memory of Ben, 
who taught me to love the whole world and everybody in it, 
especially the children. 



For Reva, 

whose gentle strength has guided me, Liane, 
and the rest of her children for three generations; 

and for Emma and Joe, 
for whom all the children of the world are like flowers, 
every one different, every one beautiful 



To Bernie, 
whose flame blazes through the darkness 
so that tomorrow's children will be able to see; 

and to Kenny, J.J., Rachel, and Deborah, 
who are constant reminders that learning about our children 
is a never-ending labor of love. 



6 



vu 

Contents 



Preface ix 
L Multicultural Literature for Whom? 

1 . Literature for Students of Color: 

On the Outside Looking In 3 

2. The Culturally Deprived American Majority 12 

3. Changing Demographics in America 22 

4. Expanding the Canon through Perceptions of 

Diversity and the American Dream: An Experiment 31 

5. Censorship in the Classroom: Fighting Back 39 

6. Multiethnic Literature for Mainstream Teachers: 

Another Experiment 53 

7. Dealing with Ableism, Ageism, Sexism, 

and Homophobia: "Otherness" 63 

II. Curricular Challenges: Beyond Eurocentric Values 

8. Brainstorming a Canon 79 

9. Educating the Illiterate Intellectual 121 

10. The Right Rules for the Right Game: 

Critical Analysis of Multiethnic Literature 1 34 

11 . What the Canon Did Not Teach Us about 

Learning Styles 1 65 

IIL Teaching Strategies for Multicultural Literature 

12. Approaches to Teaching Multicultural Literature 177 

13. Composition Pedagogy in a Multicultural Setting 194 

14. Interdisciplinary Connections in Teaching 

Multicultural Literature 209 

Thank You, Mrs. Coleman, Wherever You Are 219 



7 



viii Contents 

References 221 
Author 235 



8 



Preface 



Unfortunately, some of us continue to teach the same canonical 
works we have used for decades, missing out on all of the excel- 
lent literature that has been, for one reason or another, excluded 
from the traditional canon. In the meantime, our students find less and 
less relevance in what they are reading, and those who are marginalized 
by current curricula become even more alienated as they continue 
through school My purpose in writing Crossing the Mainstream is to bring 
attention to these issues by examining ways in which we can expand 
our canon to include diversity in our curricular choices. 

This book is separated into three sections. Part I, "Multicultural 
Literature for Whom?" attempts to develop a rationale for expanding 
the canon to include multicultural literature in everyone's educational 
experience. It also confronts the issue of censorship, which many of us 
struggle with when introducing new literature into restricted curricula. 
Part II, "Curricular Challenges: Beyond Eurocentric Values," begins the 
task of cataloging the multitude of literary works that might be included 
in the new repertoire. It also explores the complicated process of learn- 
ing critical analyses quite different from those most of us received in 
our own educations. Finally, Part III, 'Teaching Strategies for 
Multicultural Literature," gives examples of how multicultural works 
can be incorporated into literature courses. 

Readers should be aware of some semantic problems as they ap- 
proach this text. As various terms and phrases come in and out of fash- 
ion, some labels enjoy long lives, while others quickly become obsolete. 
Thus, although I use labels like mainstream and nonmainstream literature 
and multicultural education, the politics of terminology renders these 
terms precarious. An issue of propriety, one must be careful when using 
references that may not be acceptable to all readers. Nonetheless, I fear 
that no matter what terminology I use, someone will find it offensive. 
Or perhaps my terms will be obsolete by the time the ink dries on the 
page. Recognizing this semantic trap, I offer the following discussions 
using what, at this time, seem to be acceptable terms based on my re- 
search into the work of many educators and people of letters. Although 
terms like mainstream and nonmainstream, multicultural, pluralistic, and 
diverse seem appropriate to me today, my apologies to readers who find 
them disagreeable now or in the future. I hope the tone of this book 
presents my work as a beginning effort in what I expect to be a long, 
long task in which many of us will be engaged. 



X 



Preface 



And because I venture into areas where my expertise is limited, I 
have called upon friends and colleagues to assist me. I would therefore 
like to express my special appreciation to Shelli Fowler, Alex Kuo, Rory 
Ong, Ricardo Sanchez, and Marian Sciachitano, who prevented me from 
going too far astray. Their expertise was invaluable. Also, many thanks 
to Jeanne Richeson, whose patience and efficiency facilitated my efforts. 

I am certain that this book leaves out a lot. It is, however, only a 
start. Perhaps it will help stimulate and support an ongoing dialogue 
about multicultural literature. Perhaps it will generate ideas and pro- 
vide motivation for change where there has been little. It will, I hope, 
invite readers to work together to find new and better ways to intro- 
duce an ever-changing student body to what has heretofore been either 
unacknowledged or undervalued. 



10 



1 Literature for Students of 
Color: On the Outside 
Looking In 

Years ago, when I first read Louise Rosenblatt's classic Literature as 
Exploration, I was struck by her discussion of "relevance" and the 
teenage reader. Not only does she tell us that students 7 spontane- 
ous response is the first step to their understanding and awareness of 
literature, but she also underscores the detrimental effects that irrelevant 
selections have on the positive reading experiences of nonmainstream 
students. Her example of the outrageous mismatch between students 
and the literature they read has stuck with me ever since: 

During a reorganization of education on the Indian reservations 
some years ago, it was discovered that in some classes the Indian 
boys and girls were being required to read Restoration comedies. 
(Rosenblatt 1976,57) 

Imagine! Kids looking out windows, staring at walls, their heads on 
desks — lost. And the English teacher at the front of the classroom, forg- 
ing ahead, dragging her languishing charges along with her — or so she 
thinks. This picture might give us all a laugh if it weren't so painfully 
recognizable. Whether we want to acknowledge it or not, many of our 
students nationwide suffer the same classroom tortures. In fact, accord- 
ing to Rosenblatt, the plight of the Native American students in her ex- 
ample "differs only in degree from the average American child's rela- 
tion to much of the literature he [or she] reads in [the] . . . classroom" 
(57). 

After twenty-five years of teaching in high schools, community 
colleges, correctional facilities, and universities, I can see that Rosenblatt 7 s 
scenario is the rule rather than the exception, even today I have taught 
in California, Texas, New York, Minnesota, and Washington in classes 
labeled "upper-middle," "blue collar," and "inner-city." Unfortunately, 
restricted reading experiences exist everywhere. Theoretically, we have 
made great strides in "multiculturalizing" the literature we consider 
valuable and appropriate for secondary students. But the fact remains 
that vast numbers of them are still reading majority writers almost ex- 
clusively (Applebee 1989), a situation that is considered anathema in 



12 



4 



Crossing the Mainstream 



current research in reader response, literature for high school students, 
cross-cultural awareness, and multicultural education. 

The great gap between what we preach — that readers respond to 
work that relates to their own lives — and what we practice — the same 
tired selections from outdated anthologies — pervades school systems 
throughout the United States. And not without consequence. Accord- 
ing to Beach and Marshall (1991), African American students, 

particularly those in inner-city schools, have difficulty identify- 
ing with the cultural perspectives of the dominant culture . . . 
when they sire daily experiencing quite a different cultural world . 
Thus, if their study of literature . . . excludes African- American 
perspectives, they may perceive an enormous gap between the 
school culture and their home culture. (445) 

As obvious as all this sounds, the teaching of irrelevant literature and 
the alienation of nonmainstream students persists. 

I am constantly reminded of this situation by my former students. 
Recently, I received a late night call from Sandy, who was having a prob- 
lem with her class. I told her we could work on it and encouraged her to 
visit me. The next day Sandy came directly from school, where she had 
obviously ''been through the mill." This once composed, self-assured, 
top-notch student was completely frazzled. As she described her situa- 
tion, it became clear to me that her students were utterly bored with, 
even alienated by, the work they were doing. 

Sandy's class was typical of many in our inner-city schools, with 
no real "majority 7 ' population. Of her thirty-three students, some were 
African Americans, some were Asian Americans, some were Latino/ as, 
and a few were European Americans. Some were recent arrivals from 
other countries with a minimal grasp of English, and several were re- 
peating the sophomore-level class as juniors and seniors. Moreover, the 
class was at the end of the day. My first question was ''What are they 
reading?" "World literature," Sandy answered. "The Odyssey, excerpts 
from The Divine Comedy, Macbeth, Cyrano, Hedda Gabler" Say no more! 

I'm not discrediting these great works. We don't want to water 
down our cultural heritage by leaving out the masterpieces. But unless 
we figure out a better way to teach these classics, we might as well ac- 
knowledge that we've already lost many of our students and admit that 
we're just going through the motions. Teaching these works to a dying 
audience is not teaching them at all, and we owe our students — not to 
mention Shakespeare and Dante — more than that. What we're missing 
is the "connection." If students aren't motivated by literature, they won't 



13 



Literature for Students of Color 



5 



read. Yet if they can discover in literature ideas and experiences rel- 
evant to iheir own lives, they'll astound us. 

I once taught in a "continuation" school outside San Francisco. 
The tiny student body was made up of kids who had been kicked out of 
one of the six comprehensive high schools in the district There was no 
"majority" population. Within our ranks we had truants, runaways, 
strong-armed robbers, and chemical dependents. At least half of the stu- 
dents were periodically visited by probation officers checking up on 
their cases. In short, this was a tough crowd to please. 

When I first arrived, I naively stocked my room with all of the 
"appropriate classics" and adolescent literature that I had previously 
taught in a large, traditionally focused comprehensive school. I showed 
my treasures to the reading teacher, who also maintained the "library" 
next door. She smiled politely and said that she hoped the students would 
enjoy my books. But Fran knew that the students wouldn't respond 
positively to my choices. So did the other teachers who had worked 
with these kids. And after seeing my selections collect dust on the shelves, 
I knew too. These students had no interest — initially at least — in read- 
ing what I thought was great literature. They first had to discover litera- 
ture — their literature — on their own. 

For example, I gave Gordon Parks's The Learning Tree to Bobby, an 
obviously hostile African American student who made no bones about 
not wanting to be in school. He sat down and read until the end of the 
period. The next day, Bobby came in, handed me the book, and told me 
that he had finished it and wanted another. Vicki, a Mexican American 
student, a chronic truant, and a runaway, was from an abusive family 
and pretty much earned her living on the streets. I gave her Carmen, a 
story about a girl in similar straits. She finished the book by the end of 
the day. I could relate many more stories about students with terrible 
academic records who, when given the chance to read material they 
found relevant, read book after book, softened their attitudes about 
school, and became willing to write and speak about what they were 
reading. 

If one of the purposes of "teaching" literature is to "help more 
students engage successfully with print" (Tchudi and Mitchell 1989, 110), 
then we must provide our students with selections they will enjoy and 
help them to develop positive attitudes about what they read. We must 
make sure that their reading experiences, initially at least, provide them 
with both the opportunity to identify with the characters they read about 
and the opportunity to expand their worlds through the vicarious ad- 
ventures that stories offer. 



14 



6 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Reading for Identification 

Kiah (1985) notes: 

In a pluralistic society where racial, cultural, and social diversi- 
ties abound, each group eventually develops traditions and spe- 
cial interests. Within each group are exhibited mutually shared 
experiences that are unique to and characteristic of people of the 
relatively same background. It is the sharing of these experiences 
that provides a cohesiveness, or feeling of togetherness, to a par- 
ticular group. These experiences become crucial and salient to 
the members of the groups as they strive to maintain and pre- 
serve that which gives them a sense of worth and self-identifica- 
tion. (286) 

It is not surprising, then, tnat English teachers are able to find literature 
that students can identify with fairly well for those students who are 
most like them. Demographically, I'm talking about mainstream stu- 
dents who like to read, whose family environments are conducive to 
literary experiences, and who are relatively successful in school. We are 
much less successful, however, with students who are different, who 
did not grow up in middle-class families, who live in homes where read- 
ing experiences are not valued, or who come from nontraditional fam- 
ily settings. 

In 1990, as part of an outreach program at St. Cloud State Univer- 
sity in Minnesota, I invited ten high school students of color to visit my 
junior-level "Literature for Teaching" class. This experience would al- 
low my students — almost all of whom were Midwestern, mainstream 
students who thought of non-Nordic, non-Germanic peoples as "eth- 
nic" — to interact, mostly for the very first time, with students who were 
different from themselves. I will never forget the frozen looks on my 
students 7 faces when those ten African American, Asian American, and 
Mexican American high school students walked into the room. Although 
I knew that the European American students would be somewhat un- 
comfortable, I was startled by their response: they looked scared! 

I explained to the visiting students that our class was composed 
of prospective high school teachers and that they, as high school stu- 
dents, were obviously experts on this topic. I also explained that I had 
prepared a series of questions for them. Their responses to these ques- 
tions were enlightening. The visiting students were explicit in telling 
their audience about how they were able to "get around" assignments 
that they didn't like, giving detailed examples of how they could call 
their friends and share answers, "scam" the teacher by listening to what 
he or she thought was important and then parroting it back, or use any 



15 



Literature for Students of Color 



7 



of the other little tricks that many of us have come grudgingly to know 
over the years. 

What was most informative, however, was the visiting students' 
response to my question about their favorite books. One student said, 
with great poise, that he didn't like anything the teacher "made" them 
read because she never told them why they had to learn these books, 
only that "they were assigned" and that "there was no choice." I asked 
him if he had read any of them. "No," was his response. I then asked if 
he had read anything that semester. "Well, I just finished The Autobiog- 
raphy of Malcolm X." (This event occurred prior to the renewed interest 
in Malcolm X generated by Spike Lee's film.) "How was it?" I asked. 
"Great! I loved it." Since I felt that this was as important a text to under- 
standing twentieth-century America as most others we require our stu- 
dents to read, I asked my own students how many of them had read it. 
Answer: none. "What else?" I pressed. "Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man?" 
Again, I polled my students. Three of them had read it, admitting col- 
lectively that they had a difficult time with it. It had been hard to under- 
stand. ''Why?" our high schooler asked. 

Our guests then went on to share some of their other positive 
reading experiences, mentioning multiethnic titles like A Boat to Nowhere r 
The House on Mango Street, and Love Medicine. They also talked about 
books more commonly found in the canon of high school literature: To 
Kill a Mockingbird, Huckleberry Finn, Lord of the Flies, even Hamlet. I asked, 
"What was it about these books that you liked?" Their positive responses 
seemed to center around a particular teacher, Mr. Ender, and the fact 
that he didn't "set in stone" the books that everybody had to read. From 
what they were saying, the students responded favorably to this teacher 
because he allowed them great latitude, because he guided their selec- 
tions rather than making them, and because he included in his sugges- 
tions many multiethnic authors. 

Unfortunately, we do not have enough Mr. Enders in our schools. 
Students are too often given limited choices of what they can read, and 
the selections are often uninviting, particularly to nonmainstream stu- 
dents. As Scott (1988) writes, schools must "change or modify materials 
so that the content includes experiences and knowledge familiar both 
to nonmainstream groups and mainstream groups" (31). Continuing to 
ignore the literatures of diverse groups is not only unrealistic and un- 
scholarly, but also offensive to the students we teach. In a country whose 
demographics have changed drastically in the last few decades, it makes 
no sense to deny our students a look at the world through the eyes of all 
of its artists. 



16 



8 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Expanding Our Worlds through Literature 

Discussions about expanding the literary canon to include multicultural 
perspectives tend to ignore the flip-side of the argument. That is, good 
literature — "the classics/' so to speak — should be taught to everybody. 
Somehow, when we talk about using multiethnic literature for 
nonmainstream groups, some get the impression that mainstream lit- 
erature is for mainstream groups. This assumption ushers in an entirely 
different set of misconceptions about what people should have the op- 
portunity to read. 

I often require teachers to read Maya Angelou 7 s I Know Why the 
Caged Bird Sings (1969). It's surprising how many of them have not read 
this book, which is great for high school students. I focus on Angelou 7 s 
description of what books meant to her while growing up in Stamps, 
Arkansas: 

During these years in Stamps, I met and fell in love with William 
Shakespeare. He was my first white love. Although I enjoyed and 
respected Kipling, Poe, Butler, Thackeray, and Henley, I saved 
my young and loyal passion for Paul Laurence Dunbar, Langston 
Hughes, James Weldon Johnson, and W. R B. Du Bois 7 "Litany at 
Atlanta/ 7 But it was Shakespeare who said, "When in disgrace 
with fortune and men's eyes." It was a state with which I felt 
myself most familiar. (11) 

Doesn't every English teacher dream of having a student like Maya, a 
student who loves literature — and "the classics 77 at that? But she didn 7 t 
develop this interest by having her teacher ram literature down her 
throat. Actually, Angelou 7 s whole story is about how this poet/linguist/ 
essayist/dancer/singer/civil rights activist learned to love language and 
create works of art by being allowed, in one way or another, to find a 
voice of her own. Of course, Maya had Mrs. Flowers, the woman who 
taught this diffident little girl to like herself, the world, and what it had 
to offer. Mrs. Flowers, the "aristocrat of Black Stamps/ 7 was, according 
to Angelou, "the lady who threw me my first life line 77 (77), the woman 
who introduced her to books. 

Classic examples of African Americans who must "steal 77 the privi- 
lege of learning how to read go far back into our history. For example, 
Frederick Douglass (1845) speaks of first being taught to read by his 
owner, Mrs. Auld. Yet Auld 7 s husband, upon learning of such "danger- 
ous" activity, forbade her from continuing, warning her that nothing 
good could come from having a literate slave. Douglass describes how 
he then cleverly enticed his white cor temporaries into completing the 
task that Mrs. Auld had begun. 



17 



Literature for Students of Color 



9 



In a poignant passage in Black Boy (1945), a very popular book 
among high school students, Richard Wright explains how he used his 
boss's library card to check out books, since African Americans were 
not allowed to use the library. He describes his fascination with H. L. 
Mencken's work and with the world of fiction as literature unfolded 
before him: 

[Mencken] was using words as a weapon, using them as one 
would use a club. Could words be weapons? (272) 

Reading was like a drug, a dope. The novels created moods in 
which I lived for days. (273) 

And in reading Dreiser's Sister Carrie, Wright thinks of his own mother 
and her suffering (274). 

I mention these writers not only for the power and beauty of their 
work, but also because the significance of literature in their early lives is 
an important lesson for nonmainstream students. A few years ago, I 
heard Maya Angelou (1990) speak to a group of students in Minnesota. 
In short, she told them to "go to the library/' She talked about a number 
of mainstream artists whom she encouraged everyone to read. She also 
laced into her discussion Harlem Renaissance writers like Countee 
Cullen and Langston Hughes. Telling her audience that "poetry and 
music are responsible for keeping us erect/' she harkened back to her 
life in Stamps, Arkansas, where, discovering Shakespeare, she knew that 
"he wrote for me/' She also named Turgenev and Achebe, saying that 
they too wrote for her. "And," she said, dramatically underscoring her 
words as only Maya Angelou can do, "J am worth it\ ft 

Angelou's message here is that authors — mainstream and 
nonmainstream — write for all of us. Yet to say this is not to deny the 
importance of including nonmainstream literature in the literary canon. 
We need all points of view. In 1991, 1 attended a MELUS (Multi-Ethnic 
Literature of the United States) conference in Minneapolis and had the 
opportunity to hear Paul Lauter, editor of The Heath Anthology of Ameri- 
can Literature (1990), speak about the nature and conception of this new 
text. He outlined the principles of the multiethnic, gender-fair approach 
that the editors took. Explaining that these principles would inform all 
subsequent Heath texts, Lauter (1991) said: 

The most profound change that has occurred during the past 
twenty years is . . . that literature can no longer be divided into 
"mainstream" and "marginal" Unfortunately for most read- 
ers, [though,] because women and ethnic writers have been so 
seldom anthologized, coming to know their work — and to un- 
derstand its significance, especially if it deviates from what have 



18 



10 



Crossing the Mainstream 



become accepted patterns of literary representation — has been 
difficult. 

Riding home from the MELUS meetings, I asked my colleague 
Judy Foster about The Heath Anthology, which she was using in her 
American literature course. She responded enthusiastically, explaining 
that, for her, the Keath text "changes the whole focus of what we con- 
sider to be American literature/ 7 She offered several examples of what 
she meant. Reading the slave narratives of Frederick Douglass and 
Harriet Ann Jacobs, she said, gave new meaning to what students up to 
now have thought of as nineteenth-century American rhetoric. And she 
compared the ''fanfare and attention" of Thoreau's "Civil Disobedience" 
to Angelina Grimke's "Appeal to the Christian Women of the South." 
"Here's a woman," Judy claimed, "who wrote to Christian women all 
over the South, telling them to 'break the rules,' encouraging them to 
help free slaves, to teach them to read, and to speak out against this sin 
against God and man. And hardly any of our students had heard of her 
until the Lauter text came out." 

I now have my own copy of The Heath Anthology, and I can see 
why Judy was so enthusiastic about it. James Banks (1991) has noted 
that its publication was a significant milestone in the struggle for 
multiethnic literature. "This collection," Banks has said, "embodies the 
concepts of multiethnic studies and most certainly will influence subse- 
quent collections." 

One of the most destructive features of maintaining the literary 
canon as a white, male-dominated corpus is the denial of the existence 
of other literary works. Thus, students of color and others who do not 
fit into the mainstream are always on the outside looking in. They are 
required to read books about people they often perceive as oppressors. 
They seldom have the opportunity to see that they too possess a literary 
heritage worthy of study. In a later chapter, I will discuss some of the 
reasons we hold so stubbornly to the current canon. For now, I will sim- 
ply say that we must look beyond what were considered literary mas- 
terpieces when many of us were undergraduates. To deny students their 
heritage because we know little about it, to portray the "Eurocentric 
slice" of cultural literacy as the only one there is because we aren't fa- 
miliar with others as well, is not just ignorant on our part; it is also a 
cruel method of keeping many of our students from self-actualizing 
through literary experiences they can relate to. As Bennett (1986) writes: 

Literature and artistic achievements by one's own people provide 
sources of identity and pride within the individual, and sources 
of respect from others. They can help expand students' readiness 



19 



Literature for Students of Color 



11 



for empathy. Self-knowledge, self-acceptance, and security are 
necessary before people can understand and accept others with 
whom they may disagree. (197-98) 

The growing momentum for curriculum reform will, I hope, no 
longer allow the literature of "others" to be marginalized as it has been 
for so many years. For one thing, more and more scholars are "discov- 
ering" it. For another, more and more students are demanding it. As 
students of literature, we should all thirst for material we have been 
deprived of for so long. Everyone — the many students of color across 
our country and everybody else — is entitled to know the history and 
pain and beauty of the world as it has been recorded by artists who 
come from all of the strands that make up American literary society. It is 
for all of us that I write this book. May we read, learn, and grow from 
these experiences and teach our students to do the same. 



20 



2 The Culturally Deprived 
American Majority 



llan Bloom (1987) tells us that the American mind is closing. He 



objects to the increasing openness of modern theory, to the egali- 



/ \ tarian acceptance of contemporary social critics, and to the in- 
clusion of multicultural identities and political stances, all of which he 
claims has brought about the decline of intellectual thought on college 
campuses nationwide. Calling for a return to classical literature and tra- 
ditional models, Bloom denounces the democratization of disciplines 
that he believes has overtaken our intellectual communities. Instead of 
applauding the relativistic nature in which modern intellectuals "take 
in" and analyze new ideas, he is critical of their 'lack of attention" to 
the traditional models of Western thought. 

But Professor Bloom is mistaken in his assertion that the academy's 
potential for change and willingness to learn new approaches is bad. In 
decrying what has been lost, Bloom fails to acknowledge and make room 
for what has been recognized as valid and relevant in a changing world. 
To ignore reality, or worse, to deny it, is not only unproductive, but also 
unethical. We do not practice deceit in education — at least we shouldn't — 
especially when it relates to the marginalization of people. 

Holding fast to old traditions is no longer a viable option. New 
evidence has entered the public domain. A few years ago, after infor- 
mation about Columbus's annihilation of the Arawak Indians gained 
some recognition, a teacher asked me whether it might not be better to 
avoid mentioning this fact to students, who, after all, thought of Co- 
lumbus as a hero. She was suggesting that we withhold evidence to 
protect the image of this American icon. But how, in good conscience, 
can we do that? 

Further, the recognition and inclusion of other disciplines and 
other perspectives are not responsible for the myopia that Bloom sees in 
the minds of students today. Rather, the downward trend in American 
intellectual thought has more to do with students' lack of interest in an 
irrelevant curriculum. 

In "Illiberal Education" (1991), another so-called "preserver of the 
traditions," Dinesh D'Souza, laments the immunity that "champions of 
minority interests" have, "even when they make excessive or outland- 
ish claims with racial connotations" (52). For instance: 




21 



The Culturally Deprived American Majority 



13 



The African- American scholar Leonard Jeffries claims in class that 
whites are biologically inferior to blacks and that the "ultimate 
culmination" of the white value system is Nazi Germany. (54) 

An interesting point of view. D'Souza continues by citing sociologist 
Becky Thompson, who begins her course on race, class, and gender 

with the feminist principle that in a racist, classist, and sexist so- 
ciety we have all swallowed oppressive ways of being, whether 
intentionally or not. Specifically, this means that it is not open to 
debate whether a white student is racist or a male student is sex- 
ist. S/he simply is. Rather, the focus is on the social forces that 
keep these distortions in place. (54) 

Both of these perspectives ^Jrnost guarantee student engagement. 
Either would be a great point from which to begin a stimulating discus- 
sion on racism or sexism. So what is D'Souza afraid of? Our mission as 
educators is to make students think. Shouldn't they be presented with 
nontraditional points of view in order to make use of their critical think- 
ing abilities? Besides, are these theories so outlandish? Think of the sta- 
tus of women a hundred years ago. Consider the three-fifths clause in 
our Constitution and the institution of slavery in general. Think of the 
degeneracy of the Nazi regime. Think of the audience Shockley and 
Jensen have had. We should not privilege certain theoretical outbursts 
and then not listen to divergent positions. 

Besides, I think D'Souza overestimates the power of the professor's 
opinion. Students do not automatically accept a new concept — espe- 
cially one that doesn't fit into their previously constructed schema — 
just because a teacher or a professor presents them with it. At least my 
students do not. In fact, it is my observation that most students are gen- 
erally quite parochial in their thinking. It takes a lot to move them off 
dead center. 

E. D. Hirsch, Jr. (1987), the much-maligned proponent of cultural 
literacy, had a good idea. No one disputes the value of world knowl- 
edge, a strong literary background, and shared information from one's 
culture. We all wish our students had these qualities. But when Hirsch 
puts the responsibility for failure on "faulty theories promulgated in 
our schools of education and accepted by educational policymakers" 
(110), he is way out of line. The school is central to the success of stu- 
dents, but we cannot discount everything else. And to suggest that 
Hirsch's program of cultural literacy would solve the ills of our nation's 
schools is an affront and discredits many hardworking teachers. 



22 



14 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Whose Culture Is It, Anyway? 

Defining the relevance of cultural literacy, Mullican (1991) asks, "Whose 
culture? Whose literacy? All of us are culturally illiterate to a degree, 
since none of us knows everything" (246). He then describes a poem 
about the Beatles that one of his students wrote, a poem that he found 
difficult to understand because he lacked the proper background, I am 
reminded of the paper on the musical group Metallica that one of my 
own students wrote. I was clearly the most ignorant member of his peer 
response group. 

Every semester I conduct an experiment in my teaching methods 
class. I ask students to list the ten most important works every educated 
person must read. When they finish, I put them in groups and ask them 
to come up with a single list. After much negotiation and lots of conver- 
sation about "this has to stay" and "that has to go/ 7 they put their choices 
on the chalkboard. We then look at the six or so lists and compare. Of 
course, no two lists are ever the same. What we determine is that there 
is no specific literary canon. 

Evidently, the sixty K-college English teachers who met at the 
1987 English Coalition Conference in Maryland agree (Elbow 1990). This 
group convened in an attempt to identify the direction of the teaching 
of English and the language arts. One of the speakers, E. D. Hirsch, Jr., 
recommended plot summaries, terms, and information. The group 
balked at his emphasis, however, and sought less restrictive guidelines. 
Following Hirsch, Shirley Brice Heath spoke to the group and reflected 
on "conditions of nourishment and challenge . . . not just . . . skills or 
scores or grades" (Elbow 1990, 18). 

As we develop our own literary canons, we must be sure that 
what we are doing is not culturally biased. Rita Kissen (1989), for in- 
stance, comments on the cultural biases that the preservice teachers in 
her course "Children's Literature of Emerging Nations" harbored, bi- 
ases they did not even recognize that they had : 

Their world view was strongly ethnocentric, exalting competi- 
tion and individualism, permeated with racism and sexism, and 
embodying what I have come to call "technophilia," the assump- 
tion that technology is an absolute good and that human beings 
are meant to control rather than reverence nature. (212) 

The changing demographics of the American population make it 
essential that we move toward a more diverse outlook regarding the 
literature that we teach in our classes. I say this not just because we will 
soon have a "majority minority" population, but because mainstream 



23 



The Culturally Deprived American Majority 



15 



students will be "culturally deprived" if we do not And that puts the 
responsibility on teachers to provide a wide variety of reading selec- 
tions from the best traditional and contemporary writers we have. What 
exactly is the literary canon? Raymond (1990) tells us that "all human 
experience can be a worthy subject of literature, and that our traditional 
exclusions merely impoverish ourselves and our students" (82). 

Eliminating Myths of Hate 

We can make a difference. Every educator knows the power of good 
teaching. We also know that racism, homophobia, ableism, sexism, and 
other forms of discrimination are destroying our students 7 learning en- 
vironments. Discrimination affects not only those who have been 
marginalized, but everyone else as well. Because many of us perceive 
the world monolithically, we jeopardize ourselves and our future in a 
number of ways. As teachers, we must begin to look at the realities be- 
hind the surface of ethnocentric behavior and work harder to eradicate 
some of our most dangerous biases. 

The issue of affirmative action, for example, is one of the most 
volatile of all the topics I have encountered in the classroom. Though 
students usually try to be "politically correct" about racism and sexism, 
all hell breaks loose whenever the subject of college admissions, schol- 
arships, or job potential crops up. One student, convinced that he had 
not been admitted to West Point because "his place" was "taken" by "a 
minority, probably a female," wrote, "It is unfortunate to think that a 
fully qualified student was denied admission to a deserved position at 
West Point merely because of race and sex." This attitude, I believe, is 
representative of the backlash created by myths and misinformation 
about affirmative action, which has become the automatic scapegoat of 
anyone who did not get his or her anticipated job, promotion, scholar- 
ship, or college acceptance letter. 

What we need to understand is that scapegoating doesn't just af- 
fect those who bear the brunt of the hostility and bitterness it creates. It 
also harms those who Mse it as an excuse, because it gets in the way as 
they try tc face up to their own limitations. And parents who do not 
accept their children's limitations, who choose instead to find scape- 
goats for lost scholarships or college rejection letters, only reinforce their 
children's misperceptions. 

Discrimination and ignorance affect us all. Yet we can make a dif- 
ference using literature as a tool because it allows us to live vicariously 
through the characters we read about. Bennett (1990) writes: 



24 



16 



Crossing the Mainstream 



As painful as it may be, children and young adults must face 
facts about the racist past. Under the guidance of knowledgeable 
and caring teachers, minorities and nonminorities can gain in- 
sight into a social context that helps explain current patterns of 
poverty, protest, and apathy as well as interracial isolation, ste- 
reotypes, misconceptions, and conflict. (303) 

For students to do so, however, for students to "face facts about the 
racist past/ 7 educators must examine both what they teach and how 
they teach it. 

Banks (1989) tells us that most school material is taught from a 
middle- or upper-class white male perspective, which limits students' 
ability to perceive concepts and issues from other perspectives. "Conse- 
quently/ 7 he writes, "students gain only a limited conception of the de- 
velopment of the nation ana the world" (20-21). And Bennett (1990) 
demonstrates that misconceptions and stereotypes often start with the 
literature and textbooks we use. She writes: 

According to Banfield of the Council on Interracial Books for Chil- 
dren, racism in textbooks is usually most evident in five impor- 
tant ways: the historical perspective; the characterization of Third 
World peoples; the manner in which their customs and traditions 
are depicted; the terminology used to describe the peoples and 
their culture and the type of language ascribed to them; and the 
nature of their illustrations. (76) 

The negative views students often have of Africans, for example, 
frequently start with the misinformation, stereotyping, and mystifica- 
tion found in textbooks. These misconceptions, Bennett says, worsen 
similar stereotypes about African Americans and "feed the doctrine of 
white supremacy" by perpetuating myths about the inferiority of black 
people (75-76). And when we analyze the meaning of expressions such 
as "blackening" someone's character, giving someone "a black eye" (a 
mark of shame), or calling someone a "blackguard" (Robert B. Moore, 
cited in Bennett 1990, 76), understanding how racism perpetuates itself 
through literature becomes elementary. 

Though it often makes us uncomfortable, teachers must accept 
some of the responsibility for perpetuating myths and misperceptions. 
Do we recognize that stereotypic language and images exist in much of 
the literature we teach? Do we confront these issues? Or do we avoid 
teaching the material because it might get us into trouble? We too must 
"face facts about the racist past" if we are to make a difference. 

Take The Merchant of Venice, for instance. Thomas McKendy (1990) 
suggests that "a careful look at Shakespeare's prejudices and their roots 
can teach students not only about historical attitudes, but about their 



25 



The Culturally Derived American Majority 



17 



own unacknowledged assumptions as well" (18). He tells us that an 
analysis of the "Hath not a Jew eyes?" speech is not enough to absolve 
Shakespeare of anti-Semitic thought. By using our own culture's atti- 
tudes toward Gypsies, McKendy illustrates that Shakespeare in his time 
probably knew as little about Jews as students today know about Gyp- 
sie°. Thus, he writes strictly from a stereotypic view. McKendy writes: 

[Shakespeare had] most likely never seen nor spoken with a 
Jew. ... He would have known that Jews on the continent were 
often money lenders, a profession closed to Christians . . . and 
that these money lenders were despised . . . [but] Jews for 
Shakespeare, like Gypsies for my students, were a somewhat ex- 
otic and largely unknown people. They were perhaps an abstrac- 
tion to him, and as such he was probably no more hostile to them 
than my students are to Gypsies. . . . None of this, however, pre- 
cluded Shakespeare from including an offensive and degrading 
picture of a Jew when he needed a two-dimensional villain for 
his play. (20) 

McKendy concludes by telling us that we should not trivialize this bias: 
"In our own country, such casual stereotypes have almost certainly 
smoothed the way for more vicious prejudices, for the persecution and 
slaughter of Jews, Gypsies, and others" (21). 

Diversity in Literature . . . 

. . . When There Are No Students of Color in the Class 

Sometimes teachers tell me that they don't need to teach ethnic litera- 
ture because there aren't any minority students in their classes. Wrong! 
Thaf s all the more reason to incorporate such literature into their canon. 
The changing demographics of this country demand that we expand 
the heretofore Eurocentric, male-dominated canon to broaden the per- 
spectives of "majority" readers. The corollary to Maya Angelou's asser- 
tion that Shakespeare wrote for her is that Richard Wright wrote for 
Suzie Q. Smith living in Centraltown, U.S.A. And if Suzie can read and 
appreciate the works of great artists of color, perhaps she will become 
less narrow in her thinking, better able to identify with those outside 
her immediate community, and more successful in preparing herself 
for life in America. 

In addition, there is just so much more out there than the litera- 
ture that has been traditionally taught. Teachers shouldn't miss out on 
the opportunity to add some excellent literature to their canons. To as- 
sume that good literature comes only out of the European American 
classical tradition is both arrogant and ignorant. 



26 



18 



Crossing the Mainstream 



. . . When There Are a Few Students of Color in the Class 

Sometimes teachers ask me what literature they should teach when there 
are one or two students of color in their classes. These teachers are the 
brave ones. I fear that most teachers who feel uncomfortable with ethnic 
issues simply avoid teaching "sensitive" literature altogether My first 
response to those who do raise the issue is to encourage them by telling 
them that there is no one answer to their dilemma, any more than there 
is ever one solution to any teaching situation. What teachers must do is 
expect a variety of responses from students of color, just as they would 
from everyone else. I have had students from ethnic minorities who 
were happy to contribute to class discussions relevant to their ethnicity. 
Others were not and remained silent. I have had some who felt empow- 
ered by the activity. I have had others who were defensive. 

There are no rules. Yet I have always tried to be sensitive to any 
material being read and discussed that might be misconstrued. I speak 
to students individually when I think that the literature we are reading 
may be more closely tied to them than to others. I think I can sense if a 
student is uncomfortable. If a student does seem uneasy, I might pri- 
vately mention to the student that if there is some part of the literature 
that he or she finds personally relevant, he or she should feel free to add 
to our discussions. I have had a variety of results with these reassur- 
ances. Sometimes students feel empowered enough to contribute as "an 
expert" on a foreign language or dialect or community issue, perhaps 
sharing an anecdote about "what it was like when my older brother 
tried to get a job and was turned down because of his limited English." 
Sometimes students remain silent but tell me privately that the ques- 
tions I ask in class are important to them. I have had students who say 
nothing until the end of the course and then thank me for "bringing a 
lot of that stuff out in the open." Majority students do the same. We 
need to realize that young people are often much more open than we 
think. Sometimes our own fear keeps us from doing what we think is 
right. 

What I try not to do is make inaccurate assumptions. I never 
assume that just because Cindy is a Lakota Indian from South Dakota, 
that she somehow represents the voice of the Laguna Indian from the 
Southwest that Leslie Silko writes about in Ceremony. Even though Jesse, 
an upper-middle-class member of the honors orchestra whose parents 
are professors, is African American, he does not share the oppression of 
poverty and isolation that Richard Wright describes in Black Boy. I never 
ask students to act as spokespeople for their race, gender, sexual orien- 
tation, religion, whatever. 



27 



The Culturally Derived American Majority 



19 



I do make an attempt to let students see what life is like from 
other points of view. A short essay that I like to use for this purpose is 
Brent Staples' s "Night Walker" (1986), a narrative about a very tall Afri- 
can American news writer who likes to take walks at night. Seeing him 
approach, people move to the other side of the street; women clutch 
their purses; car locks click quickly as he passes. To put people at ease 
and thus ward off such unnecessary and unpleasant insults, he carries 
the Wall Street Journal under his arm while he walks and whistles opera 
music. Not only is this a great model for students' own narratives, but 
many also learn something about aspects of life they had never before 
considered. Often their realization prompts an African American male 
in the class to contribute his own experience, much to their surprise. 
"We never thought of that" is frequently the reply. 

Another very good short piece is Michael Dorris's "For the Indi- 
ans, No Thanksgiving" (1988), in which he depicts the now institution- 
alized feast as "the last full meal" for reservation Indians, who 

reside in among the most impoverished counties in the nation. 
They constitute the ethnic group at the wrong peak of every scale: 
most undernourished, most short-lived, least educated, least 
healthy. (201) 

This essay always prompts a number of students to pursue excellent 
related research questions. I have also had two Native American stu- 
dents — one Shoshone, one Choctaw and Chippewa — share some mov- 
ing stories about their parents' experiences and their families' history 
during class discussions of Dorris's work. 

. . . When the Class Is Racially Mixed 

Just because a school is racially mixed is no guarantee that all of its 
students will be treated fairly. I have taught in places where teachers 
have established a genuine atmosphere of sharing, where people ap- 
preciate one another's culture, and where students seem well able to 
interact fairly with members of other ethnicities. Yet I have also been in 
situations that encouraged just the reverse. In fact, one negative effect 
of integrating schools twenty-five or so years ago was that many of the 
students of color who were bused into mainstream schools wound up 
in lower-level classes for a variety of reasons other than ability or po- 
tential And the effects of the internal segregation resulting from tracked 
classes persist in many schools even today. 

As a college supervisor of preservice teachers, I have sometimes 
questioned the expectations that both they and their cooperating teachers 
have held for some of their students. Once, in Sacramento, California, a 



28 



20 



Crossing the Mainstream 



cooperating teacher told me that "when you get a certain number of a 
'certain kind 7 of student, you can't really do anything with the class.' 7 1 
responded that I would have to find a more positive role model for my 
student teacher. He answered, "Well, there are some liberals left who 
still believe they can make a difference/ 7 

Even in the best of situations, we still face the perplexing ques- 
tion of whether or not we should use literature that may be offensive to 
students of color. That is, if a work of literature is objectionable because 
of some aspect that may be perceived as racist, should we throw it out? 
Peter Smagorinsky (1992) says "No, 77 but we must use 

a greater sensitivity in our teaching that reflects our recognition 
that the experiences of some of our students may not enable a 
dispassionate reading. In this light we would need to be very 
open-minded in listening to student responses and try to work 
constructively with them. If Buck Finn is truly a great book then 
students should have great experiences with it. I don't think this 
is possible unless we treat the book emotionally as well as intel- 
lectually. (226) 

This position, however, does not go uncontested. Dr. Ernece B. 
Kelly of the City University of New York points out that it is 

a notion which is more acceptable to racial majority (white) teach- 
ers than to minority ones. I'd propose that white teachers read a 
book which offends them because it paints a picture of their race 
or class or ethnic group which is likely to cause pain or humilia- 
tion or the like. That might enable them to experience these feel- 
ings and to discover if they become defensive during that experi- 
ence and if they, in fact, might not be ultimately inclined to dis- 
courage use of that book. In short, I think this view is premised 
on an underestimation of the emotional/psychological damage 
that books such as The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn f with its use 
of "nigger" and other demeaning characteristics, are likely to have 
on minority readers. 

The question, then, is not so easily answered. We do not want to give up 
our "classics," but there are many other excellent books available for 
our students. My advice is for teachers to select their literature care- 
fully, making informed choices about what their students should read. 

Using Literature to Discover Our "Sameness" 

! developing her rationale for teaching multiethnic literature, Bedrosian 
(1987) points to 

the steady influx of immigrants to this country and the need for 
. . . apparently assimilated students, many of whom will soon be 



29 



The Culturally Derived American Majority 



21 



working professionally with these immigrants, to understand the 
social and psychological demands of adjustment. (125) 

Thus, in teaching a course in multiethnic literature, Bedrosian responds 
to the need students have to learn about other cultures. Yet she also 
allows her students to rediscover who they themselves are. She points 
out what should be an obvious irony in defining the term multicultural 
with respect to the American population, for who, except the Native 
American, is not from a different culture? As Bedrosian's students ex- 
plore the literatures of their own cultures in her class, they discover that 
''despite their breadth of attitude, despite the varying quality, each story 
and poem, essay and play, center[s] on universal issues — family, work, 
separation — that [are] directly accessible to everybody" (132). They learn 
that people are more alike than different. 

In teaching a diverse selection of folktales, fables, myths, and leg- 
ends, we can help students apply their reading to present values, de- 
velop their social sensitivity, expand their knowledge of geography and 
history, and "broaden their appreciation for literary techniques used by 
authors from different cultural backgrounds" (Norton 1990, 29). Much 
of the literature of diverse writers contains the issues every one goes 
through. A young adult who reads Alice Childress's Rainbow Jordan, for 
example, does not have to be African American to relate to its explora- 
tion of a fourteen-year-old girl's feelings of alienation. There is no "main- 
stream," if you really think about it. 

In his article "Revising the Literature Curriculum for a Pluralist 
Society," Cox (1988) offers some excellent advice for including diverse 
literature along with the regular "staples" of our canon. Encouraging 
teachers to use student input in selecting materials, he suggests that we 
help "our students see themselves as members of several interlocking 
communities" (30). We thus need to know each other. 

As the country undergoes the tremendous demographic changes 
described in the next chapter, teachers must expand what heretofore 
was the standard canon to include realistic pluralistic perspectives. If 
we don't, we will be consciously excluding a huge section of our popu- 
lation. We will also be missing out on some wonderful literature. 



30 



3 Changing Demographics 
in America 



Harlem (Dream Deferred)* 

What happens to a dream deferred? 

Does it dry up 
like a raisin in the sun? 
Or fester like a sore — 
And then run? 

Does it stink like rotten meat? 
Or crust and sugar over — 
like a syrupy sweet? 

Maybe it just sags 
like a heavy load. 

Or does it explode? 

Langston Hughes 



wrote this chapter in June 1992, in the aftermath of the Rodney King 
affair. Like many Americans, I watched the country rip apart once 
again, just as we knew it would once the verdict came in from the jury. 
Sadly, those of us old enough to remember the Watts riots of the sixties 
watched it happen all over again. And once again we listened to the 
mixed views of our students and colleagues. 

Coincidentally, I had just given this Langston Hughes poem to 
my African American literature class, explaining it as a metaphor for 
many of the works we were reading. Perhaps if we begin to listen to 
writers like Langston Hughes, and Nikki Giovanni and Ricardo Sanchez 
and Leslie Silko and Frank Chin and James Baldwin, we won't keep 
making the same mistakes. Maybe we can avoid another Rodney King 
horror. Indeed, Hughes's description of the effects of the deferred dream 
explains many events in our history. What happens to people when they 
are oppressed? When their goals are thwarted? What happens to a dream 
deferred? 



* From The Panther and the Lash by Langston Hughes. Copyright 1951 by Langston 
Hughes. Reprinted by permission of Alfred A. Knopf, Inc. 



31 



Changing Demographics in America 



23 



The literature is full of examples of the ways in which people are 
shaped by oppression. The numerous accounts from Japanese Ameri- 
can writers about the internment of American citizens during World 
War II, for instance, attest to the cruel treatment of Japanese Americans 
in this country. Or open any chapter of Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee 
and read the same ugly mistake repeated again and again against Na- 
tive Americans. We don't learn our lessons from the past. 

Divide and Conquer 

Perhaps the most disturbing part of these latest events is that while hos- 
tility increases between diverse groups, the majority power structure 
goes on, business as usual. But that's nothing new. It's called "divide 
and conquer." Minority groups in this country have often been at each 
other's throats as each group struggles to find its way up the socioeco- 
nomic ladder. We see this phenomenon in the struggles of the Southeast 
Asian, Mexican, and Central American groups now entering the United 
States in a steady stream. We've seen it before in the early struggles of 
southern and eastern European, Jewish, Irish, Chinese, and Japanese 
immigrants. Some of these groups look less like the dominant group 
than others; they do not blend in as easily and thus have more to con- 
tend with. But then African Americans have known that all along. 

As Henry explains (1990), "minority groups often feel keenlycom- 
petitive" (30). Latino leaders feel that the demands of African American 
groups often render the needs of the Latino community less important. 
Blacks feel that the growth of Asian and Latino groups has weakened 
the potential for gain in African American communities. And women's 
groups — not necessarily concerned with the specific needs of women of 
color — I . /e become powerful by virtue of their numbers and strong 
affirmative action guidelines. Often we are fighting for the same little 
piece of the pie. Divide and conquer! A dangerous strategy that works. 
And it's getting more vicious. 

Do racial majority students understand the conditions under 
which many of our citizens entered this country? My observation is that 
they do not. As educators, we must work actively against the continu- 
ing barriers that many students of color deal with on a regular basis. 
And literature, I believe, can help us in this endeavor. 

Teachers' Perceptions 

In an increasingly disturbing environment, teachers have a definite role. 
We must work actively to change the perceptions that many of our 



32 



24 



Crossing the Mainstream 



students have regarding the developing polarization of this nation. If s 
our job. Churches have been unsuccessful. Families often perpetuate 
existing myths. And most communities don't provide much guidance. 
If we can't effect change in our schools, then where will it happen? We 
can make a difference. 

First, though, we need to be realistic about our efforts to increase 
the number of teachers from diverse backgrounds, because we're not 
getting very far. I applaud NCTE's efforts via 'Teachers for the Dream" 
and programs like it. But as Zeichner (1992) notes, "teachers in the U.S. 
and students preparing to become teachers are mostly white, Anglo, 
monolingual women." Add to this profile the characteristics of the pro- 
totypical English teacher, who loves books, has been exposed to "the 
classics" of the English and American literary canon, has had success 
with writing and with being a student in general, and who dreams of 
imparting these fine qualities to a group of adoring students. But the 
world is not like us. These are the very characteristics that cause people 
to make comments like "I'd better watch how I speak" or "English! Ugh! 
That was my worst subject." The faster we recognize this, the faster our 
students are going to tolerate us and, perhaps, learn that we do have 
something to offer them. 

Most students don't play by our rules. I once supervised a stu- 
dent teacher — a lovely young Texan who talked about "the help" at 
home — who told me that she had given a boy an "F" on his paper and 
"He didn't even care!" I responded, "Why should he? He's not graduat- 
ing. He's only in class because his probation officer told him he either 
goes to school or to jail. He chose school." The student teacher was 
shocked. The point here is that even though most of us "English types" 
are cut from a pretty standard mold, the students we teach are increas- 
ingly different — and thaf s great, if we don't louse it up. When preservice 
teachers tell me that they want to teach in an area similar to the middle- 
class, homogeneous one "they came from" or "in an academically ori- 
ented school where kids really want to learn," I counsel them out of our 
program. Not only do I find this attitude repulsive, but I also consider it 
unrealistic. 

Who Are the Americans? 

The more this country grows, the more diverse it gets. And that's the 
most exciting thing to happen in education in a long time. Our popula- 
tion continues to shift, to look different, to have different values. Fifteen 
years ago I had never heard of the Hmong people. Yet today, according 



33 



Changing Demographics in America 



25 



to Walker-Moffatt (1992), there are 100,000 Hmong Americans, who as a 
group are quite distinct from other Southeast Asian Americans. And 
the impact of the Hmongs on school districts is significant in many ur- 
ban areas, from Minneapolis, Minnesota, to Merced, California. 

A whole array of diverse groups exists in the United States today, 
groups that can be defined in terms of race, ethnic background, eco- 
nomic conditions, physical diversity, sexual preference, household 
makeup, same-sex family partners, students or family members affected 
by AIDS, students affected by family suicide, students affected by sexual 
or other physical or mental abuse, and who knows what else. The fol- 
lowing data are thus general measures, scanty in large part and cer- 
tainly not inclusive of all groups. Most have to do with white/black/ 
Latino comparisons in particular, because those have been the groups 
measured most often over time. Even so, the statistics for Latinos (called 
Hispanics in the reported study) and blacks are continually footnoted 
with explanations such as "Hispanics may be of any race" or "Black 
numbers include Hispanic" (OERI 1991, 26). To me, such caveats mean 
that the lines we use to consider distinct groups are, in fact, very, very 
blurred. 

In addition to these limitations, other problems exist. Data for 
Asian Americans, for example, are often misleading because the "des- 
ignation . . . 'Asian-Americans' . . . encompasses so many different 
peoples as to be rendered virtually meaningless" (Mizokawa 1992). Ac- 
cording to Mizokawa, while groups do identify in the aggregate, it's for 
political reasons having little to do with educational goals. Mizokawa 
points to the same difficulty in using Native American labels: 

The classification of a person as a "Native-American" aggre- 
gates . . . Shoshones, Hopis, Apaches, Cree, Sioux, Navahos, 
Swinomish, Arapaho, and a myriad other peoples. 

With over five hundred separate Indian nations recognized by the U.S. 
government and many more bands applying for official status, how can 
we even talk about "a" group? Further confounding this analysis, many 
young Native Americans are hesitant to identify themselves publicly at 
all for fear of being discriminated against. 

Despite the difficulties we face in trying to get an accurate demo- 
graphic analysis, we do know this. According to William Henry (1990): 

In the 21 st century — and that's not far off— racial and ethnic 
groups in the U.S. will outnumber whites for the first time. The 
"browning of America" will alter everything in society, from poli- 
tics and education to industry values, and culture. (28) 



34 



26 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Indeed, this "browning of America' 7 will have a profound effect on school 
enrollments. According to Zeichner (1992), by the year 2020, 40 percent 
of the nation's school-age youth will be children of colon 

We have a lot of work to do if we're going to be ready for the 
future. As Geneva Gay (1989) tells us, although there has been some 
progress in educational attainment among ethnic minorities over the 
last twenty years, dropout rates among nonmainstream groups are still 
a major problem. While African Americans have increased their aver- 
age years in school from 8.0 in 1970 to 12.0 in 1985, whites have gone 
from 10.9 to 12.5 in the same period. The dropout rate for blacks in 1985 
was 12.6 percent, which is still higher than the 10.3 percent reported for 
whites. In California, Latinos are reported to have the highest dropout 
rate of all ethnic groups; in some districts as many as 40 percent leave 
school before the tenth grade. The dropout rate for Mexican Americans 
and Puerto Ricans has reached 50 percent in some places, and in areas 
like Chicago and New York it exceeds 70 percent. Dropout rates for 
Native Americans are not reported as systematically, but there are indi- 
cations that the educational status of Native Americans is even worse 
than that of the groups cited above (169-70). 

A look at success rates for Asian Americans is also deceiving. 
Though they are often considered high achievers in secondary and higher 
education, Gay points out that there is "immense diversity of the Asian- 
American subgroups/ 7 She also points to major issues such as "the seri- 
ous language and adjustment problems that recent refugees and new 
immigrants encounter" and "the disparity between educational attain- 
ment and income" (171). 

Further, if we look at college costs — tuition, room, board, etc. — 
we see that charges rose 31 percent at public four-year colleges and 51 
percent at private colleges between 1979-80 and 1989-90, with public 
and private colleges listing an average cost of approximately $5,000 and 
$12,500 respectively (OERI 1991, 51). Given the financial data for 
nonmainstream families, it is not difficult to see that minority popula- 
tions have fewer opportunities in higher education. Additionally, in spite 
of the push for diversity at colleges and universities, large attrition rates 
for minority students tell us that alienation and a variety of other fac- 
tors lessen these students 7 chances of earning a degree. 

We need to consider other data as well. In Youth Indicators 1991: 
Trends in the Well-Being of American Youth, the U.S. Department of 
Education's Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
offers a number of comparative data regarding family, income, and 
education. According to this research, the percentage of single-parent 



35 



Changing Demographics in America 



27 



families in the United States grew from 11 percent in 1970 to 22 percent 
in 1989. And this estimate reaches 28 percent for Latino families and 54 
percent for African American families (OERI 1991, 28-29). These figures 
mean that, on average, at least every fifth student in our class is from a 
nonmainstream group. 

The OERI also reports that while the average American family 
had an income of $34,200 per year in 1989, and while white families 
operated on $35,975 per year, the average incomes of Latino and Afri- 
can American families were $23,446 and $20,209 respectively (OERI 1991, 
35). Also, 19 percent of all families lived "in poverty" in 1989. Of the 
families in this group, 51 percent had a woman as the head-of -house- 
hold, 36 percent were Hispanic, and 43 percent were African American 
(OERI 1991, 39). Other data show that 54 percent of the children living 
in households where a woman was head were raised on an income of 
less than $10,000 (OERI 1991, 37). And "despite such high poverty rates, 
most unmarried women with children work" (OERI 1991, 4). 

Mental and physical health conditions have also changed over 
the last few years. These changes have affected not only the lives of the 
victims, but their family members as well. The number of reported cases 
of AIDS for 15- to 24-year-olds quadrupled between 1985 (379 cases) 
and 1989 (1,586 cases). And suicide is one of the five leading causes of 
death in adolescence (OERI 1991, 117). We need to take such figures into 
account as we consider just who the students that populate our class- 
rooms are. 

The Inequality of Education 

A lot can be learned from these data. First, we must acknowledge that 
there are gross inequities in our schools. Something is wrong with a 
system when children come from disparate conditions and are yet ex- 
pected to perform equally. When a child comes to school hungry, or 
comes after witnessing or experiencing abuse at home, can we expect 
the same performance as we do from other students in the class? When 
a nonmainstream student comes to class and hears and reads only about 
the inferiority of his or her race or ethnic group, can we expect the same 
response to, say, Jack London or Charles Dickens? When a student en- 
ters a college or university program in which nothing relates to his or 
her culture, can we expect a high degree of motivation toward the cur- 
ricular choices that we make? 

Indeed, only a fool would say that education is equal in this coun- 
try. The environments that exist in some of our schools are shocking for 
even the most seasoned teacher. My friend Claire, for instance, who 



3B 



28 



Crossing the Mainstream 



earned a doctorate in education from Stanford, once told me why she 
quit teaching English in what she described as "a pretty rough New 
York City school/' She confided: 

I could take just about anything. I'm six-feet tall, from a pretty 
bad neighborhood, and not afraid of much. One day I called the 
office to have the armed guard come to my room, unlock my door, 
and escort a student to the bathroom and then back to class. In- 
stead, he escorted her to the bathroom, raped her, and beat her so 
badly she had to go to the hospital. That day I turned in my resig- 
nation. I couldn't take it anymore. 

In her article "Ethnic Minorities and Educational Equality" (1989), 
Geneva Gay says that though there was steady progress in educational 
equality during the 1970s and early 1980s, these gains were "minimized 
by an unsympathetic national administration and a general social cli- 
mate of conservatism toward social service programs" (169). She illus- 
trates the result: 

750,000 economically deprived children cut from federal assis- 
tance programs 

relaxation of antidiscrimination requirements for schools receiv- 
ing federal funds 

new funding for rural and private schools; less for urban and 
inner-city schools 

drastic cuts in bilingual, migrant, Native American, and women's 
equity funding and programs 

steady decline in minority college enrollment and completion 

In addition, Gay notes that schools continue to be racially segregated. 
Urban schools continue to have less money, fewer resources, poorer fa- 
cilities, more inexperienced teachers, and higher staff turnover. And in 
integrated schools, students are often tracked, resulting in a dispropor- 
tionate enrollment of minority students in lower-ability classes and lower 
minority enrollment in academic courses (174). This fact tells us a lot 
about disproportionate college enrollment and attrition rates, as stu- 
dents in higher tracks are better prepared and thus more successful in 
college. 

Moving into the Twenty-First Century 

As teachers of literature, we can make several important changes that 
will end up benefiting all of our students. First, we can introduce di- 
verse literature. Bringing in the literature of an individual's group — 
whatever that group is — validates that individual. Further, it gives the 



37 



Changing Demographics in America 



29 



members of that group an advantage that many, perhaps most, other 
students have on a regular basis. Lots of literature from diverse groups 
exists. Lots more is coming. We have an explosion of pluralistic litera- 
ture to look forward to, and we will all be enriched as a result. 

Also, we shouldn't count on generalities when dealing with stu- 
dents. They don't work. Stereotypes are dangerous, difficult to break, 
and hard to make up for once they are exposed. Stereotypes are offen- 
sive, no matter what. 

A few years ago I went to a panel discussion led by ''Asian Ameri- 
can women students." I was anxious to finally get the "Asian" p. respec- 
tive on school, women's issues, cultural values, and the like. Tiie panel 
consisted of an American-born Japanese-Caucasian college student in 
her first year of studies at an exclusive private school in the Midwest, a 
recently arrived Hmong refugee attending junior college in an ESL pro- 
gram, a forty-year-old Chinese woman from Hong Kong who had lived 
in America for about ten years and was currently working on a Ph.D., a 
Vietnamese student who had come to the United States as a child with 
her parents over fifteen years ago, and an Indian student from Calcutta 
attending medical school. The "Asian" perspective? You bet! Just like 
the "American" perspective. What I learned that day was never to make 
assumptions about any group of people until listening to their stories, 
their needs, and their goals. 

Finally, Marian Wright Edelman, activist for children's rights, has 
a message for those who do not want to recognize diversity: "You don't 
have to like black and brown children. You just need to recognize that 
we need them economically" (Essence Awards, 29 May 1992). Shouldn't 
we know that? Shouldn't we be teaching that and much more? Shouldn't 
we be using literature to illustrate the value of every human being? 

I love the United Negro College Fund's slogan: "A mind is a ter- 
rible thing to waste." Somewhere out there, there may be a mind that 
will solve the mystery of cancer or of AIDS. Somewhere there's a person 
who might change the world. But are these individuals languishing in 
schools that do not provide them with the tools they need to advance? 
Are their campuses too dangerous for them to devote themselves to 
their studies? Are these students from families living below the poverty 
line, where the $5000 per year needed to attend college is beyond reach? 

Many of my students like to rebut this line of reasoning by telling 
me that there are lots of minority scholarships and that everyone has an 
equal chance to attend college. My response: Hogwash! Not everyone 
who deserves a scholarship gets one. Not everyone who gets a scholar- 
ship can free himself or herself from family obligations to get there. Not 



3S 



30 



Crossing the Mainstream 



everyone who gets there can survive in an unfriendly or expensive 
environment Not everyone who survives is admitted to or survives 
graduate school. Not everyone who survives graduate school is awarded 
the position that he or she deserves. 

Most of the students I have who plan to become teachers know 
about suffering, oppression, and injustice through books and lectures 
or perhaps from observing someone else's experience. Almost never have 
they experienced bias or malice firsthand. And I'm glad that's the case. 
But if it weren't for the attention that we try to place on these issues, 
most of our students wouldn't know about them at all. 

Our job is to provide the best possible educational experience for 
our students. But we've already heard that. We must also be sensitive to 
their needs. We must know who they are and where they come from 
and what we have to give them for them to succeed. Teachers who think 
they can effect a change in all of their students are naive. We can't. But 
we must recognize the potential that is being wasted and try to give as 
many of our students as we can the best opportunity possible. We can 
make a difference. 



39 



4 Expanding the Canon 
through Perceptions of 
Diversity and the 
American Dream: 
An Experiment 

Cross-cultural studies in teaching literature continue to be prob- 
lematic, not only because most of us lack more global exposure, 
but also because we share a common reticence to venture into 
what, for many, will be unknown territory. Thus, most of us who cut 
our teeth on Eurocentric models of literary criticism continue to teach 
our students in the same manner. Yet to me, real cultural literacy in a 
multiethnic world means that an educated person must know some- 
thing about the lives and literatures of the peoples that make up the 
macroculture. 

Few would dispute that nonmainstream students benefit in many 
ways from the infusion of multiethnic courses. But in our zeal to pro- 
vide for "minority" populations, we tend to neglect what we might fairly 
identify as the "culturally deprived" group: the racial majority students 
who are typically educated in homogeneous environments, devoid of 
knowledge of and exposure to the diversity that makes up the fabric of 
our nation's rich culture. 

Studying Diversity and the American Dream 

When teaching at a university in central Minnesota, far from the "big 
cities" of the nation, I found that my students 7 understanding of the 
immigrant experience in America was two or three generations old. For 
these students, to be "different" was to be non-Catholic, non-Protes- 
tant, non-Scandinavian, non-German, non-rural. During our discussions 
of current issues such as immigration and changing demographics, my 
students always made a distinction between "us" and "them" when 
referring to nonmainstream groups, with whom they had experienced 
little interaction and of whom they had little understanding. 



32 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Troubled by their perceptions, I designed my honors English 
course to provide a wider range of literature for these students, many of 
whom would soon fulfill their general education requirements and never 
take another literature course. Since the primary goal of the first-year 
class was to teach students to collect data and prepare a research paper, 
focusing on the history and literatures of nonmainstream groups seemed 
appropriate. Students were to select their own areas of literary analysis 
based on the notion that the literature of a pluralistic society is diverse. 
Research would include relevant historical and cultural background, 
identification of appropriate characteristics of artistic excellence, and 
evaluation of the treated literature through the application of recognized 
criteria. 

Since the course was designed to get students to examine the lit- 
erature of diversity and to explore the concept of "difference" and how 
it impacts on achieving the American dream, we looked at issues of 
equality, immigration, assimilation, and alternative lifestyles from the 
perspective of those outside the mainstream. Our text was Colombo, 
Cullen, and Lisle' s collection Rereading America (1989), a centerpiece from 
which students could branch out into their individual research areas. 
This text provided excellent insight into many nontraditional groups 
and gave rise to lively discussions, many of which were intermingled 
with various discoveries from the students' individual readings. 

Initial class discussions reminded me of Kissen's (1989) descrip- 
tion of the xenophobia from which many mainstream students suffer. 
Though my class was composed of honors students, bright and already 
successful in their academic pursuits, these individuals were also from 
very traditional rural backgrounds and were often myopic in their per- 
ception of nontraditional groups. Native Americans, for instance, were 
invisible to these students. Although one of the largest populations of 
Ojibway people in the country is located in Minnesota, and although 
the Mille Lacs Reservation was less than forty-five minutes away from 
the campus, no one mentioned this nation of people in any of our dis- 
cussions of local diverse cultures until I finally identified them myself. 

My students tended to think of themselves as "the real Ameri- 
cans." When I asked them to talk about their own family histories, many 
of them shared stories of migration and pioneering, of the discrimina- 
tion faced by their grandparents and great-grandparents because of "im- 
proper" languaging abilities, and of traditional religious and social cus- 
toms. Yet they clearly saw no relationship between their families' per- 
sonal experiences and those of more recent immigrant populations. 



41 



Expanding the Canon: An Experiment 



33 



In presenting course requirements, I told my students that I hoped 
that our text would stimulate ideas and interests that would ultimately 
help them select a nonmainstream group for study. I asked them to 
choose their areas of literary analysis based on the notion that the litera- 
ture of a pluralistic society is diverse and that nonmainstream work 
deserves a place in the macroculture's literary canon. All of the students 
were required to investigate the relevant historical and cultural back- 
ground of the group they selected and to give periodic progress reports 
on information such as the group's reasons for migration, the history of 
the people in America, and the individual characteristics of their litera- 
ture. The students 7 second task was to read and provide information on 
the literature of authors within the group they had selected. Finally, stu- 
dents would present their findings in groups based on some common 
aspect of their individual work. 

Selection of Topics 

Students selected topics based on a list of suggestions provided by me, 
the reference librarian with whom we worked, and several provocative 
essays from our reading collection. Some found specific authors; others 
picked groups. Our class list of selected topics was impressive: 

Asian American writers 
Chinese American writers 
Japanese American writers 
Soviet dissidents and immigrants 
The homeless 
Chicano literature 
Native American women 
Native American literatures 
The Ojibway 

Nineteenth-century immigrant women 
African American women 

The black experience in the changing South (1940-1969) 
Black writers of the depression 
Malcolm X and Martin Luther King, Jr. 
W. E. B. Du Bois and Richard Wright 
Women out of the mainstream 

Toward the end of the quarter, we viewed the film El Norte, the 
story of a brother and sister from Central America who struggle to come 



42 



34 



Crossing the Mainstream 



to the United States only to meet with misery and disaster. A tragic rep- 
resentation of the dreams and disillusionment that possess so many 
immigrants, this film had a profound effect on my students. The class 
also saw the movie Glory, the story of the first African American regi- 
ment to fight in the Civil War. Historically based and fascinating in its 
characterization, the film provided poignant examples of what some 
call "fulfillment 7 ' and of the perspective that many nonmainstream 
people have on the American dream. 

Final Presentations 

At the end of the quarter, students presented their research and literary 
analyses. Grouping them loosely according to their topics, I asked them 
to pull together, under some consistent theme, the experiences and the 
literatures of the groups and authors whose literature they had read. I 
also requested that each group present a question to the class, and I 
informed the students that these questions would appear on the final 
exam. 

This was the real test. Had students grown as a result of their 
experience, or had my efforts been in vain? Can we actually accomplish 
cross-cultural approaches to understanding and recognizing literature? 
Or should we be satisfied with doing the best we can with what we've 
already got? These questions and several others plagued me as we ap- 
proached our final days together. 

What students presented far surpassed my expectations. Those 
who had worked on women's literature traced oppression through the 
eyes of women using Anne Moody's Coming of Age in Mississippi, Toni 
Morrison's The Bluest Eye, Alice Walker's The Color Purple, Ignatia 
Broker's Night Flying Woman, and Sandra Cisneros's The House on Mango 
Street. Treating the nineteenth-century immigrant experience, they pre- 
sented Rose Cohen's Out of the Shadow, Gro Svendsen's Frontier Mother, 
and Marie Hall Ets's Rosa, Identifying women out of the mainstream, 
they presented Kate Chopin's The Awakening and Sylvia Plath's The Bell 
jar and other works from these two writers. We learned, through ac- 
companying historical documentation and authors' accounts, about the 
differences and similarities of nonmainstream women, about the rela- 
tive absence of sexism in the "old way of living" in the Ojibway com- 
munity, and about the prejudices that northern European women had 
before coming to America. 

The group centered around the lives and literatures of African 
Americans picked as their theme "Methods of Survival by African Ameri- 
cans." This group discussed W. E. B. Du Bois and Richard Wright and 



43 



Expanding the Canon: An Experiment 



35 



their efforts to fight discrimination through communism, the work and 
ideas of Harlem Renaissance writers Langston Hughes and Zora Neale 
Hurston, the religious teachings of Martin Luther King, Jr., and the 
struggles of Malcolm X, contrasting the beliefs, intellectual development, 
and successes of all these twentieth-century figures. 

The group loosely connected around the topic of Asian Ameri- 
cans proved to be, in many ways, the most diverse group, both chrono- 
logically and geographically. Drawing from the histories and writings 
of several Japanese, Chinese, Filipino, and Southeast Asian authors, this 
group treated the class to discussions of such books as Aiiieeeee! An An- 
thology of Asian-American Writers, Louis Chu 7 s Eat a Bowl of Tea, Maxine 
Hong Kingston's The Woman Warrior, Yoshiko Uchida's Desert Exile, Mine 
Okubo's Citizen 13660, Joy Kogawa's Obasan, Woman in the Woods, and 
A Choice of Dreams, John Okada's No-No Boy, Carlos Bulosan's America Is 
in the Heart, and Maureen Crane Wartski's A Boat to Nowhere. Rounding 
out this group was my "resistant dissident" report on Soviet writers 
using Elena Bonner's Alone Together, Andrei Sakharov's Progress, Coex- 
istence, and Intellectual Freedom, Aleksandr Solzhenitsyn's One Day in the 
Life of Ivan Denisovich, and Anatoly and Avital Shcharansk/s The Jour- 
ney Home. 

By far the toughest assignment, or so I thought, belonged to a 
group consisting of one student who chose to look at the military his- 
tory of the Lakota land his grandfather had claimed. In the course of his 
research, he read John Neihardt's Black Elk Speaks, Paul Radin's edited 
book The Autobiography of a Winnebago Indian, Dee Brown's Bury My Heart 
at Wounded Knee, N. Scott Momaday's House Made of Dawn and The Way 
to Rainy Mountain, and Nancy Wood's edited collection War Cry on a 
Prayer Feather. The student studying the Native Americans of the north- 
ern Midwest provided a three-page bibliography including all of Louise 
Erdrich's work, Ignatia Broker's Night Flying Woman, Jim Northrup's 
prose collection Walking the Rez Road, and numerous Ojibway poems, 
short stories, and historical documents. Chicano literature reviewed in- 
cluded Rudolf o Anaya's Bless Me, Ultima, the poetry of Gary Soto, and 
Sandra Cisneros's The House on Mango Street. The plight of the homeless 
was examined using Jonathan Kozol's Rachel and Her Children, a collec- 
tion of poetry written by members of a San Francisco homeless shelter 
entitled Out of the Rain, and the Steinbeck classic The Grapes of Wrath. 
After much thought, this group chose as their theme 'The suffering, 
pain, and indignation of certain groups can never be fully understood 
by people of privilege/' 



36 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Assessing Student Outcomes 

The institutional goal of this course was to expose students to research 
techniques through data collection in an effort to teach them the skills 
needed to write a term paper. In that I think the course was successful. 
My students read far more, used wider and more varied resources, and 
secured much more assistance from the library staff than I expected they 
would. In their evaluations, most of the students expressed surprise at 
the enthusiasm they felt for conducting their own research. Many said 
they felt much more comfortable with the prospect of working on their 
own in the future. 

My own goax for the course, however, was to provide an oppor- 
tunity for students to learn something about the lives and literatures of 
nonmainstream groups. How close did I come to achieving this goal? 
One student began her presentation on African American women by 
telling us: 

When I first started this project, I'm embarrassed to say . . . that I 
thought it wasn't going to be worth my time . . . that the litera- 
ture of uneducated black women would not have much to say to 
me. How wrong I was! The reading I've done has allowed me 
into their lives and Pm much the better person for it. These women 
have endured and overcome far more than any of us will ever 
experience. 

Another student said that she was glad to have chosen Native Ameri- 
can women, commenting, "They write so well. They really have a lot to 
say/ 7 (At which point another class member quickly corrected her, point- 
ing out that her surprise displayed some residual stereotyping, to which 
the first speaker uneasily agreed. We all still have much to learn.) 
In their class evaluations, students commented: 

You tried hard to make us think about things we otherwise 
wouldn't have. 

This class has opened my mind to different people's cultures. Liv- 
ing in central Minnesota makes it difficult to experience cultural 
diversity 

Very beneficial I learned much about my topic . . . and through 

others' presentations, [got] an overview of the real American so- 
ciety. . . . Everyone should be exposed to this material. 

We incorporated the research with the literature in an interesting 
and informative manner. ... I learned a lot about our society and 
reasons for discrimination and prejudice. It helped me look at 
literature I would otherwise not have known. 



45 



Expanding the Canon: An Experiment 



37 



I learned about minority groups through our readings and our 
individual research projects. I enjoyed the literature read and feel 
closer to my subject. I feel that some of my racial prejudice disap- 
peared. 

Only one student took exception to the "freedom of thought" we tried 
to practice in class: 

I did learn some new perspectives towards minority groups, but 
I didn't like the ideas that were seemingly forced on me when the 
class discussed homosexuals. This is a personal issue and views 
depend on personal background, religion, etc. I feel strongly about 
this and did not appreciate being told my views were wrong be- 
cause they are not. 

I regret that I did not detect this hostility during our discussion and 
deal with it more successfully. 

On the face of it, students accomplished much more than I had 
anticipated. Still, these classroom victories are not without problems. I 
thus conclude this narrative by providing some suggestions to those 
interested in teaching such a course. First, recognize that you do not 
have to be an expert on all the literatures of the world. I certainly was 
not, though I worried early in the quarter that I would shortchange my 
students because of this weakness. Nonetheless, the readings and re- 
search of the students, along with my efforts to fill in the gaps, proved 
more than adequate for their projects. 

Next, realize that topics will be uneven and dependent on library 
holdings, interlibrary loan conditions, local (and sometimes private) 
sources of materials, and the will of your students. Although our cam- 
pus was well equipped with information about and the works of earlier 
recognized men and women of letters, our searches for more current 
nonmainstream writers produced meager results. Students must accept 
these conditions as the nature of research and understand that perse- 
verance yields rewards. They will also discover the advantage of col- 
laboration when resources are scarce. 

Finally, my biggest fear: that venturing into new territories where 
students were, in many ways, educating themselves might reinforce 
some of the negative stereotypes and prejudices they already harbored. 
Perhaps my "hammer over the head" approach to learning about oth- 
ers would backfire and create a class full of confirmed bigots — and I 
would be responsible. Many times I held my breath and hoped that my 
efforts would bring positive results. But when I looked over their final 
papers and read their class assessments, my faith in exposing learners 
to quality literature and letting them make up their own minds was 
restored. 



46 



38 



Crossing the Mainstream 



If we give students the opportunity to see the world through the 
eyes of others, we are giving them a look at the American dream from 
everyone's point of view. In our efforts to expand the literary canon to 
provide a more realistic look at what American writers have to say, we 
discover for our students — and for ourselves — a vastly unappreciated 
yet wonderfully broad-based literature. 



47 



5 Censorship in the 
Classroom: Fighting 
Back 

Your choice of reading material for my daughter is in bad tast and I have told 
her to have nothing more to do with this dirty book. I was never Told to read 
this kind of book why should my daughter be forced to read it. You will see 
her grads do not suffer as a results of my orders. 

I received my first complaint from a parent in 1968 — the year I began 
I teaching — in response to Richard Wright's Black Boy. I was so naive in 
I those days that it never occurred to me that anyone would criticize 
this wonderful book. In retrospect, I believe that I was also very lucky, 
given the explosion of censorship that has been visited upon us in the 
last two decades. Even though I had a few unpleasant moments, had to 
humble myself for the benefit of my less-than-liberal-minded principal, 
and had a column written about me in the local newspaper entitled 
'Teacher Teaches Dirty Language," I got off pretty easy. The matter was 
resolved when my principal managed to pacify the irate parent with 
stories from "the old neighborhood" and I agreed to allow his daughter 
to read another book. What the girl's father didn't realize, though, was 
that this was the first book I had succeeded in getting Mary to read. In 
fact, she finished the book early, only then showing her father "the dirty 
part." 

When I came to this school — forty minutes away from San Fran- 
cisco, "The City That Knows How" — I was shocked by the bigotry and 
racism I heard from my students. Raised in an all-white, working-class 
community, the student body had had little contact with people of color 
and manifested the sort of ugly stereotypes that I assumed would be 
endemic only in a more isolated population, not in one just minutes 
away from a major multiethnic area. Attempting to discuss these issues 
with them was a waste of time. It became clear to me almost immedi- 
ately that I might as well drop the discussion. Since they were obvi- 
ously arguing frcr* t such an emotional position, my preaching would 
certainly backfire. 

Nevertheless, my department did agree to let me order Black Boy, 
Wrighfs autobiographical account of oppression and racism. As beauti- 



48 



40 



Crossing the Mainstream 



fully written as it is compelling, the book has become a staple in many 
high school literature classes. Since Wright's story ends when he is about 
the same age as were my ninth-grade students, I thought it would be a 
perfect novel for them. And it was. Not only did everyone keep up with 
the assignments, they also read ahead, discussed the novel enthusiasti- 
cally — even in other classes — and wrote wonderful expressions of their 
feelings. 

In the book, Richard is bitten by a dog. The wound festers, and 
nobody does anything about it. My students couldn't stand it. They car- 
ried on and complained, and when I said, ''Well, after all, why should 
his boss do anything for him? Richard's black," they had a fit. I was 
thrilled. Black Boy had transformed my students' feelings. "I never knew," 
they said. "I guess I never thought about how it would be." This experi- 
ence became the cornerstone upon which my belief in the value of lit- 
erature was built. 

And then I received the letter from Mary's father. Typical of the 
process in such complaints, Mary had showed her father a line out of 
context, one containing the words "nigger bitch." He objected to the 
word bitch! But it didn't matter. The book was already a huge success 
with the students. 

Since my early years in teaching, censorship has grown to epi- 
demic proportions all over the country. Today, the number of banned 
books and those which are being brought into question is increasing at 
a frightening pace. Indeed, according to the National Coalition Against 
Censorship (1987): 

For some people in the United States today books have become 
the enemy. In one book banning controversy in Florida, a parent 
saw her child's seventh grade classroom and lamented, "It's like 
walking into a B. Dalton bookstore with desks. There are books 
just lining the walls/' (1) 

Although rare only a couple of decades ago, censorship is now a tre- 
mendous problem. And because of recent court rulings, it threatens to 
grow stronger. 

Currently, I try very hard to arm the preservice teachers in my 
methods courses with as much ammunition as I can without frighten- 
ing them. I try equally hard to dissuade them from avoiding anything 
controversial, another result of the current reign of terror. In fact, as edu- 
cators, we must constantly ask ourselves, to what degree does the threat 
of censorship affect our teaching of literature? 

Unfortunately, the impact of censorship is enormous. When 
Chaucer's 'The Miller's Tale" is targeted because of its "crass humor" 



49 



Censorship in the Classroom 



41 



(NCAC 1987, 8), when works by Shakespeare, Sophocles, Dante, 
Hemingway, Dickens, Orwell, and other authors are pulled from shelves 
because of their "vulgarity" (NCAC 1987, 9), when Ms., Lysistrata, much 
of the work of Judy Blume and Robert Cormier, "The Lottery," The Learn- 
ing Tree, and Black Boy "go on trial," every one of us engaged in the 
teaching of literature needs to stand at attention. The stories of Edgar 
Allen Poe and Herman Melville have been attacked for being "depress- 
ing," "not morally uplifting," and "not Bible-based." Steinbeck has been 
condemned in toto because of his commitment to "extreme liberal 
causes" (Simmons 1991, 7-8). And since young adult literature looks at 
"the difficult issues, the tough words, the ambiguous endings . . . cen- 
sorship seems to go hand in glove" with this new genre (Christenbury 
and Small 1991,1). 

It is often difficult to be objective when we are faced with such 
repressive attitudes. An emotional topic, the question of who has the 
right to tell us what we should teach evokes strong reactions from En- 
glish educators. When I discuss censorship issues with preservice teach- 
ers, they often ask me about the responsibilities involved in selecting 
texts and about getting approval from parents. I always ask them about 
their last trip to the dentist: "Did you tell your dentist how to pull your 
teeth or what kind of anesthetic to administer to you?" "No," they say 
"Then why," I ask them, "would we as teachers — if we know what we're 
doing — ask parents which books we should teach their children? We're 
the experts. Not them. Though they are entitled to have a voice in what 
we propose for their children, it is not their job to plan curriculum or 
choose materials. It's ours." 

To be fair, though, we owe it to our accusers to try to see this issue 
from their perspective. We need to recognize our censors and under- 
stand who they are. Recently, I looked at Mayher 's review (1 990) of Storm 
in the Mountains, Moffett's account of the controversy over his Interac- 
tion series and several other texts that many of the citizens in Kanawha 
County, West Virginia, opposed. Using the voices of the protesters, 
Moffett presents the controversy from the perspective of "mountaineer 
fundamentalists" who do not want their children exposed to other points 
of view (Mayher 1990, 83). 

Censorship comes from all over, from the left as well as the right, 
from people in favor of human rights as well as from what we might 
ungenerously call the "lunatic fringe." The unfortunate reality is that 
those who oppose our ability and freedom to choose for our students 
those books we think best are people who believe that they are justified 
in their pursuit. Indeed, in "A Profile in Censorship," Raines (1986) 



50 



42 



Crossing the Mainstream 



describes the censors of school material as "perfectly ordinary men and 
women who view themselves as exemplary parents and citizens or, at 
the very least, as patriotic, responsible, and caring people whose only 
motive is to protect their children and defend the Republic" (37). 

Still, the extremes to which parents will go in their efforts to "pro- 
tect" their children are hard to fathom. The much-maligned Impressions 
series was attacked by some Yucaipa, California, parents who saw "the 
hand of Satan himself" in stories like "Beauty and the Beast" (Meade 
1990, 38). Such parents appear to be searching for books to complain 
about. Take another case. At the end of a Frank Modell story called "One 
Zillion Valentines," 

one little boy gives another little boy a valentine card. Then, on 
the next page, there is an old traditional rhyme, called "Lavender's 
Blue." One of the lines reads: "And we shall be gay, dilly diliy, 

and we shall both dance" Some of the parents . . . put the two 

together and came up with [a perception that the book] amounts 
to a classroom endorsement of male homosexuality. They say the 
juxtaposition has to be more than circumstantial. (Meade 1990, 
40) 

There have been some gains made in this battle between educa- 
tors and censors. But even those get lost when we examine the large 
number of complaints coming from every direction. Although the 1982 
Supreme Court decision Board of Education, Island Trees v. Pico held that 
it is unconstitutional for school boards to ban books "simply because 
they dislike the ideas contained in these books" (NCAC 1987, 1), cen- 
sorship continues. In fact, in the 1988-89 school year, censorship issues 
surfaced in forty-two states (Marilyn Elias, cited in Bjorklun 1990). 
Marilyn Elias cites the Hazelwood School District v. Kuhlmeier 1988 Su- 
preme Court decision as the impetus for the increased number of inci- 
dents. At issue in the Hazelwood case were the contents of two articles 
in the school newspaper that the principal thought inappropriate. The 
court's decision gave school officials "considerable control" over such 
school materials (Bjorklun 1990, 38). 

Citing as examples Mel and Norma Gabler, founders of Educa- 
tional Research Analysts of Longview, Texas, and Parents of New York 
United, the organization responsible for the Island Trees battle, 
McDonald (1991) warns educators against the organized efforts of na- 
tional, state, and local groups, groups that have already had significant 
effects on the selection of books in our schools (552). And if we drop 
multicultural literature into this mire, we are really in a fix. As Buchanan 
(1988) notes, "opponents of pluralism and tolerance in public educa- 
tion" have already proved ready to level accusations of "secular 



51 



Censorship in the Classroom 



43 



humanism/ 7 "globalism," and "situational ethics" against educators who 
introduce multicultural literature into the classroom. Further, I have seen 
many a multicultural title passed over because of "language unbefitting 
to our students." It's more likely, though, that curriculum coordinators 
and teachers use "objectionable language" as an excuse not to have to 
deal with some other uncomfortable issues. 

The roots of such avoidance are well documented in the history 
of teaching English in this country. Prominent English educators in the 
early sixties believed that high school literature anthologies should re- 
flect "the very best ever thought and written in the spirit of the human- 
istic tradition and the Anglo-American heritage" (Applebee 1974, 172). 
At this same time, however, scholars like James B. Conant were expos- 
ing, through books such as The American High School Today (1959) and 
Slums and Suburbs (1961), "the astonishing inequities in the quality of 
education for urban and suburban youth" (Applebee 1974, 226). Others 
concerned with the nonmainstream subculture of poverty, like Kohl, 
Kozol, Herndon, and Hentoff, wrote shocking accounts of the condi- 
tions in many of our nation's schools. And the Task Force on Teaching 
English to the Disadvantaged called for more relevant language experi- 
ences and "appropriate imaginative literature" (Applebee 1974, 226- 
27). Yet multicultural perspectives and nonmainstream works, by their 
very definition, come into conflict with those that are valued in the main- 
stream as "the very best of our Anglo-American heritage/ 7 

Censors often make several assumptions about the meaning of 
texts that dictate their responses. According to McDonald (1991), cen- 
sors often take fictional texts literally and believe that books should be 
used as moral models. They believe that "objectionable behavior" ob- 
served in the actions of characters will have an adverse effect on teen- 
age readers, who cannot make up their own minds and must thus be 
protected. Censors also often believe that education should be "value- 
free/ 7 and they therefore disapprove of any exposure to human values 
in texts. Unfortunately, this proscription targets many contemporary, 
especially young adult and multiethnic, novels, which often raise ques- 
tions about values that have traditionally gone unquestioned (550-52). 
Major objections also occur with books containing "bad language." Yet 
here McDonald writes: 

Buness suggests that "bad language" hides the real motives of 
many critics and cites as evidence the fact that one third of the 
objections were to books by ethnic writers, suggesting that censorship 
derives from racist motives. (551; my emphasis). 



52 



44 



Crossing the Mainstream 



The Big Three Plus One 

Aside from racist attitudes, what drives the engine of censorship? Basi- 
cally, as Julian Thompson (1991) suggests, it's the "Big Three Plus One": 
censors object to (1) vulgar language, (2) sexual activity, and (3) anti- 
establishment attitudes; plus, we censor ourselves through our own 
avoidance. Applebee (1974) seems to validate much of this theory in his 
discussion of censorship in the late forties, when objections to literature 
"focused on one of two issues: political ideology or sex" and the threat 
of communism "became the excuse for a widespread wave of restric- 
tion of instructional materials" (204). 

1. Vulgar Language 

Parents who fear that their children will suffer adverse effects from vul- 
gar language have not set foot on a junior or senior high school campus 
in the last twenty-five years. As one who has frequented hallways, gyms, 
parking lots, and cafeterias in schools all over this country, I can attest 
to the fact that my vocabulary of "blue" words has grown extraordinar- 
ily from the experience. If parent-protesters stood outside classrooms 
during passing period or— dare I suggest it? — went into a bathroom 
during school hours, they would never complain again about vulgarity 
in literature. In fact, I would bet money that many of the children whose 
parents are complaining the loudest use the most offensive language of 
all. And those who don't have heard it all anyway. From what, exactly, 
do parents think they are protecting their children? 

2. Sexual Activity 

Are they kidding? In this country? Where teenage pregnancy is so promi- 
nent — among all socioeconomic groups? Where teenage suicide has 
reached epidemic proportions? Where the majority of children come 
from "broken" homes and child abuse is rampant? Where a shockingly 
large percentage of adolescents have been sexually active since their 
early teens? Are we really worried about sexual activity in novels? Do 
we really think that kids get these ideas from books? We ought to be 
grateful to authors like Judy Blume, Robert Cormier, Maya Angelou, 
and J. D. Salinger for providing students with some useful information 
and the knowledge that they are not alone. 

3. Anti-establishment Attitudes 

I think Thompson (1991) says it all here: 



53 



Censorship in the Classroom 



45 



Even though numbers 1 and 2 are often cited as the response for 
the banning (or avoiding) of a young adult book, I suspect ifs 
number 3 that activates the censors fastest and most furiously 
Holden Caulfield's sense that adults have sold out, become a 
bunch of phonies — well, that idea's completely unacceptable to 
members of the grown-ups' union. (2) 

Plus Avoidance 

In discussing "levels" of censorship, Thompson (1991) calls attention to 
what is probably the most serious issue regarding the exclusion of liter- 
ary pieces in our schools. The most newsworthy cases, he says, are the 
Salman Rushdies, which occur only sporadically. The next level of cases 
are the ones we've been talking about: the banning of titles as a result of 
parental or group complaint. This kind of censorship occurred 172 times 
in 42 states during the 1988-89 school year (Marilyn Elias, cited in 
Bjorklun 1990). But the most troublesome level is the one Thompson 
calls "censorship by avoidance." According to Thompson, 'This kind 
of censorship takes place whenever teachers decide they won't require 
(or suggest) a book, because they fear the consequences" (2). 

Using the charge of "secular humanism" as a threat (Davis 1986, 
67), censors cause teachers to censor themselves. Ifs called "the chill 
factor." No complaints have to be made; teachers, fearing their commu- 
nities, the ideologies of parents, or the conservatism of the school sys- 
tem, simply choose not to use certain materials. Said one teacher, "There 
are many books that I would buy unhesitatingly for an urban area that 
I do not consider for purchase here." Sometimes the self-censorship is 
more subtle. Some school districts use materials that have been altered, 
with the "objectionable" pages or words left out. Others occasionally 
withdraw funds so that "questionable" materials cannot be purchased 
(NCTE 1978, 5). Yet the result of such reluctance to offend is always the 
same: the spectrum of texts that we are willing to present to our stu- 
dents continues to narrow. 

I believe that this "censorship of avoidance" occurs all the time, 
either consciously or unconsciously. Many teachers would rather choose 
an acceptable book than face what may become a very unpleasant expe- 
rience. I've seen this with colleagues in department meetings called to 
order texts, when preservice teachers ask their cooperating teachers what 
materials they can teach, and in the early days, even in my own behav- 
ior. After a few incidents such as the one over Black Boy, I asked myself 
whether or not it would be worth teaching or recommending a particu- 
lar book or series, wondering from whom or where the next complaint 
would come. There is no telling how many times teachers pass over 



54 



46 



Crossing the Mainstream 



books that they think would be of value to their students in order to 
avoid a controversy. 

Yet as Davis (1986) points out, this "self-censorship means read- 
ing and selecting literature through someone else's eyes and with some- 
one else's values" (66). McDonald (1991) similarly points out that teach- 
ers who censor themselves begin to doubt their ability to make deci- 
sions and begin to form attitudes about literature based on outside pres- 
sure (554-55). Teachers aren't the only ones affected, though. We have 
to remember that our avoidance limits students 7 access to a wide range 
of ideas and experiences, which, in turn, infringes upon their right to 
read. 

Indeed, what of our responsibilities to our students? Isn't it our 
obligation to provide them with the tools for learning? Doesn't this mean 
we should provide them with a wide range of materials and informa- 
tion? Shouldn't we encourage them to think critically about what they 
learn and to develop their own ideas based on the information they 
have? But how can they do this if we limit their access? We may find 
that what we teach is unpopular or doesn't even agree with our per- 
sonal precepts, but students should be exposed to all the information. 
As Christenbury and Small (1991) point out, "In the best of young adult 
literature, which addresses the difficult issues, the tough words, the am- 
biguous endings, we and our students have a chance to confront re- 
ality and to consider ethical choices" (1). 

Selection or Censorship? 

The issue here should not be to eliminate "bad" literature, but to select 
the best materials available based on responsible guidelines. Take the 
film industry as an example. In my opinion, many, many movies are not 
worth the two hours they take to see. Still, I neither can nor want to 
eliminate these movies by fiat; that would be censorship. But wouldn't 
it be wonderful if our students could develop a more critical ability to 
decide what is worth their time and what is not? That is, if we can teach 
students to evaluate what they see, then perhaps we wouldn't have such 
a glut of substandard movies on the market. The same goes for litera- 
ture. There's a lot of "good stuff" out there and a lot of bad. Wouldn't it 
be great if we could help students make the distinctions for themselves? 

In dealing with the question of "selection," NCTE's 1982 "State- 
ment on Censorship and Professional Guidelines" makes some impor- 
tant distinctions: 



55 



Censorship in the Classroom 



47 



Censorship Professional Guidelines 

Eliminate books with unhappy Include some books with 
endings. unhappy endings to give a 

varied view of ufe. 

Review your classroom Review your library. Add 

library and eliminate books books that portray groups in 
that include stereotypes. nonstereotypical ways. 

Do not accept "policeman." Encourage such nonlirrdting 
Insist that students write alternatives as "police officer/' 

"police officer." "officer of the law/' and "law 

enforcer." 

Drug abuse is a menace to Include at appropriate grade 

students. Eliminate all books levels books to help students 
that portray drug abuse. understand the personal and 

social consequences of drug 

abuse. 

Remove this book. The Determine whether the 

language includes profanity is integral to 

profanity. portrayal of character and 

development of theme in the 

book. 

Selection becomes crucial when using books with stereotypical 
characters. According to Kiah (1985), many young adult novels about 
African American teenagers introduce but do not resolve existing social 
problems. She cites, as an example, A Hero Ain't Nothin' But a Sandwich 
by Alice Childress, saying that Childress "is no doubt exercising an icono- 
clastic approach to the writing of fiction for teenage readers by present- 
ing this open-ended story and thereby forcing the readers to come to 
grips with their own set of values' 7 (294). Ki?h also cites Frank Bonham's 
books, which "abound with stories on organized gang behavior and 
fighting gangs, phenomena that are not representative of the total black 
community 7 ' (294). To balance the presentation of the African American 
experience when using books like these, Kiah suggests that teachers high- 
light positive aspects of the black community, such as characteristics of 
the extended family and its shared responsibility for children and fi- 
nancial support (295). 

I agree with Kiah regarding the need for a wide range of experi- 
ences for readers. Both Childress's and Bonham's books were always 
very popular among my high school students. When properly taught, 
books such as these allow students of all groups to "walk in the shoes" 
of characters under severely stressful conditions. They give readers the 
opportunity not only to identify with others, but also to gain some 



48 



Crossing tte Mainstream 



understanding of other worlds through vicarious experience. Should 
we really limit materials that have such potential? We simply need to be 
careful in how we present them. 

In "Stereotypes of American Indians in Adolescent Literature/' 
Carver (1988) presents a number of interesting titles for classroom use. 
She also points out instances where stereotyping exists, inadvertently 
or otherwise. She points to the "Tonto English" and inappropriate use 
of the word squaw in Elizabeth George Speare's The Sign of the Beaver 
(27), the lack of positive role models among full-blood characters in Jon 
Hassler's Jemmy (29), and the incorrect use of the term Eskimo in Jean 
Craighead George's Julie of the Wolves (30). Does she mean that we should 
eliminate these otherwise popular and well-written novels? I doubt it. 
If so, then I suppose we should eliminate The Merchant of Venice for its 
anti-Semitism and Huckleberry Finn for its racism. Instead, we can use 
these books to point out to students th^t sometimes improprieties and 
biases exist even in the most highly regarded literature. 

Since one of the goals of the English class is almost always "to 
develop critical thinking skills/' why not make censorship and selec- 
tion issues a learning tool? Many tear Hers are already confronting cen- 
sorship issues in the classroom. For instance, Carole Williams (1988) 
designed a unit examining censorship in which she had high school 
seniors respond to a Phyllis Schlaffly article attacking journal writing. 
In their responses, students moved away from their original emotional 
reactions toward rational, clear, well-organized responses. And in look- 
ing at their district's censorship policies, the students discovered their 
own biases and the "need to examine, contemplate, challenge, assimi- 
late, and participate in the experience that literature affords" (68). 

Elsewhere, Reimer and Brock (1988), using several novels that are 
often censored, planned a unit that began with a staged incident in which 
the principal burst into the room and demanded the return of the unac- 
ceptable books. This dramatic "prelesson" was followed by student re- 
search into censorship, writing, and verbal sharing of ideas. The stu- 
dents were greatly involved in all of these activities and no doubt wound 
up with a heightened awareness of themselves and their positions. 

Finally, Frangedis (1988) uses "close textual analysis and candid 
discussion" to deal with the controversial aspects of Catcher in the Rye. 
Her approach is to portray Holden Caulfield as a troubled, sympathetic 
character who has fine human qualities. She doesn't avoid the novel's 
controversial points; she and her students discuss the profanity, athe- 
ism, and sexual promiscuity included in the novel. In doing so, Frangedis 
demonstrates that "a tactful, sensitive approach . . . will enable stu- 



57 



Censorship in the Classroom 



49 



dents ... to understand . . . our troubled hero . . . [and] the issue of cen- 
sorship in general, which actually affects them more than it affects teach- 
ers" (75). 

Proactive Measures to Confront Censorship 

But what can we say to teachers who are consciously or unconsciously 
eliminating books because they fear reprisals? How can we arm them 
so that they can teach what they think is worthwhile and not what their 
communities dictate? Although there may not be a definitive answer to 
this question, there are steps that we can take that will facilitate our 
efforts to secure the freedom to make our own decisions about what we 
will teach. As Christenbury and Small (1991) write: 

Armed with book rationales, a materials selection policy and a 
procedure for dealing with challenged books, we can battle the 
censors. We will not, it is sure, always win, but we can raise the 
flag and, perhaps, end the days of lonely fighters. (1) 

First, however, a few principles: 

We and our students have rights. The Minnesota Department of 
Education (1985) writes: 

The freedoms to teach, to learn, and to express ideas without fear 
of censorship are fundamental rights held by public school teach- 
ers and students as well as by all other citizens. These freedoms, 
expressed and guaranteed in the First Amendment to the U.S. 
Constitution, must be preserved in the teaching/learning pro- 
cess in a society of diverse beliefs and viewpoints and shared 
freedoms. Public schools must promote an atmosphere of //ee 
inquiry and a view of subject matter reflecting a broad range of 
ideas so that students are prepared for responsible citizenship. 

Note, however, that the Minnesota Department of Education goes on to 
say that ''criticism of educational resources and teaching methods and 
the advocacy of additional educational resources are also essential First 
Amendment rights of students, faculty, parents, and other members of 
the community/ 7 Free debate, yes. Censorship, no. 

Teachers should be empowered to teach as they see fit We should 
not have to look over our shoulders. Many organizations exist to support 
the freedom to teach and the freedom to learn. The ALAN Intellectual 
Freedom Committee, for example, exists to defend the First Amendment, 
provide assistance for teachers, promote free access to information, and 
work with other anti-censorship organizations (Sacco 1991, 6-7). And 
many committees and organizations have prepared statements — such 
as NCTE's statement on students 7 right to read — to assist teachers. 



58 



50 



Crossing tlie Mainstream 



We need to stick to the principles that we as educators stand for. 
But to do that successfully, we have to develop strategies to deal with 
censorship and to be prepared for it when it comes. NCTE (1978) de- 
scribes a number of steps teachers can take before they are confronted 
with censorship: 

Keep abreast of recent issues and court decisions regarding cen- 
sorship. If we do our homework, we won't be caught unprepared. Small 
and Weiss (1991) describe a number of committees and organizations 
designed specifically to deal with censorship. NCTE's Standing Com- 
mittee Against Censorship, for instance, coordinates "requests for in- 
formation and for assistance from affiliates and individual members'' 
through NCTE's director of affiliate and membership services. Several 
publications also assist teachers with regular updates on censorship, 
including School Library Journal, English Journal, the Newsletter on Intel- 
lectual Freedom, and Censorship News, the newsletter of the National 
Coalition Against Censorship. 

Before beginning a unit or book, develop a rationale for teach- 
ing materials. We should always know why we are teaching a particu- 
lar lesson, unit, or literary piece. If material is worth teaching, there's a 
reason for it. We should be able to justify the importance of the work to 
anyone. 

Check into or develop department school, or district procedures 
for handling censorship. Today most districts are prepared to handle 
censorship cases. Teachers should become familiar with — or, if they do 
not exist, create — local preview forms for the acquisition and reconsid- 
eration of materials, local policy on district review, the local library's 
bill of rights, local policy on the freedom to view films, procedures for 
submitting a rationale for use to the department or district, complaint 
procedures, and other district policies. 

Enlist department support Too many times teachers are "out there 
by themselves" when their departments should be supporting them. 
Indeed, although this should never happen, some of our worst censors 
might turn out to be our colleagues. But even if getting full consensus 
among our peers is impossible, I'd muster as much support as I could if 
I were about to begin a controversial piece, especially if I were in a com- 
munity where censorship was prevalent. Besides, we never know what's 
possible until we try. 

Keep administrators informed and get their support. Though 
Simmons (1991) writes that administrators' "track record in supporting 
their teachers in time of parental challenge is spotty indeed" (7), the 
more we can share curricular theory and research and other information 



59 



Censorship in the Classroom 



51 



with administrators, the less threatened and more supportive they will 
be when censorship issues arise. After my few early "scrapes," I learned 
to go first to my department chair and then to the principal with a ratio- 
nale and all other information that I felt would facilitate my case before 
beginning a controversial piece. Not only was my principal much more 
willing to assist, but I also think he was flattered that I would spend 
time informing him of my plans. Another advantage is that I was able 
to keep him abreast of any exciting activities that took place in my class. 

Get community support. NCTE (1978) suggests that one way to 
develop community support for materials is to have a professional get- 
together twice a year, during which school personnel meet to talk about 
new materials. Another suggestion is to plan activities for special events 
like National Hispanic Heritage Week (September), Trick or Treat for 
UNICEF (October), and Black History Month (February). NCTE also 
suggests having a media week during which local newspapers and ra- 
dio and television stations are contacted in order to acquaint people 
with the resources in the district. The Council writes: 

Remember, the press, more than any other single element in your 
community, is concerned with the preservation of First Amend- 
ment rights. In time of trouble, the press can be your strongest 
ally. (13) 

Notify parents* After being "stung," I took some precautions that 
eliminated the attacks I encountered in my first year. I began each se- 
mester with a letter to parents, welcoming them, telling them that I 
looked forward to a wonderful semester with their children, and men- 
tioning several of the activities that I had planned for the term. I also 
wrote that I had made plans for the students to read "a number of excit- 
ing books and other materials." I cautioned parents, however, that "if at 
any time you would prefer that your child not read one of our selec- 
tions, just let me know and I will be glad to offer an alternative assign- 
ment which you would find more suitable." Parents were asked to sign 
this letter, and students were required to return it. I kept these "permis- 
sion slips" in my top drawer. I do not know whether students ceased to 
show their parents what they were reading for fear they would com- 
plain or whether parents felt less empowered to attack, but I never re- 
ceived any more complaints about materials in the eight years that I 
taught at that school. 

Be confident Teachers make the best decisions for their students. 
Although parents have the right to declare a particular literary work 
"unsuitable" for their child, the judgment regarding materials rests with 



60 



52 



Crossing the Mainstream 



the teacher. The teacher, not the parent, is in the best position to provide 
broad-based reading experiences. 

Censorship has grown at a frightening pace. I wish I could say 
that if we all followed the steps articulated above, we could eliminate 
all of our problems. Yet that simply isn't being realistic. The increase in 
censorship cases does not bode well for English educators, and we must 
prepare for what I fear will be an increasing burden on us all. 

As I describe the various precautions that we can take to prevent 
the unfortunate results reported in the journals, I am reminded that de- 
spite all of these efforts, the battle, in those cases in which it cannot be 
avoided, will still be an arduous one. After their long, hard straggle to 
keep the Responding series intact in Washington County, Virginia, Raines 
(1986) reports that the English teachers began to wonder whether the 
fight was worth it. "We were being worn down/' he notes. Community 
support was waning, the materials were being compromised, and, in 
fact, over the next few years the series disappeared altogether. The ef- 
fects of the controversy, Raines wrote, "will be crippling to this school 
system for many years to come" (43). His conclusion: 

Even when school officials have done everything that NCTE and 
other professional organizations recommend, even when school 
leaders are logical and fair and consistent, even when teachers 
have goodness and truth on their side, the censors frequently 
prevail. (44) 

Perhaps what makes this issue even more pernicious is the fact 
that the censors will not only frequently prevail, but sometimes they'll 
even divide us in the process. A particularly discouraging example of 
this effect involved teacher Claudia Johnson, who fought to restore a 
text called The Humanities: Cultural Roots and Continuities in Lake City, 
Florida. She lost support, was ostracized by colleagues, friends, and 
neighbors, and was secretly told by some that they feared they would 
be verbally or physically abused if they supported her. 

If we are to maintain some standards of freedom in our curricu- 
lum, we must fight against this kind of abuse and intimidation. We must 
work together, or we will fight alone — and lose. Simmons (1991) writes, 
"Maybe that's the grimmest lesson to be learned from recent censorship 
events. They've divided us and damn well may conquer" (8). 



61 



6 Multiethnic Literature for 
Mainstream Teachers: 
Another Experiment 

When I signed up for this class, I had little idea of what even to expect. All I 
knew was that I did need some English credits. You liave turned me on to the 
importance of and desire to teach ethnic literature. Since our district has done 
very little in this area, I anticipate that I will be the main person responsible 
for encouraging and helping others in this endeavor. 

Some of the strategies that we use on our younger students don't 
work with adults. That's why I decided to try a "topics" course 
on multiethnic literature with some teachers a few years ago. Since 
this area has not been fully accepted into the mainstream of the typical 
English education curriculum, I thought that such an approach would 
give teachers working on masters' degrees an opportunity to explore 
areas that have received little attention. 

A big obstacle for English instructors, even those of us who want 
to "multiculturalize" our curriculum, is that we have so little time. All 
those papers to grade! The lessons to prepare! The meetings to attend! 
All those demands made upon us by our administrators and our stu- 
dents! Who has time for new literary pursuits? So, we often stick with 
the "tried and true/' Even with the not-so-true. 

My colleagues and I often commiserate about the irony of our 
profession. We chose this field because of our love of language and lit- 
erature, but, as a result of our choice, we have no time to read. I saw my 
"topics" class as an opportunity for teachers to spend some "captured" 
time reading literature they probably hadn't read before. What English 
teacher could resist? The description of the course follows: 

Seminar in Teaching Multiethnic Literature 

For junior and senior high school teachers, this course will allow 
participants to increase their awareness of cultural pluralism 
within the context of teaching literature. Readings and research 
will examine ways to incorporate nonmainstreain authors, poets, 
and playwrights into the curriculum. Students will read several 
multiethnic selections, pursue a specific area of literary analysis, 
and explore the notion that the literature of a pluralistic society 



62 



54 



Crossing the Mainstream 



should be reflected in what we teach. Materials and instructional 
strategies will be developed, compiled, and shared. Censorship 
will be discussed. 

When I introduced my objectives for the course, I explained that 
my goal was for students to take advantage of the opportunity to read 
various literary works and to analyze ways in which they could use 
such pieces to expand the canon they were already using. Thus, stu- 
dents of the course were expected to: 

identify the concepts of cultural pluralism and ethnoviolence as 
they relate to students 

evaluate the usefulness of multicultural literature in the English 
class 

analyze several works from nonmainstream writers 

develop strategies for expanding the generally accepted canon to 
include multiethnic literature 

create and present units of literary study based on the concept of 
diversity 

Yet as our first discussion of "cultural pluralism" revealed, most 
students were unclear as to what exactly the expression even meant. 
Students had enrolled for the most part because mine was one of the 
few courses in English available that would count toward either their 
master's degree or an incremental step up their district's pay scale. At 
least half of the students commuted long distances after having taught 
all day and found the Monday night slot to be the most workable for 
their already busy schedules. What students lacked in knowledge, how- 
ever, they made up for in their willingness to give this multicultural 
thing a shot. No one resisted, and no one asked if the topic was worth 
studying for an entire quarter. Thus, we began the course together with 
no negative baggage to drag along with us. 

Our discussions began with some very general observations, ones 
which, quite frankly, surprised me. Although several of the class mem- 
bers had been teaching for many years, few had heard of any of the 
authors we were going to read. Even fewer had used any of the books in 
their classes. A few were familiar with Wright or Angelou or maybe 
even Anaya. But none of them had thought extensively about the 
importance of using multiethnic literature in the classroom for both 
mainstream and nonmainstream students. And when I took a verbal 
inventory of how much or how little students knew about and made 
use of issues of cultural pluralism, several commented that they hadn /f 
really done much in this area, nor had they thought much about its 



63 



Multiethnic Literature for Mainstream Teachers 



55 



importance. Many said that since they were involved mostly with racial 
majority students, these hadn't been major concerns for them. 

One teacher shared that although she had used works like To Kill 
a Mockingbird (sometimes criticized because of the helpless victimiza- 
tion of Tom Robinson and the romanticized heroism of Atticus Finch) 
when she had one or two African American students in her class, her 
tendency was to avoid using this book because of some "delicate is- 
sues/' Another said that he had always felt unprepared to teach African 
American literature because he was hot black. Someone else, however, 
responded to this admission by poinrtng out that if we followed that 
logic, only those who belonged to a particular group would be allowed 
to teach the literature of that group. 'That pretty much wipes out most 
of the great works/' he decided. Another student said that she would be 
glad to teach Native American literature, but that there wasn't enough 
available. Yet someone else responded that she had just taken a course 
in Native American literature and that "there was a ton. We just don't 
have access to publishers/ 7 

Little by little our discussion yielded an author here and a poet 
there, until it was agreed that perhaps there were a number of writers 
that we needed to learn about. At this point, one young man admitted 
that he felt intimidated by our discussion because he recognized very 
few of the names that had been mentioned. Yet that was our beginning: 
an admission that we didn't know all there was to know. From there, 
we just needed to be willing to learn. 

Although our course would focus on multiethnic literature, we 
started by defining the notion of cultural diversity. Our concept of this 
country's diversity should include all groups, and teachers should al- 
ways be cognizant that the makeup of such groups changes drastically 
and unpredictably. Our country is shifting demographically all the time; 
in a few decades, our definition of what constitutes a "minority 7 ' will be 
significantly different. Further, lifestyle characteristics should also fig- 
ure importantly into any concept of our cultural diversity. 

In focusing on multiethnic literature for my class, I underscored 
the fact that reading six books written by authors representing four 
groups — African American, Native American, Mexican American, and 
Japanese Canadian — was a far cry from being multiethnic. This was just 
a first step, nothing more. These readings would merely be a starting 
point from which students could pursue their own fields of interest. 

Each week, students read a novel and wrote a short piece based 
on their impressions of the work and their ideas for incorporating it 
into the existing canon. Each person brought copies of their work for 



64 



56 



Crossing the Mainstream 



everyone else in the class. We began with Richard Wrighf s Black Boy, a 
favorite of mine. Because I love this book and have had such great suc- 
cess with it, I was both interested in and surprised by students' responses, 
some of which were tentative. Although everyone seemed to be very 
positive about their own experience reading Black Boy, some were wor- 
ried about the "appropriateness 77 of the book. Pointing out the few sec- 
tions where language and sex rear their ugly heads, several teachers felt 
that the book "would be appropriate for a mature, moderate-to-high 
ability eleventh-grade English class. 77 1 took exception, explaining that I 
had used it with a "lower-level/ 7 ninth-grade group over twenty years 
ago. Though I did have trouble with one parent, my teaching of the 
book was still a great success. 

Despite their concern, students were quick to praise the book for 
its compelling description and beautiful language, agreeing that Wright 
was, indeed, a great artist. One student enthusiastically wrote: 

This novel left me at a loss for words. It is a well-written, true 
story of a boy who, though unjustly inflicted with terror and pain, 
survives. It is a story that students would never forget. 

I was also impressed with the collection of stylistic, symbolic, and the- 
matic notes that class members made in their responses. 

During these first few weeks, I spent some time talking about 
ethnoviolence, a disease that has been alive and well in this country for 
a long time. Despite these discussions, students found Black Boy op- 
pressive. And, in spite of Maya Angelou 7 s great joy and inspiration, they 
found much of our next book, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, oppres- 
sive as well. Fancy that! People who have been oppressed writing about 
oppression! I hadn't realized that students would find these themes so 
surprising. It reminded me of how far away many of us are from under- 
standing others. 

Many teachers are afraid to teach controversial texts, and mem- 
bers of this class were no exception. One student wrote: 

1 would not use Caged Bird as a whole-class novel. There is too 
strong a potential for controversy. As I began the novel, I thought 
I had a strong possibility for our eighth-grade buying list; but the 
molestation scene brought a sinking feeling. I knew what was 
going to unfold between Maya and Mr. Freeman and I knew that 
it meant that the book was out. 1 didn't want to read on Per- 
haps this is a cowardly attitude. After all, if things like this hap- 
pen, ought not they be discussed? I agree that thaf s only right, 
but my opinion is almost irrelevant. Even if students could handle 
% I'm not certain my fellow teachers or the administration would. 



65 



Multiethnic Literature for Mainstream Teachers 



57 



Also, I'm sure some parents would object Since there are other 
good African- American novels appropriate for this grade level, I 
would choose one less controversial. 

Well, maybe she's right. But I explained to the class that I had also used 
this book years ago and that I had not had any problem with it. In fact, 
I pointed out that since we are now uncovering so many cases of child 
abuse — physical and emotional — perhaps this book would provide com- 
fort and awareness to some of our young readers. 

One class member, Terrace Evans, wasn't shrinking from contro- 
versy. She saw in Angelou's book an opportunity for her students, all of 
whom were from "mainstream, middle America": 

Marguerite Johnson's experiences are similar to those experiences 
most readers lived and felt in their own growing up years. 
Angelou is able to see the laughter, the struggle, and the learning 
that are all a part of the "becoming" process. From her struggles 
with religion, family, and transience, and her disciplined outlook 
on physical beauty, sex, death, and education, we can hear the 
strains of the music this "bird" sings as we "listen" to our own 
pasts. 

Angelou's work made such an impact on Terrace that she decided to 
teach it along with her staple, To Kill a Mockingbird. Coming from a school 
district with strong restrictions on what materials teachers could use, 
she secured permission from her department chair and her principal 
prior to teaching Caged Bird. I heard from Terrace about six months ago. 
Her unit had been a great success. In fact, she was honored with a state 
teaching award for excellence because of her efforts with this project. 
Terrace's experience proves that we will never know what successes we 
might have until we try. 

Some teachers in the class were concerned that mainstream read- 
ers might get the impression that all African Americans suffer from the 
kind of oppression that Wright and Angelou describe. That's a good 
point, one that has been raised before. My response is that there are 
numerous other selections from which to choose. For my money, how- 
ever, I'd rather err on the serious side than on the side that allows us to 
believe that most people of color today have no problem attaining equal 
rights. In my opinion, too many students think that way already. 

We ended this section of the course with a discussion of Molefi 
Asante's (1987) theory of Afrocentricity, which gives the mainstream, 
Eurocentric modus operandi a run for its money. Although Asante has 
been attacked recently for his model, I believe that his "read" of history 
and the development of the African continent makes as much sense as 



66 



Crossing the Mainstream 



the Eurocentric traditions that we have always been taught in our 
histories of Western civilization. 

Next we focused on Native Americans. Our discussion of the at- 
trition rates for the Native American children in our schools shocked 
even some of the teachers who had a few Native American students in 
their classes from time to time. Raising issues of alienation and hope- 
lessness, we discussed whether "the culture of school" might not in fact 
be a hostile environment for Native American students. 

We then read Ignatia Broker's Night Flying Woman, the narrative 
account of Oona (Night Flying Woman), a great-great-grandmother who 
tells the tale of the Ojibway, pushed from the East Coast to the northern 
Midwest, losing their long-established way of life along the way This 
tale is all too familiar. It relates to a multitude of Native Americans, 
both as individuals and as sovereign nations. 

Most students agreed that they could teach this book to almost 
any class because it is short and easily read. One student, however, was 
troubled by what she perceived as a lack of emotion. "I couldn't stand 
this book/ 7 she wrote. "If s so heartless, so emotionless. After all Oona 
and her family suffer, she never shows any feeling." Yet someone else 
pointed out to this student that she had missed the strongest part of the 
book: "Don't you see the emotion in her descriptions? The environment 

mourns this human tragedy ... the trees, the winds Broker uses 

nature to depict her great sorrow at what is happening to her people." 
The first student was surprised at this observation. "I guess I'll have to 
go back and look at it again," she said. 

I believe that the reason that students often miss the depth of 
Broker's message is that they are often unaware of the values of Native 
American literature. Looking at the literature through Eurocentric eyes, 
they miss the aesthetic quality because they do not understand it. If we 
are to evaluate — and appreciate — nonmainstream literature, we need 
to become aware of nonmainstream perspectives on art. 

When we came to Canadian writer Joy Kogawa's Obasa n, another 
favorite of mine, we had to redefine our understanding of "Asian Ameri- 
cans." Is a seventh-generation American Chinese the same culturally — 
or in any other way — as a Cambodian refugee who arrived here last 
year? Is a Filipino resident of San Francisco the same ethnically as a 
Hmong resident of Minneapolis? We decided that the term Asian Ameri- 
can was so broad it could hardly be used at all. We compared it to the 
term European American, which could describe peoples ranging from 
the French to the Polish, from the Swedish to the Spanish. 

Most students responded positively to the artistry of Obasan. In 



67 



Multiethnic Literature for Mainstream Teachers 



59 



many places the book reads like poetry; for me, it is breathtaking. This 
book could be used in so many ways for so many themes. Many of my 
students agreed. One wrote, "Kogawa is a keen observer of life, and she 
writes with almost microscopic detail/' Another commented, "I found 
Joy Kogawa' s novel Obasan to be an enlightening and unique journey 
through a world of ignorance and prejudice, seen through the eyes of a 
child that wished to love/ 7 

Once again, there were dissenters. One student wrote: 

I thought the beginning was terribly slow. I really had to force 
myself to keep reading and stop counting pages until the "real 
story" began. I was not at all comfortable with the writing style 
of the present-day narrator and never felt truly engaged in the 
conflicts she was experiencing as an adult. Perhaps this is be- 
cause I know so little about the culture, the history, the traits, and 
the values of the people. The meaning of her dreams eluded me, 
and the metaphoric language was ineffective. I was frustrated by 
it and felt like I was reading through a fog or had just taken some 
mind-altering drug. The transitions in time seemed clumsy and 
were confusing, and the present-day sections were intrusive. 

I disagree. This student's remarks were clearly out of sync with the 
majority of students in the class. Further, her comments on all of the 
books were fairly consistent. The further the writing got from main- 
stream style and content, the less she liked it. 

When we came to Rudolfo Anaya's Bless Me, Ultima, the story of a 
young boy growing up in the Southwest, this same student complained 
about the abundance of Spanish words, which she said made the book 
more difficult for her to read. Several of us were surprised by her com- 
ments, especially since she taught in a school with a significant Mexican 
American population and had told us about the culture clashes that had 
recently taken place. At this point, I began making comparisons between 
these students and the much younger ones from my undergraduate 
honors class. Further, I began developing my own biases about teach- 
ing teachers. 

Other impressions from students surprised me. The religious 
mysticism in Ultima was, for some, frightening. One student said that 
she had nightmares about the story and found the whole thing so dis- 
turbing that she couldn't do anything more with the book. I was as- 
tounded. It had never occurred to me that the book would have such an 
effect. Her feelings, however, were validated by another very seasoned 
teacher who said that he too found these passages very disturbing. We 
thus had a lengthy discussion about magical realism, a literary form 
brought to us by Colombian-born Gabriel Garcia Marquez and other 



68 



60 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Mexican and South American writers. Still, another student was struck 
by the violence and death experienced and/or observed by the young 
hero, Antonio. This blending of fantasy and harsh reality had not af- 
fected me so personally I simply was not prepared for these responses. 

Another student, however, who identified herself as German 
Catholic, said: 

There is nothing more gratifying than to read something in a story 
that is familiar to the reader; it validates your own experiences. 
While growing up Catholic and attending a Catholic school, I 
experienced the power of wearing a scapula, and in the homes of 
many of my friends, there was a shrine to the Virgin Mary like 
the one in the Marez home. And, I know how Tony felt the first 
time he stepped into the confessional. And, I too experienced the 
depression that comes with fasting and strict penance during Lent. 
This made the story very meaningful to me. 

Finally, this response: 

I'm not sure how to explain this or why it is so, but of all the 
books we have read, this seemed first a novel, then a multicultural 
novel. This would be a strong recommendation for its use in the 
classroom. As we strive to make our curricula more culturally 
diverse, I believe it is wise to avoid using all "reactionary" 
pieces . . . pieces that focus mainly on the oppressed minority's 
response to their treatment by the Anglo majority. We risk creat- 
ing the impression that these groups have nothing else to say. 

I do agree with this last statement. It is important that we give students 
a variety of materials. And they do exist. 

The last book that we looked at as a class was The House on Mango 
Street by Sandra Cisneros. Once again, we were not without controversy. 
The book is, as one student described it, "a statement about being a 
Mexican American female in an urban and impoverished neighborhood 
where the only chance for escape seems to be marriage." Although many 
felt that the book could be used at a variety of grade levels, others felt 
that it portrayed negative stereotypes of young Mexican American 
women. One student said that he had certain notions of this group that 
were reinforced by the book: girls, standing in doorways, wearing a lot 
of makeup, waiting for whoever might take them away from this op- 
pressive existence. 

Yet this statement was contested by someone who had just gone 
to a book-signing by Sandra Cisneros. "No," she told us, "Cisneros said 
that her characters are drawn very purposefully, very true to life. She 
knows exactly what effect she's having on her readers. She wants you 
to see her characters as they are." Another student added, "And who 



69 



Multiethnic Literature for Mainstream Teachers 



61 



are they? For some of the women who marry, life is mundane, limiting, 
and abusive. They spend their days gazing out the window Some of 
the women have been abandoned. Some fear their husbands. Some who 
still live with their parents fear their fathers." Another student wrote: 

The House on Mango Street provides justification for the use of 
multicultural literature in the English classroom in that it repre- 
sents, even celebrates, our differences and our individuality while 
showing us those things that link us as human beings. 

After we had read and discussed this series of books, students 
chose areas in which to read and conduct research. Just as in the long- 
term assignment I gave to my undergraduate honors students, mem- 
bers of this graduate class were to gather background information on 
the authors and groups they were studying, read widely from the lit- 
erature of their chosen topics, and review critical analyses that had been 
written by others in the field. In addition, these teachers were expected 
to provide their colleagues with suggestions for implementing these 
multiethnic works in their established curricula. 

While students were preparing for their presentations, we talked 
about several other issues, including retention/attrition rates for 
nonmainstream students, problems that class members had in relating 
to what had been discussed in class, the negative stereotypes perpetu- 
ated in the media and their influence on the perceptions of our students 
(or, for that matter, on the perceptions of our peers), the need for inter- 
disciplinary cooperation in teaching literature, and anything else any- 
body felt was important. 

By this time, we were ready for individual presentations. Although 
somewhat uneven, many were the source of some wonderful ideas and 
materials that I and several of my students have since used quite suc- 
cessfully. One student took the standard themes already used by many 
teachers and presented strategies for incorporating multiethnic litera- 
ture. Another student provided excellent background in Japanese- Ameri- 
can relations for the past four generations, great material for those 
interested in using Obasan or any of the short stories and plays that the 
student reviewed. Several people offered wonderful ideas and resources 
for incorporating oral histories, folklore, fairy tales, and myths into the 
Eurocentric model we have all become so familiar with. Since students 
are often required to read and learn about the origins of Western cul- 
ture, it would be an easy matter to add traditions from other groups. In 
all, by pooling our resources, we came up with strategies, materials 
and background that would have been almost impossible to compile 
individually. 



70 



62 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Just as I had in my undergraduate honors course, I held my breath 
the entire semester wondering whether I had made the case for expand- 
ing the literary canon better or worse. At the end of the semester, how- 
ever, students expressed feelings of gratitude for our work together. Most 
of them told me that this was a whole new area for them, that prior to 
the class, they had known very little about cultural diversity and its 
place in the English curriculum. Several agreed that now that they had 
been introduced to these issues, their teaching would never be the same. 
They were aware of multiethnic literature and the importance of in- 
cluding it in the canon of works we present to our students. Some said 
that they had not realized that they had kept such good literature out of 
their classes simply because it might be controversial. Although a few 
were a little scared, they were going to "get up the courage" to speak 
out against the censorship that existed in their schools. One student said, 
"I offer all of you a challenge. I challenge each one of you to vow to use 
nonmainstream authors, teach your students their value both aestheti- 
cally and ethnically, and five years from now look back and evaluate 
whether or not you have made a difference/' 

I did not, of course, make converts out of them all. Some are prob- 
ably teaching as they had been teaching all along. Others might have 
made only minor changes. But I feel confident that some are now more 
empowered to fight for the literature they believe in at department and 
faculty meetings. Many had become committed to change and talked 
about bringing up these issues with their colleagues. In my experience, 
moving faculty is sometimes more difficult than influencing students 
or parents. But if we are willing to accept these challenges, we can make 
a difference. 




7 Dealing with Ableism, 
Ageism, Sexism, and 
Homophobia: 
"Otherness" 

once heard author/poet/critic/publisher Ishmael Reed (1991) speak 
on the topic "multiculturalism." He said that the term has become too 
common, too popularized, too used. I agree in part. The terms 
multicultural and nonmainstream have been greatly abused. Indeed, as a 
member of faculties in several states, I have witnessed horrific examples 
of racist, sexist, ageist, and homophobic behavior carried out in the name 
of diversity. 

The most obvious misuse of the word multicultural is when it is 
used synonymously with multiethnic. Ethnicity is just one subset of the 
multicultural experience. Though ethnicity — especially race — is often 
the most obvious kind of difference among citizens of the United States, 
many more aspects of "otherness" exist. These further aspects are what 
carry multiculturalism beyond the bounds of ethnicity and into a broader 
sphere. 

"Otherness" 

Most would agree that multiethnic refers to a multitude of regional, reli- 
gious, and racial groups. But multicultural is an even broader term. 
Besides the multitude of ethnicities, multiculturalism must include any 
nonmainstream group with characteristics of "otherness." 

Being different is not particularly valued in this culture, especially 
rot among young people. In their quesf *o "fit in," students strive to be 
like others. Just look at the costumery on a high school campus. Stand 
in the hallway during passing period in a typical high school, and you 
can't miss the various personae: the jocks, the preppies, the stoners. In- 
deed, you can often tell what a student's desired image is just by the 
clothes he or she wears. Although I have no scientific justification for 
these observations, I first made note of this phenomenon in my early 
years of teaching and have watched it operate ever since. 



72 



64 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Students who do not "fit in" to a particular group are often ex- 
cluded by their peers. Thus, the discrimination faced by many people is 
not necessarily racist, anti-Semitic, or the like, though heaven knows 
we have plenty of that Unfortunately, bias doesn't stop there. Still, most 
adolescents outgrow their "differentness" and become part of the gen- 
eral population. But many others in the United States endure continued 
bias because of ableism, ageism, sexism, and homophobia. I have had 
discussions with many students and colleagues about all of these is- 
sues, and I am sorry to say that they are not all sympathetic. 

I must confess my own errant ways. As I reflect on my own teach- 
ing, I believe that I have always been conscious of ethnic, religious, and 
racial issues, and I have tried to ensure that my students have had posi- 
tive, direct experiences in these areas. Like so many other teachers, my 
efforts were no doubt limited by ignorance, time constraints, and per- 
haps weariness. I could have searched more actively for works by and 
about different groups of people. But the effort was there. I am not sure, 
however, that I have always addressed the problems created by other 
forms of prejudice. When it comes to these other issues, my report card 
isn't so good: 

Evaluation: Eileen Oliver's Sensitivity to and Literary Treatment 
of Ableism, Ageism, Sexism, and Homophobia 

Ableism: Poor 
Ageism: Poor 
Sexism: Fair 
Homophobia: Good 

To tell the truth, I'm a little reluctant to go on after having given 
myself this assessment. It appears that I haven't established a very good 
record in any of these areas until very recently I have a feeling, how- 
ever, that I'm not alone. If s only recently that questions have been raised 
about many of these issues, and only recently that a plethora of litera- 
ture about them has been put — with a little digging — into the public 
domain. Yet literature about all of these issues is available, and teachers 
should take advantage of it. Though we may not have had an exem- 
plary record in the past, we can increase our own understanding of these 
issues now. 

Ableism 

As a high school teacher in the years before much of the development in 
special education, I didn't realize that I had students who might now fit 



73 



Dealing with Ableism, Ageism, Sexism, and Homophobia 



65 



into this category. I did, however, have a number of students over the 
years who I thought of as behavior problems — students who couldn't 
sit still, who ''performed' 7 whenever I would allow it, who were sullen, 
depressed, or angry, students whom I now realize probably had vari- 
ous emotional or learning disabilities. Yet in the the past, these students 
were often relegated to the "X" group, our euphemistic name for reme- 
dial classes. In all the years I taught, I don't think I over recommended 
to have a student put into an "X" class. It was like going to jail. Once 
students were there, there wasn't much they could do to climb out. 

When I transferred to the district's continuation school, I learned 
much more about emotional and learning disabilities. Many of the kids 
who ended up there had distinct characteristics that I would now rec- 
ognize as indicative of these impairments. I've always wondered what 
might have happened to them had we been able to address their needs 
in the large comprehensive high school before they did poorly in school, 
developed truant behavior, or got into trouble. 

Sometimes family members suffer too. Jennifer, a student in a 
teacher education program at Syracuse, had an older brother, John, who 
had been labeled "developmentally disabled." As his condition wors- 
ened, the family decided that he could not be left alone anymore. At 
twenty-three, Jennifer felt that she couldn't leave home, that she had a 
responsibility to her family and to John. The family did not dissuade 
her from this position. Though her studies suffered and she began miss- 
ing work, she was convinced that she should do more for her brother 
and that taking any time for herself would be selfish. Yet when I spoke 
to a counselor at the facility that often treated John, it was apparent that 
Jennifer's staying home would not improve her brother's condition. 

Unfortunately, neither I nor the dean of students could convince 
her of that, and Jennifer almost buried herself in guilt, responsibility, 
and self-doubt. Recently, I got a letter from Jennifer telling me that she 
had finally moved out; her family had ''let her go." Her brother had 
been placed in a special home, and she was now a special education 
teacher. Her tone sounded more positive than ever before. But it had 
taken a long time. 

Once a new student's mother came to talk to me about her son 
Joe, whom she described as having dyslexia, a term used by physicians 
to describe a number of different disabling conditions. She explained to 
me that Joe had spent ten years in special schools and was only now 
being mainstreamed into a regular high school. In describing his 
disability, she explained that while it might take a "regular" student 
forty-five minutes to complete an assignment, Joe would need at least 



74 



66 



Crossing the Mainstream 



thirty minutes more to process all the information. When I told her that 
Joe could always take his work home at night and finish it with her, she 
began to cry. Horrified that I had said the wrong thing, I apologized, 
asking her what she would like to have happen. She apologized for her 
tears and told me that she had just visited the history teacher, who told 
her that "Joe could take as long as everyone else and not a minute more/ 7 
Clearly, there is need for more literature and information by and about 
people with learning disabilities, for teachers as well as for students. 

What we must remember about students with certain physical 
impairments is that they are in no other way disabled. One of my stu- 
dents, Bernadette, was legally blind and worked with a resource teacher. 
She had a special typewriter, and while the other students wrote, she 
typed, which didn't seem to bother anyone. Though I wanted her to feel 
as much a part of the class as anyone else, it never occurred to me to 
find books that she might identify with or to ask her to share her exper- 
tise and special abilities. Bernadette was outgoing, friendly, and eager 
to participate in all school activities. She would have loved to become a 
resource for the rest of the class. 

So much literature exists that could help kids in their quest to 
belong. My cousin Cindy, who now has three wonderful children of her 
own, was diagnosed with scoliosis at age thirteen. She had to wear a 
brace from neck to thigh and a mouthpiece to put her jaw into the cor- 
rect position. She was devastated. It didn't matter how much she was 
told that this wasn't permanent, that she would need the brace for only 
a year or two. Maybe reading some literature about others in her situa- 
tion would have helped. I wish I had been able to recommend some at 
the time. 

We must remember, though, that trying to make students with 
disabilities "feel like everyone else" is as unrealistic as asking teachers 
"not to see color," as asking them "to treat everyone the same." That's 
impossible. It's also insulting. In a pluralistic society, we should both 
accept people as a part of the larger community and acknowledge their 
uniqueness. 

I learned this lesson from Professor Mark Seng of the University 
of Texas at Austin while taking his class on learning theory. At the start 
of the class, Dr. Seng asked if someone would take notes for Brian, a 
blind student. Since no one raised a hand, and since I was a bit older 
(and wiser?) than most of the others, I volunteered. I have never taken 
such good notes for any class before or since. My success in the class 
was greatly enhanced by the responsibility I felt toward Brian, and I 
have capitalized on this experience ever since by setting up similar cross- 
tutoring situations in my own classes. 



75 



Dealing with Ableism, Ageism, Sexism, and Homophobia 



67 



What I learned most in this class — besides learning theory, that 
is — was Dr. Seng's approach to relating to people with disabilities. Once, 
in a discussion about the importance of visual, auditory, and kinesthetic 
perception, Professor Seng turned to Brian and said, ''Well, Brian, I guess 
you can tell us about the necessity for various compensating skills/ 7 1 
froze. How could he openly point out Brian's blindness like that? How 
could he single out this poor man and call attention to his disability? To 
my surprise, Brian launched into a fascinating treatise on the impor- 
tance of skills compensation, a system which, I learned, we all take ad- 
vantage of in one way or another. 

Another time, while discussing the importance of various inven- 
tions, Seng turned to Cheryl, a student in a wheelchair, and said, 'Til 
bet the discovery of the wheel is an important one for you, huh Cheryl?" 
Again, I was horrified. He was holding up her disability for all of us to 
consider — right in front of her. But Cheryl grinned and said, "You bet! 
Where would I be without these wheels?" 

Some time after these discussions, I spoke to Dr. Seng, telling him 
that he had taught me a great deal about facing what had been for me a 
difficult question. He pointed to an award he had received from a local 
organization of disabled people. The plaque was in recognition for his 
fair and sensitive treatment of the disabled. 

Fortunately, kids today do not seem to be as "hung up" as I was. 
My daughter Rachel, for instance, had a severely disabled student named 
Sandy in her fifth-grade class. Sandy was very bright. She was a mem- 
ber of the Brownie troop and a participant in the choir. The students 
took turns wheeling Sandy to lunch and to the playground. They read 
to her and helped her with her materials and her lessons. We have come 
a long way since I was in school. 

Nonetheless, we have a long way to go before people with dis- 
abilities will have equal access to the opportunities the rest of us take 
for granted. Many of the stereotypes that make people with disabilities 
endure unfair bias still persist. In conducting an activity to portray the 
insidiousness of these stereotypes, Davis (1989) found that while her 
six-year-old students found few distinctions between racial groups, they 
did display certain biases in their perceptions of people with disabili- 
ties. Students were presented with two pictures: the first of a girl sitting 
in a chair and the second of a girl in a wheelchair. When asked "Who is 
the better student?" twenty-nine chose the girl sitting in the chair, six 
said the girl in the wheelchair, and seven were unsure. 

Relating findings from Biklen and Bogdan (1977), Margolis and 
Shapiro (1987) tell us that to rid ourselves of these stereotypes, we must 



78 



68 



Crossing the Mainstream 



first recognize those that exist in our literature. They point out that like 
sexism and racism, negative stereotypes of disabilities abound. We have, 
for example, the villainy of Captain Hook, Richard III, and Captain Ahab, 
the piteous Tiny Tim, and Lenny of Steinbeck's Of Mice and Men. Point- 
ing to the subliminal messages of inferiority and evil that these famous 
literary characters convey, Margolis and Shapiro argue that since we 
learn our values from such literature, we are giving negative messages 
to our students about disability. 

We must teach our students to recognize the symbolic nature of 
literary instances of physical abnormality, to recognize, for instance, 
Richard Iirs physical deformity as a representation of his evil and ruth- 
lessness, Philip's clubfoot in W. Somerset Maugham's Of Human Bond- 
age as a symbol of his psychological bondage, and Quasimodo's disfig- 
urement as a sign of his intellectual limitations. Further, we should de- 
termine where stereotypes originate. Biklen and Bogdan (1977) point 
out: 

In fairy tales, there is the malicious Rumpelstiltskin and the mean 
witch (who "leans upon a crutch") in Hansel and Gretel. Classic 
children's literature has exploited this stereotype to the hilt. Take 
Stevenson's Treasure Island. In evoking the terror and suspense 
that mark this book's opening pages, the key elements are the 
disabled characters Black Dog and Pew. The former is introduced 
as a "tallow-faced man, wanting two fingers." This minor dis- 
ability sets a tone that is built up when the second man is de- 
scribed as that "hunched and eyeless creature" In addition, 

when Long John Silver is introduced as a good guy, there is only 
a casual mention of the fact that he has a wooden leg. Later, when 
his treachery is revealed, the references to his "timber 7 ' leg be- 
come ominous and foreboding. (7) 

Finally, characters with disabilities should be integrated in a positive 
way with others, not like Tiny Tim or Clara from Heidi. Margolis and 
Shapiro (1987) recommend positive books like The Story of My Life by 
Helen Keller or Joni by Joni Eareckson and biographies of people like 
Franklin Roosevelt, Beethoven, Stevie Wonder, and Thomas Edison. 

There are a number of ways in which we can include representa- 
tions of people with disabilities in our canon. I have recently learned, 
for instance, about the Association for Theatre and Disability, which, 
along with the American Alliance for Theatre and Education, put on a 
conference for artists and educators entitled "Theatre: The Art of Inclu- 
sion" (1992). With workshops, demonstrations, and performances on 
such topics as "literacy for a multicultural society," "innovative strate- 
gies for directors," and "exploring curriculum subjects through drama," 
conferences like this one steadily advance the diversity of our drama. 



77 



Dealing with Ableism, Ageism, Sexism, and Homophobia 



69 



Ageism 

Who knows where our stereotypic thinking comes from? Even those 
who think they are blameless discover their own biases from time to 
time. A few years ago, for instance, I realized that I was making a ter- 
rible generalization about older adults. Whenever I spoke to someone 
with grey hair, I raised my voice. I had to be told several times by people 
with whom I was speaking that I did not have to shout, that they were 
not hearing-impaired. 

There is an easy explanation for my behavior. My father had a 
hearing problem for many years. In fact, this impairment runs in our 
family. I have been speaking loudly to my aunts and uncles since I was 
a little girl. As their ability to hear got progressively worse, my volume 
increased accordingly. My tendency to speak loudly to anyone with grey 
hair is thus based on my experience with older adults who don't hear 
very well. Still, it's unfair of me to assume that all older adults need me 
to shout at them. 

This misinformed behavior was inadvertent and certainly not 
malicious. Yet a look at the general treatment of older adults in this coun- 
try shows that our behavior is not always so innocent. Occasionally the 
media shocks us with stories about abusive treatment of older adults. 
Indeed, the treatment that older adults receive in the dominant group 
in this country is sometimes less than exemplary. 

The respect and position that older adults receive varies from 
culture to culture. Anna, a former colleague of mine whose heritage is 
both African American and Native American, once told me that she 
didn't think "white people" treated their elders very well. "In my cul- 
ture/' she told me, "we care for our elders; we revere them." The litera- 
ture is full of examples of the love and respect that older adults receive 
in many nonmainstream cultures. Examining alternatives to mainstream 
treatment of elders is thus a fine opportunity to include multicultural 
literature in our classes. 

Numerous literary examples attest to the value, strength, and dig- 
nity of older adults. Two major figures in Toni Morrison's Beloved, Baby 
Suggs and Stamp Paid, emerge heroically for their strength and cour- 
age in adversity. Pat Mora's poem "1910" creates a regal Dona Luz. 
Ultima, the curandera of Bless Me, Ultima, provides strength, hope, and 
healing to those who trust her. Loyalty to grandparents is never ques- 
tioned in Richler's 'The Summer My Grandmother Was Going to Die." 
Oona, the great-great-grandmother of Night Flying Woman, carries with 
her the wisdom of the old way amidst the ravages of cultural annihila- 
tion. And a former student of mine once did a unit on older adults using 




70 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Hemingway's The Old Man and the Sea, a series of articles on the Grey 
Panthers, and the films The Whales of August and On Golden Pond. 

Sexism 

Although we're a long, long way from achieving equality between the 
sexes, at least we're talking on an institutional level about the issues cf 
women's studies, women's representation, and women's literature in 
our schools. This then is a good time for making changes in our curricu- 
lum to accommodate the many wonderful women authors, essayists, 
and poets who have been overlooked in the past. 

In looking over the Educational Testing Service's "Advanced 
Placement Course Description for English," Patricia Lake (1988) noticed 
that only thirteen of the eighty-five authors suggested as models were 
women. She thus writes: 

I can only infer that there have been no women either interested 
in politics or able to express themselves articulately about politi- 
cal concerns, and only one who wrote biographical or historical 

material of merit Here, too, the implication is that no women 

wrote drama worth studying. (What happened to Lillian 

Helknan?) Only three women poets . . . (Where is Pulitzer 

Prize-winning Gwendolyn Brooks?) And only three women wrote 
expository literature of note. (Where is Mary Wollstonecraft or 
Charlotte Perkins Gilman?) (36) 

To put women writers back into the canon, Lisa Moore (1989) sug- 
gests pairing male and female writers. Pairing Dickinson's #288 ("I'm 
Nobody! Who are you?") with Whitman's "Song of Myself," for instance, 
evoked lively discussions from her students. Pairing Angelou's I Know 
Why the Caged Bird Sings with Richard Wrighf s Black Boy made for an- 
other successful unit. Moore continues: 

The more you think about writers or pieces of literature qne-on- 

one, the more pairings will come to your mind How about 

My Antonia beside Huckleberry Finn? How about two carnival/ 
initiation stories: Flannery O'Connor's "Temple of the Holy 
Ghost" and John Updike's "You'll Never Know Dear"? . . . I've 
always wanted to study Adrienne Rich's "Fish" beside Hem- 
ingway's The Old Man and the Sea. Sophisticated students may 
appreciate Edith Wharton's "Journey" about a woman on a train 
ride with her dying husband, coupled with Raymond Carver's 
* Compartment," about a man on a train ride to visit his son. If 
Anne Frank: The Diary of a Young Girl is not going over as well as it 
used to, try pairing it with Uri Lev's Island on Bird Street. Younger 
readers might enjoy the pairing of two wilderness survival sto- 
ries: Scott CyDelTs Island of the Blue Dolphins and Jean Craighead 



79 



Dealing with Ableism, Ageism, Sexism, and Homophobia 



71 



George's Julie of the Wolves. Carolyn Chute's Beans of Egypt, Maine 
has been critically compared with Faulkner's Snopes family — 
would they work one-on-one in the classroom? (38) 

Andrew Barker (1989), however, points out that under some strat- 
egies, adding more writing by women means dropping writing by men, 
which, for him, means "putting Huckleberry Finn aside to make room 
for Sarah Orne Jewett, Charlotte Perkins Gilman, and Kate Chopin" (39). 
Barker suggests instead that in addition to "classics" like Miller's Death 
of a Salesman, Hemingway's Nick Adams stories, and Faulkner's "Bear/' 
which allow boys to "make connections" with their own lives, we use 
works about girls growing up as well. Harper Lee's To Kill a Mocking- 
bird, Carson McCullers's The Member of the Wedding, and Bobbie Ann 
Mason's In Country come to mind. 

Our goal in adding women writers to the canon ought to be to 
bring even more excellent literature into the mainstream. And this is 
easy to do. For example, my African American literature course has, 
coincidentally, as many female writers as male writers. (While I'd like 
to take credit for that, I must thank Alex Kuo, professor of English at 
Washington State University, for sharing his syllabus with me.) Yet in- 
cluding Harriet Wilson, Zora Neale Hurston, Alice Walker, Toni 
Morrison, and the collection Breaking Ice, edited by Terry McMillan, is 
no gesture to please women. To leave out these artists would simply be 
excluding some of the best. 

At least one of my students, however, saw in my selections a 
"slightly feminist slant." My response to that student: 'Tough!" Good 
writers, men and women, should be presented for their talents. And 
unless we believe that women's writing is not as significant as men's, 
then women should be represented without regard to numbers. 

Recently, a teacher told me that she would love to use more 
women's literature in her classes, but that there was not enough from 
which to choose. I brought her my copy of Sandra Gilbert and Susan 
Gubar's 2,400-page collection The Norton Anthology of Literature by Women 
(1985). This excellent publication begins with Dame Julian of Norwich, 
who was born in 1342, attesting to the fact that women have been writ- 
ing for a long time and in great volume. Edith Blicksilver's The Ethnic 
American Woman: Problems, Protests, Lifestyle (1978) offers choices like 
Joan Baez Harris, Shirley Chisolm, Gwendolyn Brooks, Toni Cade 
Bambara, Diana Chang, Angela de Hoyos, Nikki Giovanni, Joy Harjo, 
Maxine Hong Kingston, Monica Krawczyk, Emma Lazarus, Mary 
McCarthy, Janice Mirikitani, Nicholasa Mohr, Grace Paley, Adrienne 
Rich, Marina Rivera, Muriel Rukeyser, Buffy Sainte-Marie, Ntozake 



SO 



72 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Shange, Leslie Silko, Berry Smith, May Swenson, Alice Walker, Marga- 
ret Walker, and Hisaye Yamamoto. Those who say that they "just can't 
find any 'ethnic' women writers" should start here! 

Before leaving this subject, I would like to mention one more is- 
sue, one which has gotten me into trouble with a few of my feminist 
colleagues. While I believe that current feminist figures have looked 
carefully into this problem, we cannot deny that, historically, the femi- 
nist movement has been no friend to women of color. Bell Hooks's es- 
say "Racism and Feminism" (1981) is a disturbing description of the 
active, sometimes violent, racism demonstrated by some of the earlier 
proponents of women's rights. 

Hooks's words echoed in my head quite recently when I attended 
a meeting of faculty women. The university was conducting a search to 
fill a vacant administrative position. I was appalled to hear comments 
like "We want to make sure this position is given to a woman. Naming 
a person of color would limit our opportunities." Although we would 
like to think that all groups are working toward a mutual equality, this 
simply isn't always the case. Indeed, I believe that a large part of our 
responsibility as educators is to help students from the various groups 
in our culture sort out these issues so that we won't all continue to fight 
for the same little piece of the pie. 

One final note: While studying Hooks's essay, teachers might want 
to point out that one of the most outspoken advocates of women's rights 
in the early years was Frederick Douglass, the former slave and promi- 
nent civil rights leader. Sojourner Truth's "Ain't I a Woman?" (1851) 
also fits well into this theme. 

Homophobia: Th© Equal Opportunity Bias 

Nowhere in the classroom, campus, or community have I witnessed 
hostility, resentment, or anger as virulent as that which is directed at the 
gay and lesbian community. I am sorry to say that some of the nastiest, 
most mean-spirited, and utterly hurtful remarks that have ever been 
uttered in my presence have been about gays. I have heard such unkind 
remarks from just about every racial and ethnic group I have been 
around, as well as from faculty members, school administrators (both 
high school and college), and even a city mayor. When it comes to gay 
and lesbian issues, we seem to bar no holds. 

Let's start with young teenagers, who are at their worst when it 
comes to their attitudes about homosexuality. Since at this age kids are 
having a hard enough time defining their own identities and sexualities, 



81 



Dealing with Ableism, Ageism, Sexism, and Homophobia 



73 



many don't seem to have the strength of charaecta to be generous to 
others. Further, even if they did, to defend gay and lesbian rights might 
somehow reflect on what they think others think of them. I have had 
several students, both male and female, in high school and in college, 
tell me privately that even though they agreed with me when we dis- 
cussed these issues in class, they felt uncomfortable speaking in affir- 
mation lest anyone think they were gay. 

It is very difficult to empower students to speak freely under these 
conditions. Thus, we must bring good material into the classroom to 
assist students in their thinking about these matters. Regardless of what 
an individual's religious or moral philosophy happens to be, no one has 
the right to beat someone else to death with a baseball bat because of 
that person's sexual preference. This is an issue that needs to be dis- 
cussed openly. When students resist the notion of tolerance, teachers 
must bring in examples of gay bashiii and ask, Do you really condone 
this sort of behavior? Are you aware that such things go on in our coun- 
try? Are you really willing to allow this hate and hostility to flourish if 
these are the results? I believe that every citizen of this country should 
answer these questions, and the best place to start is in the classroom. 

Homophobia, like all prejudice, has an insidious way of warping 
people's perceptions. Take the case of Margarethe Cammermeyer. Colo- 
nel Cammermeyer was nominated for the position of chief nurse for the 
National Guard. A twenty-seven-year veteran of the military, she re- 
ceived the Bronze Star during the Vietnam War and was "selected from 
34,000 nurses nationwide as 'VA Nurse of the Year' in 1985" ("Lesbian 
Has No 111 Will Toward Military," Spokesman-Review and Spokane Chronicle, 
27 June 1992, B6). In a final security clearance before assuming the re- 
sponsibilities of her new position, Colonel Cammermeyer answered 
truthfully when asked if she was a homosexual. Result: honorable dis- 
charge. Wouldn't this incident make a great cartoon strip? 

Frame one: A wounded U.S. soldier bleeding to death 
Frame two: Nurse Cammermeyer rushes to save him 
Frame three: Soldier asks if his rescuer is a lesbian 
Frame four: Nurse Cammermeyer responds "Yes" 
Frame five: Soldier rejects her aid and bleeds to death 

Though I always offer it as a topic choice, students seldom want 
to work with the issue of homosexuality. This is so, I think, for many 
reasons, beginning with what they think others will think of them. I 
have had only one student pursue this topic extensively. That student 
was a very bright, very attractive young woman who had a very hand- 



82 



74 



Crossing the Mainstream 



some boyfriend. She was very sure of herself and felt very confident not 
only about her academic ability, but about her sexuality as well. Phyllis's 
paper on homosexuality couldn't possibly shake anyone's image of her 
heterosexuality. She knew it, and so did everyone else. 

Phyllis's research was excellent. First she gave an interesting ac- 
count of the history of homosexuality in this country, citing a 1646 New 
Haven Colony law that made homosexuality a crime punishable by 
death. Then, after tracing the development of homophobia to the present, 
she discussed several literary works, beginning with Olga Broumas's 
poetry in Beginning with O. She continued with reviews of Audre Lorde's 
essay collection A Burst of Light, Tennessee Williams's Cat on a Hot Tin 
Roof, Alice Walker's The Color Purple, and Jane Rule's Against the Season, 
all of which have themes related directly or indirectly to the issue of 
homosexuality. In the end, I don't think Phyllis decided to become les- 
bian, nor do I think anyone in the class thought she would. What is 
important is that she learned some things, and so did the rest of us. 

In her last meeting with me, Phyllis told me that she was glad 
that she had picked homosexuality as a research topic because she had 
never read about anything like it before. Further, she said that she had 
never thought about many of the issues gays and lesbians face. She wrote: 

I was very intrigued by these works because so many aspects of a 
homosexual's life were dealt with. The thought of homosexuals 
growing old and having to face the problems of losing their lov- 
ers doesn't come up very often . . . but the problems are still 

there With the help of writers like ones I studied, we have the 

opportunity to develop a better understanding of homosexuals, 
and with this understanding, homophobia can be lessened, and 
hopefully someday, eliminated altogether. 

Whether teachers, administrators, and communities like it or not, 
a significant part of our population is gay. By ignoring this segment of 
our community, or worse, by denigrating these people, we force stu- 
dents who may be working out their own sexuality, or who have al- 
ready determined their homosexuality, to sublimate, deny, hide, or feel 
less than equal. This is not what we're in the classroom to do. 

What we are in the classroom to do is educate — all of our stu- 
dents on all of the issues. Many books are available that deal with the 
issue of homosexuality. In an interesting article on cross-cultural fiction, 
George Shannon (1988) recommends Nancy Garden's Annie on My Mind. 
In the book, the character Liza explains, "Even when I was little, I'd 
often felt as if I didn't quite fit in with most of the people around me; I'd 
felt isolated in some way that I never understood." 



83 



Dealing with Ableism, Ageism, Sexism, and Homophobia 



75 



Someone once accused me of advocating homosexuality. I don't. 
Nor do I advocate being black, white, disabled, or old. People just are. 
What I do advocate, and what I believe is every teacher's responsibility, 
is that we make room for everyone, that we increase our tolerance of 
difference, and that, above all, we not create problems for others as a 
result of our own biases. 



84 



II Curricular Challenges 
Beyond Eurocentric 
Values 



8 Brainstorming a Canon 



In a recent study of secondary schools, the National Center on Litera- 
ture Teaching and Learning reported the following: 

Of the 11,579 individual selections reported in the public school 
sample ... 81% were by male authors, 98% were by white (non- 
Hispanic) authors, and 99% were written within the United States 
(63%), United Kingdom (28%), or Western European (8%) tradi- 
tion In spite of efforts to broaden the canon over the past sev- 
eral decades, the study found only marginal increases in the per- 
centage of selections written by women (from 17% in 1963 to 19% 
in 1988) or by writers from alternative cultuial traditions (from 
0.6% to 2%). (Applebee 1992, 27-28) 

Thus, despite the explosion of multicultural anthologies on the market, 
schools haven't consistently welcomed nonmainstrer.rn perspectives into 
their curricula. In fact, in analyzing five anthologies of U.S. literature 
that schools often use, Pace (1992) found their selections to be 

unfortunately ... not a chorus of multicultural voices. Of the 98 
writers represented in the textbook canon, 65 are white men, 16 
are white women, and 10 are black men. There are only four black 
women, and the two native Americans and single Chicano are 
males. There are no Asian Americans. (33) 

This chapter offers suggestions for materials to use in a 
multicultural curriculum, a variety of materials from a variety of groups. 
Keep in mind, however, that I am by no means an expert in any of the 
literatures I discuss. I do not claim to have the knowledge to present an 
exhaustive representation of any particular group, genre, or category. 
Instead, I offer only a list of titles that have come to my attention through 
my own teaching and reading, through listening to colleagues, and 
through soliciting suggestions from friends, former students, anyone 
willing to talk to me. It's a preliminary list, not a definitive one. 

I don't think that any of us can claim to know so much about 
literature that we are able to make perfect judgments about someone's 
reading practices. I have a great deal of respect for students of all back- 
grounds, ages, and abilities. If we give students the opportunity to evalu- 
ate books, they will have no trouble telling us whether they like them or 
not. I have often asked my students to read various works and to offer 
suggestions for others to follow. I "pick the brains" of many of my friends 
as well. If they have literature that is working for them, then I want to 
take advantage of those titles too. 



86 



80 



Crossing the Mainstream 



I prefer to think of the compilation that follows as a brainstorm- 
ing. That is, I have listed a number of works using much the same method 
we might use to gather any set of data or ideas that will later need to be 
sorted, grouped, organized, accepted or rejected, and so forth. I see this 
as a task that will take all of our efforts. And if s probably one we will 
never complete. But that's okay. The study of literature is organic. Some 
of the works I once taught I don't like anymore. Some of them I think I'll 
love forever. I've had to make room for new pieces by putting others 
aside — I'll probably take another look at them later. Some previously 
discarded works Fve revived and welcomed back into my canon. In 
fact, when preservice teachers ask me what literature they should teach, 
I tell them that they should never feel that they have to teach anything. 
They should always choose works that they can be enthusiastic about 
and that they think will have some positive impact on their students' 
lives. 

I have read many of the works that follow. Many, I have not. Some 
titles appear that I have only recently discovered and want to pursue. 
Many have been recommended by colleagues or by various publica- 
tions. Others have been endorsed by NCTE or by other well-known state 
and national organizations. Instructors in communities, schools, or de- 
partments that are resistant to change or reluctant to add multicultural 
literature might want to seek out these endorsements, as the endorse- 
ment of a prominent organization might help to garner administrative 
or community support. 

There are many groups that are not represented here at all. This 
void is not intentional. Rather, I simply haven't yet learned about the 
literatures of these groups. For some categories, there is a small repre- 
sentation. This paucity does not mean that there isn't more to be had. 
Again, it simply reflects my own lack of knowledge. Those who are 
looking for the literature of a particular group and who are disappointed 
with what I present should not be offended. Instead, I urge anyone with 
more titles and recommendations, or who has had a positive or nega- 
tive experience with a book that he or she would like to share, to write 
to me (and others) with this information. We are all in this together, and 
unless we work collectively to bring attention to multicultural litera- 
ture, those who want to maintain the status quo will continue to domi- 
nate — and our students will remain deprived. 

One category of liter'iture that I have practically eliminated from 
my list is literature written about a particular ethnic group by a main- 
stream writer. Although once widely accepted, this literature is no longer 
viewed by many as representative. That is, we should identify and value 



$7 



Brainstorming a Canon 



81 



writers from the group we are reading about. To ignore them means that 
we do not think that they can speak for themselves, or that they are less 
talented, or that they do not exist. 

For example, in my first few years of teaching, I used Conrad 
Richter 's The Light in the Forest, which deals with cultural alienation and 
poses good questions for young people. I still like this novel and recom- 
mend it in the cross-cultural literature section of my list. But I have not 
listed it as a Native American work. Despite the fact that this book is 
often taught as an "Indian" novel, it was not written by a Native Ameri- 
can author. If teachers want a Native American novel, there are plenty 
of Native American writers from which to choose. 

I know that some will disagree with this position, saying that "a 
good book is a good book/ 7 1 agree. But that isn't the point. Many years 
ago, I had a discussion with an African American educator who strongly 
objected to John Griffin's Black Like Me, a nonfiction account of a white 
man who ingests chemicals that turn his skin dark enough to "pass" as 
African American. He travels into the deep South to see what life is like 
for the black citizens living there. The book is the horrendous story of 
one harrowing event after another and of the cruel treatment he receives. 
When I discussed this work with my African American friend, I lauded 
it, saying that "all white people should read this book to get an idea of 
all the terrible things blacks endure on a daily basis." Her response: 
"Black sociologists, and, for that matter, black people in general, have 
been telling whites these things for years and nobody paid attention. 
Why does it take a white person to 'dress up' as a black man for people 
to get the message?" Why, indeed? I had no answer. I had never looked 
at it that way. I still like the book, but Black Like Me does not appear in 
the African American section of my list. 

Nor does the epic poem of Chicano nationalism I Am Joaquin ap- 
pear in the Mexican American section. Although I have used this poem 
in various courses over the years and admire it as a work of great sig- 
nificance, the authenticity of Corky Gonzales's authorship has lately 
been called into question by contemporary Chicane cities. Aside from 
the authors of certain nonfiction titles (documentaries, biographies, his- 
torical accounts, etc.), the authors, poets, playwrights, and filmmakers 
featured in my list are, to my knowledge, authentic voices from their 
communities. 

Because of limitations of time and space, my list includes very 
few international titles. Except for a few favorites — like Joy Kogawa's 
Obasan and Sheila Gordon's Waiting for the Rain — and some specific 
recommendations — like a few titles from a list compiled by Jesse Perry 



88 



82 



Crossing the Mainstream 



(1991) — I have stuck to the literature of the United States. This restric- 
tion means that a multitude of work about important topics like the 
Holocaust and apartheid had to be left out Thus, such favorites as Anne 
Frank: The Diary of a Young Girl, though widely accepted in the canon, 
are not mentioned. Neither is Mark Mathabane's Kaffir Boy, an excellent 
work about life in South Africa. (For a compelling discussion of interna- 
tional literature, see Judith Peterson's article in the September 1992 is- 
sue of English Journal In it she discusses some wonderful multicultural 
literature that goes beyond U.S. borders.) 

Further, although I almost never believe in censorship, I must ac- 
knowledge that some of the works on my list might be offensive or ob- 
jectionable to readers for a number of reasons, and teachers should be 
alerted to this possibility. And then they should make their own choices. 
I like the disclaimer issued in Books for Ymv A Booklist for Senior High 
Students (1985): 

In a few instances, you may find books whose subject matter or 
language may offend you, since some of the books we list con- 
tain unhappy endings, violence, sex, death, or obscenities. If such 
things offend you, then choose another book from among the 
hundreds listed. Our purpose is not to offend; on the other hand, 
we did not wish to exclude good books from this collection just 
because some individuals might find parts of them controversial 
or distasteful, (xi) 

My sentiments exactly! Those who believe that there is any literature 
left in this world that will shock a teenager, we need to talk. Ditto for 
college students. 

Stereotypes present a more difficult problem. My goal for this 
chapter was to gather up as many nonmainstream titles as I could get 
my hands on, to present them to teachers of literature, and to let them 
make up their own minds about what to present in their classes. In ac- 
complishing this task, however, I risk including titles that some readers 
might find objectionable because of the manner in which certain char- 
acters are presented. For example, some teachers have found The House 
on Mango Street to be stereotypic. Without proper guidance, a literal- 
minded student reading Wright's Native Son might find reinforcement 
for some of the negative stereotypes he or she already labors under. 
Does this mean that I should take these superb works off my list? What 
other books might people find objectionable? 

Recently, I spoke to a group of teachers at a conference and sug- 
gested some titles for multiethnic reading. A graduate student took ex- 
ception to one title, saying that she had read it and thought that it did 
not represent a particular group in a positive light. I thanked her for her 



88 



Brainstorming a Canon 



83 



input and started to take it off my list. Then I thought about other titles 
that, given similar consideration, I really ought to remove. Huck Finn 
must go because of its racism. The Merchant of Venice is out because of its 
anti-Semitism. Heart of Darkness goes because of its mystification of Af- 
rica. Hey, wait a minute! Am I back in chapter 5? I thought we had fin- 
ished with the censorship issue. Critics are right to point out that spme_ 
multiethnic books are stereotypic (see Kiah 1985). Yet rather than ex- 
cluding these titles, I believe that we should guide students 7 reading, 
pointing out and discussing negative qualities as we do, for example, 
the anti-Semitism in The Merchant of Venice or the stereotypic characters 
in William Armstrong's Sounder (Beach and Marshall 1991, 441). 

In looking over my list, one colleague asked me why I hadn't 
grouped the works thematically, a method of categorizing sometimes 
useful in instruction. But most literature has so many possible themes 
that I felt that such a grouping would be too confusing. After consider- 
ing various ways of categorizing the following materials, I decided on 
the most obvious classification: group identity. I hope this will be the 
easiest way to access the information for the greatest number of read- 
ers. Note, however, that although the main focus of this book is to high- 
light the literature of marginalized groups, I am by no means suggest- 
ing that teachers "ghettoize" these titles by group. Rather, these lists 
should be used as a resource for incorporating multicultural titles into 
the mainstream. 

Finally, I am aware that some of the titles presented here are bet- 
ter than others. But that's true of all literature. And as the title of this 
chapter states, I am "brainstorming a canon/' We all know that after 
brainstorming, a lot of hard work follows. For those interested in spe- 
cific ideas and strategies for implementing some of these titles into their 
canon, chapter 12 presents a series of recommendations from educators 
who have used this literature successfully. 

African American Literature 

Literature by African Americans dates back to the early eighteenth cen- 
tury, with voices like Jupiter Hammon, Prince Hall, Olaudah Equiano, 
and Phillis Wheatley. Nineteenth-century slave narratives by Frederick 
Douglass and Harriet Ann Jacobs and the moving words of women like 
Sojourner Truth and Frances Ellen Watkins Harper are already included 
in many American literature classes. And the literature of the Harlem 
Renaissance, of the Black Arts Movement of the sixties, and of contem- 
porary artists has received increasing recognition as scholars continue 



90 



84 



Crossing the Mainstream 



to discover what has been largely withheld in the past. Beach and 
Marshall (1991) write: 

The work of . . . writers such as Langston Hughes, Claude McCay, 
Gwendolyn Brooks, Lorraine Hansberry, Zora Neale Hurston, 
Richard Wright, Ralph Ellison, James Baldwin, Toni Morrison, 
Alice Walker, Nikki Giovanni, and August Wilson . . . represent 

major contributions to contemporary American literature And, 

poets such as Sonia Sanchez, Carolyn Rogers, June Jordan, Alice 
Walker, Audre Lorde, and Ntozake Shange portray the perspec- 
tives of African-American women, particularly their feminist 
struggle with patriarchal society. 

Because such a plethora of African American writers exists, this list only 
touches the surface. For a further listing of young adult African Ameri- 
can fiction, see Carolyn M. Corson's "YA Afro- American Fiction: An 
Update for Teachers" (1987). 

Adoff, Arnold. Celebrations: A New Anthology of Black American Poetry (1977). 

Angelou, Maya. J Know Why the Caged Bird Sings (1969). Angelou's autobio- 
graphic account of growing up in racist Stamps, Arkansas. 

. Shaker, Why Don't You Sing? (1983). Poetry. 

. All God's Children Need Traveling Shoes (1986). Another installment in 

Angelou's continuing autobiography. 

. Now Sheba Sings the Song (1987). Poetry. 

Baldwin, James. Go Tell It on the Mountain (1953). 

. Giovanni's Room (1956). 

. Nobody Knows My Name (1961). 

. Another Country (1962). 

. The Fire Next Time (1963). 

Bontemps, Arna. Black Thunder (1936). Harlem Renaissance writer's account 
of a slave's struggle for freedom, with overtones of the racism and 
poverty of the 1930s. 

Cheatham, K. Follis. Bring Home the Ghost (1980). Set on the western frontier 
of the 1830s. 

. The Best Way Out (1982). A thirteen-year-old starts junior high school 

poorly, but learns, with special help, of his talents and of the value of 
family 

Children, Alice. A Hero Ain't Nothin But a Sandwich (1973). 

. Rainbow Jordan (1981). A girl adjusts to her mother's rejection and to 

life with her stepmother. 

Cooper, J. California. Homemade Love (1986). Short stories. 



91 



Brainstorming a Canon 



85 



Daughters of the Dust. Film by Julie Dash. A Gullah family from a sea island 
off the South Carolina-Georgia coast migrates north. Characters 
symbolize deities. 

Ellison, Ralph. Invisible Man (1947). Blockbuster modernist novel about a 
young man searching for identity in a racist world. 

Fuller, Charles. A Soldier's Play (1982). World War II story of murder in a 
segregated army. 

Gaines, Ernest }. The Autobiography of Miss Jane Pittman (1971). Depicts the life 
of a woman who lives long enough to see freedom. 

. A Gathering of Old Men (1983). Several old men from the backwoods 

of Louisiana get a second chance. 

Gates, Henry Louis, Jr., ed. The Classic Slave Narratives (1987). Personal 

narratives of Frederick Douglass, Olaudah Equiano, Harriet Jacobs, 
and Mary Prince. 

Gilman, Michael. Matthew Henson: Explorer (1988). Biography of the explorer 
who accompanied Robert Peary to the North Pole. 

Giovanni, Nikki. Black Feeling, Black Talk (1983). Twenty-six poems describing 
black experience. 

Glory (1990). Film. Civil War story of the courage of the first African Ameri- 
can regiment, suffering bigotry while fighting for their honor. 

Glover, Vivian. The First Fig Tree (1987). Ellen, born into slavery, is not certain 
of the coming changes when Roosevelt declares war on Japan. 

Guy, Rosa. The Disappearance (1979). An inner-city teen comes to live with a 
middle-class family and must solve a murder to save himself. 

. New Guys around the Block (1983). Sequel to The Disappearance. 

. And I Heard a Bird Singing (1987). Sequel to New Guys around the Block. 

. The Ups and Downs of Carl Davis III (1989). 

Haley, Alex. Rcois (1976). The struggle of black Americans as seen through 
one family's odyssey. 

Hamilton, Virginia. The House of Dies Drear (1968). 

. The Planet of Junior Brown (1971). 

. M. C. Higgins the Great (1974). 

. Arilla Sun Down (1976). 

. Sweet Whispers, Brother Rush (1982). 

. The Magical Adventures of Pretty Pearl (1983). 

. Willie Bea and the Time the Martians handed (1983). 

. A Little Love (1984). 

. Junius Over Far (1985). 

. The People Could Fly: American Black Folktales (1985). 

. A White Romance (1987). 



86 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Hansberry, Lorraine. A Raisin in the Sun (1959). Tragic play about a family 
torn apart through despair and misunderstanding. 

Hansen, Joyce. Home Boy (1982). A young Caribbean boy moves to the South 
Bronx and gets into trouble defending himself against the taunts of 
others. 

Haskins, James. Black Dance in America: A History through Its People (1990). 
The history of African American dance, from slaves forced to exercise 
to innovative contemporary dancers. 

Himes, Chester. Lonely Crusade (1947). Tough look at the isolation and 
pressures facing the African American male. 

. The Real Cool Killers (1959). 

. Cotton Comes to Harlem (1965). 

. A Rage in Harlem (1965). 

. Run Man Run (1966). 

. Blind Man with a Pistol (1969). 

Hunter, Kristin. God Bless the Child (1964). 

. The Soul Brothers and Sister Lou (1968). 

. Lou in the Limelight (1981). Girls in Las Vegas seeking fame are 

exploited until a surrogate mother helps. 

Hurmence, Belinda. Tough Tiffany (1980). An eleven-year-old in rural North 
Carolina copes with her laige family. 

. A Girl Called Boy (1982). An eleven-year-old girl dislikes her slave 

heritage until she goes back in time and is taken captive by slave 
traders. 

. Taney (1984). A young girl searches for her mother and adjusts to 

freedom at end of the Civil War. 

Hurston, Zora Neale. Jonah's Gourd Vine (1934). 

. Mules and Men (19 .£). 

. Their Eyes Were Watching God (1937). A young woman learns about 

life, love, and marriage in rural Florida. 

Jacobs, Harriet. Incidents in the Life of a Slave Girl, Written by Herself XI 861). 
Autobiographic account of the horrors of slavery. 

Katz, William Loren. Breaking the Chains: African-American Slave Resistance 
(1990). Takes a look at slavery from the seventeenth century on, 
examining economic and historical causes, personal struggles, and the 
concept of freedom. 

Lee, Spike. All films. Prophetic look at an America we often do not want to 
see. 

Lester, Julius. To Be a Slave (1968). Compilation of reminiscences about life in 
slavery. 



Brainstorming a Canon 



87 



. This Strange New Feeling (1981). Short stories based on the true 

accounts of three enslaved couples. 

. Do Lord Remember Me (1985). A reverend looks back on his long life. 

Lyons, Mary E. Sorrow's Kitchen: The Life and Folklore ofZora Neale Hurston 
(1990). Biography of the woman who brought African American 
folklore to national attention. 

Madhubuti, Haki R. Black Men: Obsolete, Single, Dangerous? (1990). Discus- 
sions of life now and in the future. 

Marshall Paule. Brawn Girl, Brownstones (1959). 

. Praisesong for the Widow (1983). A woman inexplicably leaves on a 

cruise. 

Mathis, Sharon Bell. Brooklyn Story (1970). 

. Teacup Full of Roses (1972). 

. Listen for the Fig Tree (1974). 

. Cartwheels (1977). 

Mattox, Cheryl Warren, compiler and adaptor. Shake It to the One That You 
Love the Best: Play Songs and Lullabies from Black Musical Traditions 
(1989). African American history told through music and illustrations. 

McCannon, Dindga. Wilhemina Jones, Future Star (1980). An eighteen-year-old 
deals with life in Harlem in the 1960s. 

McKissack, Patricia, and Frederick McKissack. A Long Hard Journey: The Story 
of the Pullman Porter (1989). Explanation of the "tradition" of black 
porters and their labor union. 

McMillan, Terry ed. Breaking Ice: An Anthology of Contemporary African- 
American Fiction (1990). Five dozen authors of short stories. 

Milton, Joyce. Marching to Freedom: The Story of Martin Luther King, Jr. (1987). 
Major events in the life of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr. 

Morrison, Toni. The Bluest Eye (1970). 

. Sula (1973). 

. Song of Solomon (1977). 

.Tar Baby (1981). 

. Beloved (1987). 

. 7*22 (1992). 

Myers, Walter Dean. Fast Sam, Cool Clyde, and Stuff (1975). 

. It Ain't All for Nothin' (1978). 

.Hoops (1981). 

. The Legend ofTarik (1981). 

. Won't Know Till I Get There (1982). 

. Motown and Didi: A hove Story (1984). 



9< 



88 



Crossing the Mainstream 



; The Outside Shot (1984). Sequel to Hoops, 

. Fallen Angels (1988). A seventeen-year-old escapes Harlem for the 

honors of Vietnam. For older readers. 

. Malcolm X: By Any Means Necessary (1993). Biography. 

Naylor, Gloria. The Women of Brewster Place (1982). Women's struggles in the 
inner city. 

. Mama Day (1988). 

Parks, Gordon. The Learning Tree (1963). A twelve-year-old boy learns about 
racial violence. 

. To Smile in Autumn: A Memoir (1979). Autobiography. 

Reed, Ishmael. Mumbo Jumbo (1972). 

. The Last Days of Louisiana Red (1974). 

. Japanese by Spring (1993). 

Sanfield, Steve. The Adventures of High John the Conqueror (1988). Sixteen tales 
about the legendary black slave and folk hero who found victory over 
bondage. 

Shange, Ntozake. For Colored Girls Who Have Considered Suicide, When the 
Rainbow Is Ewu/(1975). 

. Spell #7; A Theater Piece in Ttvo Acts (1981). 

. Betsey Brown (1985). A teenager is caught between her father's 

interest in their African heritage and her mother's desire to fit into a 
white world. 

Southerland, Ellease. Let the Lion Eat Straw (1979). Struggles of a woman in 
Brooklyn. 

Tate, Eleanora E. The Secret of Gumbo Grove (1987). Raisin learns about black 
history and about the mystery of the famous person buried in the 
New Africa No. 9 Missionary Baptist Church Cemetery. 

Taylor, Mildred D. Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry (1976). Racism in rural 
Mississippi before and during the depression. 

. Let the Circle Be Unbroken (1981). Sequel to Roll of Thunder, Hear My 

Cry. 

. The Road to Memphis (1989). 

Terry, Wallace. Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans 

(1984). Twenty veterans' accounts of heroism, racism, and the horror 
of war. 

Thomas, Joyce Carol. Marked by Fire (1982). A young girl has to overcome the 
trauma of both a tornado and a physical assault. 

. Bright Shadow (1983). Sequel to Marked by Fire. 

. Water Girl (1986). A young girl wants to know why the injustices of 

the past were allowed to happen. 



95 



Brainstorming a Canon 



89 



Walker, Alice. In Love and Trouble: Stories of Black Women (1973). 

. The Color Purple (1982). A woman's struggle through child abuse, 

poverty, and racism toward affirmation, friendship, and love. 

. In Search of Our Mothers' Gardens: Womanist Prose (1983). 

Walter, Mildred Pitts. The Girl on tiie Outside (1982). Based on the Central 

High School integration fury in Little Rock, Arkansas, 1957. Portrays 
the fear and emotions of students on both sides. 

. Because We Are (1983). An honors student is transferred to a segre- 
gated school. 

. Trouble's Child (1985). A fourteen-year-old on an isolated island off 

the coast of Louisiana must make decisions about her future. 

Washington, Mary Helen, ed. Invented Lives: Narratives of Black Women, 1860- 
1960 (1987). Chronological anthology. 

Wideman, John Edgar. Damballah (1981). Harsh tales set in Home wood, a 
Pittsburgh ghetto. 

. Hiding Place (1981). More Homewood tales. 

. Sent for You Yesterday (1983). More Homewood tales. 

. Brothers and Keepers (1984). Autobiographic account of two brothers. 

Wilkins, Roy (with Tom Mathews). Standing Fast: The Autobiography of Roy 
WiMns (1982). History of the civil rights movement, with attitudes 
and actions toward African Americans on the part of presidents from 
Roosevelt to Carter. 

Wilkinson, Brenda. LudelVs New York Time (1980). A girl struggles with her 
new life in Harlem before returning to Georgia. 

Williams, John A. Africa: Her History, Lands, and People (1962). 

. The Man Who Cried I Am (1967). 

. Sons of Darkness, Sons of Light: A Novel of Some Probability (1969). 

. Captain Blackman (1972). 

. IClick Song (1982). 

. Jacob's Ladder (1987). 

Williams, Juan. Eyes on the Prize: America's Civil Rights Years, 1954-1965 (1987). 
The history of the civil rights movement through stories and photo- 
graphs. Also part of a superb PBS video series. 

Wilson, Harriet E. Our Nig; or, Sketches from the Life of a Free Black (1859). 

Combination slave narrative and melodrama depicting the brutality of 
indentured servitude. 

Wright, Richard. Uncle Tom's Children (1938). Short stories. 

. Native Son (1940). A story about racism and entrapment that shocked 

American sensibilities. 

. Black Boy (1945). Autobiographic story of Wrighf s youth. 



96 



102 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Anaya, Rudolfo A., and Antonio Marquez, eds. Cuentos Chicanos: A Short 
Story Anthology (1980). 

Anzaldua, Gloria. Borderlands: The New Mestiza (1987). Poetry and prose 
about being caught between two cultures. 

Arias, Ron. The Road to Tamazunchale (1975). An old man dying in the barrio 
has a wonderful time superimposing fantasy on reality. 

Avendano, Fausto. El Corrido de California: A Three Act Play (1979). Events 
surrounding the occupation of California in 1846. 

Baca, Jimmy Santiago. Martin; and, Meditations on the South Valley (1987). 

Lyrical narratives about the struggle between middle-class and rural 
poor life. 

The Ballad ofGregorio Cortez (1984). Film. Classic ballad of a Mexican hero 
running from the Texas Rangers. Based on a popular corrido. 

Candelaria, Nash. Memories of the Alhambra (1977). Hero's search for cultural 
roots leads him first to Mexico and then to Spain. 

. Not by the Sword (1982). Historical sequel goes back to the mid-1850s. 

. The Inheritance of Strangers (1985). Historical look at Hispanic New 

Mexico. 

Cervantes, Lorna Dee. Emplumada (1981). Limitations of patriarchal society. 

Chavez, Denise. The Last of the Menu Girls (1986). Seven interrelated stories 
about Chicanas' everyday experiences. 

Cisneros, Sandra. The House on Mango Street (1983). Prose poem vignettes 
about a girl growing up in urban America. 

. Woman Hollering Creek and Other Stories (1991). 

Corpi, Lucha. Palabras de Mediodia: Noon Words (1980). 

. Delia's Song (1988). A woman's perspective on life, loyalty, politics, 

and relationships. 

De Casas, Celso A. Pelon Drops Out (1979). Satire about a young man who 
drops out of college to learn about life. 

De Hoyos, Angela. Arise, Chicano! and Other Poems (1980). 

De Leon, Nephtali. Chicanos: Our Background and Our Pride (1972). 

. Chicano Poet: With Images and Visions of the Poet (1973). 

Dwyer, Carlota Cardenas de. Chicano Voices (1975). Anthology. 

EUzondo, Sergio. Libro para batos y chawlas Chicanas (A Book for Chicano Guys 
and Gals) (1977). Younger teens' relationships with whites. 

Fincher, Ernest. Mexico and the United States: Their Linked Destinies (1983). 

Survey of economic, political, and historical interactions between the 
two countries. 

Galarza, Ernesto. Barrio Boy (1971). A family migrates from Mexico to Sacra- 
mento. Historical information. 



109 



90 



Crossing the Mainstream 



X, Malcolm (with Alex Haley). The Autobiography of Malcolm X (1965). 

Yarbrough, Camille. The Shimmershine Queens (1990). A young girl learns to 
glow with "srummershine" and pride because of her African heritage. 

Young, Al. The Song Turning Back into Itself (1971). Poetry. 

. Ask Me Now (1980). 

. The Blues Don't Change (1982). 

. Seduction by light (1988). 

Asian American Literature 

Until recently/Asian American literature got little attention. Yet writing 
by Asian Americans began at least seven generations ago and continues 
to thrive all over the country. Pioneering efforts to recognize this corpus 
of work have resulted in several popular anthologies. These antholo- 
gies have, in turn, ushered in an increasing interest in the poets, writers, 
and playwrights who, tinder the umbrella label " Asian American/' rep- 
resent a variety of ethnic and cultural groups. Below is a sampling of 
the literature available to those interested in pursuing this broad range 
of work. 

General 

Asian Women United of California, eds. Making Waves: An Anthology of 

Writings by and about Asian American Women (1989). Poems, memoirs, 
essays, and fiction from a woman's perspective. 

Bruchac, Joseph, ed. Breaking Silence: An Anthology of Contemporary Asian 
American Poets (1983). Fifty poets, with autobiographic statements. 

Chan, Jeffrey Paul, Frank Chin, Lawson Inada, and Shawn Wong, eds. The 
Big Aiiieeeee! An Anthology of Chinese American and Japanese American 
Literature (1991). Collection of short stories, poetry, historical docu- 
ments, and other work. 

Chin, Frank, Jeffrey Paul Chan, Lawson Inada, and Shawn Wong, eds. 

Aiiieeeee! An Anthology of Asian-American Writers (1974). Writings that 
challenge old stereotypes and "claim America" for Americans of Asian 
descent. 

Chock, Eric, et al., eds. Talk Story: An Anthology of Hawaii's Local Writers 
(1978). 

Chock, Eric, and Darrell Lurn, eds. The Best of Bamboo Ridge: The Hawaii 
Writers' Quarterly (1986). Special issue. 

Geok-lin, Shirley, Mayumi Tsutakawa, and M. Donnelly, eds. The Forbidden 
Stitch: An Asian-American Women's Anthology (1988). The poetry, prose, 
and art of new and established writers and artists. 



S7 



Brainstorming a Canon 



91 



Hagedorn, Jessica, ed. Charlie Chan Is Dead: An Anthology of Contemporary 
Asian American Fiction (1993). 

Hongo, Garrett, ed. The Open Boat: Poems from Asian America (1993). 

Hsu, Kai-yu, and Helen Palubinskas, eds. Asian-American Authors (1972). 
Stories and poems about Asian American identity, maternalism, and 
assimilation. 

Cambodian 

Crew, Linda. Children of the River (1989). Forced from Cambodia by the 

Khmer Rouge, a seventeen-year-old honors student tries to adjust to 
American customs and romance in Oregon. 

i/zymusiak, Molyda. The Stones Cry Out: A Cambodian Childhood, 1975-1980 
(1986). Autobiographic account of the honors of war. 

Chinese 

Berssenbrugge, Mei-mei. Fish Souls (1971). 

. Summits Move with the Tide (1974). 

. Random Possession (1979). 

. The Heat Bird (1983). 

. Empathy (1989). 

. Sphericity (1993). 

Chang, Diana. The Frontiers of Love (1956). 

. The Only Game in Town (1963). 

. Eye to Eye (1974). 

Chin, Frank. The Chickencoop Chinaman; and, Tlie Year of the Dragon: Two Plays 
(1981). 

. The Chinaman Pacific & Frisco R.R. Co. (1988). Short stories about 

Chinese American history and contemporary experiences. 

. Donald Duk (1991). Dream sequences of a young man seeking his 

identity. 

Chin, Marilyn. Dwarf Bamboo (1987). Poetry on urban experiences. 

Chu, Louis. Eat a Bowl of Tea (1961). A young couple faces the demands of 
adjusting to life in America. 

Far, Sui-sin [Edith Maude Eaton]. "In the Land of the Free/ 7 "Leaves from the 
Mental Portfolio of an Eurasian/ 7 "The Story of One White Woman 
Who Married a Chinese/ 7 "Her Chinese Husband. 77 Among the first 
works published by an Asian American author, Far 7 s stories depict the 
exploitation suffered by her family. 

A Great Wall (1987). Film. A Chinese American family learns about their 
history. 



88 




92 Crossing the Mainstream 



He Liyi. The Spring of Butterflies and Other Folktales of China's Minority Peoples 
(1986). 

Hwang, David Henry. Broken Promises: Four Plays (1983). 

. M. Butterfly (1988). 

. FOB and Other Plays (1990). 

Kingston, Maxine Hong. The Woman Warrior: Memoirs of a Girlhood among 
Ghosts (1976). A young woman finds identity through myth and 
reality. 

. China Men (1980). 

. Tripmaster Monkey: His Fake Book (1989). 

Kuo, Alex. The Window Tree (1971). Poetry. 

. New Letters from Hiroshima and Other Poems (1974). Poetry. 

. Changing the River (1986). Powerful poetic images of life, land, 

emotion, and silence. 

Lai, H. Mark, Genny Lim, and Judy Yung, eds. Island: Poetry and History of 
Chinese Immigrants on Angel Island, 1910-1940 (1986). 

Lau, Alan Chong. Songs for Jadina (1980). Poetry mingling life in California 
with that of "the nameless ones" who came before. 

Lau, Carolyn. Wode Shuofa: My Way of Speaking (1988). Complex poems on 
Chinese tradition and American language. 

Li Fei-kan. The Family. 

Lo Kuan-chung. Romance of the Three Kingdoms. 

Louie, David Wong. Pangs of Love (1991). Short stories. 

Lowe, Pardee. Father and Glorious Descendant (1943). Early days in San 
Francisco's Chinatown. 

Lum, Wing Tek. Expounding the Doubtful Points (1987). Poetry about familial 
and domestic experiences. 

New Year (1987). Film by Valerie Soe. A fourth-generation Chinese American 
girl looks at negative stereotypes. 

Ng, Fae Myenne. Bone (1992). Debut novel. 

Nieh, Hua-iing. Mulberry and Peach: Two Women of China (1986). A tale about 
running from oppression. 

Shih Nai-an. Water Margin. 

Tan, Amy. The Joy Luck Club (1989). Short vignettes about women in pre-war 
China and their daughters growing up in California. 

Wei, Katherine, and Terry Quinn. Second Daughter: Growing Up in China, 
1930-1949 (1984). Leaving China at age nineteen, a young woman 
gives a detailed account of rural and city life in China during the war. 

Wong, Jade Snow. Fifth Chinese Daughter (1950). Autobiographic story of a young 
girl's attempt to reconcile ethnic pride with assimilation in the 1930s. 



99 



Brainstorming a Canon 



93 



Wong, Nellie. Dreams in Harrison Railroad Park (1977). Poetry. 

. The Death of Long Steam Lady (1986). Poetry. 

Wong, Shawn. Homebase (1979). A young man struggles with dual identity. 

Yee, Paul. Tales from Gold Mountain: Stories of the Chinese in the New World 
(1989). Eight stories — with accompanying paintings — about the 
traditions, living conditions, dreams, and values of Chinese 
immigrants. 

Yep, Laurence. Dragonxvings (1975). A young boy and his father in early 
twentieth-century San Francisco attempt to make a flying machine. 

. Child of the Owl (1977). A young girl tries to adopt her grandmother's 

beliefs. 

. Sea Glass (1979). A young Chinese American boy faces prejudice in 

California. 

. Dragon of the Lost Sea (1982). A fantasy tale based on Chinese myth. 

. The Mark Twain Murders (1982). Mark Twain and a young friend 

attempt to investigate a murder. 

. Dragon Steel (1985). Fantasy tale of a dragon princess whose way is 

blocked by supernatural creatures. 

. Mountain Light <1985). An adventure story set in nineteenth-century 

China. 

. Monster Makers, Inc. (1986). Science fiction tale of a scientist's creation 

of mini-monsters. 

Filipino 

Bulosan, Carlos. America Is in the Heart (1946). A young man learns about the 
hardships of life in America. 

Hagedorn, Jessica Tarahata. Dogeaters (1990). Difficult but rewarding novel 
about growing up in upper-middle-class Manila. 

Santos, Bienvenido. You Lovely People (1966). A look at second-class citizen- 
ship and disappearing identity. 

. Scent of Apples (1979). Short stories. 

Villanueva, Marianne. Ginseng and Other Tales from Manila (1991). Poignant 
stories about urban violence, rural poverty, and the courage of the 
Philippine people. 

Hmong 

Moore, Dave, ed. Dark Sky, Dark Land: Stories of the Hmong Boy Scouts of Troop 
100 (1989). From atrocities in Laos and Cambodia to difficulties in 
Eden Prairie, Minnesota. 

Numrich, Charles H., ed. Living Tapestries: Folktales of the Hmong (1985). 



100 



94 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Indian 

Mukherjee, Bharati. Jasmine (1989). A Hindu woman in rural Iowa learns to 
adapt to a different world. 

. The Middletnan and Other Stories (1988). Short stories. 

Pevsner, Stella. Lindsay, Lindsay, Fly Away Home (1983). A sixteen-year-old 
must move from India to the United States to live with her aunt. 

Japanese 

Armor, John, and Peter Wright. Manmnar (1988). Photographs by Ansel 

Adams. Commentary by John Hersey. Description of life in Manzanar, 
a "relocation center" during World War EL 

Come See ike Paradise (1991). Film about a Japanese/Caucasian liaison during 
the internment. 

Family Gathering: A Search for a Japanese-American Past (1988). Film. A grand- 
daughter searches for facts about her family's internment. 

Hamanaka, Sheila. The Journey: Japanese Americans, Racism, and Renewal 

(1990). An illustrated description of Japanese American experiences 
during World War II. 

Hiroshima Maiden (1988). Film. A World War II A-bomb survivor comes to live 
in the United States. 

Hongo, Garrett Kaoru. Yellow Light (1982). Poetry. 

. The River of Heaven (1988). Poetry about life in Hawaii and mainland 

experiences. 

Houston, Jeanne Wakatsuki, and James D. Houston. Farewell to Manzanar: A 
True Story of Japanese American Experience during and after the World War 
II Internment (1973). 

Inada, Lawson Fusao. Before the War: Poems as They Happened (1971). 

. Legends from the Camp (1992). Poetry. 

Kadohata, Cynthia. The Floating World (1989). A young woman's memories of 
the difficulty Japanese Americans had in finding work after World 
WarH. 

. In the Heart of the Valley of Love (1992). 

Kaneko, Lonny. "The Shoyu Kid" (1976). Life in America behind barbed wire. 

Kashiwagi, Hiroshi. Laughter and False Teeth (1975). A play about the bitter- 
sweet humor of life for a woman in a concentration camp. 

Kawabata, Yasunari. Snow Country (1956). 

Mirikitani, Janice. Shedding Silence (1987). Poetry. 

Mishima, Yukio. The Sound of Waves (1956). Forbidden love in rural Japan. 

Mori, Toshio. Yokohama, California (1949). Vignettes of life in San Francisco's 
East Bay. 



101 



Brainstorming a Canon 



95 



Mura, David. After We Lost Our Way (1989). Poetry. 

. Turning Japanese: Memoirs of a Sansei (1991). 

Murayama, Milton. All I Asking for Is My Body (1975). Criticism of 
authoritarianism in the Japanese American community. 

Okada, John. No-No Boy (1957). Ayoung man is stigmatized after refusing to 
go to war. 

Okimoto, Jean Davies. Molly by Any Other Name (1990). A seventeen-year-old 
adopted girl fights to learn her true identity. 

Okita, Dwight. "In Response to Executive Order 9066." Poem in Bruchac's 
Breaking Silence. 

Okubo, Mine. Citizen 13660 (1946). 

Saiki, Jessica K. Once, a Lotus Garden, and Other Stories (1987). Complexities of 
ethnic identity. 

. From the Lanai and Other Hawaii Stories (1991). Short stories about 

Japanese Americans in Hawaii before and during World War II. 

Shirota, Jon. Lucky Came Hawaii (1965). 

Sone, Monica. Nisei Daughter (1953). Events leading up to and during the 
internment of a Seattle-born Japanese American. 

Takeda, Izumo. Kanadehen Chushingura. 

Tanizaki, Juruchiro. Some Prefer Nettles (1955). 

Uchida, Yoshiko. The Dancing Kettle and Other Japanese Folktales (1949). 

. Desert Exile: The Uprooting of a Japanese-American Family (1982). 

. Picture Bride (1987). A young girl comes to the United States for an 

arranged marriage. 

Yamada, Mitsuye. Camp Notes and Other Poems (1976). 

. Desert Run: Poems and Stories (1988). 

Yamamoto, Hisaye. Seventeen Syllables and Other Stories (1988). Japanese 
Americans before and after World War II. 

Yamasaki, Minoru. A Life in Architecture (1979). 

Yamauchi, Wakako. And the Soul Shall Dance: A Play in Two Acts (1977). An 
Asian American's search for identity in a racist environment. 

Yoshikawa, Eiji. Miyamoto Musashi (1953). 
Korean 

Choi, Sook Nyul. Year of Impossible Goodbyes (1991). 

Hwang, Sun-won. Cranes in Flowers of Fire: Twentieth-Century Korean Stories. 

Hyun, Peter. Man Sei! The Making of a Korean American (1986). 

Kang, Younghill. The Grass Roof (1931). A young man's life in Korea before 
coming to the United States. 



102 



96 



Crossing the Mainstream 



. East Goes West: The Making of an Oriental Yankee (1937). A young man 

in America. 

Kim, Richard E. The Martyred (1964). 

Kim, Ronyoung. Clay Walls (1986). Early experiences of Korean immigrants 
in the United States. 

Lew, Walter. "Leaving Seoul: 1953." Poem in Bruchac's Breaking Silence. 

Song, Cathy. Picture Bride (1983). Poetry about Asian American life and 
immigrant ancestors. 

Vietnamese 

Alamo Bay (1985). Film about a conflict between Texas fishermen and Viet- 
namese refugees. 

Hayslip, Le Ly. When Heaven and Earth Changed Places: A Vietnamese Woman s 
Journey from War to Peace (1989). Survival during the Vietnam War. 

Huynh, Sanh Thong, ed. The Heritage of Vietnamese Poetry (1979). 

Nguyen Ngoc Ngan. The Will of Heaven: The Story of One Vietnamese and the 
End of His World (1982). 

Tran Thi Nga and Wendy Wilder Larsen. Shallow Graves: Two Women and 
Vietnam (1986). Poetry. 

Tran Van Dinh. Blue Dragon, White Tiger: A Tet Story (1983). Experiences of 
Vietnamese immigrants. 

Truong Nhu Tang. A Vietcong Memoir (1985). Former government official tells 
of war and politics from the Vietnamese point of view. 

Vuong, Lynette D. The Brocaded Slipper and Other Vietnamese Tales (1982). 

Jewish Literature 

Beach and Marshall (1991) identify a variety of contemporary Jewish 
writers, including Saul Bellow, Philip Roth, Bernard Malamud, Norman 
Mailer, J. D. Salinger, Grace Paley, Arthur Miller, Cynthia Ozick, Isaac 
Bashevis Singer, Woody Allen, Stanley Elkin, and E. L. Doctorow. Many 
more can be found in the canon. Included in the list below are a few 
books that attempt to provide some historical information, books by 
authors who have already been acknowledged as great artists, and some 
books by new writers, especially in the area of young adult literature. 

Angell, Judie. One-way to Ansonia (1985). A young immigrant in the 1890s 
struggles to keep her dream alive. 

Arnold, Caroline, and Herma Silverstein. Anti-Semitism: A Modern Perspective 
(1985). Historical look at anti-Semitism around the world. 

Arrick, Fran. Chernowitz! (1981). Longtime friends are at odds when an anti- 
Semitic bully starts trouble. 



103 



Brainstorming a Canon 



97 



Asher, Sandy. Daughters of the Law (1981). A young girl feels guilty because 
she is the child of concentration camp survivors. 

Asheri, Michael. Living Jewish: The Lore and Law of Being a Practicing Jew 
(1983). Answers questions about Judaism. 

Barrie, Barbara. Lone Star (1990). A girl whose family has moved from 

Chicago to Corpus Christi, Texas, tries to adjust, while her family tries 
to maintain Jewish traditions and cope with the war in Europe. 

Baum, Charlotte, and Paula Hyman. The Jewish Woman in America (1976). 
From sweatshop workers to overprotected wives. 

Bellow, Saul. The Adventures ofAugie March (1953). A young man travels all 
over America in search of American experience. 

, ed. Great Jewish Short Stories (1963). Selections from Singer, Paley, the 

Agada, and more. 

Blair, Cynthia. Crazy in Lwe (1988). A girl gives up her chance for romance 
because the boy is Puerto Rican. 

Cohen, Barbara. People Like Us (1987). A teenager is caught between follow- 
ing her parents' wishes for her not to date outside her religion and her 
love for the star quarterback. 

Dershowitz, Alan M Chutzpah (1991). Discusses the "otherness" of Jewish 
Americans, living as guests in one's own home. 

Doctorow, E. L. World's Pair (1985). Growing up in a lower-middle-class 
family in the Bronx during the 1930s. 

Finkelstein, Norman H. The Other 1492: Jewish Settlement in the New World 
(1989). Account of the persecution of Jews in Europe and of Jewish 
settlement in the New World. 

Girion, Barbara. A Tangle of Roots (1979). A family comes to terms with grief 
over their mother's death. 

Gold, Michael. Jews without Money (1930). Growing up as a Rumanian 
immigrant on the Lower East Side of New York at the turn of the 
century. 

Goldreich, Gloria, ed. A Treasury of Jewish Literature from Biblical Times to Today 
(1982). Sampling from the Torah, Talmud, Siddur, and Kabbalah 
through the literature of contemporary writers like Arthur Miller and 
Philip Roth. Historical settings and criticism. 

Greene, Bette. Summer of My German Soldier (1973). A young girl helps a 

prisoner of war escape and defies the prejudice of an Arkansas town. 

Hentoff, Nat. Boston Boy (1986). Vignettes about growing up in 1940s Boston, 
anti-Semitism, and jazz. 

Heyman, Anita. Exit from Home (1977). A boy breaks free from the yeshiva 
and political turmoil and makes his way to America. 

Hobson, Laura. Gentleman's Agreement (1947). A journalist pretends to be 
Jewish and is shocked by the prejudice he encounters. 



104 



98 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Howe, Irving. World of Our Fathers (1976). Journey of Eastern European Jews 
to America and the life they made. 

Kemelman, Hany. Sunday the Rabbi Stayed Home (1969). Early story in a series 
of mysteries involving Rabbi David Small. 

Kerr, M. E. If I Love You, Am I Trapped Forever? (1973). Prejudice in middle- 
class society. 

Konecky, Edith. Allegra Maud Goldman (1976). Trials and tribulations of 

growing up in 1930s Brooklyn. / 

Lasky, Kathryn. Pageant (1986). A young girl grows bored with stuffy friends 
and strives toward individuality. 

Lehrman, Robert. Juggling (1982). A cocky soccer player tries to join a team of 
immigrant Jews and to overcome his shyness with girls. 

Levine, Peter. From Ellis Island to Ebbetts Field: Sport and American Jewish 
Experience (1992). 

Levitin, Sonia. The Return (1987). An Ethiopian Falasha Jew journeys to Israel. 

. Silver Days (1989). A family escapes from Nazi Germany and tries to 

build a life in the United States. 

Levoy, Myron. Alan and Naomi (1977). Friendship between Alan and Naomi 
grows as he breaks through her troubled memories of her father's 
murder by Nazis. 

Lewis, Bernard. Semites and Anti-Semites: An Inquiry into Conflict and Prejudice 
(1986). 

Malamud, Bernard. The Natural (1952). Baseball story. 

. The Assistant (1957). Struggle between religious beliefs and adoles- 
cence. For older students. 

Marzollo, Jean. Do You Love Me, Harvey Burns? (1983). Romantic relationship 
between teens. 

Mayer, Egon. Love and Tradition: Marriage between Jews and Christians (1985). 
The ongoing struggle between love and tradition. 

Mazer, Harry. The Last Mission (1979). A young Jewish boy lies about his age, 
goes to war, and is taken captive by the Germans. 

Mazer, Norma Fox. After the Rain (1987). A grandfather's illness and the love 
of his granddaughter. 

Meltzer, Milton, ed. The Jewish Americans: A History in Their Own Words, 1650- 
1950 (1982). Personal accounts of Jewish Americans from colonial 
times to the 1950s. 

Miklowitz, Gloria. Close to the Edge (1983). A teenager, thinking of suicide, 
becomes involved with Jewish senior citizens. 

Moline, Jack. Growing Up Jewish; or, Why Is This Book Different from All Other 
Books? (1987). A rabbi discusses being Jewish. 

Morales, Aurora Levins, and Rosario Morales. Getting Home Alive (1986). Also 
listed in the Puerto Rican and cross-cultural sections. 



t05 



Brainstorming a Canon 



99 



Moskowitz, Faye. A Leak in the Heart: Tales from a Woman's Life (1985). Auto- 
biographic stories about an immigrant in the 1930s and 1940s. 

Olshan, Joseph. A Warmer Season (1987). A young man learns about his 
parents' separation, sex, the aged, and other cultures. 

Potok, Chaim. The Chosen (1967). Two adolescent boys from the Hassidic and 
Orthodox traditions have difficulty with expectations. 

. The Promise (1969). Sequel to The Chosen, 

. My Name Is Asher Lev (1972). 

. Davita's Harp (1985). A girl is surrounded by the unrest of the Great 

Depression and of the Spanish Civil War. 

Roiphe, Anne. Lovingkindness (1987). Radical feminist mother is heartbroken 
when her daughter joins an Orthodox sect in Jerusalem. 

Rosofsky, Iris. Miriam (1988). A girl questions life, religion, and faith after the 
death of her thirteen-year-old brother. 

Roth, Henry. Call It Sleep (1934). A young boy struggles to assimilate. Roth 
uses Joyce's stream-of consciousness to portray the boy's develop 
ment in his urban neighborhood. 

Roth, Philip. Goodbye, Columbus (1959). Struggle between religion and 
rejection of belief. For older students. 

. Portnoy's Complaint (1969). A young man struggles with sex and "the 

gentile girl/' 

. Our Gang (1971). Ridicules Nixon's politics. 

. The Great American Novel (1973). 

Kuby, Lois. Two Truths in My Pocket (1982). Six stories about adolescence told 
through the eyes of teenagers facing the problems of being Jewish 
today. 

Schulberg, Budd. What Makes Sammy Run? (1941). The corruption of Holly- 
wood in its early days. 

Schwartz, Howard. Miriam's Tambourine: Jewish Folktales from around the World 
(1986). 

Shenker, Israel. Coat of Many Colors: Pages from Jewish Life (1985). Essays, 

stories, and interviews about Jewish culture, from ancient texts to life 
around the world today. 

Simon, Kate. Bronx Primitive: Portraits in a Childhood (1982). Biographic 
account of a Jewish Polish American girl growing up. 

. A Wider World: Portraits in an Adolescence (1986). Memoirs of teen life 

in depression-era New York. 

Simon, Neil. Brighton Beach Memoirs (1984). Fifteen-year-old Eugene grows 
up in a lower-middle-class family dining the depression. 

Singer, Isaac Bashevis. Yentl, the Yeshiva Boy (1983). A young woman poses as 
a boy to continue school. 



ioe 



100 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Tene, Benjamin. In the Shade of the Chestnut Tree (1981). Illustrated anecdotes 
about youth in a Polish Jewish ghetto. 

Weidman, Jerome. Fourth Street East: A Novel of How It Was (1970). Son of 
immigrant parents grows up on New York's Lower East Side in the 
1920s. 

Wiesel, Elie. Night (1960). Terrifying account of Wiesel's experience in a Nazi 
death camp. 

. Legends of Our Time (1968). Memories of friends and teachers and the 

anguished experience of a Holocaust survivor. 

Latino Literature 

This section includes a variety of Latino works, but it is by no means 
exhaustive. Latino literature spans races, cultures, and nationalities. 
Latino can, for example, refer to Chicanos, or to Cubans, or to Puerto 
Ricans, or to Hondurans, or to many, many other nationalities. Thus, 
the following literature — mostly Chicano, along with some Cuban and 
Puerto Rican — is a sampling of the literature of only the major popula- 
tions of "Latinos" in the United States. 

General 

Bethancourt, T. Ernesto. New York City, Too Far from Tampa Blues (1975). A 
musician adjusts to New York City life. 

. The Me Inside of Me (1985). A seventeen-year-old becomes a million- 
aire and learns that money can't buy everything. 

Duran, Daniel Hores. Latino Materials: A Multimedia Guide for Children and 
Young Adults (1979). An annotated list of book titles and films. 

El Norte (1984). Film. A sister and brother escape political oppression in 
Central America only to find misery in the United States. 

Garver, Susan, and Paula McGuire. Coming to North America: From Mexico, 
Cuba, and Puerto Rico (1981). The history and lifestyles of three major 
Latino groups: Mexicans, Cubans, and Puerto Ricans. 

Kanellos, Nicolas, and Jorge Huerta, eds. Nuevos Pasos: Chicano and Puerto 
Rican Drama (1979). Anthology. 

Rios, Alberto Alvaro. The Iguana Killer: Twelve Stories of the Heart (1984). 

Portraits of young people grappling with questions of sex, friendship, 
and life. 

Schon, Isabel. A Hispanic Heritage: A Guide to Juvenile Books about Hispanic 
People and Cultures (1980). See more recent editions as well. 

Vigil, Evangelina, ed. Woman of Her Word: Hispanic Women Write (1983). 
Anthology. 



107 



Brainstorming a Canon 



101 



Cuban 

Hijuelos, Oscar. Our House in the Last World (1983). Influences of the Cuban 
homeland and life as an immigrant. 

. The Mambo Kings Play Songs of Love (1989). 

Mexican American 

In 1848, with the signing of the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo, much of 
the northern part of Mexico was ceded to the United States. Mexicans 
living on that land lost title to their property and many of their civil 
rights. This marks the beginning of what some call "Mexican American 
literature/' though the literary roots of Mexican American writers go 
farther back than those of English-speaking writers in the United States. 

The following is a sampling of artists who wrote before, during, 
and after the sixties "revolution" (the Chicano Movement) as well as 
some nonfiction and young adult fiction. For a more extensive listing, 
see Marie Stewart Frankson's "Chicano Literature for Young Adults: 
An Annotated Bibliography" (1990), which includes novels, short sto- 
ries, poehy, biographies, anthologies, and drama. Charles Tatum's (1990)' 
work has also been very helpful in forming this partial list. 

Abelardo. Chicano: 25 Pieces of a Chicano Mind (1969). 

. Here Lies Lalo: 25 Deaths of Abelardo (1977). 

Acosta, Oscar. The Autobiography of Brown Buffalo (1972). A young man 

struggles to find identity within two unaccepting cultures during the 
civil rights activism of the 1960s. 

. The Revolt of the Cockroach People (1973). 

Alurista. Return: Poems Collected and New (1982). Deals with the poet's role in 
the Chicano Movement. 

Anaya, Rudolf o A. Bless Me, Ultima (1972). A young boy's touching relation- 
ship with an old curandera, or faith healer, in New Mexico. 

. Heart ofAztian (1979). Illustrated by Morton Levin. A family struggles 

to hold on to their culture in a new setting. 

. Tortuga (1979). The spiritual and physical struggles of a disabled boy 

in a body cast sent to a Mexican hospital 

. The Silence of the Llano: Short Stories (1982). 

. The Legend of La Llorona: A Short Novel (1984). Historic tale of an 

Indian princess and of Cortez's conquest of the Aztecs. 

. Lord of the Dawn: The Legend of Quetzalcoatl (1987). A readable tale 

about the deity of the Toltecs. 



108 



Brainstorming a Canon 



103 



Garza, Roberto, ed. Contemporary Chicano Theatre (1976). Anthology. Includes 
several prominent playwrights. 

Harth, Dorothy, and Lewis Baldwin, eds. Voices ofAztlan: Chicano Literature of 
Today (1974). Anthology. 

Hernandez, Irene Beltran. Across the Great River (1989). A family's decision to 
leave Mexico for a better life in the United States leads to experiences 
with labor smugglers, a curandera, and the authorities. 

Hinojosa-Smith, Rolando. The Valley (1983). Multiple views of the Chicano 
culture of the Rio Grande Valley. 

—. . Partners in Crime: A Rafe Buenrostro Mystery (1985). A murder mystery 

with a surprise ending. 

. Klail City (1987). Sequel to The Valley. 

Mares, E. A. I Returned and Saw under the Sun: Padre Martinez of Taos (1989). 
Bilingual work of a legendary nineteenth-century New Mexican 
Catholic priest. 

Martinez, Julio,, and Francisco LomelL Chicano Literature: A Reader's Encyclo- 
pedia (1985). 

Martinez, Max. Schoolland (1988). A coming-of-age story about a schoolboy in 
Texas in the 1950s. 

Mora, Pat. Chants (1984). A powerful book that intertwines the desert with 
people's lives, loneliness, love, joy, and despair. 

Moraga, Cherrie. Giving Up the Ghost: Theater in Two Acts (1986). Chicana 
lesbian on the oppressive and abusive role of males in her culture. 

Morton, Carlos. The Many Deaths of Danny Rosales and Other Plays (1983). 
Satiric collection with social content. 

Ortiz y Pino, Jose. Curandero: A Cuento (1982). A romantic story about a 
beautiful girl, a handsome man, an accident, and refound love. 

Paredes, Americo, and Raymund Paredes. Mexican-American Authors (1972). 

Ranck, Katherine Quintana. Portrait of Dona Elena (1982). Love and accep- 
tance in an old New Mexican village. 

Rebolledo, Diana, Erlinda Gonzales-Berry, and Teresa Marquez, eds. Las 
Mujeres Hablan: An Anthology ofNuevo Mexicana Writers (1988). 

Rechy, John. City of Night (1963). Beautiful El Paso contrasted with life in the 
barrio. 

Rivera, Tomas. ynoselo trago la tierra / And the Earth Did Not Part (1971). 
Twelve related stories about a boy from a migrant farm family who 
can call nowhere home. 

. This Migrant Earth (1985). Rolando Hinojosa-Smith's translation of 

ynoselo trago la tierra. 

Rodriguez, Joe. TJie Oddsplayer (1988). Racism faced by soldiers during the 
Vietnam War. 



110 



1 



104 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Rodriguez, Richard. Hunger of Memory: The Education of Richard Rodriguez 
(1981). Autobiography. 

Sanchez, Ricardo. I Sing about My Liberation (1971). 

. Hechizospells (1976). 

. Selected Poems (1985). 

Schon, Isabel. A Bicultural Heritage: Themes for the Exploration of Mexican and 
Mexican-American Culture in Books for Children and Adolescents (1978). 

Soto, Gary. The Elements of San Joaquin (1977). Poetry. 

. The Tale of Sunlight (1978). Poetry. 

. Living up the Street (1985). Short stories portraying some of the 

positive experiences of living in the barrio. 

. Baseball in April and Other Stories (1990). Eleven short stories about 

teens in central California, sports, family issues, and the opposite sex. 

. Who Will Know Us? (1990). Poetry about boyhood in Fresno. 

Sweet 15 (1990). Film. A young girl prepares for a special birthday and learns 
that her father is an illegal immigrant. 

Tatum, Charles, ed. Mexican American Literature (1990). Anthology. 

Trambley, Estela. Trini (1986). A young girl matures through illegal migration 
and child birth. A haunting story of love and struggle. 

Valdez, Luis, and Stan Steiner, eds. Aztlan: An Anthology of Mexican American 
Literature (1972). Historical and contemporary excerpts relevant to 
modern-day Mexican Americans. 

Vasquez, Richard. Another Land (1982). 

Villanueva, Alma Luz. The Ultraviolet Sky (1988). A woman's complex and 
distressing relationships with her friends, her lover, her son, and 
others. 

Villarreal, Jose Antonio. Pocho (1959). A young artist struggles with Mexican 
and Anglo values, ultimately rejecting both. 

Puerto Rican 

Algarin, Miguel, and Miguel Pinero, eds. Nuyorican Poetry: An Anthology of 
Puerto Rican Words and Feelings (1975). 

Barrio, Raymond. The Plum Plum Pickers (1969). A bilingual work about the 
grim living conditions of migrant workers. 

Colon, Jesus. A Puerto Rican in New York and Other Sketches (1961). A young 
man :onfronts prejudices against his language and race. 

Cruz, Victor Hernandez. Mainland (1973). Poetry. 

. Tropicalization (1976). Poetry. 

. By Lingual Wholes (1982). Poetry. 



in 



Brainstorming a Canon 



105 



Flores, Juan. Divided Borders: Essays on Puerto Rican Identity (1993). Essays on 
the sociology and culture of Puerto Rico. 

Marzan, Julio, ed. Inventing a Word: An Anthology of Twentieth-Century Puerto 
Rican Poetry (1980). Bilingual anthology of twenty-three poets. 

Mohr, Eugene. The Nuyorican Experience: Literature of the Puerto Rican Minority 
(1982). 

Mohr, Nicholasa. Nilda (1973). 

. El Bronx Remembered: A Novella and Stories (1975). Twelve stories of 

survival. 

. In Nueva York (1977). Seven interrelated stories of a New York City 

Puerto Rican barrio. 

. Rituals of Survival: A Woman's Portfolio (1985). 

Morales, Aurora Levins, and Rosario Morales. Getting Home Alive (1986). Also 
listed in the Jewish and cross-cultural sections. 

Ortiz Colfer, Judith. The Line of the Sun (1989). Explores contrasts between 
"the tropical paradise'' and the streets of New Jersey. 

Rivera, Edward. Family Installments: Memories of Growing Up Hispanic (1982). 

Thomas, Piri. Down These Mean Streets (1967). A boy contrasts his mother's 
memories of Puerto Rico with his own growing up in East Harlem. 

. Savior, Savior Hold My Hand (1972). 

. Seven Times Long (1974). 

. Stories from El Barrio (1978). 

Vega, Bernardo. Memoirs of Bernardo Vega (1980). Translated by Juan Flores. 
Experiences of Puerto Rican workers in a cigar factory in New York 
City at the turn of the century. 

Native American Literature 

The Heath Anthology begins the "Colonial Period to 1700" with Native 
American creation stories, trickster tales, and historical narratives from 
the Winnebago, Pima, Zuni, Navajo, Hopi, Iroquois, Tlingit, and 
Tsimshian traditions. From the earliest of times in colonial history, then, 
Native Americans have been contributing to the cultural literacy of the 
United States. 

Among the following books are early myths, tales, ceremonial 
pieces, and other oral lore. A few nonfiction titles are also included. 
Mostly, however, I've listed some of the contemporary offerings that 
have exploded onto the literary scene in the last few decades. I would 
like to especially thank Dr. James Charles of the University of South 
Carolina at Spartanburg and Alex Kuo of Washington State University 
for providing me with many of the following titles. The work of the 



112 



106 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Native American Authors Distribution Project (1992) has also been ex- 
tremely helpful in formulating this list. They offer far more titles than I 
can include in this short space. 

Alexie, Sherman [Spokane/Coeur d'Alene]. The Business of Fancy Dancing 
(1992). Stories and poems. 

The Lone Ranger and Tonto Fistfight in Heaven (1993). Stories and 

poems. 

. Old Shirts and New Skins (1993). Poetry. 

Allen, Paula Gunn [Laguna Pueblo/Lakota]. Coyotes Daylight Trip (1978). 

. A Cannon between the Knees (1981). A woman's perspective on urban 

California and New Mexico. 

. Star Child (1981). Poetry. 

. Shadow Country (1982). Poetry. 

. The Woman Who Owned the Shadows (1983). 

> ed. Spider Woman's Granddaughters: Traditional Tales and Contemporary 

Writing by Native American Women (1989). Anthology. 

Allen, T. D„ ed. Arrows Four: Prose and Poetry by Young American Indians 
(1974). Anthology. 

Annharte [Anishinabe]. Being on the Moon. Poetry. 

Apes, William. A Son of the Forest: The Experience of William Apes, A Native of 
the Forest (1829). Autobiography. 

Armstrong, Jeanette [Okanagan]. Breathtracks. Poetry. 

. Enwhisteetkwa: Walk in Water. Poetry. 

. Slash. Poetry. 

Arnett, Carroll/Gogisgi [Cherokee]. Engine. Poetry. 

. Night Perimeter. Poetry. 

. Rounds. Poetry. 

Ashabranner, Brent [Cheyennel. Morning Star, Black Sun: The Northern 
Cheyenne Indians and Americas Energy Crisis (1982). The Northern 
Cheyenne struggle to choose between instant wealth and preservation 
of the land. 

Astrov, Margot, ed. The Winged Serpent: An Anthology of American Indian Prose 
and Poetry (1946). 

Awiakta, Marilou [Cherokee]. Abiding Appalachia (1978). Poetry. 

Bataille, Gretchen M., and Kathleen Mullen Sands. American Indian Women: 
Telling Their Lives (1984). Autobiographic accounts. 

Beal, Merrill. "/ Will Fight No More Forever": Chief Joseph and the Nez Perce War 
(1963). 



113 



Brainstorming a Canon 



107 



Bedford, Denton [Delaware]. Tsali (1972). 

Benai, Edward Benton [Anishinabe]. Generation to Generation. 

Bierhorst, John, ed. In the Trail of the Wind: American Indian Poems and Ritual 
Orations (1971). 

. The Sacred Path: Spells, Prayers, and Power Songs of the American Indians 

(1983). Chants, prayers, and songs about birth, love, hunting, farming, 
and death. 

Bigjim, Frederick Seagayuk [Inupiaql. Letters to Howard: An Interpretation of 
the Alaska Native Land Claims (1974). 

. We Talk, You Yawn: A Discourse on Education in Alaska (1985). 

. Sinrock. Poetry. 

. Walk the Wind. Poetry. 

Black Bear, Ben, and R. D. Theisz. Songs and Dances of the Lakota (1976). Song 
poems. 

Black Elk [Oglala Sioux], Black Elk Speaks: Being the Life Story of a Holy Man of 
the Oglala Sioux (1932). Autobiography, as told to John Neihardt. 

. The Sacred Pipe: Black Elk's Account of the Seven Rites of the Oglala Sioux 

(1953). 

. The Sixth Grandfather: Black Elk's Teachings (1984). 

Black Robe (1992). Film. The flip-side of Dances with Wolves. Jesuits journey to 
Quebec and clash with Algonquins. 

Blue Cloud, Peter [Mohawk]. White Corn Sister (1979). Celebrates the spiritual 
values of the land through Indian myth. 

. Sketches in Winter, with Crows (1984). Poetry. 

. The Paranoid Foothills. Poetry. 

Boyd, Doug. Rolling Thunder: A Personal Exploration into the Secret Healir^ 
Powers of an American Indian Medicine Man (1974). Documents a 
shaman's life. 

Brant, Beth [Mohawk]. Mohawk Trail (1985). 

. Food and Spirits (1991). Short stories. 

Brito, Silvester [Comanche/Tarascon], Looking through a Squared Off Circle 
(1985). Poetry. 

. Red Cedar Warrior (1986). Poetry. 

Broker, Ignatia [Ojibway]. Night Flying Woman (1983). An Ojibway girl moves 
with her family from the Northeast to the Midwest and is forced to 
give up living in "the old way/' 

Brown, Dee. Bury My Heart at Wounded Knee: An Indian History of the American 
West (1971). Chapter after chapter of broken treaties, broken promises. 

Brown, Emily Ivanoff [Inuit]. Tales ofTicasuk: Eskimo Legends and Stories 
(1987). 



114 



108 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Bruchac, Joseph, ed. [Abenaki]. Songs from This Earth on Turtles Back Contem- 
porary American Indian Poetry (1983). 

. Tracking (1986). Poetry. 

. Translator's Son, Poetry. 

. Turtle Meat and Other Stories (1992). Short stories. 

Burlin, Natalie Curtis, ed. The Indians' Book (1923). 
Campbell, Marie [Cree-Metis]. Halfbreed. 

Cannon, A. E. The Shadow Brothers (1990). A Navajo boy raised by whites 

encounters a Hopi who makes him think seriously about his heritage. 

Carter, Forrest. The Education of Little Tree (1976). 

. Watch for Me on the Mountain: A Novel of Geronimo and the Apache 

Nation (1978). 

Chief Eagle, Dallas. Winter Count (1967). Portrays a young Sioux couple's life 
from 1875 to 189Q. 

Clements, Susan [Blackfeet/Mohawk/Seneca]. The Broken Hoop. Poetry. 

. In the Moon When the Deer lose Their Horns (1993). Poetry. 

Cuero, Delfina. The Autobiography of Delfina Cuero, A Diegueno Indian (1968). 
Autobiography, with Florence Shipek. 

Cuthand, Beth [Cree]. Voices in the Waterfall Poetry. 

Deloria, Ella Cara [Sioux], Dakota Texts (1932). Oral narratives. 

Deloria, Vine [Sioux]. Custer Died for Your Sins: An Indian Manifesto (1969). 

Dorris, Michael [Modoc]. A Yellow Raft in Blue Water (1987). A daughter, a 

mother, and a grandmother on a Montana reservation tell their stories. 

. The Broken Cord (1989). 

Eastman, Charles Alexander [Ohiyesa]. Indian Boyhood (1902). Autobiography 
describing a traditional Sioux childhood. 

. Old Indian Days (1907). Autobiography. 

. From the Deep Woods to Civilization: Chapters in the Autobiography of an 

Indian (1916). Autobiography. 

Ehle, John. Trail of Tears: The Rise and Fall of the Cherokee Nation (1988). 

Erdoes, Richard, and Alfonso Ortiz, eds. American Indian Myths and Legends 
(1984). A wide-ranging compilation of myths and legends from many 
tribes, some sexually explicit. 

Erdrich, Louise [Turtle Mountain Chippewa]. Jacklight (1984). Poetry. 

. Love Medicine (1984). 

. The Beet Queen (1986). 

. Tracks- (1988). Lyric rhythms of traditional storytelling. 

Evers, Larry, ed. The South Corner of Time: Hopi, Navajo, Papago, Yaqui Tribal 
Literature (1981). Mixed-genre anthology. 



115 



Brainstorming a Canon 



109 



Evers, Larry, and Felipe Molina, eds. Yaqui Deer Songs/Maso Bwikam (1987). 
Song poems. Also on audiotape. 

Feldmann, Susan, ed. The Storytelling Stone: Myths and Tales of the American 
Indians (1965). Oral narratives. 

Fisher, Dexter, ed. The Third Woman: Minority Women Writers of the United 

States (1980). Includes selections from Mourning Dove, Kaky Bennett, 
Janet Campbell, Joy Harjo, Nia Francisco, Ramona Wilson, Anna Lee 
Walters, and Paula Gunn Allen. 

Freedman, Russell. Buffalo Hunt (1988). Explains the value and relationship of 
the buffalo to the Native Americans of the Great Plains and compares 
that to the misuse of this resource by whites. 

French, Alice [Inuit]. The Restless Nomad. 

Geiogamah, Hanay [Kiowa]. New Native American Drama: Three Plays (1980). 

Glancy, Diane [Cherokee]. Trigger Dance (1990). Short stories about Native 
Americans caught between worlds. 

. Claiming Breath (1992). Poetry. 

Grinnell, George Bird. Blackfoot lodge Tales: The Story of a Prairie People (1892). 
Hale, Janet Campbell [Coeur d'Alene]. The Owl's Song (1974). 

. The Jailing of Cecelia Capture (1985). 

Harjo, Joy [Creek]. What Moon Drove Me to This? (1979). Poetry. 

. She Had Some Horses (1983). Poetry. 

. In Mad Uwe and War (1990). Poetry. 

Henson, Lance [Cheyenne]. In a Dark Mist. Poetry. 
. This Small Sound. Poetry. 

Hinton, Leanne, and Lucille Watahomigie, eds. Spirit Mountain: An Anthology 
ofYuman Story and Song (1984). Mixed-genre anthology. 

Hobbs, Will [Ute]. Bearstand (1989). A fourteen-year-old whose mother is 
dead and father kept alive by machines resents his life and feels 
alienated at school and at work. 

Hobson, Geary, ed. [Cherokee/Quapaw/Chickasaw]. The Remembered Earth: 
An Anthology of Contemporary Native American Literature (1979). 

Hogan, Linda [Chickasaw]. Seeing through the Sun (1985). 

. Mean Spirit (1990). 

Humphrey, William. No Resting Place (1989). Story of the downfall of the 
Cherokee nation. 

James, J. Alison [Anasazi Pueblo]. Sing for a Gentle Rain (1990). A high school 
junior, fascinated by Anasazi dreams, meets a girl from the thirteenth 
century and falls in love. 

Josephy, Alvin. Biography Series of American Indians. Biographies of Apache, 
Iroquois, Cherokee, and other heroes. 



116 



110 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Kenny, Maurice [Mohawk]. Dancing Back. Poetry. 

.IAm the Sun. Poetry. 

. North: Poems from Home. Poetry. 

. Strong the Nation. Poetry 

Lame Deer [Sioux]. Lame Deer: Seeker of Visions (1972). Autobiography, with 
Richard Erdoes. 

Lesley, Craig, ed. Talking Leaves: Contemporary Native American Short Stories 
(1991). Winner of the 1992 Northwest Book Award. Louise Erdrich, 
Elizabeth Woody, Gerald VLzenor, Roger Jack, and Gloria Bird are 
some of the authors included in the thirty-eight selections. 

Marriott, Alice, and Carol Rachlin. American Indian Mythology (1968). Oral 
narratives. 

Maxwell, James A., ed. America's Fascinating Indian Heritage (1978). Explores 
eight geographical areas of North America and the diversity of 
cultures within. Contemporary Native Americans discuss issues. 

McCarthy, James. A Papago Traveler: The Memories of James McCarthy (1985). 
Autobiography, with John Westover. 

McNickle, DArcy [Salish/Kootenai]. The Surrounded (1936). 

. Runner in the Sun: A Story of Indian Maize (1954). 

. Wind from an Enemy Sky (1978). 

Milton, John R., ed. The American Indian Speaks (1969). Poems and short 

stories from Simon Ortiz, Norman Russell, Darlene McCarty, Curtis 
Link, Soge Track, and Janet Campbell. 

The Mission (1986). Film about South American Indians and proselytizing 
eighteenth-century Jesuits in Brazil. 

Momaday, N. Scott [Kiowa]. House Made of Dawn (1968). A young man 

struggles to overcome a hostile past. Difficult for secondary students. 

. The Way to Rainy Mountain (1969). 

. The Gourd Dancer (1976). Poetry. 

. The Names: A Memoir (1976). 

, ed. American Indian Authors (1971). Anthology features authors such 

as Chief Dallas Eagle, Thomas S. Whitecloud, Emerson Blackhorse 
Mitchell, Patty Harjo, Juanita Platero, Mendoza Durango, Grey Cohoe, 
N. Scott Momaday, James Welch, and Vine Deloria, Jr. 

Mourning Dove/Christine Quintasket [Colville]. Cogewea: The Half Blood 

(1927). Problems faced by a mixed-blood girl growing up in the early 
part of the century. 

. Coyote Stories (1933). 

Niatum, Duane [Klallam]. Carriers of the Dream Wheel: Contemporary Native 
American Poetry (1975). 



117 



Brainstorming a Canon 



111 



Oandasan, William [Yuki]. Round Valley Songs (1984). Poetry. 
. Moving Inland. Poetry. 

Ortiz, Simon [Acoma Pueblo]. Going for the Rain (1976). 

. Fight Back: For the Sake of the People, For the Sake of the Land (1980). 

. From Sand Creek (1981). Poetry. 

. Fightin': New and Collected Stories (1983). 

, ed. Earth Power Coming: Short Fiction in Native American Literature 

(1983). Short story anthology. 

Peyer, Bernard, ed. The Singing Spirit: Eight Short Stories by North American 
Indians (1989). 

Pitts, Paul. Racing the Sun (1988). Through his grandfather, a young man 
learns about the heritage his father rejected. 

Reedstrom, E. Lisle. Apache Wars: An Illustrated Battle History (1990). Illus- 
trated history of the group that resisted takeover longer than any 
other western tribe. 

Robinson, Margaret [Nootka]. A Woman of Her Tribe (1990). Half European 

American, half Nootka Indian, must a fifteen-year-old choose between 
cultures? 

Rose, Wendy [Hopi/Miwok]. Long Division: A Tribal History (1976). Poetry. 

. Academic Squaw: Reports to the World pom the Ivory Tower (1977). 

. Lost Copper (1980). Poetry. 

. What Happened When the Hopi Hit New York? (1982). Poetry. 

. The Halfbreed Chronicles and Other Poems (1985). Poetry. 

Rosen, Kenneth, ed. Voices of the Rainbow: Contemporary Poetry by American 
Indians (1975). Anthology. 

Sanchez, Carol Lee. Conversations from the Nightmare (1975). Poetry. 

. Coyote's Journal, 

. Morning Prayer. 

Sandoz, MarL The Story Catcher (1963). 

Silko, Leslie [Laguna Pueblo]. Laguna Woman (1974). Poetry. 

. Ceremony (1977). Mixed-blood Laguna returning home must seek 

healing through ceremony. 

. Storyteller (1981). 

. Almanac of the Dead (1991). 

Stedman, Raymond William. Shadows of the Indian: Stereotypes in American 
Culture (1982). Discusses distorted images and understanding and 
recognizing the Native American as a vital force in the modern world. 

Stensland, Anna Lee. Literature by and about the American Indian: An Annotated 
Bibliography (1979). 



ns 



112 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Storm, Hyemeyohsts. Seven Arrows (1972). 

. SongofHeyoehkah (1981). 

Tallmountain, Mary [Koyukon]. Continuum. Poetry. 

Tedlock, Dennis, ed. Finding the Center: Narrative Poetry of the Zuni Indians 
(1972). 

Theisz, R. D., ed. Buckskin Tokens: Contemporary Oral Narratives of the Lakota 
(1975). 

Tremblay, Gail [Micmac/Onondaga]. Indian Singing in Twentieth-Century 
America (1990). Poetry. 

Velie, Alan R., ed. American Indian Literature (1979). Anthology. Includes 
selections from Red Jacket, Lance Henson, and Simon Ortiz. 

Vizenor, Gerald [Chippewa]. Earthdivers: Tribal Narratives on Mixed Descent 
(1981). 

. Touchivood: A Collection ofOjibway Prose (1987). 

. The Trickster of Liberty: Tribal Heirs to a Wild Baronage (1988). 

. The Heirs of Columbus (1991). 

. Dead Voices: Natural Agonies in the New World (1992). 

Wallin, Luke [Creek]. In the Shadow of the Wind (1984). Problems arise when 
two sixteen-year-olds, Pine Basket, a Creek Indian, and Caleb, the son 
of white settlers, fall in love. 

Welch, James [Blackfeet/Gros Ventre]. Winter in the Blood (1974). 

. The Death of Jim honey (1979). 

. Fools Crow (1986). Historical novel about the massacre of a band of 

Blackfeet fighting to survive. 

. The Indian Lawyer (1990). 

Welsch, Roger. Omaha Tribal Myths and Trickster Tales (1981). Oral narratives. 

Where the Spirit Lives (1989). Film. A Blackfoot Indian girl is taken from home 
and relocated to a government boarding school. 

Whiteman, Roberta Hill [Oneida]. Star Quilt (1984). Poetry. 

Wiget, Andrew, ed. Native American Literature (1985). 

Wolfson, Evelyn. From Abenaki to Zuni: A Dictionary of Native American Tribes 
(1988). Description of sixty-eight Native American tribes, with maps, 
information about historical and contemporary ways of life, and other 
information. 

Young Bear, Ray [Mesquakie]. Winter of the Salamander: The Keeper of Impor- 
tance (1980). Poetry. 

. Black Eagle Child: The Facepaint Narratives (1992). 

Yue, Charlotte, and David Yue. The Igloo (1988). Illustrated description of the 
life of Alaskan Natives. 

Zepeda, Ofelia, ed. When It Rains: Papago and Pima Poetry (1982). Anthology. 



119 



Brainstorming a Canon 



113 



Cross-Cultural Literature 

Many multiethnic works are about mixed-blood people or individuals 
who find themselves struggling with dual identities. In "Making a Home 
of One's Own: The Young in Cross-Cultural Fiction 7 ' (1988), George 
Shannon suggests a number of titles, including: 

Jean Craighead George's Julie of the Wolves (1972) 
Virginia Hamilton's Arilla Sun Dawn (1976) 
Paule Marshall's Brown Girl, Brownstones (1959) 
Robert Screen's With My Face to the Rising Sun (1977) 
Laurence Yep's Child of the Owl (1977) and Sea Glass (1979) 

Greene (1988) adds Buchi Emecheta's Second-Class Citizen (1974) to the 
list. Furthermore, in the past few years, there has been an explosion of 
multicultural readers and anthologies. Several of these publications are 
discussed in chapter 14. Other titles follow. 

Beaty, Jerome, and J. Paul Hunter, eds. New Worlds of Literature (1989). A vast 
resource of culturally diverse literature. 

Beilke, Patricia, and Frank Sciara. Selecting Materials for and about Hispanic and 
East Asian Children and Young People (1986). 

Blicksilver, Edith. The Ethnic American Woman: Problems, Protests, Lifestyle 
(1978). 

Brown, Wesley, and Amy Ling, eds. Imagining America: Stories from the 
Promised Land (1991). Collection of fiction about early immigrants. 

Fisher, Dexter. The Third Woman: Minority Women Writers in the United States 
(1980). 

Haskins, James. The Guardian Angels (1983). True story of a multiethnic group 
whose volunteers helped to prevent crime in New York City in 1979. 

Heath, R. B., ed. Tradewinds: Poetry in English from Different Cultures — Chinese, 
Indian, Pakistani, African Caribbean (1990). 

In America. Illustrated series with historical information about more than 
thirty emerging ethnic groups in America. 

Jacobs, William Jay. Gre*t Lives: Human Rights (1990). Thirty articles about 
hu \an rights activists, with special attention paid to women and 
minority groups. 

Moraga, Cherrie, and Gloria Anzaldua, eds. This Bridge Called My Back: 

Writings by Radical Women of Color (1981). Groundbreaking collection 
of writings by women of color. 

Morales, Aurora Levins, and Rosario Morales. Getting Home Alive (1986). Also 
listed in the Jewish and Puerto Rican sections. 



120 



114 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Norwick, Kenneth R, ed. Lobbying for Freedom in the 1980s: A Grass-Roots 

Guide to Protecting Your Rights (1983). A useful handbook for "citizen 
lobbyists." 

Thomas, Joyce Carol, ed. A Gathering of Flowers: Stories about Being Young in 
America (1990). Short stories collected "with the idea that all of us in 
America are somehow related." 

Disabilities 

Many classical pieces exist that cast characters with disabilities in a nega- 
tive light (e.g., Of Mice and Men, Moby Dick, Richard HI, A Christmas Carol 
Treasure Island). Teachers must recognize the effects of this problem and 
treat such literature with an awareness of and sensitivity to this issue. 
We should also make an ai-empt to balance these stereotypic presenta- 
tions with more positive, well-rounded ones. Reading the biographies 
of people like Franklin Roosevelt, Beethoven, Stevie Wonder, and Tho- 
mas Edison, for instance, can provide students with a better understand- 
ing of the accomplishments of people with disabilities. The following 
are additional titles, mostly for young adults. 

Emotional/Mental Disabilities 

Bauer, Marion Dane. Tangled Butterfly (1980). A seventeen-year-old's mental 
illness increases as her family denies it. 

Cavallaro, Ann. Blimp (1983). The story of a relationship between an over- 
weight girl and a boy with emotional problems. 

Hautzig, Deborah. Second Star to the Right (1981). A fourteen-year-old's 
obsession with her weight results in anorexia. 

Hull, Eleanor. Alice with Golden Hair (1981). A girl leaves a special school for 
the mentally retarded to find work and acceptance at a convalescent 
home. 

Johnson, Julie Tallard. Understanding Mental Illness: For Teens Who Care about 
Someone with Mental Illness (1989). Discusses depression, manic 
depression, and schizophrenia. Interviews with family members offer 
solutions to difficult situations. 

Klein, Norma. Learning How to Fall (1989). A boy recovering in a psychiatric 
hospital struggles to survive. Mature situations. 

MacCracken, Mary. City Kid (1981). The story of a teacher who works with 
emotionally disturbed children. 

Mahy, Margaret. Memory (1988). A young man's friendship with an 
Alzheimer's victim helps ease the pain of his sister's death. 

McNair, Joseph. Commander Coatrack Returns (1989). After becoming deeply 
involved in the care of her special brother, Lisa is almost taken in by a 
schoolboy who has difficulty with his own identity. 



121 



Brainstorming a Canon 



115 



Neufeld, John. Lisa, Bright and Dark (1969). Lisa's family's denial of her 
mental disturbance forces her friends to take action. 

Oneal, Zibby. The Language of Goldfish (1980). A thirteen-year-old's sanity is 
threatened by die difficulty she has handling pressure. 

Piatt, Kin. The Ape Inside Me (1979). A boy has trouble controlling his illness, 
which gets him into trouble. 

Polikoff, Judy (as told to Michele Sherman). Every Loving Gift: How a Family's 
Courage Saved a Special Child (1983). The story of a family's emotional 
and financial sacrifice to help their brain-damaged son Andy with 
controversial treatment. 

Riley, Jocelyn. Only My Mouth Is Smiling (1982). A mother's bizarre behavior 
forces teenagers to accept her mental illness. 

Sachs, Marilyn. The Fat Girl (1984). The story of a strange relationship be- 
tween an overweight girl and her boyfriend. 

Slepian, Jan. Risk V Roses (1990). New in the Bronx, Skip finds it difficult to 
be accepted because of her mentally retarded sister. 

Smith, Lee. Black Mountain Breakdown (1980). A girl suffers a mental break- 
down despite apparent popularity, good looks, and academic success. 

Snyder, Anne. Goodbye, Paper Doll (1980). A seventeen-year-old develops 
anorexia nervosa and must deal with underlying problems. 

Snyder, Anne, and Louis Pelletier. Nobody's Brother (1982). A pending divorce 
threatens to break up stepbrothers and increases Josh's stuttering. 

Stren, Patti. I Was a Fifteen-Year-Old Blimp (1985). A teenage girl deals with 
being overweight. 

Wolff, Virginia Euwer. Probably Still Nick Swansen (1988). A learning disabled 
student, self-conscious about placement in the resource room, meets a 
girl who accepts his invitation to the prom. 

Physical Disabilities 

Anaya, Rudolfo A. Tortuga (1979). The spiritual and physical struggles of a 
disabled boy in a body cast sent to a Mexican hospital. 

Eareckson, Joni. Joni (1976). A young artist learns to survive after a skiing 
accident. 

Farish, Terry. Why I'm Already Blue (1989). Unhappy in his homelife, a thir- 
teen-year-old finds solace in a friendship with the wheelchair-bound 
boy next door. 

Froman, Katherine. The Chance to Grow (1983). Informative material about the 
causes of various disabilities, the purpose of physical therapy, and 
where to find additional sources. 

Girion, Barbara. A Handful of Stars (1981). The story of an energetic, active 
teenager learning to live with epilepsy. 



122 



116 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Hall, Lynn. Halsey's Pride (1990). After her mother's rejection, a thirteen-year- 
old learns to live with epilepsy and develops a good relationship with 
her father and his prized dog. 

Hallman, Ruth. Breakaway (1981). A hearing-impaired teenager's struggle to 
cope with a hearing world, his smothering mother, and a determined 
girlfriend. 

Kata, Elizabeth. A Patch of Blue (1961). Blinded as a child, a young white 
woman falls in love with a man who has also suffered the pain of 
intolerance. Originally published as Be Ready with Bells and Drums. 

Keller, Helen. The Story of My Life (1903). A young girl who can neither hear 
nor see becomes a productive writer and activist. 

Kellogg, Marjorie. Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon (1984). Two men, one 
a paraplegic, the other stricken with a neurological disease, and a 
woman disfigured by an angry boyfriend find that together they can 
build relationships. 

Klein, Norma. My Life as a Body (1987). A high school girl tutors a classmate 
who is permanently wheelchair-bound. Eventually, they fall in love. 

Krementz, Jill. How It Feels to Fight for Your Life (1989). Personal accounts of 
young people who have dealt with serious illness or disability. 

Levy, Marilyn. The Girl in the Plastic Cage (1982). A teenager stricken with 
scoliosis must wear a brace, give up gymnastics, face losing her 
boyfriend, and get along with her family. 

Likhanov, Albert (translated by Richard Lourie). Shadows across the Sun 

(1983) . A disabled girl in the Soviet Union falls in love with a boy 
whose father is an alcoholic. 

Marsden, John. So Much to Tell You (1987). A fourteen-year-old girl, terribly 
disfigured by an attack, works things out in her class journal. 

Perske, Robert. Show Me No Mercy: A Compelling Story of Remarkable Courage 

(1984) . A father, paralyzed by an accident that kills his wife and 
daughter, fights to keep a son with Down's syndrome from institu- 
tionalization. 

Sallis, Susan. Only Love (1980). The story of love between spunky Fran, 

paralyzed from the waist down, and Lucas, injured in a motorcycle 
accident. 

Savitz, Harriet May Run, Don't Walk (1979). A diving injury leaves a girl in 
wheelchair, making her an activist for the rights of the disabled. 

. Come Back, Mr. Magic (1983). A young man known for his work with 

disabled people is left in a coma and must rely on the support of 
others. 

Terris, Susan. Wings and Roots (1982). The story of a relationship between a 
1950s polio victim and a hospital volunteer. 



123 



Brainstorming a Canon 



117 



Thiele, Colin. Jodie's Journey (1988). A trophy-winiiing rider shows that her 
confinement to a wheelchair is not enough to stop her from saving 
herself and her horse. 

Valens, E. G. The Other Side of the Mountain (1975, 1978). Two volumes. The 
true account of a girl permanently paralyzed while training for the 
Olympic ski team who is detenxiined to lead a meaningful life. 
Originally A Long Way Up. 

The Homeless 

The number of books about the homeless has increased in recent years 
as this population continues to grow. Further, the topic is easily com- 
bined with many multiethnic titles, since endemic homelessness has 
existed in many nonmainstream communities long before the problem 
became a public issue. 

Fowler, Tom, Malcolm Garcia, and the staff of the St. Vincent de Paul 
Ozanam Shelter, eds. Out of the Rain: An Anthology of Drawings, 
Writings, and Photography by the Homeless of San Francisco (1988). 

Holman, Felice. Secret City, U.S.A. (1990). Several kids from the tenement try 
to create a place for the homeless in a decaying city. 

Hughes, Dean. Family Pose (1989). The story of an eleven-year-old living on 
the streets of Seattle. 

Jimenez, Francisco. 'The Circuit/ 7 Short story in Tatum's Mexican American 
Literature. 

Kozol, Jonathan. Rachel and Her Children: Homeless Families in America (1988). 
Steinbeck, John. The Grapes of Wrath (1939). 

Szymusiak, Molyda. The Stones Cry Out: A Cambodian Childhood, 1975-1980 
(1986). Dispossessed people in Cambodia. 

Torrey, E. Fuller. Nowhere to Go: The Tragic Odyssey of the Homeless Mentally III 
(1988). Discusses the policy and practice of deinstitutionalizing the 
mentally ill. 

Homosexuality 

A number of titles deal with homosexuality, either directly or indirectly. 
This literature contributes to the growing acknowledgment of the gay 
and lesbian presence in our culture. Titles like Cat on a Hot Tin Roof, 
Suddenly Last Summer, The Color Purple, Against the Season, The Andrew Is 
Dead Story, and many others are currently in our literary canon. The 
following list, primarily for secondary students, suggests some other 
titles. 



124 



118 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Cohen, Susan, and Daniel Cohen. When Someone You Know Is Gay (1989). 
Teenage homosexuality — its history, scientific information, an AIDS 
update, and personal commentaries from interviews with gay teens. 

Ecker, B. A. Independence Day (1983). A sixteen-year-old faces the challenge of 
declaring his homosexuality. 

Garden, Nancy. Annie on My Mind (1982). Two high school senior girls fall in 
love and learn to deal with the consequences of their controversial 
relationship. 

Klein, Norma. Now That I Know (1988). An active teenager responds posi- 
tively to her parents' divorce until she learns a family secret that turns 
her world upside down. 

Koertge, Ron. The Arizona Kid (1988). A Missouri boy goes to Arizona with 
his uncle for the summer and learns about himself, life, kindness to 
others, romance, and his uncle's gay identity. Includes frank language. 

Rench, Janice E. Understanding Sexual Identity: A Book for Gay Teens and Their 
Friends (1990). Dispels myths about gay and lesbian people in an 
attempt "to work against violence, hatred, and ignorance." 

Shannon, George. Unlived Affections (1989). A seventeen-year-old discovers 
some family secrets after the death of the grandmother who raised 
him. 

Older Adults 

Arias, Ron. The Road to Tamazunchale (1975). An old man dying in the barrio 
has a wonderful time superimposing fantasy on reality. 

Benjamin, Carol Lea. Nobody's Baby Now (1984). 

Brancato, Robin. Sweet Bells Jangled Out of Tune (1982). 

Branfield, John. The Fox in Winter (1983). Developing a friendship with a 
ninety-year-old and then coping with his death. 

Butterworth, W. E. Leroy and the Old Man (1980). 

Irwin, Hadley. Wltat about Grandma? (1982). 

Kerr, M. E. Gentlehands (1978). A teenager learns that his beloved grandfather 
was formerly a Nazi. 

Klass, Sheila. Alive and Starting Over (1983). 

Mahy, Margaret. Memory (1988). The story of a young man's friendship with 
an Alzheimer's victim. 

Myers, Walter Dean. Won't Know Till I Get TItere (1982). 

Ruby, Lois. This Old Man (1984). 

Smith, Robert. The War with Grandpa (1984). 

Wallace-Brodeur, Ruth. Steps in Time (1986). 

Zindel, Paul. The Pigman's Legacy (1980). 



125 



Brainstorming a Canon 



119 



Teenage Suicide 

This subject is a delicate one, one that teachers should handle carefully. 
Yet since suicide is one of the leading killers among teenage youth, we 
must recognize it and learn more about how to deal with it. Although 
there is much literature in the canon that deals with this issue, little has 
been recognized as appropriate learning material for young adults. The 
following list has been developed primarily for the secondary level. 

Bennett, James. I Can Hear the Mourning Dove (1990). A sixteen-year-old 
recovers from a suicide attempt and works, along with a friend, to 
overcome her problems. 

Byars, Betsy. The Burning Questions of Bingo Brown (1988). A sixth-grader 
wonders why his teacher had students write on the topic "suicide" 
and then rides his motorcycle without a helmet and has an accident. 

Crutcher, Chris. Chinese Handcuffs (1989). The story of a boy confused by his 
brother's suicide. Mature situations and language. 

Gardner, Sandra, and Gary Rosenberg. Teenage Suicide (1990). Case studies of 
teenage suicide along with other information, including prevention 
suggestions. 

Hermes, Patricia. A Time to Listen: Preventing Youth Suicide (1987). Open 
discussion by family and friends of suicide victims as well as by 
survivors of suicide attempts. 

Irwin, Hadley So Long at the Fair (1988). An eighteen-year-old can't accept his 
girlfriend's suicide and escapes by becoming a drifter. 

Klagsbrun, Francine. Too Young to Die: Youth and Suicide (1985). Presents the 
realities of suicide and ways to prevent it. 

Mack, John E., and Holly Hickler. Vivienne: The Life and Suicide of an Adoles- 
cent Girl (1981). Letters and diaries of a suicide victim. Includes both a 
clinician's and a teacher's view. 

McCuaig, Sandra. Blindfold (1990). With the help of a psychiatrist, a girl tries 
to deal with the double suicide of her friends. 

Pevsner, Stella. How Could You Do It, Diane? (1989). A family copes with a 
fifteen-year-old girl's suicide. 

Pfeffer, Susan Beth. About David (1980). A story about the pain felt by survi- 
vors after a boy commits murder and suicide. 

Radley, Gail. The World Turned Inside Out (1982). A fifteen-year-old works 
through guilt and questions about his brother's suicide. 

Vietnam Veterans 

The United States is still dealing with the aftermath of the Vietnam War. 
Much has been written recently on the subject, both fiction and nonftc- 



126 



120 



Crossing the Mainstream 



tion. The following is a partial list that may help teachers begin. For an 
excellent treatment of the subject with extensive annotations, see Larry 
Johannessen's Illumination Rounds: Teaching the Literature of the Vietnam 
War (1992), which includes numerous references to personal narratives, 
oral histories, novels, drama, poetry, photography, and films. 

Edelman, Bernard, ed. Dear America: Letters Home from Vietnam (1985). Letters 
from soldiers about life on the front lines, injuries, prisoner-of-war 
camps, and other subjects. 

Hoobler, Dorothy, and Thomas Hoobler. Vietnam: Why We Fought (1990). The 
history of the war, the role of the United States, and the change in 
Americans' views. 

MacPherson, Myra. Long Time Passing: Vietnam and the Haunted Generation 
(1984). Five hundred interviews about the human cost of war. 

Marshall, Kathryn. In the Combat Zone: An Oral History of American Women in 
Vietnam, 1966-1975 (1987). The accounts of twenty women serving in 
the war. 

Palmer, Laura. Shrapnel in the Heart: Letters and Remembrances from the Vietnam 
Veterans Memorial (1987). Interviews with survivors of those com- 
memorated at the Vietnam Veterans Memorial in Washington, 
D.C. 

Rodriguez, Toe. The Oddsplayer (1988). Racism faced by soldiers during the 
Vietnam War. 

Terry, Wallace. Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War by Black Veterans 
(1984). Twenty veterans' accounts of heroism, racism, and the horror 
of war. 



127 



9 Educating the Illiterate 
Intellectual 



Ouch! I know I'm getting myself into trouble here because I'm 
going to talk about some teachers and their reluctance to change. 
Resistance to multicultural education, as I see it, is as much the 
fault of faculty and administrators as it is the fault of the population at 
large. If educators do not believe in multiculturalizing the curriculum, 
and many of them do not, then convincing the community becomes 
much harder. To avoid this additional burden, those interested in a plu- 
ralistic approach to teaching literature must evaluate their own campus 
climate and plan strategies to promote their goals within their own de- 
partments. 

While I was teaching "Introduction to Literature" in central Min- 
nesota, my department conducted a survey to determine the level of 
commitment faculty members had to nontraditional authors. Although 
the number of professors in favor of expanding their material to include 
multicultural authors was more than double that of those against, sev- 
eral objected strongly. One commented: 

I am terribly nervous about telling faculty what authors they may 
or may not teach, and what material they must or must not 
cover. ... I teach traditional authors; I would be very angry if 
forced by the thought police to include nontraditional authors, 
and I would hence not teach those authors at all well. Leave the 
choice of this kind of material entirely up to the individual pro- 
fessors. 

But leaving the choice up to faculty has perpetuated the status 
quo. In a moving essay called 'The Censorship of Neglect," Rudolfo 
Anaya (1992) argues that many fine works of literature continue to be 
excluded simply because our curriculum is 

controlled by groups with a parochial view of what the curricu- 
lum should and should not include These groups have told 

us . . . what is universal in literature . . . which has kept ethnic 

literature . . . out of the curriculum We are tired of being told 

that we do not understand the needs of our youth because we 
belong to a particular ethnic group. We are told that because we 
are Mexican, Native, Black, or Asian American — or women — that 
somebody else has the right literature and language to describe 
our reality. (18-19) 



128 



122 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Indeed, we are missing some wonderful works because of such exclu- 
sion. And that loss is bad enough. But we are also missing the opportu- 
nity to provide students with literature that could positively affect their 
attitudes. 

The Naysayers and Miss Bleeding Heart 

Of course, there is much speculation about whether or not the imple- 
mentation of multiethnic literature really does alter attitudes, and this 
is a fair argument. I do not believe that diverse literature automatically 
neutralizes mainstream student attitudes. Some studies tell us that read- 
ing nonmainstream literature has some effect on reducing racism; other 
studies show that it has little or no effect; some even show negative 
effects (see Page 1977; Hogan 1992). 

In discussing the merits of teaching multiethnic literature, Page 
(1977) suggests that 

black literature, as well as Asian American, Chicano, Italian Ameri- 
can, Jewish American, Native American, Puerto Rican, and other 
ethnic literatures, must be incorporated within the fabric of the 
American literary tradition and read by all students because it is 
effective, stimulating, and insightful reading. (33) 

But he also warns that teaching multiethnic literature will not automati- 
cally change the racial and ethnic attitudes of our learners. To deter- 
mine the effects of African American literature on mainstream students, 
Page studied three classes. Class 1 read African American literature in- 
dividually or in small groups. Class 2 read the literature as a class and 
received "traditional" instruction (i.e., the teacher gave directions, asked 
questions, led discussion, made assignments, etc.). Class 3 read no Afri- 
can American literature at all. Results of the study showed that reading 
black literature had either no effect (as measured by the Multifactor Racial 
Attitude Inventory) or a negative effect on students. 

These findings are not surprising for several reasons. "Learning" 
literature is a difficult business in any case. For instance, a student in 
one of my own classes — a class that at one point touched on gay and 
lesbian issues — thought that I had failed miserably in my attempt to 
make his reading experience successful. That was my mistake. I had not 
anticipated and planned for the hostility I would face when dealing 
with these issues. I have tried to do better since. The point is that teach- 
ers need to anticipate the problems that some students will encounter 
when reading diverse literature and be ready to deal with them. 



129 



Educating the Illiterate Intellectual 



123 



Furthermore, the major literary piece that Page had his test classes 
read was Native Son by Richard Wright. This is a tough novel for anyone. 
Wright meant to disturb his audience. The main character, Bigger, unin- 
tentionally commits murder and then, motivated by fear, saws the 
victim's head off and forces her body into a furnace! That's pretty up- 
setting by anyone's standards. Nonetheless, I believe students can ben- 
efit greatly from a careful treatment of this book. I have taught Native 
Son in both high school and college settings with positive results. Stu- 
dents are haunted by Bigger's actions and by the message that Wright 
conveys. The novel can easily provoke discussion about social and po- 
litical issues or about a young person's inability to escape his or her 
world. Further, Native Son is a beautifully written book that should be 
"studied" as a masterful "modernist" novel. 

Whenever I use this book, students tell me about how it affects 
them beyond the normal experience. I think that would satisfy Wright. 
Yet we must be careful as instructors to guide students in their reading; 
we shouldn't expect them to always "get it" on their own. I suppose I 
can imagine how some literal-minded reader might be upset with Big- 
ger Thomas and foolishly transfer these negative feelings over to an 
entire race. But thaf s where we come in: to guide our students and to 
help them make distinctions between the literal and the figurative. 

Defining Art 

By arguing that art has both ethical and aesthetic components, Hogan 
(1992) harkens back to Horace's description of art, "dulce et utile/' sweet 
and useful, as well as to Sir Philip Sidney's contention that art exists "to 
teach and delight." Indeed, according to Hogan, "the link between eth- 
ics and aesthetics is a nearly constant theme in the Western tradition" 
and in other traditions as well (186-87). Using these precepts, Hogan 
justifies the teaching of diverse materials. 

I agree. I accept the long tradition of recognizing both the aes- 
thetic and the ethical components of art. And I see no greater ethical 
imperative in the United States today than the importance of including 
all of its voices. Discussing the merits of mandatory diversity, Hogan 
says: 

Thus, the situation is uncertain, but in our present state of knowl- 
edge it does appear that mandatory diversity in literary study is 
quite unlikely to do any harm, and has a reasonable chance of 
doing some good. Given the urgency of the problems of racism, 
sexism, and ethnocentrism, the possibility of doing good gives 
moral import to mandatory diversity. (188) 



130 



124 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Diversity in literary study, however, should mean inclusion, not 
segregation. The students in Page's study suggest "that black literature 
should be taught in its chronological, historical, literary, and artistic set- 
tings within American literature/' Of course! In the best of all possible 
worlds, thaf s exactly what we should be doing. James Baldwin, for ex- 
ample, should be taught in African American literature courses, in spe- 
cial topics courses where students concentrate on only one author, but 
most of all in American literature courses. 

Still, Hogan notes that, unfortunately, "as nonwhite and women's 
literatures have entered the airriculum, they have become ghettoized. 
Of course, if it is a choice between ghettoization and absence, ghet- 
toization is preferable" (189). But we should be moving away from this 
model as we continue to develop a concept of multiethnicity based on 
the inclusion of several groups within the same course. The University 
of California at Berkeley, for example, requires courses in multiethnic 
education to involve at least three groups, not one. This range provides 
a much better look at diversity (Takaki 1991). 

Developing Materials 

One of the problems in teaching or reading multiethnic literature has 
been, up until very recently, the scarcity and expense of materials. Thafs 
why I was so disappointed by Hertzel's review (1992) of Braided Lives in 
the Minnesota English Journal. Braided Lives is a 1991 attempt by the Min- 
nesota Humanities Commission, working in conjunction with the Min- 
nesota Council of Teachers of English, to put together a collection of 
multiethnic works by Native American, Latino American, African Ameri- 
can, and Asian American artists. When it was published, every English 
teacher in the state received a copy. I admire the great effort put forth by 
all those involved in the project. For Minnesota teachers who felt at a 
loss for materials, Braided Lives proved invaluable. In fact, the March 
1994 issue of English Journal offers a number of interesting articles on 
strategies for implementing sections of Braided Lives into the curriculum. 

Hertzel's article, however, presents some troublesome questions. 
He starts by describing the book as a "splendid selection of writing by 
American minorities," acknowledging that "the book goes well beyond 
the usual bland, conservatively safe products of institutional commit- 
tee compromise" (2). But then he asks the same nagging questions that 
prevent fellow teachers from using "risk/ 7 literature: Is there evidence 
that multiethnic literature will promote better attitudes? Are teachers 
trained to teach such literature? Is the purpose of literature to promote 
cultural awareness and sensitivity? 



131 



Educating the Illiterate Intellectual 



125 



I believe that the editors of Braided Lives intended to make avail- 
able some excellent literature for the English teachers of Minnesota. And 
they did. But asking them to offer teaching strategies and historical and 
sociological backgrounds would be asking for another book, at least. 
Their intention was to put together an anthology of multiethnic works. 

Hertzel is also troubled by the fact that the pieces do not seem to 
fit into the mainstream of America: 'The theme of many of the stories . . . 
goes directly contrary to principles or beliefs that American schools have 
traditionally endorsed 77 (5). But we need to remember that mainstream 
American optimism often ignores the experiences of nonmainstream 
Americans. As Juanita Garciagodoy argues in 7 The Wake-Up Call 7 '' (1991) 
introducing the Latino American section of Braided Lives: 

A tragic feature shown in some of these writings is the violence 
that poverty, racism, and ethnocentrism inflict on the lives of 
people. Don't recoil from the sorrow in these pages. It is part of 
this world in which you live, in which you were born and raised 
and which, if you allow yourselves to be courageously open and 
free of prejudice and indifference, you can help change in your 
lifetime. (84) 

Should we ignore Garciagodoy's advice and 77 recoil from the sorrow in 
these pages 77 because it somehow goes against traditionally endorsed 
attitudes? I don't think so. Writers often reflect the environments in which 
they live, and many racial and ethnic groups in this country face ex- 
tremely oppressive environments. 

Sometimes teachers tell me that their students would "really be 
upset 77 by much of the 77 ethnic literature 77 that they have read. 77 It 7 s so 
violent, 77 they protest. 77 It 7 s so stereotypic, 77 they complain. But should 
we shelter our mainstream, middle-class, roof-over-their-heads, full- 
stomach students? Shouldn't they know that a world other than their 
own exists? All too often, students live in a vacuum. Hogan laments, for 
example, that when he teaches The Merchant of Venice in his Shakespeare 
class, "virtually the only students . . . who sympathize with Shylock — 
at least before we discuss the play — are Jewish" (189). 

Of course, not all teachers regard the possibility of teaching 
multiethnic literature with suspicion. In fact, when Hertzel asked sev- 
eral teachers about the possibility of teaching "minority literature" with 
"the object of developing appreciation of these cultures," the teachers 
he spoke to "thought it might work." Asking specifically about James 
Baldwin's "Sonny's Blues," Hertzel says that the teachers 7 responses 
were "interesting because they revealed a kind of innocent anxiousness." 
Yet still Hertzel warns that "we need to think this thing through" (5). 



132 



126 



Crossing the Mainstream 



I think that we can get beyond the hypothetical here. I have taught 
"Sonny's Blues' 7 (1965) in both high school and college, and, yes, it's a 
tough story. But if s well worth the effort. The story is about two broth- 
ers who have grown up in Harlem. The older brother becomes a math 
teacher and stays in the neighborhood. The younger brother, a talented 
musician, gives himself over to drugs and struggles, toward the end, 
for salvation. Baldwin's description of their physical surroundings is 
hard to forget: 

We drove along . . . toward the vivid, killing streets of our child- 
hood. These streets hadn't changed, though housing projects jut- 
ted up out of them now like rocks in the middle of a boiling sea 

Some escaped the trap, most didn't. Those who got out always 
left something of themselves behind, as some animals amputate 

a leg and leave it in the trap It came to me that what we both 

were seeking . . . was that part of ourselves which had been left 
behind. If s always at the hour of trouble and confrontation that 
the missing member aches. (282-83) 

Baldwin continues by characterizing Sonny as a young man trapped in 
his environment, first losing one parent, then another; then his older 
brother joins the army. Sonny wants to escape. But as an African Ameri- 
can teenager living with his brother's in-laws, too young to join the 
military, with no outside connections, what can he do? 

I suppose we can look at this story in two ways. Negatively, it 
could be seen as a sordid tale of a man growing up in a squalid place, on 
drugs and in trouble. Not very appealing. On the other hand, "Sonny's 
Blues" could be seen as a story that presents us with all kinds of ethical 
questions about growing up, making decisions, and accepting respon- 
sibility. In this sense, Sonny's plight is both unique and universal. These 
human dilemmas are compelling, and students discuss Sonny's predica- 
ment passionately. Moreover, many young people know what it feels 
like to experience alienation, no matter where they grow up. Of course, 
the most compelling reason to read the story is that it is a superb piece 
of literature — moving, beautifully crafted, poetic. 

Knowing Our Students 

To the naysayers who scoff at those who try to bring literature into the 
classroom to change attitudes, I say you're selling our students short. 
True, we can't get to them all. I have had some students who resisted 
everything I ever tried to present. One unpleasant young man — we'll 
call him Jerry — wouldn't budge on any issue. He described Ida Wells's 
shocking essay "Lynching at the Curve" as "another essay blaming the 



133 



Educating the Illiterate Intellectual 



127 



white man for everything/ 7 1 really don't think literature will make much 
of a difference with readers like Jerry. I guess Yd have to say that I failed 
with him in many ways. I do believe, however, that Jerry's writing im- 
proved in my class. I also think that we changed his manner of expres- 
sion by the time the semester was over; the disapproving responses he 
got from his classmates for his outbursts were not what he expected. If 
we didn't change his thinking, at least we altered his behavior some- 
what by demonstrating that his was not the only voice that deserved to 
be heard. 

That's one student. I've had others. I do not know how ma^v "at- 
titude changes 77 would show up on an assessment test, but I go think 
that the thinking of many of my students has opened up as a result of 
their reading. Continuing with "Sonny's Blues 77 for a moment, I have 
had many interesting discussions with students about what life must 
be like in the environment Sonny was raised in. Most students in Ameri- 
can schools know that such places exist. Yet they also need to give some 
thought to what life is like there. And they can do that through the eyes 
of Sonny and the other characters they read about. 

In his July 1992 Democratic Convention speech, Jesse Jackson 
pointed out that for some youths in this country, going to jail is a step 
up. They are fed; they are given clothes; they have a place to sleep. My 
God, think of it! There are actually people in this country whose lives 
are better in jail than out! Huge numbers of our population live below 
the poverty level, are abused emotionally or physically, or dwell in un- 
safe neighborhoods. I think that we should all understand these issues. 
We should never "protect 77 our students from the truth. Instead, we must 
help them find it. 

Although there are many Jerrys out there, there is also a large, 
good-hearted, but naive and uneducated student population that is re- 
ceptive to new ideas. They are, in short, willing to learn. They may not 
change overnight, but at least they are willing to look at the lives of 
others from different perspectives. And it is up to us to expose them to 
these different voices. 

Though I have not yet analyzed quantifiable data related to this 
issue, I firmly believe from my own experiences in the classroom that 
students are moved by the literature they read. Recently, a student came 
to my office to thank me for giving her the opportunity to read Toni 
Morrison's Beloved. 77 At first, 77 she explained, "I didn't want to read it I 
knew it would be oppressive. But once I saw how beautifully it was 
written, I couldn't put it down. Morrison is a genius. Thank you for 
choosing this book for the class. 77 



134 



128 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Whose Canon Anyway? 

Finally, Hogan (1992) notes that the whole argument about literary 
choices is ethnocentric, explaining that "our canon 77 is Eurocentric mainly 
because of European political and economic domination. 77 But in fact 
there is a Chinese canon, a Japanese canon, an Arabic canon, an Indian 
canon — indeed, canons 77 (184). Referring to the Indian literary tradition, 
he notes: 

I know of nothing in Western literature which so movingly rep- 
resents the separation of loved ones as Act IV of Sakuntala, no 
literature more powerfully erotic than the lyrics of Bilhana, noth- 
ing which so touchingly evokes the love between father and child 
as some poems from the Tamil anthologies, no genuinely aes- 
thetic use of intellectually stimulating dialectic comparable to 
passages in Gora, no more profound and no more emotionally 
devastating exploration of hopelessness and anonymity than A 
House for Mr. Biswas. (188) 

We might make similar claims for many of the literatures of the 
United States. But first we must learn more about them. As Hogan points 
out, 77 it is only under racist and ethnocentric assumptions that one might 
come to believe aesthetic criteria need to be dropped 77 to include non- 
Western, non white, nonmale works (187). He argues, and I agree, that 
people are often attracted to literature that they can understand because 
of gender, race, nationality, or other means of identification (189). We 
should keep this in mind as we look at what we have been given to read 
in the past and consider what we should be presenting to our students 
in the future. If, as Hogan says, 77 pai i of the point of literary study is to 
help people transcend narcissism, to understand the universal in litera- 
ture 77 (189), then we ought to be making some significant changes. But 
even if we acknowledge the existence of other literatures, we still face 
profound Western ignorance of non- Western and Western minority tra- 
ditions (185). 

Perhaps it is not our fault that we don't know about all the litera- 
tures of the world. Many of us earned our degrees long before the ex- 
plosion of multicultural awareness. When I was an undergraduate, we 
had 77 the dead white men and Emily Dickinson. 77 Yet now we know dif- 
ferently, and we can no longer deprive students — mainstream or 
nonmainstream — of these other artistic pieces. To do so is unethical. 

Finding Support within Schools and Community 

My observation and experience tell me that most teachers are receptive 
to incorporating nonmainstream literatures into their programs. Once 



135 



Educating the Illiterate Intellectual 



129 



they understand the issues and have had some exposure to the excel- 
lent literature that's out there, any resistance they formerly had breaks 
down fairly easily. What most teachers are more concerned about, and 
rightly so, are the real barriers to making changes in the curriculum: 
colleagues, background knowledge, and money 

Support from Colleagues 

We must depend on each other for support. Although not all teachers 
are interested in teaching the same literature, they usually support oth- 
ers 7 right to teach what they want. I suggest that new teachers seek the 
support of older, more experienced teachers in adapting the curriculum 
to better suit the needs of students. And I encourage those of you who 
have been on your campuses for a while to seek out new people and to 
look at what they're bringing in. Mentor these people and support them 
even if you do not want to teach some of their choices. Work together as 
a department to develop a philosophy about the value of teaching 
nonmainstream literature. 

If you are interested in incorporating nonmainstream literature 
into your curriculum, tell the rest of the faculty and administration about 
your policies. Encourage them to work with you in an interdisciplinary 
fashion. Ask your district's curriculum coordinator to meet with you 
and define your modus operandi. Tell the coordinator that you'd like to 
make this a district-wide effort. Get district-level input and support. 
Arm yourself with NCTE data about censorship and recommended 
books and be aware of the relevant local, regional, and national agen- 
cies within NCTE and other organizations. 

Incorporating multicultural literature does create a number of 
problems for teachers. But according to Anaya (1992), if it's not in your 
canon, you're part of the problem: 

Have we become the problem itself? Have we become the de- 
fenders of the status quo? Is it really we who have refused to see 
the reality of the African American experience, the Chicano world, 
the Asian American struggle, the woman's search for her own 
self-representation? Are we free to teach when we fear the social 
and aesthetic reality of other groups? 

Anaya provides a call-to-arms of sorts, a call that I believe all English 
educators should heed: 

If you are teaching in a Mexican American community, it is your 
social responsibility to refuse to use the textbook which doesn't 
contain stories by Mexican American authors. If you teach Asian 
American children, refuse the textbook which doesn't portray 



136 



130 



Crossing the Mainstream 



their history and social reality. This kind of activism will free you 
to teach. If you don't refuse, you are part of the problem. But you 
don't have to be teaching in a Mexican American barrio to insist 
that the stories and social reality of that group be represented in 
your textbook. You short-change your students and you misrep- 
resent the true nature of their country if you don't introduce them 
to all the communities who have composed the history of this 
country. To deny your students a view into these different worlds 
is to deny them tools for the future. (20) 

Professors do not usually have the same problems with censor- 
ship that secondary teachers do, but advocating for ethnic literature at 
the college level can still create serious tenure and promotion issues. 
According to Hogan (1992): 

Once it has been decided what the legitimate objects of study are 
and what sorts of knowledge are valuable, those who wish to 
study other objects (e.g., Third World literature) and those who 
have other sorts of knowledge (e.g., of Indian literary history) are 
put at a disadvantage, for their interests and expertise are deval- 
ued. Because it is structural, institutional, such discrimination is 
harder to see. Despite its invisibility, however, it is clearly stron- 
ger and more pervasive. (184) 

Further, questions of commitment affect scheduling and course loads. 
When departments discuss incorporating pluralistic literature, re- 
sponses, as Hogan notes, are often logistic and defensive: Who will do 
it? Will we have to hire new staff? What graduate courses will be lost? 
(184). Supportive faculty must work to bring about change on college 
campuses to ensure that their colleagues are not shortchanged be* ✓ • 
of their interest in multiculturalism. 

Knowledge 

If the classical concept of great literature includes both ethical and aes- 
thetic components, and I think it does, then surely we need to expand 
our canon in a number of directions. As I said earlier, I believe that most 
teachers would be willing, even eager, if the real barriers were taken 
away. Thus, once faculty organize their goals and present a united front, 
they then need to arm themselves with the knowledge and background 
required to teach new materials. 

We all, in one way or another, find ways to learn as we live our 
lives as English educators. Some of us take classes. Some, because of a 
new assignment or new program or strong personal commitment, have 
learned on their own. English teachers are resourceful; they know their 
way around the library. Indeed, most of us teach literature because we 



137 



Educating the Illiterate Intellectual 



131 



love to read, because we love to talk about what we read, because we 
love to learn more about what we read. There is no group that can pre- 
pare better. Sure, we're loaded down. And ifs very difficult to do any 
research in new areas of literature. I remember semesters where I met 
with 165 students each day. Where could I have found the time to read 
and study? 

But today, because of the explosion of diverse literature into a 
much larger geographic market, the focus on multicultural education 
across the country, and the English teacher's ability and motivation to 
learn, the news is good. Many resources are available. Lots of new courses 
and workshops and conferences are being offered. Teachers should seek 
funding from their departments and districts for release time or light- 
ened teaching loads so that they can attend workshops or inservice 
meetings on multicultural issues. 

Living close to a college campus is a great advantage. English, 
human relations, American studies, and other departments often invite 
noted speakers to campus. In the last few years I have heard Maya 
Angelou, Elaine Kim, Joy Kogawa, Ishmael Reed, Ronald Takaki, Shawn 
Wong, and several other speakers at various campuses. In 1991, a Ford 
Foundation grant funded a consortium of several universities in the 
Minneapolis area to study women of color in the United States. I at- 
tended a series of two-day sessions in which noted women scholars and 
artists from the African American, Asian American, Latino American, 
and Native American communities spoke and conducted workshops. 
That same year I attended a MELUS (Multi-Ethnic Literature of the 
United States) conference where I heard James Banks, Frank Chin, and 
Paul Lauter speak. 

None of us should feel intimidated or embarrassed because we 
don't have enough information. As English teachers, we may never seem 
to have the extra time to seek out that information, but ifs out there and 
ifs available. 

Money 

Collegial support and information are important. But even if we all agree, 
the question of money always comes up. Often ifs the biggest problem 
of all. My discussion of support from colleagues and knowledge prob- 
ably had little new to say to those who have already been working at 
expanding the canon. Perhaps it is helpful to say that we should go to 
conferences and do research. But who's going to pay for all this retool- 
ing? Faculties are already stretched farther than they should be, and 



138 



132 



Crossing the Mainstream 



many school districts are getting more and more into debt University 
systems all over the country are reporting cutbacks. 

But there is always money, and English educators need to learn 
how to get it. Many small grants are available from large and small, 
public and private organizations. Department chairs, deans, develop- 
ment officers, principals, district coordinators, city officials, university 
grant officers — all have information about funding available for study 
Grants can buy teaching time, offer part-time and full-time leave for 
study, or pay for substitutes, travel, and registration for conferences. 
When I began teaching, I wasn't aware of any of these wonderful op- 
portunities to "build my knowledge base/' About the only thing I knew 
how to do was read. Of course, thaf s a great start. But there's so much 
more that we can do and share with each other. 

For high school teachers, the biggest money issue is books. At 
every high school I've been to and at every conference and workshop 
I've attended, teachers lament the fact that they are bound to the books 
in their districts. "Even if we were in agreement about the need for 
multicultural literature, we would still have trouble getting the materi- 
als/ 7 they say. I know that this is true. That's why whenever anybody 
asks me to recommend an anthology for their program, I first ask how 
much money the district has to spend on books. My next response used 
to be "No anthology." If a school invested in one of those costly edi- 
tions, its book budget would almost certainly be depleted. 

Recently, however, I have changed my mind. Almost all major 
and many minor publishers have "become multicultural." At the 1992 
NCTE Annual Convention, I passed by many exhibitors' booths noting 
the diverse faces and figures on the covers. Leafing through the pages, I 
saw many pieces by women and ethnically diverse authors; some I rec- 
ognized, some I didn't. Diverse pieces were incorporated into thematic 
readers for composition courses and into the poetry, short story, and 
essay sections of literature anthologies. Books representing every level: 
elementary school, middle school, high school, and college. We can't 
complain any longer. If s out there. Some volumes are better than oth- 
ers, but at least there are many from which to choose. 

If money is available, several very good ethnic collections have 
been published in the last few years. Mexican American Literature (1990), 
edited by Charles Tatum, is one example. African American Literature: 
Voices in a Tradition (1992), edited by William L. Andrews, is another. 
The new Heath series for high school, Making Cultural Connections (1992), 
offers an entire four-year program for multicultural work. 



133 



Educating the Illiterate Intellectual 



133 



Many teachers are aware of and use paperbacks. But they also 
point out that after two or three readings, these publications fall apart 
The bound copies, they explain, "are very expensive and almost defeat 
the whole purpose/ 7 College and university people are lucky in this 
respect for not having to worry about expense, because our students 
buy their own books. Although we have to be sensitive to our students 7 
pocketbooks, we can ask them to buy whatever we want them to read. 
Money just isn't the same barrier. 

If teachers are committed to including pluralistic literature in the 
accepted canon, then mountains can be moved. Through hard work, 
solicitation, receptive attitudes, and promoting personal opportunity, 
we can transform ourselves into a truly literate force that can have a 
tremendous impact on all of our students. But we have to be committed 
to change. In summarizing the monoethnic nature of the English cur- 
riculum, Applebee (1992) warns: 

As long as these texts remain unchanged, "canonicity" is likely 
to elude non-white authors and women; they will continue to be 
at the margins of a culture that is legitimized by its place in the 
school. [We must find] . . . the proper balance among the many 
traditions, separate and intertwined, that make up the complex 
fabric of society in the United States. In their instruction, teachers 
need to find better ways to insure that programs are culturally 
relevant as well as culturally fair. (32) 



140 



10 The Right Rules for 
the Right Game: 
Critical Analysis of 
Multiethnic Literature 

One of the problems with expanding our literary canon to include 
multicultural perspectives is that we must also expand the crite- 
ria with which we judge. That is, if we look at a Native Ameri- 
can work, we should attempt to understand it from a Native American 
perspective. If we critique an African American piece, we should try to 
analyze it from an Afrocentric perspective Furthermore, we need to be 
aware that ethnic authors write for different audiences — members of 
their own culture, mixed populations, the macroculture — and thus their 
purpose in writing may be other than we ordinarily would expect. 

Still, if I was on shaky ground in the last chapters, then the earth 
has given way on me in this one. I am, as I hope has been made clear by 
this time, a rank beginner in the search for understanding the diverse 
literatures in the United States. Thus, for me to attempt an adequate 
discussion of any of the following literatures may be presumptuous. 
Yet by the time I become an expert in all of these areas, I will be retired. 
So I have decided that I must begin somewhere if I am to begin at all. 
Perhaps what I lack in formal background, I can compensate for some- 
what with experience and enthusiasm. After all, isn't that what we En- 
glish teachers do best? 

This section is a response to sporadic but increasing awareness 
and identification of multicultural issues in a number of professional 
journals. And though I know that many teachers are not as uninformed 
as I, I cannot help but think that there are some, through no lack of 
interest, commitment, or ability, who find themselves lacking solid back- 
ground in multicultural literature and so hesitate to teach it. 

Indeed, although the last few years have seen the burgeoning of 
ethnic studies and African American specializations at the Ph.D. level, 
the climate for these areas of investigation hasn't always been so warm. 
In a provocative discussion of "new Black aesthetic critics and their 
exclusion from American 'mainstream 7 criticism/' Martin (1988) points 



141 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



135 



out that new black aesthetic criticism is almost absent in readings of 
standard literary criticism. He also notes the paucity of courses and com- 
prehensive examinations that focus on such criticism in doctoral pro- 
grams, thus rendering a corpus of literature almost invisible (379). Ac- 
cording to Jay (1991), this "socially constructed ignorance of teachers 
and students will be a hard obstacle to multicultural literacy, for the 
knowledge it requires has been largely excluded from the mainstream 
classroom, dissertation, and published critical study" (274). 

But we shouldn't chide ourselves too much. Even though mul- 
ticultural literature has been largely left out of the canon, other disci- 
plines have not done much better. Indeed, the traditional "history of 
Western civilization" has virtually institutionalized the exclusion of non- 
Western cultures and left them outside of history altogether. Asante 
(1987) points out, for example, that we do not teach the Egyptian "The 
Coming Forth by Day" as the precursor to the Torah, the Koran, and 
possibly the Bhagavad-Gita. Nor do our history books represent the 
Egyptian and Nubian civilizations as the progenitors of Greek and Ro- 
man thought (166). As I've noted elsewhere, such exclusions reveal a 
"xenophobic perspective which all but eliminates a multicultural ap- 
proach to history and literature" (1988, 50). 

Nonetheless, if we believe, as Henry Louis Gates, Jr. (1990) does, 
that the literary canon is "the commonplace book of our shared culture" 
(58), and if we are, in fact, a multicultural population, then we needn't 
argue anymore about whether or not to expand the canon to include 
diverse literature. We simply need to learn more about the literatures of 
the diverse peoples that make up the population of what we call the 
United States. We can't understand "American" literature without this 
knowledge. Jay (1991) writes: 

One cannot . . . adequately interpret works . . . without some 
knowledge of the various cultures surrounding and informing 
them. Most writing produced here after the eighteenth century 
moreover, borrows words, characters, events, forms, ideas, and 
concepts from the languages of African-, Hispanic-, Jewish-, Na- 
tive-, and Asian-Americans. (270) 

Writers have been "crossing boundaries" for a long time. Look- 
ing at Mexican American literature, for instance, we can see that nation- 
ality, language, and culture have blended for centuries. Citing Bless Me, 
Ultima, Jay wonders how we can categorize a work "which crosses so 
many . . . linguistic and cultural divides" (268). Noting the ancient tra- 
ditions defined in Black Elk Speaks or James Welch's Fools Crow, he asks, 
"Can the borders between Native-, Hispanic-, and Anglo-American lit- 



142 



136 



Crossing the Mainstream 



erature be drawn without blurring historical traditions which placed all 
but the Anglo outside?" And Elizabeth Meese cites Leslie Silko's "half- 
breed protagonist/' Tayo, and the other multiracial characters in Cer- 
emony as an illustration of the "crossing of cultures" by contemporary 
writers and readers (quoted in Jay 1991). 

In fact, notions of "separateness" have recently come under close 
scrutiny by a number of critics. In Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the 
Literary Imagination (1992), Toni Morrison points out that the black pres- 
ence in America has had a profound influence on white writing, despite 
the fact that this influence has traditionally been ignored or denied, that 
white literature has traditionally been thought of as "separate" from 
such issues: 

For some time now I have been thinking about the validity or 
vulnerability of a certain set of assumptions conventionally ac- 
cepted among literary historians and critics and circulated as 
"knowledge." This knowledge holds that traditional, canonical 
American literature is free of, uninformed, and unshaped by the 
four-hundred-year-old presence of, first, Africans and then Afri- 
can-Americans in the United States [Yet] the contemplation 

of this black presence is central to any understanding of our na- 
tional literature and should not be permitted to hover at the mar- 
gins of the literaiy imagination. (4-5) 

The institution of slavery, the Constitution, and the history of our cul- 
ture, argues Morrison, have had an impact on the thinking of writers, 
and there has been an unspoken agreement of silence about this. She 
mentions several works for which much scholarship exists, but for which 
analysis of African American characters and themes is almost nonexist- 
ent: for example, "the black woman who lubricates the turn of the plot 
and becomes the agency of moral choice and meaning in Henry James's 
What Maisie Knew/' the black woman who "holds the center stage in 
Gertrude Stein's Three Lives/' or the problem of race in Willa Gather's 
"Sapphira and the Slave Girl" (13-14). 

Shelley Fisher-Fishkin takes the critique of separateness a step 
further by asserting that Twain based the voice of Huckleberry Finn on 
a ten-year-old African American slave (cited in Winkler 1992). Although 
she has met with some criticism for her views, we already know that 
Twain adopted a number of dialects for his characters. Fisher-Fishkin's 
provocative notion would make for an interesting class discussion, and 
the enterprising student could write a stimulating exploratory paper. I 
look forward to more discussion on this issue by Fisher-Fishkin and 
others in the field. 



143 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



137 



The point here is that if we look at literary criticism in this way, 
the whole notion of separateness may become obsolete. In fact, Gates 
(1990) sees a new Rainbow Coalition of contemporary critical theory in 
"the uneasy, shifting set of alliances formed by feminist critics, critics of 
so-called minority discourse, and Marxist and post-structuralist critics 
generally/ 7 a coalition that "rejects the 'antebellum aesthetic position/ 
when men were men, and men were white, when scholar-critics were 
white men, and when women and persons of color were voiceless" (56). 
Jay (1991) calls for nothing less than the "uprooting of the conceptual 
model defining the field" of American literature (264). 

To look more critically at the literatures of the United States, how- 
ever, we must broaden our knowledge of characteristics of literary ex- 
cellence beyond the traditional Eurocentric models that we have been 
educated with and continue to teach in our classrooms. Traditional ele- 
ments such as plot development, characterization, use of symbolism, 
and so forth simply may not be relevant when we study the literature of 
nonmainstream writers. Thus, we may be undervaluing the aesthetic 
quality of nonmainstream work simply because we do not know what 
to look for. 

For example, Li (1992), in discussing the "filiative and affiliative 
textualization" in Marilyn Chin's poetry, claims that this theme is "the 
sheaf of other Chinese American verse as well" (178). It's used to create 
"a sense of cohesive kinship" in Mei-mei Berssenbrugge's "Chronicle," 
as a means of identification in Nellie Wong's "Dreams in Harrison Rail- 
road Park," and to express "intimacy, enhanced by . . . loss" in Cathy 
Song's "The Youngest Daughter" (178-79). Can we recognize these quali- 
ties when we search for a more "traditional" theme? 

Or take the idea that storytelling is sacred and can be used for 
the purpose of healing, a common view in Native American literature. 
From a Eurocentric perspective, a work of art is typically appreciated 
for its aesthetic qualities alone. Thus, an uninformed reader might miss 
the significance of the healing powers of N. Scott Momaday's House 
Made of Dawn or Leslie Silko's Ceremony. Furthermore, if we do not un- 
derstand the importance of the vision quest or the significance of dreams 
in many Native American novels and poems, we may overlook or be 
confused by much of the action. 

Similarly, the criteria for African American rhetorical excellence 
are not necessari y the same as the direct, linear model of the European 
American traditon. According to Cook (1985), the "flourish of words," 
the creation of "*vitty turns of phrase," the "plays on words" to alter the 
length and rhythms of the expected text, the sequence of narratives for 



144 



138 



Crossing the Mainstream 



building, in a circuitous way, the powerful message of the text are all 
part of a carefully formatted pattern that an uninformed audience might 
miss (261-67). These literary elements and many more have been and 
will continue to be lost to a lot of us if we do not take the time to learn 
and examine the characteristic qualities of nonmainstream work. 

What follows is in no way complete. In fact, I will merely touch 
on a few major groups about whom I am learning. In this chapter, I look 
briefly at African American, Chinese American, Japanese American, 
Mexican American, and Native American literatures, all of which are 
becoming increasingly accessible to readers. To include more groups 
would be beyond the scope of this book. 

Clearly, I feel more comfortable discussing some areas than I do 
others because I have been studying them longer. Thus, my commen- 
tary will probably seem uneven to those who are well versed in each 

literature. For those who will say "But she didn't include " or 

"No one ever talks about ," please understand that my intention 

was not to purposely exclude anything. I did the best I could with the 
time and space that I had. I hope that I will hear from those willing to 
add to this beginning effort. 

African American Literature 

Molefi Asante (1987) claims that artists from Afrocentric traditions should 
be judged not by Eurocentric models, but by styles and characteristics 
that better represent African American works, by a "Black Aesthetic." 
He argues that Western rationality and objectivity are inadequate for 
understanding the Afrocentric thinker, for whom, as I've said elsewhere, 
"the interactive metaphors of discourse" are interrelated differently 
(1988,51). 

Similarly in The Way of the New World: The Black Novel in America, 
Addison Gayle talks about "a black way of seeing": 

In more concrete terms, before beauty can be seen, felt, heard, 
and appreciated by a majority of the earth's people, a new world 
must be brought into being; the earth must be made habitable 
and free for all men. This is the core of the Black Aesthetic ideol- 
ogy and forms the major criterion for the evaluation of art: How 
much better has the work of art made the life of a single human 
being on this planet, and how functional has been the work of art 
in moving us toward that moment when an ars poetica is possible 
for all? (quoted in Martin 1988, 377-79) 

And in discussing the style and essence of African American writ- 
ing, Henry Louis Gates, Jr. (1990) relates the result of his discoveiy of 



145. 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



139 



James Baldwin at age fifteen: 

I wrote and rewrote verbatim his elegantly framed paragraphs, 
full of sentences that were at once somehow Henry Jamesian and 
King Jamesian, yet clothed in the cadences and figures of the spiri- 
tuals. (58) 

At the 1991 NCTE Annual Convention in Seattle, I heard Haki R. 
Madhubuti relate a similar story. As a young boy he discovered Richard 
Wright, and that discovery changed his world. Finally a writer whose 
voice he could identify with and be moved by at the same time. 

What follows is a discussion of African American literary theory. 
It's only an introduction, a beginning, and should not be taken as any- 
thing else. But perhaps it gives readers some knowledge of the power 
and difference of African American literature. 

Separatist or Syncretist? 

According to Gates (1990), "the poles of black canon formation, estab- 
lished firmly by 1849/' were originally defined by the question 'Is 'black' 
poetry racial in theme, or is black poetry any sort of poetry written by 
black people?" Gates writes, 'This question has been at play in the tra- 
dition ever since" (62). 

Thus, African American literary theory has historically included 
both separatist and syncretic points of view. The syncretists hold that 
great African American writers follow Eurocentric forms and belong to 
a larger mainstream t ;roup. Scholars like Houston Baker and Robert 
Stepto believe that mainstream criticism can be combined with African 
American forms that identify "the quest for freedom and literacy" 
(Savery 1991, 191). This group believes that their argument gives the 
writer more tools: those of mainstream traditions as well as those of 
distinct African American traditions. Since African Americans have had 
to "fit into" a larger whole and remain a "subgroup" at the same time, 
this group argues, and since they have managed to be successful at it, 
why shouldn't they take advantage of both camps (Martin 1990, 728)? 

Separatists believe that true African American artists write with a 
distinctive identity of their own. This group "shouted down and trans- 
formed" the critics of the forties and fifties, insisting that '"uniquely 
black' ways of 'seeing' literature" could not be fairly judged by the cri- 
teria of oppressors. The "forceful rhetoric and politically timely mes- 
sages" of the separatist camp continued to dominate until Henry Louis 
Gates, Jr.'s work in the syncretic "use of Euro/ Anglo-based critical ideas" 
changed the focus of analysis. Nevertheless, Gates's work in "Significa- 
tion" has moved him closer to the earlier separatists. 



146 



140 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Responding to Gates's work, Barbara Johnson points out that "we 
can have it both ways" (quoted in Kirkpatrick 1990, 814). Gates chal- 
lenges scholars to. Savery (1991) too allows for differences of opinion 
and the importance of teaching our students that there is no one answer 
(196). Contemporary African American literary critics, and specifically 
Henry Louis Gates, Jr., are moving away from the necessity of authenti- 
cating black literature through standard models. They are, according to 
Spurlin (1990), trying to develop "theories of criticism indigenous to 
black literature rather than simply mastering only the canons of criti- 
cism and imitating and applying these to African-American texts" (732). 

Nommo and the Lyrical Attitude 

The concept of "nommo" figures centrally in African American litera- 
ture (see Oliver 1988). Forbidden to learn to read or write, the spoken 
word became the central medium of communication for the slave in 
America. And "nommo" — in African discourse "the generative and pro- 
ductive power of the spoken word"— established the ancestral oral tra- 
ditions on American soil. Indeed, Asante argues that an awareness of 
"nommo" explains the black American experience of spoken inter- 
changes between preachers and congregations and the "long tradition 
of masterful orators" like Marcus Garvey, Martin Luther King, Jr., and 
Jesse Jackson (quoted in Coughlin 1987). 

As part of this tradition of oral discourse, African American speak- 
ers often use "indirection" to arouse curiosity, suspense, or emotion; 
sometimes it is used to subvert authority. Building "deductively," the 
orator skillfully "stalks the issues," speaking circuitously, slowly lead- 
ing up to the statements. Unlike Eurocentric discourse, which values 
directness and linear argument, the African American tradition values 
the use of indirection as a test of rhetorical talent. 

The structural emphasis on voice, lyrical quality, and indirection 
leads to an African American approach to language most consistent with 
narration. Public orators and preachers often employ narrative devices 
in their speeches to elicit call-response patterns, "talkbacks," and affir- 
mative hand claps. Examples from the oratories of King, Garvey, Jack- 
son, and the like, as well as from characters drawn from the literary 
works of Baldwin, Wright, and Jones, demonstrate these characteristics. 
Asante (1987) uses James Weldon Johnson's "The Creation" to illustrate 
these devices. 

In fact, narrative sequencing offers teachers an excellent method 
for making connections from text to audience, for linking a lecture or a 
talk or a work of literature to the lives of students. Those of us who 



14? 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



141 



believe that we can link up great literary works with our students 7 prior 
knowledge can easily capitalize on this technique. In his discussion of 
the black folk sermon, Cook (1985) suggests a number of good charac- 
ters to use for this exercise, such as Ellison's Barbee and the protagonist 
in Invisible Man, those from several Baldwin novels, even the Reverend 
Shegog of The Sound and the Fury. Cook writes that "even though he 
could not rid himself of certain received racial stereotypes/ 7 William 
Faulkner did recognize the black folk sermon "as a distinct and power- 
fully moving art form' 7 (264). 

Oral traditions manifest themselves in African American litera- 
ture in other ways as well The vernacular traditions of spirituals, blues, 
and labor songs have long been part of African American literature. The 
blues, perhaps the most widely known of these traditions, is described 
by Martin (1988) as 7 'a uniquely black index for writing and thinking 
about what is written." Martin notes, "The blues are 'encoded 7 with mes- 
sages of Afro- American culture: the sadness, the happiness, how to sur- 
vive 77 (378). 

Signifyin(g) 

In The Signifying Monkey: A Theory of Afro-American Literary Criticism 
(1988), Henry Louis Gates, Jr., introduced a provocative and exciting 
new trope for literary critics to contemplate: Signifyin(g). Operative in 
the oral traditions of African American myth and folklore, in slave nar- 
ratives, in the novels and poems of the Harlem Renaissance, and through 
to contemporary literature, Signification is, according to Spurlin (1990), 
a "formal repetition always repeat(ing) with a difference, a black differ- 
ence that manifests itself in specific language use"; it is "two-tiered or 
double-voiced and serves as a trope for African American discourse in a 
relation of difference to English or Western signification 77 ; it is a "talk- 
ing back and forth between texts" (733). Gates (1988) demarcates Afri- 
can American Signification from other linguistic signification by an al- 
ternative spelling: 77 Signifyin(g) 77 or "Signification, 77 both with a capital 
"S 7 ' to distinguish it as different. 

Once we begin to look for Signifyin(g), we find a number of rela- 
tionships between texts in the African American tradition. For example, 
Ellison's title Invisible Man is a response to Wright's Black Boy and Native 
Son. Savery (1991) notes: 

Hurston revises both specific passages and narrative strategies 
from Frederick Douglass, W. E. B. Du Bois, and Jean Toomer. 
Likewise, Ralph Ellison signifies on Richard Wright. Ishmael Reed 
signifies on Ellison, Wright, and Baldwin. Toni Morrison signifies 



148 



142 



Crossing the Mainstream 



on Ellison; and Morrison and Alice Walker signify on Hurston. 
(191) 

Gates's chapter in The Signifying Monkey on Ishmael Reed pro- 
vides a complicated and fascinating treatment of Signify in(g) in Mumbo 
Jumbo, Reed's dazzling postmodern treatment of the Black Arts Move- 
ment, the Harlem Renaissance, and everything else that has happened 
in art, history, and civilization for the last two thousand years. I used 
Mumbo Jumbo in my class, and students were amazed by the amount of 
material that could be put into one book. Reed's work is yet another 
challenging example of Gates's theory of Signification. 

The Pathos of Being Black and American and Other Themes 

Commenting on African American literature, Martin (1988) points out 
the "situational emotive construct of the diction and lexicon choices," 
the "channeled use of emotion" that reflects the pathos, the horror, of 
being black and American (373). Indeed, developing an awareness of 
the black aesthetic requires a sensitivity to the cultural character, the 
rhetoric, the haunting communication styles of "epic memory," and the 
racial ethos of the oral traditions that have survived through oppres- 
sion (Asante 1987; Cobb 1985). Thus, if despair over oppression becomes 
a dominant theme in some of the literature, it should not be criticized as 
an aesthetic weakness because it contradicts the American ideal of opti- 
mism (Turner 1985). 

Critics of African American literature talk extensively about un- 
covering masks of oppression and secrecy. Teachers must remember the 
frame of reference for the artist: Africans were brought to this country 
as slaves. They were persecuted, abused, and robbed of their birthrights. 
Asante remarks, "Our souls have been stolen" (quoted in Coughlin 1987, 
A7). This tradition is reflected in much of the literature. (Though cer- 
tainly not all For a great variety of styles, moods, genres, characteriza- 
tions, and perspectives, see Breaking Ice, a collection of over three dozen 
African American contemporary writers edited by Terry McMillan.) 

Indeed, much of the literature is tough. John Edgar Wideman's 
Reuben is the story of an old man with an orthopedic disability, a young 
prostitute fighting to keep her son, and a basketball recruiter who has 
murderous visions as a result of the hideous racism he has suffered. In 
Beloved, Morrison's Sethe commits infanticide rather than condemn her 
child to a life of slavery. Perhaps this is the kind of literature the separat- 
ist critics are talking about when they say that the parlor manners of 
Eurocentric critical models simply won't do when looking at African 
American literature. 



149 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



143 



Musa Moore-Foster (1991) identifies several other prominent Af- 
rican American literary themes, including the image of Africa and its 
influence in the United States, kinship and the strength of the black family 
in spite of poverty, hopelessness and duress, the double struggle of be- 
ing female and black, male/female relationships, and the problems 
caused by the duality of bondage and democracy that exists even today 
Looking more broadly, Moore-Foster writes: 

The African American literary tradition displays a heightened 
degree of introspection through which readers may perceive a 

kaleidoscope of Black Selfhood [These writers] . . . allow us 

to examine region, class, and gender along with race, all as ex- 
pressions of African American identity. (144) 

Mexican American/Chicano Literature 

The mountain of materials I have collected on Mexican American litera- 
ture intimidates me. Nonetheless, in this short space, I hope to provide 
a bit of historical background and to mention a few of the characteris- 
tics of Chicano literature. For much of the discussion, I call on the works 
of Carl and Paula Shirley (1988) and Charles Tatum (1990), beginning 
sources for high school and college classes reading Chicano literature. 
Bear in mind that this discussion is only a start, nothing more; I invite 
everyone to continue where I've left off. 

Also, please note that I've decided to limit my discussion to Mexi- 
can American/Chicano literature. Latino literature comes from a much 
larger, more general population that includes Puerto Ricans, Cubans, 
Nicaraguans, and many, many others. Groups under the umbrella term 
Latino/a represent many different people with many different political, 
philosophic, and religious views. Garciagodoy (1991) writes: 

The problem of how to refer to us is complicated by the fact that 
we are, in fact, a very heterogeneous group. We are not all immi- 
grants. We are not all chicanas and chicanos, nor puertoriquenos nor 
cubanas. We do not all speak Spanish. (81) 

I have chosen to look only at Mexican American/Chicano literature in 
this section because Mexican Americans are one of the largest groups of 
Latino/a Americans and because their history in the United States, as 
Jay (1991) notes, predates that of European Americans: 

Our peoples and writers have been flowing back and forth over 
the space these boundaries now delineate since before the colonial 
adventure began. These borders make little sense when one is 
studying the histories, say, of Native- or Hispanic- or African- 
American literature. This crossing of boundaries . . . becomes the 



150 



144 



Crossing the Mainstream 



paradoxical center of Mexican-American and Chicano literature, 
for example, which has been violating borders of nationality and 
of language since the 1500s. (268) 

One more note: I have listened to and read about reasons for and 
against the use of the term Chicano. Some say it is very old. Most attach 
it to the political activity of the sixties. Some like it; some don't. Some 
find it "too closely linked with a political or social movement with which 
they do not identify" (Shirley and Shirley 1988, 7). Still, according to 
Shirley and Shirley (1988): 

It has gained in use and popularity over the last two decades to 
the point that for many it is a symbol of pride. It is a common 
term used by most Chicanos when they refer to themselves as a 
group, and it is the term most frequently used to designate their 
history, culture, and literature. Most authors and scholars and 
virtually all reference works employ the word. (7) 

I have chosen to follow Shirley and Shirley's example in Understanding 
Chicano Literature and use the terms Chicano and Mexican American 
synonymously. 

The History of Chicano Literature 

Any introduction to Chicano literature should start with a history les- 
son, because many assume that this "genre" began in the sixties. Fur- 
ther, to suggest that "English language dominance defines American 
literature" is ethnocentric (Candelaria 1990, 1). In fact, the literature of 
Mexican American people goes back to the sixteenth century. Candelaria 
(1990) writes: 

U.S. ethnic art and literature are not recent, post-1960s phenom- 
ena resulting from the counterculture movements of that decade. 
Rather, they date back to the pre- American past of Native myth 
and legend, to the belles lettres of the Spanish Colonial period, to 
the mestizo balladry of New Spain, to the antebellum African 
American narratives and song, and on and on. The roofs of eth- 
nic-identified U.S. American literature are thus ancient in both 
"old" and "new" world terms. (1) 

During the "Spanish Conquest" period, Spanish explorers fought 
for dominance and brought Mexican Indians under control. Though they 
caused much suffering, many explorers settled and married, creating 
"a new race of mestizos" (Tatum 1990, 4). Exploration continued until, 
by the late eighteenth century, Spanish ranchers were settled all over 
Texas, New Mexico, Arizona, and the southern half of California (to San 
Francisco). 



151 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



145 



In the nineteenth century, the mestizos fought bitterly and gained 
their independence from Spain. But during the westward expansion of 
the United States,. "Anglos" poured into the Southwest looking for farm- 
land/ ranches, and gold. They were welcomed by some, seen as a threat 
by others. Eventually, U.S. government encouragement precipitated the 
Mexican American War, which, by the way, was denounced by Frederick 
Douglass and Abraham Lincoln, then a congressman from Illinois. No 
matter. With the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848, the United States 
won control over the entire Southwest, as we know it today. Thus, by 
the middle of the nineteenth century, the United States had engulfed all 
of Mexico's northern territories (Tatum 1990). 

During these years, from the sixteenth century to the mid-nine- 
teenth century, literature flourished in the area now known in the United 
States as the Southwest. Indeed, Mexican American literature is as old 
as Spain's presence in the New World, though it has long "been over- 
looked by non-Chicano 'majority' readers and critics" (Shirley and 
Shirley 1988, 4). Garcia (1976) tells us that Mexican American folklore 
fused 

the best tradition of 16th century Spanish genres, antedating the 
literary genres of the Eastern American colonies by one hundred 
years . . . with the mysticism of the indio (Mexican Indian). Mexi- 
can-American folklore brought to American literature one of the 
first genuine forms of cultural pluralism, the indio-his panic syn- 
thesis. (84) 

Like many other folklore traditions, the songs, stories, and poems 
of the culture were passed orally from one generation to another by 
storytellers. And, like many other folklore traditions, Mexican Ameri- 
can tales feature heroes and heroine who solve riddles and receive a 
reward, humorous views of human lolly, animals that act and speak 
like people, lessons and morals, fiendish villains who play cruel jokes, 
magic and ench mtment, and ghostly apparitions that frighten wayward 
people into mending their ways (Tatum 1990, 21). 

Four popular folklore characters appear in much of the literature: 
La Llorona (the Weeping Woman), La Bruja (the Witch), La Curandera (the 
Healer), and La Muerte (the Angel of Death) (Garcia 1976). La Llorona 
was wronged by her husband, drowns her children in revenge, and dies 
in remorse. (Sound familiar? Wouldn't this folktale make for interesting 
comparison with Medea?) Her restless spirit takes many forms as she 
interacts with characters in stories. La Curandera, the Healer, also plays 
a prominent role, as evidenced in Bless Me, Ultima, Anaya's story of a 



152 



146 



Crossing the Mainstream 



young boy who learns to love the old woman who comes to help his 
family. 

Because of "a strong oral and written tradition/' poetry has al- 
ways been one of the most prolific genres in Chicano literature (Shirley 
and Shirley 1988, 11). The corrido, or folk ballad, is a running narrative 
depicting a hero or heroine involved in an adventure, sometimes a mis- 
adventure. Dating back to pre-Columbian times, corridos tell of "heroic 
deeds, catastrophes, wars, and everyday events" (Shirley and Shirley 
1988, 12). One of the most famous corridos is the 1901 tale 'The Corrido 
of Gregorio Cortez." 

Most Chicano historians and writers consider the "acquisition" 
of the Southwest Territory by the United States a disaster for Mexican 
Americans. Although the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo guaranteed 
Mexican peoples living in the conquered territory U.S. citizenship, the 
new "Mexican Americans" suffered greatly. Families that had lived on 
land for generations were cheated out of their property, and the new 
Mexican Americans were the victims of extreme racial prejudice (Tatum 
1990; Shirley and Shirley 1988). Reaction to the violence and denial of 
the years following the "treaty'' engendered political leaders who be- 
came "symbols of resistance against domination." This period also gave 
rise to cultural heroes about whom corridos were composed that remain 
popular even today. 

After the acquisition, numerous Spanish language publications 
flourished all over the borderland, from Brownsville, Texas, to San Di- 
ego, California. Spanish language theaters were present in many mid- 
sized towns, though these theaters became "more English" through the 
thirties (Tatum 1990). Resistance to oppression produced heroic figures, 
and the struggles of the common people precipitated strikes to improve 
working conditions for Chicanos. And as reflected in much of the con- 
temporary literature, they are still fighting today. 

Contemporary Literature and the Chicano Renaissance 

With the sixties came a renaissance in Mexican American literature. 
According to Shirley and Shirley (1988): 

In many ways, the poetry, novels, plays, short fiction, and other 
literary works written after 1965 represent a break with the works 
that preceded them. The chief source of this break lay in the 
Chicano movement's rejection of the efforts toward assimilation 
made by Mexican Americans after World War II through the early 
1960s. (16) 



153 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



147 



From the sixties on, Chicano literature focused chiefly on social 
and political issues. Shirley and Shirley (1988) note: 

In the modern age . . . there are several characteristic themes and 
subjects expressed by Chicanos writing in all genres. Among these 
are the themes of social protest and exploitation, the migratory 
experience, self-exploration or definition (which includes the ex- 
ploration of myths and legends), and life in the barrio There 

is also La Raza, which has a spiritual connotation that joins all 
Spanish-speaking peoples of the Americas. (8) 

According to Tatum (1990), the harsh realities of prejudice and 
poverty, loneliness and alienation, best describe contemporary Chicano 
fiction. In addition, many authors "interweave this stark realism with 
satire, allegory, fantasy and myth, creating many multif aceted and highly 
imaginative works" (287). Tatum compares the magical realism of Ron 
Alias's The Road to Tamazunchale to the writings of Colombian Gabriel 
Garcia Marquez and Mexican Carlos Fuentes. Magical realism, a "blend- 
ing of wild fantasy and stubborn reality" (Laskin 1989), is also central in 
Rudolfo Anaya's Bless Me, Ultima. 

Shirley and Shirley (1988) describe Rolando Hinojosa-Smith as 
"the most prolific Chicano novelist." They note that "like many Chicano 
authors, Hinojosa-Smith presents contrasts and conflicts between Anglo 
and Chicano people, but he does so through irony, gentleness, and hu- 
mor." His first novel, they say, is characterized by "fragmented time 
and space, shifting narration, and a phantasmagoria of characters" (111). 

Movement Poetry 

Cordelia Candelaria identifies a number of "polar opposites" that de- 
fine the spirit of "Movement Poetry," the poetry of the sixties revolu- 
tion: Raza nationalism versus universalism, Mexico and Aztlan versus 
the United States, equity and justice versus racism, tradition and com- 
munalism versus capitalism, holism and pre-Americanism versus the 
Euro-Western world view (quoted in Shirley and Shirley 1988, 17). The 
epic poem Yo Soy Joaquin/I Am Joaquin, attributed to Rodolfo "Corky" 
Gonzales, is a well-known example of the mood of Chicano movement 
poetry. Still, its authorship has recently been called into question by many 
of the "revolution poets." (See Ricardo Sanchez's parody "I Am Joking" 
and other related essays.) 

Many regard Ricardo Sanchez as one of the strongest poetic voices 
of the Chicano movement. Sanchez, along with his longtime friend 
Abelardo "Lalo" Delgado, "cry out against a nation that rejects cultural 
and ethnic diversity" (Shirley and Shirley 1988, 20). Sanchez's corpus of 



154 



148 



Crossing the Mainstream 



work was recently archived at Stanford University and is currently the 
largest collection by a single Chicano poet in existence at a major insti- 
tution. 

Post-Movement Poetry 

Although Sanchez insists there is no "post-movement" because the 
struggle continues, Shirley and Shirley (1988) describe the poetry of the 
mid-seventies as much less strident than that of earlier years. The poet 
Alurista, for instance, "draws upon the Amerindian heritage of the Az- 
tec and Mayan world" (30) to represent the concerns of the past and the 
hope for change in the future. Bernice Zamora gives us a sense of the 
intertextual links between Anglo and Chicano voices. 

Gary Soto, a popular contemporary Chicano poet and fiction 
writer, appeals to a variety of audiences. His work has won numerous 
awards and is appreciated by both young and old readers. Many of his 
themes revolve around young people. According to Shirley and Shirley 
(1988), Soto's work reflects "a Chicano consciousness of racial identity 
and the despair that can come from poverty and alienation" (49). 

Language: Spanish, Spanglish, English 

Introducing the "Hispanic American" section of Braided Lives, Juanita 
Garciagodoy (1991) invites readers "to discover what it means to speak 
a forbidden language ... to feel the sense of loss ... in which mono- 
lingualism became the rule" (83). Indeed, language seems to be a prob- 
lem in this country. But I think we've got it backwards. For some rea- 
son, many North Americans do not see the value in speaking more than 
one language. I think ifs because most of us don't know how. 

But thaf s changing. In the summer of 1992, 1 attended a wonder- 
ful conference entitled "Crossing Borders: Chicano Realities." Partici- 
pants were treated to readings from some of the most prominent poets 
and critics of the last three decades — writers such as "Lalo" Delgado, 
Felipe Ortega y Gasca, and Ricardo Sanchez — and a variety of other 
festivities as well, including some wonderfully prepared art exhibits, 
food, and dancing. I delighted in the facility with which many of the 
conference participants switched from English, which I understand, to 
"Spanglish," some of which I understand, to Spanish, almost none of 
which I understand. 

I am envious of people who can speak more than one language 
and can move from one to the other with ease. Instead of purging our 
schools of these "foreign" languages, I think we should capitalize on 
the talent that so many of our students have. In 1989 I heard Samuel 



155 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



149 



Betances, a noted sociologist and proponent of multicultural education, 
speak on the issue of nonmainstream students and education. After 
describing his early childhood experience as a racially mixed English 
speaker in New York City, he told us of his move to Puerto Rico, where 
he spoke no English for several years. Upon his return to New York as a 
teenager, he was told by his teachers that he could no longer speak Span- 
ish. "And there I was/ 7 he beamed in his captivating manner, "illiterate 
in two languages!" 

Gloria Anzaldiia (1987) had the same experience. In "How to Tame 
a Wild Tongue," she says: 

I remember being caught speaking Spanish at recess That was 

good for three licks on the knuckles with a sharp ruler. I remem- 
ber being sent to the corner of the classroom for "talking back" to 
the Anglo teacher when all I was trying to do was tell her how to 
pronounce my name. "If you want to be American, speak 'Ameri- 
can/ If you don't like it, go back to Mexico where you belong." 

Shirley and Shirley (1988), remarking on the "linguistic realism" 
of Chicano literature, explain that many Chicano writers mix all three 
languages in their work: English, Spanish, and calo, which mixes the 
grammar, structure, and vocabulary of each to form a hybrid language. 
This English /Spanish/calo, code-switching, Spanglish style sometimes 
confuses non-Spanish-speaking readers who don't want to bother to 
"figure it out." But such readers are missing out. Professors and teach- 
ers of literature must present this linguistic variety as an enrichment, 
not as a barrier to understanding. 

A student of mine once brought up the language issue during a 
discussion of BJess Me, Ultima. She complained that she was not able to 
"understand it all." "How many others had trouble understanding what 
was going on?" I asked. Only one hand went up. A young man from 
Puerto Rico responded, 'Too bad she doesn't understand Spanish. She 
missed all the swearing." Laughter all around. 

Gender Issues 

Although it is not my purpose here to explore the work of feminist writ- 
ers specifically, I did note discussions about gender in the work of sev- 
eral scholars (see Candelaria 1990; Garciagodoy 1991; Gomez, Moraga, 
and Romo-Carmona 1983). And a number of women writers are ad- 
dressing the issue of gender in their works. In "By Word of Mouth," 
Gomez, Moraga, and Romo-Carmona (1983) say, "We need una literatura 
that testifies to our lives, provides acknowledgment of who we are: an 
exiled people, a migrant people, mujeres en \ucha" (vii). Gloria Anzaldua 



156 



150 



Crossing the Mainstream 



(1987) talks about her discovery of a female voice. Referring to the use 
of the word nosotros for a group that may include women, even for a 
group made up entirely of women, she notes, "We are robbed of our 
female being by the masculine plural Language is a male discourse" 
(54). And Cordelia Candelaria (1990) talks about changes in society that 
will affect the lives of Chicano women. 

Expanding the Limits of American Literature 

In their investigations into Mexican American literature, Charles Tatum 
(1990) and Carl and Paula Shirley (1988) explore a vast wealth of mate- 
rials from a number of different genres. They open the way for all of us 
to investigate this growing corpus of work. As Shirley and Shirley (1988) 
note: 

Mexican American literature has mushroomed over the last two 
decades, The sheer volume of high-quality writing ... is forcing 
the limits of .American literature to expand; as the vitality and 
excitement of Chicano literature are being increasingly felt, it is 
taking its rightful place in the field of American letters. (10) 

Chinese American and Japanese American Literature 

I heard Elaine Kim note several years ago that "much recent literature 
by Asian Americans deals with establishing identity, with 'fitting into 7 a 
country where your family has lived for generations/ 7 Indeed, Asian 
Americans are still often looked upon as foreigners in this country. They 
are thought to have a suspiciously dual heritage: an American one and 
an Asian one. Furthermore, according to many observers (Kim 1982; 
Chan, Chin, Inada, and Wong 1982), the American mainstream has used, 
confused, and manipulated the Asian image of Chinese and Japanese 
people throughout the history of their presence in the United States. 
The "good Asian" and "bad Asian" myths have haunted these groups 
from the beginning. 

Recently, however, attempts have been made to "claim America" 
for Asian Americans too (Kim 1982, 173). Perhaps we can help by using 
Asian American literature, both historical nonfiction and fiction, to 
straighten out some of the misconceptions. 

What follows is a brief sketch of some impressions I have gotten 
from my own reading and from a few of the prominent critics in the 
area of Asian American literature. Much of the information for this dis- 
cussion comes from the work of noted critics Elaine Kim (1982), Jeffrey 
Chan, Frank Chin, Lawson Inada, and Shawn Wong (1974, 1982, 1991), 
and David Leiwei Li (1992). 



157 



77a? Right Rules for the Right Game 



151 



One note: When we speak of "Asian Americans/ we speak of 
many racial, ethnic, and cultural groups, recent immigrants and long- 
time residents, a multitude of literatures. I've thus confined this discus- 
sion to Chinese American and Japanese American literature. These two 
peoples have been in the United States for a long time, seven genera- 
tions in the case of the Chinese and four generations in the case of the 
Japanese (Chan, Chin, Inada, and Wong 1982). In fact, their literary tra- 
ditions are older than some of our European American classics. Only 
recently, however, have we begun to acknowledge the work of these 
artists. 

Historical Development of the Literature 

Jeffery Chan, Frank Chin, Lawson Inada, and Shawn Wong (1974) re- 
mind us that Chinese and Japanese immigrants were a literate people 
(like the Mexican Americans from the Southwest) from literate civiliza- 
tions, whose "presses, theaters, opera houses, and artistic enterprises 
rose as quickly as their social and political institutions'' (x v). Tracing the 
early literary traditions of Asian American writers, Chan and his col- 
leagues (1991) describe a struggle for recognition despite exclusionary 
practices and conscious or unconscious manipulation by a mainstream 
public and publishers. 

Japanese Americans in particular faced the virulent prejudice and 
internment camps that resulted from the Second World War. Much of 
the literature of this group was suppressed, emerging only decades later. 
Nonetheless, according to Chan and his co-authors (1982): 

Japanese America produced writers who came together to form 
literary-intellectual communities. As early as the twenties, Japa- 
nese American writers were rejecting the concept of the dual iden- 
tity and assuring a Nisei [second generation! identity that was 
neither Japanese nor white European American. (214) 

John Okada's No-No Boy (1957) was the first novel by a Japanese 
American (and the second book by a Nisei writer from Seattle; the first 
was Monica Sone's Nisei Daughter). Like many other nonmainstream 
works that do not fit the standard criteria of modern fiction, No-No Boy 
was considered a novel of social history rather than a piece of good 
literature. But as its critics suggest, it was so much more. In fact, it de- 
fined itself. According to Chan and colleagues (1982): 

There is no reference, no standard of measure, no criterion. So, 
by its own terms, Okada's novel invented Japanese- American fic- 
tion, full-blown, self-begotten, arrogantly inventing its own cri- 
teria. (215) 



158 



152 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Many critics failed to appreciate Okada's style because they did 
not understand the Japanese American idiom. Again, Chan and his col- 
leagues (1982) write: 

John Okada writes from an oral tradition he hears all the time, 

and talks his writing onto the page [His] work is new only 

because whites aren't literate in the Japanese-American experi- 
ence, not because Okada has been up late nights inventing Japa- 
nese-American culture in his dark laboratory. (218) 

Okada' s hero rejects the dual identity foisted on Japanese Ameri- 
cans. The title is a double rejection: "no" to being Japanese, "no" to be- 
ing American. His family has spent two years in an internment camp, 
and he thus refuses to fight for "his country." Because of this, he is re- 
jected by everybody In my classes, I discuss No-No Boy in conjunction 
with the theme of war and identity and use it alongside Crane's The Red 
Badge of Courage, Silko's Ceremony, and Williams's Captain Blackman. 

Also worthy of note are the several Japanese American works that 
surfaced after the infamous internment days of American history. Mine 
Okubo's Citizen 13660, an autobiographical account of relocation and 
camp experience, was printed in 1946, during an extremely anti-Japa- 
nese period in our history. Toshio Mori's Yokohama, California, often com- 
pared to Sherwood Anderson's Winesburg, Ohio, was published in 1949. 
It was written in 1941, but such a work would have found no welcome 
among the American public at the time. 

One final reference: Any discussion of the history of Japanese 
American literature should include the work of Hisaye Yamamoto, who 
wrote the only pre-war rural Japanese American literature available 
(Chan etal. 1991, 339). 

Barriers to Inclusion 

Critics point to a number of reasons for why many Chinese American 
and Japanese American works were not accepted by the American main- 
stream: they weren't easy to understand, they weren't of interest, they 
didn't "fit in" with popular stereotypes of the Asian in America. Or, 
perhaps they made the general readership uncomfortable by remind- 
ing it of the less-than-hospitable reception Asians have traditionally re- 
ceived in this country. Frank Chin has said that his play The Chickencoop 
Chinaman was difficult to get published because it was "too ethnic," 
and "the ethnicity of yellow writing embarrasses white publishers" 
(quoted in Kim 1982, 174). 

Aside from the denial of the existence of credible Asian American 
literature until very recently, literature about Asians has done much to 



15.9 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



153 



damage both the public image and the self-image of Asian Americans. 
In the beginning chapters of her book Asian American Literature: An In- 
troduction to the Writings and Their Social Context (1982), Elaine Kim pre- 
sents an informative account of the misperceptions and stereotypes that 
face Asians, from the "good" Chinaman, Charlie Chan, to the "bad" 
Chinaman, Fu Manchu, from the exotic seductress to the scheming 
dragon lady. 

I heard Professor Kim speak a few years ago. She brought with 
her a series of videos to demonstrate the "whitening' 7 of Asian women 
so that they would be acceptable to an American audience. She ended 
with a shot of the beautiful Eurasian in one of the Rambo movies (I get 
them mixed up), pointing out that it must have been difficult for Rambo 
to find a woman with such Caucasian features in the middle of the Viet- 
namese jungle. 

To counter continued ignorance and misperception, Jeffrey Chan, 
Frank Chin, Lawson Inada, Shawn Wong, and others formed a group 
called the Combined Asian Resources Project, or CARP, a tough fish 
which in Japanese tradition symbolizes strength. CARP's mission is to 
collect and disseminate authentic Asian American literature and to ob- 
serve the conflicts and struggles among Asian Americans regarding their 
art. Because of the group's efforts, the landmark publications Aiiieeeee! 
An Anthology of Asian American Writers (1974) and then The Big Aiiieeeee! 
An Anthology of Chinese American and Japanese American Literature (1991) 
are now on the market. Besides presenting a wide variety of literary 
works, the Aiiieeeee! editors provide excellent background for beginning 
readers. As a result of collections like these, the corpus of Asian Ameri- 
can literature has gained much wider attention. 

Popularity versus Authenticity 

One of the nagging issues for some Asian American literary critics is the 
difference between what they view as authentic artistic work and pieces 
that have received commercial success because they have appealed to 
what the American mainstream expects to see as "Asian." In examining 
the works of Chinese American and Japanese American writers, then, 
we must be aware of the discrepancies between those who write for 
white audiences and those who, at least for some Asian American crit- 
ics, write with integrity, not pandering to Anglo audiences and feeding 
their stereotypes. 

A critical point for the Aiiieeeee! editors is whether or not Asian 
American writers abandon their own heritage to be accepted into the 
mainstream. Chin (1991) argues that they do not have to. He contends 



160 



154 



Crossing the Mainstream 



that Chinese and Japanese immigrants and their children have preserved 
the myths, folklore, and traditions of their heritage. The literary lega- 
cies of China and Japan were well known to those who emigrated to 
this country. Chin criticizes some of the more popular Asian American 
writers who have adapted their heritage to fit a Western mold, using, 
for example, the autobiographical model, which is a Western form. In- 
stead, Chin believes that true Asian American writers have preserved 
the traditional forms. These classic tales were well understood by im- 
migrants and their children: 

TheChinese people . . . have already set the canon, kept it, taught 

it, and used it No matter how dangerous it was to tell these 

stories, [they] made sure their children heard the three classics of 
the heroic tradition: The Romance of the Three Kingdoms, The 
Water Margin (Outlaws of the Marsh), Journey to the West (Mon- 
key) Likewise, the Issei — Japanese first-generation — [knew 

these classics] along with their own evolution of the forms of the 
heroic tradition, Momotaro (Peach Boy) and Chushingura (The 
Loyal Forty-Seven Ronin). (34) 

The Aiiieeeee! editors identify Louis Chu 7 s Eat a Bowl of Tea (1961) 
as the first Chinese American novel set in America. Retaining the tradi- 
tional forms, Chu 7 s novel is a version of the Three Kingdoms tale. I found 
this book to be fascinating because it reveals the effects of exclusion on 
Chinese American men who came to this country without their fami- 
lies. They performed various services, earned their wages, and dreamed 
of their return to China someday. In fact, to compensate for this empty 
life, fraternal societies were created in large cities like New York and 
San Francisco. According to Chan and his colleagues (1982), Chinese 
America was 

basically a bachelor society, replete with prostitutes and gambling, 
existing as a foreign enclave where the white world stands at an 
officially prescribed distance, where Chinatown and its inhabit- 
ants are tributaries to a faceless and apathetic authority. (212) 

Still, for me, Eat a Bowl of Tea is basically the story of a father and 
son in New York's Chinatown, an arranged marriage, a young woman's 
dilemma, a disgracing of the family name, arid a journey to a better life. 
I missed Chu's adaptation of the traditional Three Kingdoms and Water 
Margin tales of "exile, warlike loneliness, promises made and promises 
broken, marriage and betrayal, a hero running away from home to the 
original stronghold and to new promise and a new life 77 (Chin 1991, 50). 
As an uneducated Western reader, I did not understand the true signifi- 
cance of the story. I must read it again. 



161 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



155 



Chu 7 s style is also worthy of note for the way in which it portrays 
exquisitely the Chinatown life of the time. According to Chan and his 
co-authors (1982): 

The manner and ritual of address and repartee is authentic 
Chinatown. Chu translates idioms from the Sze Yup dialect, and 
the effect of such expressions on his Chinese- American readers is 

delight and recognition He knows Chinatown people, their 

foibles and anxieties, and at once can capture their insularity as 
well as their humanity. (212). 

In distinguishing between "the real and the fake/ 7 Chin and the 
Aiiieeeeel editors (1991) identify "real" Asian American literature by its 
use of Asian fairy tales and the Confucian heroic tradition as a source 
and by the ability of the writers to be understood on their own terms. 
Yet my colleagues Alex Kuo, Rory Ong, and Marian Schiachitano re- 
mind me that not all critics of Asian American literature agree with Chin 
and his associates. Recently taken up by a number of scholars (see Kim 
1990; Kondo 1990; Lowe 1991), the question of "authenticity" remains a 
matter of debate. 

Filiative and Affiliative Textualization 

In tracing the dual movement of "filiative" and "affiliative" elements in 
the work of numerous Chinese American poets and novelists, Li (1992) 
builds a strong case for looking at the "gestures of family devotion 77 in 
Chinese American literature. "Filiative" elements involve a tribute to 
ancestors; "affiliative 7 ' elements involve efforts to build a community. 
Together, the two elements work to give Chinese Americans both his- 
torical anchorage and present legitimacy as an ethnic entity (198). 

In his article, Li traces the filiative "adherence to descent 77 in the 
works of several poets. He notes, for example, Marilyn Chin's reference 
to "The Parent Node" in her poem "The End of a Beginning " Li asserts 
that this ancestral connection exists in the work of many other poets 
too, that it is "the sheaf of other Chinese American verse" (1 78). He cites, 
for example, Mei-mei Berssenbrugge 7 s "Chronicle," Nellie Wong's 
"Dreams in Harrison Railroad Park," and Cathy Song's "Youngest 
Daughter." 

To look at affiliated efforts to embrace a communal awareness of 
the past and the need for identification in the present, Li uses Laurence 
Yep 7 s novel Dragonwings. Yep uses his understanding of his ancestral 
traditions (e.g., of the folk epic Romance of the Three Kingdoms) to connect 
early traditions to a fantasy world. Steeped in the traditions of Chinese 
mythology and with a flair for science fiction, Yep delights his young 



162 



156 



Crossing the Mainstream 



readers with a tale of mystery, fantasy, and fascination. (In much of his 
popular young adult literature, Yep also deals with the difficult prob- 
lems of growing up, including the additional challenges faced by cross- 
cultural and Chinese American children in a white world.) 

Li cites Shawn Wong's Homebase as another example of Chinese 
American literature ''authenticating the ethnic self in significant tradi- 
tions/ 7 In this novel of self-discovery, Rainsford, the main character, 
comes to see a centrally symbolic tree as his "homebase" and as the 
basis for, as he says, "the stories of four generations of my own life" 
(182-83). 

Citing other examples, Li notes that Maxine Hong Kingston rep- 
resents "a sibling product, a sister's voice and a daughter's song" in her 
novel China Men, which again exhibits the quest for filiative and affiliative 
wholeness. Li concludes his discussion with examples from the work of 
David Henry Hwang, Frank Chin, and Amy Tan. In each case, he illus- 
trates the presence of devotion to family, community, and tradition. 

Common Themes 

The struggle for identity and manhood is prevalent in much of the writ- 
ing of Asian Americans. This is a particularly troubling issue because it 
relates to stereotypic and racist beliefs about ''the good Asian," the emas- 
culated Asian. A number of books deal with father-son relationships, 
which, due to the history of Chinese American and Japanese American 
males and limited family life, has created problems. Chu's Eat a Bowl of 
Tea, for instance, portrays a strained relationship between father and 
son. The same is true in No-No Boy, where the main character sees his 
father as weak, as someone who has given up. In Shawn Wong's 
Homebase, another very good novel for young adults, the main character's 
father is dead. But that doesn't keep him from struggling with memo- 
ries of him, his grandfather, and his great-grandfather in his search for 
identity. Less optimistic is Chin's The Chickencoop Chinaman, which por- 
trays Chinatown in decay. In Chin's story, the characters must leave 
Chinatown to become men; in the dying, restrictive, unpleasant envi- 
ronment of Chinatown, their manhood is denied. 

Some historical symbols remain as well. Chinese American writ- 
ers continue to use trains and journeys to symbolize their often tragic 
railroad heritage, and Japanese American writers use recurring images 
of the desert as a reminder of the internment days, which have not been 
forgotten. Yet many Asian American writers have made a deliberate ef- 
fort to make Asian American literature "more accessible" to mainstream 



163 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



157 



readers (Kim 1982, 214). Further, much of the new literature is charac- 
terized by "new styles and fresh language as well as new combinations 
of genres and forms" (Kim 1982, 217). Milton Murayama's All I Asking 
for Is My Body, for example, uses four dialects to portray reality. Sansei 
(third generation) poet Ron Tanaka uses "simple Japanese words and 
phrases, especially as spoken by Issei personae . . . linguistically [mix- 
ing] the world of the American-born Japanese" (Kim 1982, 218). 

Asian Americans have also continued their affinity with African 
American writers, "because the Asian American experience has been 
shaped in large part by poverty and discrimination" (Kim 1982, 237). In 
fact, African American presses were some of the first to recognize, ac- 
knowledge, and publish Asian American writers. 

Contemporary Asian American writers have worked aggressively 
to overcome harmful stereotypes and assert their own identity. Maxine 
Hong Kingston believes that all Asian Americans must "recognize them- 
selves as warriors instead of victims" (quoted in Kim 1982, 253). Janice 
Mirikitani says that "although she might be 'angry/ she is not bitter" 
(quoted in Kim 1982, 253). The Aiiieeeee! editors (1982) write: 

Asian-American writers are elegant or repulsive, angry and bit- 
ter, militantly antiwhite or not, not out of any sense of perversity 
or revenge but out of honesty. America's dishonesty — its white 
supremacy passed off as love and acceptance — has kept seven 
generations of Asian-American voices off the air, off the streets 
and praised us for being Asiatically no-show. A lot is lost forever. 
But from the few decades of writing we have recovered from seven 
generations, it is clear that we have a lot of elegant, angry, and 
bitter life to show. (204) 

These themes, existing throughout the works of Asian American au- 
thors and poets, would be interesting idsas to bring to students. As Kim 
(1982) writes: 

Contemporary Asian American writers are in the process of chal- 
lenging old myths and stereotypes by defining Asian American 
humanity as part of the composite identity of the American 
people, which like the Asian American identity, is still being 
shaped and defined. (279) 

Native American Literature 

I would like to quote my friend flo wiger's introductory remarks (1989) 
as she addressed an audience of Minnesota educators interested in work- 
ing with Native American students: 



164 



158 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Before I begin, I want you to be very clear about who I am. I am a 
Lakota person. I have one voice. I do not speak for all the Lakota 
people much less for all Indian people. I will share with you my 
thoughts, my knowledge, and my ideas. But I do not represent 
"the Indian perspective" any more than I would expect any other 
Lakota to speak for me. In my culture, everyone has the right to 
think and speak as he or she sees fit 

Similarly, to attempt to monolithically define the literatures of Native 
American peoples in a few pages would be as difficult and as unfair as 
trying to describe all of European literature — perhaps even more so, 
because we are talking about more than five hundred nations separately 
and officially recognized by the United States government. 

My intention in this section is thus more modest. First, I would 
like to point out some of the misunderstandings we have of Native 
American literature, a consequence of both the unreliable accounts we 
have depended on for so long and a failure to take into account a world 
view very different from our own. Then I will describe a few of the 
elements of Native American literature that teachers might begin to use 
in the classroom. 

A History of Literature 

Perhaps the most insulting premise that can be made about literature in 
America is that it began with Columbus. We have already established 
that the "New World" was inhabited tens of thousands of years before 
the arrival of Europeans. Dreaming of his tribal ancestors, Black Elk, the 
Lakota holy man, says that perhaps they were "older than men can ever 
be— old like hills, like stars" (Lincoln 1982, 80). And "voluminous" tra- 
ditional literature existed. According to Chapman (1975), "the bits and 
pieces . . . that have been put in written form and published add up to 
many thousands of volumes" (3). Lincoln (1982) notes: 

Each tribe . . . can be traditionally defined through a native lan- 
guage, an inherited place, and a set of traditions (speech, folk- 
lore, ceremony, and religion), a heritage passed from generation 
to generation in songs, legends, jokes, morality plays, healing ritu- 
als, event histories, social protocol, spiritual rites of passage, and 
vision journeys to the sacred world. (80) 

Similarly, Diane Glancy (1991), who identifies Native Americans as 
"those-who-were-here-when-the-others-came," writes: 

In the old days, literature was the oral tradition and the teepee- 
lining painted with exploits of the individual and the tribe. Even 
the name of the person, the clothing and maiks of body-paint, 
told a story. 



165 



77k? Right Rules for the Right Game 



159 



Thus, before Europeans ever arrived, the oral traditions of storytelling 
and ceremony were integral to the lives of Native American people 
(Stensland 1979, 3). 

Yet this tradition of literature has long been ignored and misun- 
derstood by Western observers. Wiget and Mulford (1990) note that be- 
cause of the literature's dramatic nature, the written word really isn't 
sufficient to convey its correct meaning. Perhaps it is this element that 
has made Native American work so difficult for outsiders to understand. 

Conversely, the Western concept of literature was altogether 
strange for the Native American. What value did something written 
have? Native Americans called the white man's writing "talking leaves." 
They saw it as magic, as a trick, as something not quite straightforward. 
It seemed to hold no religious, spiritual, or medicinal value. The suspi- 
cion seems warranted when we consider that the United States govern- 
ment broke 389 of the written treaties it made with the various Native 
American nations (Lincoln 1982, 84). 

The Meaning of Tales 

Carol Miller begins her article "Tellers in the Circle" (1989) with a quo- 
tation from Leslie Silko's Ceremony: 

I will tell you something about stories, 
(he said) 
They aren't just entertainment. 

Don't be fooled. 
They are all we have to fight off 
illness and death. 

One basic difference between Native American literature and 
Western literature is purpose. That is, Native Americans do not typi- 
cally compose literature for the sole purpose of self-expression or emo- 
tion. As Paula Gunn Allen (1975) writes, to do so would be "arrogant, 
presumptuous, and gratuitous The tribes seek, through song, cer- 
emony, legend . . . to . . . share reality, to bring the isolated private self 
into harmony and balance" (113). Tales thus serve to transmit values, 
messages for good. Literature is ceremonial, created to bring about har- 
mony through song, legend, stories, and myths. The language of stories 
is tied to all other elements of life. Lives are bound through oral tradi- 
tions to the earth, to other living beings, to each other. Literature is part 
of the whole, part of the circle of life (Lincoln 1982). 

The European American tradition typically separates literature 
into genres: poetry, short stories, novels, and so on. Native Americans, 
however, do not always make such distinctions. Many forms can exist 



166 



160 



Crossing the Mainstream 



in the same piece. The purpose and desired effect is more important 
than the mode. For instance, though it might appear to be a traditional 
novel, Silko's Ceremony actually incorporates many forms. 

Using Western criteria to analyze and evaluate Native American 
literature, then, is incorrect and unfair. Recognition of Native American 
literature has suffered greatly as a result of this practice. According to 
Lincoln (1982), Native American literature has often been considered 
"barbaric, heathen, pagan" (85). To be accepted as "good" in the Ameri- 
can mainstream, Native American writers have had to abandon their 
own forms and "imitate" European ones. The earlier writings of James 
Eastland, for instance, reflect this "adjustment," though his later writ- 
ings show a return to and embracing of Native American traditions and 
styles. 

The Word as Sacred Tool 

Lincoln (1982) writes that in Native American literature: 

Words are penetrant as arrows; the craft, ceremony, power, and 
defense of the tribal family depend on them. A well-chosen word, 
like a well-made arrow, pierces to the heart. (93) 

In fact, he goes on to say that, for Native Americans, "a thought is a 
spiritual act; a word has the magical power to actualize spirits" (100). 
So it is that N. Scott Momaday (1975), discussing his own spiritual in- 
teraction with words while writing The Way to Rainy Mountain, can write: 

Then it was that that ancient, one-eyed woman Ko-sahn stepped 
out of the language and stood before me on the page. I was 
amazed. Yet it seemed to me entirely appropriate that this should 
happen. (98) 

In addressing the First Convocation of American Indian Scholars 
in 1970, Momaday described the significance of language and its rela- 
tionship to the Native American: 

It seems to me that in a certain sense we are all made of words; 

that our most essential being consists in language In one of 

the discussions yesterday the question "What is an American In- 
dian?" was raised. The answer of course is that an Indian is an 
idea which a given man has of himself. And it is a moral idea, for 
it accounts for the way in which he reacts to other men and to the 
world in general. And that idea, in order to be realized completely, 
has to be expressed. (Momaday 1975, 96-97) 

For Native Americans, this expression took the form of an oral 
tradition, which, according to Momaday, is a "process by which the 



167 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



161 



myths, legends, tales, and lore of a people are formulated, communi- 
cated, and preserved in language by word of mouth ... a combination 
of art and reality, the realization of the imaginative experience/' Later, 
when defining the relationship between humanity and language, 
Momaday says: 

Generally speaking, man has consummate being in language, and 
there only. The state of human being is an idea, an idea which 
man has of himself. Only when he is embodied in an idea, and 
the idea is realized in language, can man take possession of him- 
self. (104) 

World View 

Major nineteenth-century writers like Emerson, Whitman, Melville, and 
Thoreau recognized the difference and importance of the Native Ameri- 
can world view (Chapman 1975, 20-21 ). But the typical Western view of 
nature and culture is in opposition to Native American conceptions, 
wherein nature and culture are inseparable, even identical (Miller 1989, 
4). As Paula Gunn Allen (1975) writes, the "basic assumptions about the 
universe and, therefore, the basic reality experienced by tribal peoples 
and westerners are not the same" (112). And this difference has led to 
misunderstanding. 

Miller (1989) explains that the central representational image 
within Native American societies has been, and remains, the circle, "the 
sacred hoop." This image accounts for the Native American perception 
of life, time, nature, everything (12). Black Elk notes, for instance, that 
"every thing does try to be round." Thus, in contrast to our linear West- 
ern existence, life for Native Americans is an integrated whole, a com- 
plete circle. Stensland (1979) writes, "Religion, food gathering, songs, 
poetry, ceremony — all are one. All Indians are poets and singers" (5). 

Consider time. Miller (1989) explains, "Among Western peoples, 
for example, time is linear; for Native Americans, time is circular, with- 
out divisions, uninterruptedly continuous" (13). Thus, time in much of 
the literature of Native American peoples does not follow the linear 
development typical of many Western works. Momaday's House Made 
of Dawn is a good example. Students sometimes have trouble with cer- 
tain sequences in the book and need some preparation for this differ- 
ence. Indeed, I heard once Roberta Hill Whiteman speak on Native 
American literature, and she made a similar suggestion (Native Ameri- 
can Women's Institute 1989). 

Further, because Native Americans see everything as an integrated 
whole, the Native American, Lincoln (1982) writes, "assumes a place in 



168 



162 



Crossing the Mainstream 



creation that is dynamic, creative, and responsive, and he allows his 
brothers, the rocks, the trees, the corn, and the nonhuman animals . . . 
the same and even greater privilege" (114). There is no hierarchical chain 
of being, no Judeo-Christian sense of superiority over the rest of the 
animate and inanimate world. 

Miller (1989) also attributes the traditional Native American 
culture's ability to avoid a patriarchal social system to this concept of 
the integrated circle (13). In many of the sacred stories of Native Ameri- 
can peoples, female and male deities share equal and almost always 
complementary presence, function, and significance. In the Pueblo sa- 
cred story, for example, Thought Woman or Grandmother Spider per- 
sonifies the Creator. In Ojibway myth, Gitchie Manito may personify 
the Great Mystery, but the Earth has a feminine identity and precedes 
man in being (13). 

Finally, Native Americans draw no hard and fast distinction be- 
tween the spirit world and the natural world. Lincoln (1982) says that 
the spirit world and the natural world often intermingle through dreams, 
"most intense in the traditional vision quest" (100). In this vein, the film 
Black Robe (1992) includes an interesting portrayal of dreams as actions. 
The hero in the film Thunderheart (1992), a contemporary murder mys- 
tery, also experiences a vision, a vision that his Oglala Sioux companion 
identifies for him. And Tayo, the main character of Silko's Ceremony, 
incorporates visions like these into his healing process. 

The Trickster 

The Trickster figure, who sometimes goes by the name "Imitator," is a 
popular figure in much of the tales and folklore that have come down 
through the generations. According to Lincoln (1982): 

Trickster teaches comically, by negative example, that this shift- 
ing world bears careful study, that the behavior of things is often 
other than it appears, that masking and duplicity remain basic to 
nature, and that all survive despite this trickery, perhaps even 
learning from it. (127) 

The Native American Trickster, unlike the tricksters of the West- 
ern tradition, such as Odysseus, isn't necessarily a heroic character. Miller 
(1989) writes, "Coyote, Rabbit, and Nanabozho are as frequently come- 
dic as heroic, as often foolish as doughty, for it is their foolishness that 
by contrast illuminates correct conduct" (13). According to Ballinger 
(1991-92), the difference between the European/American picaro and 
the Native American Trickster is that the Native American character is 
open to the "multiplicity" of life, unlike the European trickster, whose 



169 



The Right Rules for the Right Game 



163 



birthright or circumstances dictate his situation. The Native American 
Trickster "is on or beyond the margin because of his character alone/ 7 
This fellow is "lascivious, gluttonous, arrogant, disobedient, greedy, 
cruel, reckless/lazy/ 7 Still, we recognize his traits in all of us. He is the 
"all person," and while we laugh at him, we laugh at ourselves too, 
because he represents us all (21-25). 

Teaching Contemporary Native American Literature 

Those of us who are just beginning to introduce Native American litera- 
ture into the mainstream of our curriculum must anticipate the responses 
we are likely to encounter from our students. Some will have difficulty 
looking beyond the literal meanings of characters and their actions. They 
may, for example, view Tayo, Silko's hero in Ceremony, or Momaday's 
Abel in House Made of Dawn, or even Welch's Jim Loney in The Death of 
Jim Loney as ne'er-do-wells without considering context at all. They might 
miss entirely the significance of the literature's healing powers, its cer- 
emonial characteristics, its reference points; they might misunderstand 
the problems of disenfranchisement, oppression, and a host of other 
stressful conditions under which Native Americans live. As Stensland 
(1979) tells us, the familiar themes of Native American literature reflect 
the tragic results of whites' betrayal and violence (3). Glancy (1991), for 
instance, tells us of "stories of resilience, defiance, power, v'sion, tough- 
ness, pain, loss, anger, sarcasm, a humiliation built on welfare, a humor 
built on irony" (14). 

So what are we to do with literature that we fear students will 
misunderstand, literature that might inadvertently end up reinforcing 
negative stereotypes? Do we avoid teaching it? Do we submit to the 
"censorship of avoidance"? When introducing Native American litera- 
ture, my colleague Alex Kuo approaches these issues by foregrounding 
the literature with relevant themes. He characterizes Native Americans 
for his students as a population living under "house arrest," an apt 
metaphor when examining more carefully the conditions under which 
many are forced to live. He explains economic pressures, fetal alcohol 
syndrome, repatriation, sovereignty, conflicts between traditional and 
activist groups, rural and urban living, mixed bloods and their relation- 
ships, and more. Once students understand and appreciate the contexts 
from which the authors draw their stories, they are better able to learn 
from their reading and to appreciate the literature as art. Kuo cautions, 
however, against the easy temptation to read these stories and poems 
only within the constraints of these social and political issues; good lit- 
erature always stretches and blurs the boundaries. 



170 



164 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Allen (1975) also warns educators to be careful of using "really 
sacred materials" in the classroom for study, since educators may not be 
prepared to teach them. Teaching ceremonial materials without the 
proper background and knowledge could cause resentment or confu- 
sion; teachers even risk using taboo or culturally inappropriate mate- 
rial (132). 

There are many excellent writers from which to choose when we 
and our students are ready to tackle specific literature. Prominent among 
new writers is Louise Erdrich, whose Love Medicine, Jacklight (a collec- 
tion of poetry), Tracks, and The Beet Queen have received wide attention 
and many awards. Erdrich's husband Michael Dorris is author of Yellow 
Raft on Blue Water, a book popular among young adult readers. The 
couple's The Crown of Columbus offers a fictional treatment of the search 
for the real Columbus story. Leslie Marmon Silko's Ceremony, a haunt- 
ing novel about a returning serviceman coming to grips with his past, 
has won great popular acclaim. And the works of James Welch, N. Scott 
Momaday, Paula Gunn Allen, and many more have exploded over the 
last few decades into a huge corpus of work that offers exciting pros- 
pects for interested readers. 

Miller (1989) describes Allen, Erdrich, and Silko as storytellers in 
the traditional sense. But, she adds, they have been able to translate oral 
traditions into talking leaves, preserving the healing powers and iden- 
tity of Native American tribal life while telling new stories — realities of 
what was and what is. The healing power of storytelling is an impor- 
tant element in each of these contemporary women's works. 

Momaday and Vizenor see their role as that of "tricksters/ 7 "word 
warriors/' "arrowmakers" (where arrowmaking is synonymous with 
wordmaking). Silko, Allen, and Erdrich "have literally and figuratively 
assumed their roles as tellers of stories created, as in the old way, out of 
a primal bonding of memory and imagination" (Miller 1989, 6). From 
the£e two traditions and purposes, we get some of our finest contempo- 
rary writing. 

The literatures that have been described in this chapter come from 
traditions very different from the Eurocentric one to which we have 
become so accustomed. As teachers of multicultural literature, we must 
recognize and appreciate the multitude of perspectives from which the 
literatures of our culture come. Though few of us can claim to be ex- 
perts in any of these areas, we must at least try to learn, seeking the 
assistance of our friends and colleagues and encouraging others to join 
us. What I have attempted here is a beginning. 



171 



11 What the Canon Did 
Not Teach Us about 
Learning Styles 

Although many of us have made great strides in expanding cur 
awareness of diverse literature, the way we teach it often remains 
the same. The mismatch between how we teach and who we 
teach is an increasing problem in this country, particularly as changing 
demographics move us closer to the "majority minority" population 
that is predicted by the year 2000 (Henry 1990). The situation is exacer- 
bated by the relative lack of nonmainstream teachers, and projections 
for the future predict almost no gains in recruiting people of color into 
the field (Zeichner 1992). The result is that mainstream teachers must 
continue to adapt a hitherto monocultural approach to accommodate a 
multicultural student body. 

Current research suggests that perhaps monoethnic teaching and 
dropout rates are related (Bennett 1990) and that, as a result, we ought 
to increase our understanding and implementation of other methods of 
instruction. Becoming aware of other world views, implementing less 
culture-bound strategies, adapting our questioning techniques, encour- 
aging cooperative and collaborative learning activities, and expanding 
reader-response programs to validate and empower students might help 
to stem the tide of ever-increasing high school and college attrition rates 
among students of color. Indeed, if we attempt to define literature from 
authentic points of view, then we must also look at the variety of ways 
in which people learn. 

The following discussion adequately covers neither the broad area 
of learning styles nor the relationship between learning preference and 
cultural, ethnic, and racial diversity. For more complete discussions in 
these areas, teachers should examine the extensive work of James Ander- 
son, Lisa Delpit, Signithia Fordham, and others in this field. 

There Must Be Something to This Learning Style Thing 

In Marching to Different Drummers (1985), Guild and Garger differenti- 
ate among learning styles. They begin by asking why some people bal- 
ance their checkbooks down to the penny — like my sister Liane — while 



166 



Crossing the Mainstream 



others do not bother to do it at all — like me. I thought I knew the an- 
swer: Liane, an accountant knows how to do those things. I find such 
precision and order unappealing. Is Liane smarter than I am? Guild and 
Garger assure us that such "talents" are not indicative of one's intelli- 
gence. What they are indicative of is one's learning preference. The con- 
cept intrigued me enough to take David Kolb's "learning preference" 
assessment (1986) and apply Bernice McCarthy's 4MAT system (1980) 
to discover my own perceiving preferences and processing tendencies. 
I discovered that my learning preference is divergent: I ask why more 
often than if, how, or what . I am a diverger. 

This made sense to me. As a result, I now value some of the habits 
that I had previously thought marked me as rather disorganized. I see 
now why I need to "take in" a lot of information, mull it over, observe 
others, go off in a corner, sleep, eat, generally "absorb reality," before 
coming forward with a plan, before sitting down and "pouring it all 
out" at the computer. I finally understand why I must keep little piles of 
papers and books around me while I work, even though it would take 
only moments to put them away. There is method to this madness. 

But it is the "assimilator," says Kolb, who likes traditional class- 
rooms. Wait a minute! So do 1. 1 am also skillful at making linear out- 
lines for term papers, which I used to require of my students because I 
found them so workable for my own writing (perhaps because my own 
teachers insisted on them). Kolb tells us that though individuals have a 
general learning preference, they have the ability to operate in other 
areas as well. Thus, while my preference is to "diverge," I can also "ac- 
commodate," "assimilate," and "converge" (Kolb's three other learning 
style categories). 

There are other ways to identify learning styles. Some of us learn 
better visually (seeing); some auditorially (hearing); some kinestheti- 
cally (through activity, such as writing). I think that I use all of these 
modes. And because I am not sure how each of my students learns best, 
I try to give information using all three of these methods. 1 certainly do 
not want to leave anyone out. 

The Impact of Culture on Learning Style 

If learning styles vary from person to person, do they perhaps vary from 
culture to culture in any distinctive way? Research tells us that certain 
cultural factors do have an impact on learning preference. A study by 
K. M. Evenson Worthley (cited in Bennett 1990) identifies five major 
areas: 



173 



What the Canon Did Not Teach Us about Learning Styles 



167 



1 . Socialization process — the more control over child rearing, the 
more "field dependent" 

2. Sociocultural tightness — the more pressure for conformity, the 
more "field dependent" 

3. Ecological adaptation— the more dependent on environment, 
the more highly developed perceptual skills (e.g., the Native 
Alaskan's sophisticated reliance on weather or the African 
American's adaptation in a hostile community) 

4. Biological effect — nutrition and physical development 

5. Language — emphasis on written (field independent) or oral 
(field dependent) language 

Other studies have found that African American and Latino stu- 
dents tend to be field dependent, that they respond to others' feelings 
and opinions, welcome opportunities to ask questions seeking guid- 
ance and affirmation, and personalize activities. Mainstream students, 
on the other hand, tend to be field independent. That is, they tend to be 
more analytical, more focused on impersonal or abstract aspects of the 
environment, more task-oriented; they tend to work independently and 
to enjoy individual recognition (Dunn and Dunn, Bennett, Banks and 
Banks, Ramirez and Castaneda, and Gollnick and Chinn, cited in 
Whetten 1991, 17-19). 

If students from different cultures tend to have different learning 
styles, then it stands to reason that teachers from different cultures tend 
to have different teaching styles as well. Bennett (1990) points out that 
learning styles and teaching styles are closely related, that we tend to 
teach using the same styles that we prefer to use when we learn. The 
problem with this is that our learning and teaching preferences are not 
always the same as those of our students, especially if those students 
are from nonmainstream groups. Indeed, since the majority of teachers 
are from the mainstream, teachers have tended toward a monoethnic 
teaching style that doesn't accommodate all learners. 

As our schools become more diverse, we must become more 
knowledgeable about different options in instruction. If African Ameri- 
can and Latino students tend to be more field dependent, then it be- 
hooves teachers of these students to offer appropriate learning strate- 
gies to accommodate them, strategies such as group work, noncompeti- 
tive opportunities for oral discourse, and so forth. Indeed, as Shirley 
Brice Heath comments in discussing the importance of training educa- 
tors to use this wider repertoire of teaching strategies: 

One of our best hopes for increasing and enhancing the opportu- 
nity for children of subordinated cultures and languages is to have 



174 



168 



Crossing the Mainstream 



more and more people in colleges who have the sensibility and 
the teaching experience necessary to understand minority chil- 
dren. They also must be people who are willing to take the rel- 
evant social science and linguistic and historical knowledge and 
bring that to bear on thinking about how institutions and policy 
work, (quoted in Goldberg 1992) 

Conflicting World Views 

Bennett (1990) describes the term world view as the way in which "a 
cultural group perceives people and events" (47-48). Individuals within 
groups develop similar styles of cognition — similar processes for per- 
ceiving, recognizing, conceiving, judging, and reasoning— and similar 
values, assumptions, ideas, beliefs, and modes of thought. Since the 
"world view" of this country's macroculture is primarily British and 
Western European, those who do not come from this cultural background 
often operate from a totally different frame of reference. And those in 
the majority misunderstand. 

For example, in contrasting "the Navajo way" with the Western 
world view, Bennett (1990) finds fundamental differences between each 
view's conception of time, the future, patience, age and bid age, family, 
wealth, and nature (49). And in comparing the Western world view with 
the African world view, Linda James Meyers claims that the difference 
is "at the heart of present cultural differences 77 between European Ameri- 
can and African American culture: 

The Western world view is segmented; the African world view is 

holistic Western culture tends to compartmentalize reality and 

focus on the parts. The African cultural focus is on the whole, 
and the tendency is to integrate all perceived existence into the 
total reality. . . . Western culture assumes a reality that is materi- 
alist and limited to comprehension via the five senses Afri- 
can culture assumes a reality that is both material and spiritual 
viewed as one and the same. This view allows for a reality that 
goes beyond the comprehension of the five senses and is known 
in an extrasensory fashion, (quoted in Bennett 1986, 20) 

The question for educators is this: How will these differences manifest 
themselves in the classroom? 

The "culture" of the classroom presents a number of conflicts for 
nonmainstream students. In her booklet Culturally Responsive Teaching, 
Ana Maria Villegas (1991 > explains that for mainstream students, school 
is an extension of the home and community culture. Yet for many 
minority children, the classroom culture often clashes with home and 
community expectations. According to Anderson (1988), mainstream 



175 



What the Canon Did Not Teach Us about Learning Styles 



169 



children go through school and into their jobs in consonance with the 
learning patterns that are provided for them. They develop following a 

linear, self-reinforcing course. Never are they asked to be bicul- 
tural, bidialectic, or bicognitive. On the other hand, for children 
of color, biculturality is not a free choice, but a prerequisite for 
successful participation and eventual success They are casti- 
gated whenever they attempt to express and validate their indig- 
enous cultural and cognitive styles. Under such conditions cog- 
nitive conflict becomes the norm rather than the exception. 

This conflict manifests itself in unexpected behaviors, such as silence, 
lack of participation, and failure to be competitive, behaviors often mis- 
interpreted by teachers to mean that nonmainstream students are less 
academically capable. A look at the lower tracks in most schools reveals 
the tremendous overrepresentation of students from culturally or lin- 
guistically nonmainstream backgrounds. And all of us who have taught 
in this system know about the self-fulfilling prophecy that is created by 
the system's lowered expectations for so-called "lower ability" students. 
We also know that once a student is put into a. lower-level class, his or 
her chances of getting out are limited. 

Language development is of primary concern here, because facil- 
ity for language is where racial majority children excel. For them, school 
culture reinforces home and community culture. Villegas (1991) writes 
that, in contrast, 

minority children frequently experience discontinuity in the use 
of language at home and in school. They are often misunderstood 
when applying prior knowledge to classroom tasks. How can they 
use their own experience if their established ways of using lan- 
guage and making sense of the world are deemed unacceptable 
or prohibited in the classroom? (7) 

Since language is a part of culture, taking someone's language 
away is a denial of that culture's validity. Unfortunately, this happens 
all the time. Author and poet Gloria Anzaldiia (1987) was punished for 
trying to tell her teacher the correct pronunciation of her name. Sociolo- 
gist Samuel Betances (1989) suffered as a child for using Spanish, his 
primary language, in class. One Anishanabe woman was even paddled 
in elementary school because she was caught speaking her own lan- 
guage (Native American Women's Institute 1989). 

We must understand that languaging patterns are different for 
different cultural, ethnic, and socioeconomic groups, even if they speak 
the dominant language. Shirley Brice Heath's work in Trackton with 
African American students revealed that the differences among Euro- 



176 



170 



Crossing the Mainstream 



pean American family questioning and African American family ques- 
tioning presented problems in the classroom for African American stu- 
dents. At home questions were "real" inquiries demanding answers 
unknown to the questioner, whereas in the classroom teachers asked 
rhetorical questions for which they already knew the answers. This 
seemed strange to the African American students (cited in Villegas 1991, 

In a similar study, Sarah Michaels looked at the very different 
narrative styles of black and white children in the first grade. The sto- 
ries told by the black children were often "a series of implicitly associ- 
ated anecdotes." The white children's stories were more topic-centered. 
Since the latter group's products were more closely related to the 
teacher's expectations, greater value was assigned to them by the teacher 
(cited in Villegas 1991, 8). 

Ramirez and Price-Williams compared stories told by Mexican 
American and Anglo-American children. They found that the products 
of the Mexican American group "were lengthier, indicative of greater 
verbal productivity, and included more characters" than those of their 
Anglo-American counterparts. Yet the Mexican American children were 
criticized by their teachers for being too "flowery, too excessive" in their 
descriptions (cited in Anderson 1988, 4-9). 

Trying to determine why Warm Springs Indian Reservation chil- 
dren were silent in class, Susan Phillips observed that these same chil- 
dren "were used to a high degree of self-determination, that they learned 
by watching adults, and that they were often taken care of by siblings 
whom they turned to for help." Rather than being "slow 7 ' or "shy," these 
children were uncomfortable with the classroom's method of learning 
(cited in Villegas 1991, 4). 

Consider one final example. Up until very recently, most academic 
activities have been directed, competitive, individual. Testing and as- 
sessment have almost always been thought of as a singular event. Yet 
this puts many of our students at a disadvantage. Describing inner-city 
African American youth, Geneva Gay and Roger Abrahams define learn- 
ing preferences that are almost the opposite of those of mainstream stu- 
dents. For the African Americans in the study, competition and indi- 
vidual excellence were valued in play, but cooperation was valued in 
work situations: 

Because so much of the transmission of knowledge and the cus- 
toms of street culture take place within peer groups, the black 
student is prone to seek the aid and assistance of his classmates 
at least as frequently as he does the teacher's. What is nearly al- 
ways interpreted by teachers as cheating, copying, or frivolous 



177 



What the Canon Did Not Teach Us about Learning Styles 



171 



socializing may in fact be the child's natural m^ir^on to seek 
help from a peer, (quoted in Bennett 1990, 69). 

Acute differences such as these are stinging reminders of the mis- 
match between the strategies we use to teach and the ways in which 
many of our students learn. Fortunately, the current emphasis on col- 
laborative learning, whole language learning, reader response to litera- 
ture, and other educational strategies will be a great advantage for many 
nonmainstream students — and all others whose learning styles have not 
been well accommodated in the past. 

Warning: Avoid Stereotypes 

While we need to know more about ethnic and racial minority learning 
style characteristics, we must also be careful when generalizing about 
groups of people. Consider the Chin >c e American whose family has 
resided in California for seven generations. Compare that student with 
the Cambodian refugee who has been in the United States only since 
last year. Or compare the Latina whose family came to New York from 
Puerto Rico fifty years ago with the Honduran recently granted asylum 
in this country. 

We can make terrible mistakes if we group people together just 
because of race or ethnicity. One year I participated in a mentoring pro- 
gram where I vvas "assigned" a Laotian student. Since I was supposed 
to give advice and help him with his socialization, I contacted him and 
invited him for a visit. After my little speech about how I was "there for 
him," assuring him that he could discuss all of his troubles with me, he 
informed me that he was an honors student, had been in this country 
for several years, and wasn't sure what I wanted from him. Was I em- 
barrassed! His name had been "kicked out" of the computer and given 
to me with no other preparation or thought to this placement. 

Over the years, I've noticed that some strategies and materials 
work for some students; other techniques and materials work for other 
students. Like many teachers, I have come to understand and believe a 
variety of things about the classroom through observation — before I 
learned the theory behind my conclusions. In fact, teachers' observa- 
tions over time are, for me anyway, some of the most valuable data we 
have regarding student success. We should use these perceptions to 
enhance the learning experiences of all of our students. 

If we apply what we know about field sensitivity, learning styles, 
cultural considerations, the young and not-so-young learner, and moti- 
vation, then our observations make sense. Literature instructors can 



17S 



172 



Crossing the Mainstream 



make more use of this information and apply it to the material they 
offer students. We can motivate students to read if they can identify 
with the characters or if they can vicariously relate the story to their 
experiences. Recall the young African American student who spoke to 
my class in Minnesota who hadn't read anything in school yet zipped 
through The Autobiography of Malcolm X and Invisible Man. Maya Angelou, 
Richard Wright, Gloria Anzaldua, Haki R. Madhubuti, Henry Louis 
Gates, Jr. — all self-actualized through the beauty and closeness of litera- 
ture they could identify with. I once had a student who "hated to read" 
but carried Popular Mechanics (absolutely impossible for me to under- 
stand) with him at all times. And what about the multitude of students 
who "hate poetry" while making millionaires out of numerous musical 
groups? 

In her piece "I Know They Can Learn Because F ve Taught Them," 
Hodges (1987) tells us that she taught "in every ghetto of New York 
City" for fourteen years. She describes her abandonment during that 
time of the "analytical, lecture-and-recitation" approach in favor of "glo- 
bal, tactual-kinesthetic experiences: high interest activities that seem real, 
require movement, and involved working with others." In a short time, 
she raised her students 7 low scores on New York proficiency exams dra- 
matically. She notes: 

Millions of young people are "at risk" because . . . they need an 
education. It is simply not true that we don't know what to do 
about it We do. We must teach them in accord with the way they 
learn. (3) 

What Can We Do? 

The most obvious strategy is for teachers to learn about their students 
and their communities and to apply this information to their classrooms 
and develop personal bonds. Further, we must have high expectations, 
provide a framework that includes culturally relevant elements in the 
classroom, expand our teaching strategies, include contributions by dif- 
ferent groups in our curriculum, develop a collaborative environment 
in which cooperative grouping and peer tutoring takes place, facilitate 
interaction among individuals from different groups, develop a better 
means of assessment, and encourage parental involvement 

Since, as Zeichner (1992) points out, the teaching force will, in 
most instances, continue to be ''white, Anglo, monolingual, and mostly 
female" for a long time, we had better improve our abilities to work 
toward intercultural communication in the classroom. Yet such improve- 



179 



What the Canon Did Not Teach Us about Learning Styles 



173 



ment seems a low priority ii\ teacher education reform. Methods of in- 
struction privilege mainstream learning styles, and both student teach- 
ing programs and prospective teachers tend to avoid inner-city situa- 
tions. Zeichner argues that if we were preparing " teachers for diversity, 
we would not have today such a massive reluctance by beginning teach- 
ers to work in urban schools and in other schools serving the poor and 
ethnic and linguistic minority students/' In fact, though, less than five 
percent of the 45,000 or so education faculty in the United States have 
taught for even a year in the classrooms of one of our large urban school 
districts (Haberman 1987). 

Applying Knowledge of Learning Styles to the Multiethnic 
Classroom: A Summary 

Again, a caveat. There is so much to know. This overview only hits the 
surface. We need to keep abreast of all of the new research on student 
learning styles. For now, though, here's a quick, general description of 
what learning styles are, how they differ among groups, and how, in 
general, we should apply this knowledge to the classroom. 

Learning style is the preferred — though not the only — manner in 
which a person approaches an educational experience or task (Bennett 
1990, 142-57). One learning style is no better than another. The problem 
arises when teachers make no accommodations for the variety of learn- 
ing styles among their students. Teachers should present all informa- 
tion in a variety of ways to accommodate all students. Too often, teach- 
ers teach in a way that privileges the students who have learning pref- 
erences similar to their own. 

Since we have substantial evidence that nonmainstream children 
possess learning styles that differ from those of mainstream students, 
the teacher's presentation of information often inadvertently puts 
nonmainstream students at a disadvantage. African American children 
whose experiences are outside the mainstream, for example, might tend 
to process information differently, viewing things more in their entirety 
than in isolation. They might prefer intuitive reasoning to deductive or 
inductive reasoning; personal stimuli to nonsocial, objective stimuli; and 
approximate concepts of space, numbers, and time. They might rely on 
nonverbal as well as verbal communication. 

African American students, as well as other nonmainstream stu- 
dents, tend to be field sensitive rather than field independent. This means 
that they like to work with and assist others and value other people's 
opinions. They tend to seek guidance and rewards from teachers. By 



180 



174 



Crossing the Mainstream 



contrast, field-independent learners prefer to work alone, to gain indi- 
vidual recognition, and to compete. They are task-oriented and inatten- 
tive to social environment, and they maintain more formal relationships 
with the teacher. Field-sensitive students do better when objectives and 
global aspects of the lesson are explained, when concepts are presented 
in a humanistic way, and when these concepts are relevant to their lives 
and experiences. To work most positively with students who are field 
sensitive, teachers need to express approval and warmth and confidence 
in the students 7 ability. They need to hold informal discussions, empha- 
size the global aspects of the lesson, and help students apply concepts 
to their personal experiences. 

To accommodate the cultural • nismatch, we do not have to imi- 
tate the learning styles of all groups. Instead, Courtney Cazden and Hugh 
Mehan suggest that we need a "mutual accommodation in which both 
teachers and students adjust their actions with regard to the common 
goal of academic success through cultural respect" (quoted in Villegas 
1991,7). 

The Kamehameha Early Education Project (KEEP) in Hawaii is 
one example of how we can apply what we know to improve the qual- 
ity of education for our students. Some of KEEP's Polynesian students 
were getting poor reading scores and were unresponsive in school. At 
home, however, "they were clearly adept learners/ 7 Researchers noticed 
that the older siblings were responsible for a great deal of the younger 
ones' learning. KEEP then modeled peer tutoring after what they wit- 
nessed in the homes and brought the "talk story/' a Hawaiian tradition, 
into the classroom. These two changes substantially improved the read- 
ing scores of the students (Villegas 1991). 

Villegas suggests we work to bring about more changes like the 
one mentioned in the KEEP program. She also calls for teachers to be 
aware of and respect cultural differences, to investigate the resources 
available to us in our communities, to use cultural knowledge to meet 
instructional needs, and to be aware of the misperceptions that cultural 
misunderstanding can cause. 

Earlier in this book I suggested that some of the great minds in 
our culture are goin,5 to waste because students are not getting enough 
food, are languishing in classrooms where nothing is going on, or are 
afraid of their school environment. In addition, our knowledge of learn- 
ing styles should tell us that many of our students are able to take less 
advantage of the education they do receive because they are never given 
a chance to learn in the way they most prefer. If we can become more 
sensitive to the variety of learning styles our students bring to the class- 
room, we can make a difference. 



181 



Ill Teaching Strategies for 
Multicultural Literature 



12 Approaches to 

Teaching Multicultural 
Literature 



While reading a selection from Living Tapestries: Folk Tales of t^e 
Hmong, I looked up to see a twen ty -eight-yea r-old Hmong woman with 
tears streaming down her face. I thought I had insulted her by reading 
this tale aloud. After class she came to my office to thank me. "No one has 
ever read literature from my people in any of my classes" she told me. 
This is a perfect example of why we need multicultural literature in the 
classroom. 



here are no set rules for teaching literature. Instructional ap- 



proaches depend on a number of variables: student needs, teacher 



I background, available material, curricular requirements, comm- 
unity influence, class size, time of day, and many other factors. Most 
teachers have a fairly comfortable repertoire based on what has worked 
for them in the past. In fact, much of what we teach is dictated by what 
we already know and what we are pretty sure will be acceptable. Let's 
be honest. No one welcomes a fight, whether it comes from students, 
colleagues, administrators, or parents. We typically self-censor our ma- 
terials, sometimes consciously, sometimes unconsciously. Who can blame 
us? One // roasting // over "unacceptable literature" is enough to send 
any sensible teacher back to that twenty-year-old anthology. 

On the other hand, if we continue to take the safe road, we'll never 
get past the "white men and Emily" syndrome that we've been suffer- 
ing from all these years. Those of us who have been around a long time 
must lead the way, and we must give our support to teachers new in the 



Recently, my teaching methods class read and discussed Cormier's 
The Chocolate War. Though the students were moved by it, many said 
they would be hesitant to teach it for fear that their communities would 
disapprove. They were right to have misgivings. But what I found dis- 
turbing was the advice that many of my students received during their 
field experiences from teachers who definitively said that though they 
liked the book, it would be too controversial to teach. If this is the atti- 
tude that educators have about teaching nontraditional literature, then 



Chris Gordon, St. Cloud State University 




field. 



183 



178 



Crossing the Mainstream 



literature written by culturally diverse authors doesn't stand much of a 
chance of even entering the classroom, let alone the canon. 

Teachers give a variety of reasons for not wanting to teach 
multicultural literature: 

"I'd like to, but I hardly have time to teach what I already do." 

"I'd like to, but I'm required to teach other materials." 

"I'd like to, but I'm not familiar with any good titles." 

'Td like to, but I'm teaching the advanced placement [or college- 
bound or regular or basic] group and if s not relevant." 

'Td like to, but I have a heterogeneous group and could never 
teach those topics." 

Nonsense to all of this! Still, I've used some of the same excuses myself. 
Many times I've been overwhelmed with papers to grade, reports to get 
out, and committees to meet. The thought of developing a new course 
or modifying an existing one made me dizzy. 

In this chapter, I will offer my suggestions for teaching pluralistic 
literature and for curricular reform. I'll begin with suggestions for us- 
ing a chronological approach to teach American literature, because that's 
as traditional as it gets. Then I'll discuss a variety of thematic treatments 
for literature and touch briefly on the genre approach, which still sees 
frequent use, particularly in introductory college literature courses. 

What Should We Do When We Muiticuituraiize? 

Those of us who are new at this must be careful not to end up with 
nothing more than what James Banks (1988) calls a "heroes and holi- 
days" approach to becoming multicultural. That is, if we want to truly 
pluralize our curriculum, we must do more than march out our "ethnic 
display" for African American History Month or Viva la Raza Week. 
Not that we should do away with these additions to our calendars. Cer- 
tainly a Native American literature course or a "gender-fair" museum 
exhibit are steps in the right direction. Bu f we should not be satisfied 
with such a minimal effort. We need to work to integrate diverse litera- 
ture into the mainstream of our curriculum. 

In defining "levels of integration of ethni* content," Banks sees a 
"heroes and holidays," or "contributions," ap r ^ach as only the first 
level of curricular reform. Adding a book or an ethnic unit to a course is 
limited, he claims, because the ethnic content is still viewed "from the 
perspectives of mainstream . . . writers" (2). In defining more advanced 



184 



Approaches to Teaching Multicultural Literature 



179 



levels, the "transformation and decision-making and social action 
approaches/ 7 Banks suggests that 

the key curriculum issue ... is not the addition of a long list . . . 
but the infusion of various perspectives, frames of reference, and 
content from various groups that will extend students 7 under- 
standings of the nature, development, and complexity of U.S. 
society. (2) 

Thus, a teaching unit called ''The Westward Movement 77 might become 
'The Invasion from the East 77 when a Lakota perspective is introduced. 
Or perhaps it becomes "Two Cultures Meet in the Americas 77 (Banks 
1988, 1-2). 

According to Ronald Takaki (1991), the multicultural course re- 
quired at the University of California at Berkeley must consist of com- 
parative minority studies. The class might, for example, study Latino, 
African American, Asian American, and European immigrants and in- 
vestigate concepts of class and gender. Such a policy is far ahead of that 
of those institutions which simply require students to pick a 
'"multicultural course 77 from a list of many. Students might choose a 
course in Native American studies or a course in African American stud- 
ies or a course in women's studies. Thus, even though students are ex- 
posed to one group, all other groups are excluded. This "minority of 
choice 77 approach may be a start, but it's nowhere near perfect. We need 
to take note of the creative strategies for multicultural education that 
are being developed at a number of institutions nationwide. 

A Chronological Approach to Teaching American Literature 

This is the approach that I always took, starting with the colonial period 
and going forward. Yet up until the last decade or so, my curriculum 
included white male writers almost exclusively, with a few women 
thrown in here and there depending upon what was offered in the latest 
anthology. I started with the typical Puritan beginnings, with a nod to 
Anne Bradstreet and Sarah Kemble Knight, followed with the Revolu- 
tionary pieces, and moved up through the early-nineteenth-century fel- 
lows and the Transcendentalist gentlemen. 1 77 did 77 Hawthorne, Melville, 
Longfellow, and Whitman, and, of course, Emily Dickinson, our nine- 
teenth-century woman of choice. Marching along through my anthol- 
ogy and selected novels, the only women I included were Willa Cather, 
Edna St. Vincent Millay, Lillian Hellman, and Eudora Welty. I did in- 
clude some diversity when I got to contemporary writers: Richard 
Wright, Ralph Ellison, James Baldwin, and Lorraine Hansberry. Still, 



185 



180 



Crossing the Mainstream 



nonmainstream did not "happen" in my class until the middle of the 
twentieth century. I knew vaguely that something was missing, but my 
access was limited and my commitment was weak. 

Today much more is already included; instructors shouldn't have 
to go any further than the text. I inventoried the table of contents of my 
Heath Anthology of American Literature (1990) to see what I could recog- 
nize from "the old days" and what was "new." It appears that there is a 
lot more to American literature than "the canon" my former students 
and I had the opportunity to read. For example, The Heath Anthology's 
"Colonial Period to 1700" collection includes Native American "origin 
and emergence stories/' historical narratives, and trickster tales from 
the Winnebago, Pima, Zuni, Navajo, and other nations. "The Literature 
of Discovery and Exploration" section begins with Columbus, de Vaca, 
Casteneda, and other writers of the Spanish period of dominance over 
the so-called "New World." Subsequent sections include "Poetry of the 
Revolution: A Collection of Poetry by Women" and "Emerging Voices 
of a National Literature: African, Native American, Spanish, Mexican." 
The "Early Nineteenth Century: 1800-1865" compiles "Tales from the 
Hispanic Southwest," while "Explorations of the 'American Self" has 
selections from Frederick Douglass and Harriet Ann Jacobs. 'Issues and 
Visions in Pre-Civil War America" includes the "Indian Voices" of Wil- 
liam Apes, Chief Seattle, and others. And "The Emergence of American 
Poetic Voices" presents Native American oral poetry and slave poetry. 

In addition to works from our long-accepted traditional canon, 
the second volume of The Heath Anthology features /rr he Development 
of Women's Narratives," "African American Folktales," and "Issues and 
Visions in Post-Civil War America." Authors include Standing Bear, 
Charles Eastman, and W. E. B. Du Bois. Also included are ghost dance 
songs and several famous corridos. "New Explorations of an 'American' 
Self" includes Booker T. Washington, Abraham Cahan, Sui-sin Far, and 
others. "The Modern Period: 1910-1945" features a large section on the 
Harlem Renaissance and a section of poetry by early Chinese immi- 
grants called "Carved on the Walls." The "Contemporary Period" is 
filled with the literature of nomnainstream writers. Major figures like 
Tilhe Olsen, Ralph Ellison, Saul Bellow, and James Baldwin are acknowl- 
edged, but so are newly acclaimed artists like Nicholasa Mohr, Maxine 
Hong Kingston, Leslie Silko, Louise Erdrich, Mari Evans, Sonia Sanchez, 
Amiri Baraka (LeRoi Jones), Audre Lorde, Ishmael Reed, Bernice Zamora, 
Janice Mirikitani, Pedro Pietri, Roberta Hill Whiteman, and a host of 
others. 



Approaches to Teaching Multicultural Literature 181 



The preceding list is an example of how one very excellent an- 
thology successfully handles the issue of multicuituralism while main- 
taining the traditional chronological survey approach. There are, increas- 
ingly many other such anthologies on the market. Today most of the 
large and small book companies have begun to publish multiethnic au- 
thors in their mainstream anthologies. The Norton anthology New Worlds 
of Literature, for example, is another excellent collection that includes a 
variety of wonderful pieces that have only recently come to proper public 
attention. Although many secondary school districts cannot afford these 
expensive new anthologies, they can at least begin to consider them, 
and teachers can prepare to negotiate with each other, administrators, 
and school boards for these much needed volumes. 

Thematic Approaches to Teaching Literature 

In developing ideas for a thematic approach to literature, I created a 
"wish list" for an imaginary — though certainly feasible — multicultural 
U.S. literature course. Actually, it was fun. I encourage everyone to try 
it. I'm calling my course "Diversity and the American Dream: Litera- 
ture of the United States/' Arranged thematically, readings for this course 
might look Like this: 

Unit One — We the Americans: Beginnings 

Authors with origins all over the world describe their homelands 
and trace their circumstances of migration. Excerpts from: 

Alex Haley's Roots 

Maureen Crane Wartski's A Boat to Nowhere 

Gregory Orfalea's Before the Flames 

Rose Cohen's Out of the Shadow 

Gro Svendsen's Frontier Mother 

Marie Hall Ets's Rosa 

Ignatia Broker's Night Flying Woman 

Ole Rolvaag's Giants in the Earth 

E. L. Doctorov/s World's Fair 

Isaac Bashevis Singer's "Tanhum" 

E/Norfe(film) 

Unit Two — A Cross-Cultural Look at Who We Are 

The fabric of American life as told by diverse voices. Excerpts 
from: 



167 



182 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Willa Cather's My Antonia 
Richard Wright's Black Boy 
Amy Tan's 77ie Joy Luck Club 
Rudolfo Anaya's Bless Me, Ultima 
Charles Eastman's Indian Boyhood 
Yoshiko Uchida's Journey to Topaz 

Unit Three— Tales and Folklore from Our Past 

A gathering of tales and folklore from many traditions. 
John Steptoe's Mufaro's Beautiful Daughters 
Tales of La Llorona (many versions) 
Romance of the Three Kingdoms 
Ai-ling Louie's Yeh Shen 
Joseph Jacobs's Tattercoats 
Robert San Souci's The Talking Eggs 
Charlotte Huck's Princess Furball 

Unit Four— On the Margins 

Perspectives of life outside the mainstream. Excerpts from: 

Joy Kogawa's Obasan 

Ralph Ellison's Invisible Man 

Alan Dershowitz's Chutzpah 

Helen Keller's The Story of My Life 

Gus Lee's China Boy 

Michael Olivas's "History Class" 

Tran Thi Nga's "Letter to My Mother" 

Brent Staples's "Night Walker" 

Pat Mora's "1910" 

Studs Terkel's "Stephen Cruz" 

Janice Mirikitani's "We, the Dangerous" 
A look at the problem of homelessness. Excerpts from: 

Lorna Dee Cervantes's "Freeway 280" 

Francisco Jimenez's 'The Circuit" 

Jonathan Kozol's Rachel and Her Children 

John Steinbeck's The Grapes of Wrath 

Mike Rose's Lives on the Boundary 



188 



Approaches to Teaching Multicultural Literature 



183 



Unit Five— Who Are Our Heroes? 

Uncovering history through fiction and nonfiction, myths are dis- 
pelled and true heroes emerge. Excerpts from: 

Michael Dorris and Louise Erdrich's The Crown of Columbus 

Fred Ross's Conquering Goliath: Caesar Chavez at the 
Beginning 

The Autobiography of Malcolm X 
Helen Keller's The Story of My Life 

Other biographies and autobiographies of students' choice 
Unit Six— What Is Family? 

A look at diverse views of family relationships. Excerpts from: 

Zora Neale Hurston's Their Eyes Were Watching God 

Louise Erdrich's The Beet Queen 

Maya Angelou's I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings 

Amy Tan's The Joy Luck Club 

Chaim Potok's The Chosen 

Toni Cade Bambara's "My Man Bovanne" 

Mordecai Richler's 'The Summer My Grandmother Was 
Supposed to Die" 

William Faulkner's "Barn Burning" 
Richard Goldstein's 'The Gay Family" 

Unit Seven — Growing Up in a Changing World 

Excerpts from: 

Nancy Garden's Annie n My Mind 

Annie Dillard's An American Childhood 

Chaim Potok's The Chosen 

Marion Dane Bauer's Tangled Butterfly 

Katherine Mansfield's "Her First Ball" 

Waring Cune/s "No Images" 

Countee Cullen's "Incident" 

Gary Soto's "Jacket" 

Mourning Dove's Cogewea 

James Baldwin's "Sonny's Blues" 

Norma Klein's Learning How to Fall 



183 



184 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Unit Eight— A Study of Values 

Excerpts from: 

Harper Lee's To Kill a Mockingbird 

Elie Wiesel's Night 

Rudolfo Anaya's Bless Me, Ultima 

Marilyn Levy's The Girl in the Plastic Cage 

Joni Eareckson's Joni 

Frank Chin's Donald Duk 

Sandra Cisneros's The House on Mango Street 

Henry David Thoreau's "Civil Disobedience" 

Mark Twain's Huckleberry Finn 

Bharati Mukherjee's Jasmine 

George Shannon's Unlived Affections 

Walt Whitman's "I Hear America Singing" 

Langston Hughes's "I, Too, Sing America" and "Let 
America Be America Again" 

Angelina Grimke's "Appeal" 

Martin Luther King, Jr/s "Letter from Birmingham Jail" 

Unit Nine — Gender, Race, and Power; or, All (Wo)men Are 
Created Equal and Some Are More Equal Than Others 

Excerpts from: 

Richard Wrighfs Native Son 

James Welch's The Death of Jim honey 

Leslie Silko's Ceremony 

Maxine Hong Kingston's Hie Woman Warrior 

Zora Neale Hurston's Their Eyes Were Watching God 

You don't have to envision an entire course to use diverse litera- 
ture thematically, though. Many ideas for thematically pairing or group- 
ing diverse literature with frequently used works have recently been 
discussed and implemented. The following suggestions come from a 
variety of public figures, personal colleagues, students, and friends: 

Twain's Huckleberry Finn with Our Nig; or, Sketches from the Life of 
a Free Black by Harriet Wilson 

Austin' s Pride and Prejudice with Hurston's Their Eyes Were Watch- 
ing God, with marriage as the theme 



ISO 



Approaches to Teaching Multicultural Literature 



185 



Ignatia Broker's Night Flying Woman with "Sand Creek Survivors" 
from Gerald Vizenor's Earthdivers 

Annie Dillard's An American Childhood with Maxine Hong 
Kingston's The Woman Warrior: Memoirs of a Girlhood among Ghosts, 
the story of a Japanese Canadian whose family loses everything 
during the war (Bischoff 1989) 

To portray relationships in Jewish American families, Chaim 
Potok's The Chosen with "The Summer My Grandmother Was Sup- 
posed to Die" by Mordecai Richler 

Struggles for survival among the homeless using Steinbeck's The 
Grapes of Wrath together with Jonathan Kozol's Rachel and Her 
Children, Raymond Barrio's The Plum Plum Pickers, and Out of the 
Rain, an anthology of drawing, writing, and photographs by the 
homeless of San Francisco 

To explore the theme of older adults, Dylan Thomas's "Do Not 
Go Gentle into That Good Night," Pat Mora's "1910," Richler's 
short story "The Summer My Grandmother Was Supposed to 
Die," and excerpts from Louise Erdrich's Love Medicine 

To explore the theme of "belonging," Dickens's Great Expectations 
with Louise Erdrich's The Beet Queen, Shawn Wong's Homebase, 
Richard Rodriguez's Hunger of Memory, Richard Wright's Black 
Boy, Tran Thi Nga's "Letter to My Mother," Michael Dorris's "For 
the Indians, No Thanksgiving," Brent Staples' s "Night Walker," 
Marcel Christine Lucero-Trujillo's "Roseville, Minn., U.S.A.," 
Lorna Dee Cervantes's "Heritage," and "We, the Dangerous" by 
Janice Mirikitani 

For echoes of family expectations for adulthood and marriage, 
Hisaye Yamamoto's "Epithalamium" (college level), Amy Tan's 
The Joy Luck Club, Guess Who's Coming to Dinner, Fiddler on the 
Roof, West Side Story, and Romeo and Juliet 

Professor Ronald Takaki (1991) suggests using Carlos Bulosan's 
America Is in the Heart, the story of a Filipino immigrant, with Fitzgerald's 
The Great Gatsby to study the immigrant experience for different peoples 
of the United States. Whereas Jay Gatsby attempts to Anglicize himself 
to rise in class and win Daisy, Bulosan's hero has no expectations for 
such mobility. Steinbeck's East of Eden could work, too, as would 
Homebase, by Shawn Wong, or Chutzpah, Alan Dershowitz's treatise on 
being Jewish in America. 

Beach and Marshall (1991) suggest using the theme of the diffi- 
culty of growing up and defining one's identity as an ethnic minority 
using Invisible Man, I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, Ceremony, The 
Woman Warrior, No-No Boy, Down These Mean Streets, and Bless Me, Ultima, 
After reading, they suggest that students "compare these protagonists' 



191 



186 



Crossing the Mainstream 



experiences . . . [as] they confront certain barriers to their development* ' 
(466). 

Mark Tonyan, a former student now teaching in central Minne- 
sota, combined Dances with Wolves and "POWOW" by Gogisgi/Carroll 
Arnett (in The Remembered Earth) with Thoreau's Walden. His students, 
European Americans, acknowledged that at first it was difficult for them 
to understand Native American culture. But after the material was pre- 
sented, their attitudes changed. Tonyan explains: 

If you sat any of my students down to explain the culture of na- 
tive peoples before it was spoiled by invading Europeans, they 
would reject your point of view outright. However, as we read 
issues in Walden and related them to Dances with Wolves, they be- 
came much more willing to grasp some of the ideas and under- 
standing I was trying to bring out for them. 

Another former student, Susan Henkemeyer, did a terrific unit 
entitled "Passages to Freedom: The Underground Railroad, the Ocean, 
and the River" to which we could add many more pieces. She divided 
her unit into three parts: 

I. The Underground Railroad: The Black Experience 

A. The Underground Railroad by Charles Blockson 

B. A Woman Called Moses by Marcy Moran Heidish 

C. Videotape of King's "I Have a Dream" speech 

D. Selected poetry 

1. 'Theme for English B" by Langston Hughes 

2. "Young Gal's Blues" by Langston Hughes 

II. The Ocean: The Immigrant Experience 

A. Documentary video The Boat People 

B. A Boat to Nowhere by Maureen Crane Wartski 

C. "Neighbor Rosicky" by WillaCather 

III. The River: The Individual's Experience 

A. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain 

B. Poetry selections 

1. "The River" by Hart Crane 

2. 'Two Rivers" by Ralph Waldo Emerson 

3. 'The Negro Speaks of Rivers" by Langston Hughes 

Other units might focus on the sixties or on the Vietnam War. I 
have received recently two volumes that contain a wealth of ideas and 



192 



Approaches to Teaching Multicultural Literature 



193 



courageous African American regiment that fought in the Civil War and 
earned the dubious privilege of becoming cannon fodder 

To address Vietnam, I'd use Born on the Fourth of July, Ron Kovic's 
autobiographical description of a young soldier who goes off to fight 
for his country and returns to suffer indignities as a paraplegic (also an 
Oliver Stone film). I'd add Bobbie Ann Mason's In Country, a story about 
a young girl trying to establish an identity based on her father's tragic 
death in Vietnam. Students could also share readings from Wallace 
Terry's Bloods: An Oral History of the Vietnam War, accounts of war as 
told by African American soldiers, and Kathryn Marshall's In the Com- 
bat Zone: An Oral History of American Women in Vietnam, 1966-1975. 1 
would also present John Williams's Captain Blackman, a fascinating story 
of a military history buff wounded in Vietnam. The hero's hallucina- 
tions take him back to the Revolutionary War, proceeding forward with 
each war the United States has been involved in and focusing on the 
treatment of black soldiers throughout. 

The more I think about this proposed course, the better I like it. I 
know it would be great! And if I've talked anybody into teaching it, I 
hope you'll let me know how it goes. I think students in high school and 
college would find this literature informative, exciting, and very worth- 
while reading. 

There are a number of ways to structure a literature class. Even 
when professors and teachers feel they must cover works that have long 
been in the curriculum, many ways exist to incorporate multicultural 
works into the mainstream. Quite simply, multicultural literature can 
be implemented into any curriculum if we are committed to expanding 
our programs and to becoming truly multicultural. 



199 



Approaches to Teaching Multicultural Literature 



187 



information for use in the classroom. Brooke Workman's Teaching the 
Sixties (1992) is really a lesson plan for secondary teachers. And for a 
great source of information, titles, and teaching suggestions, read Larry 
Johannessen's Teaching the Literature of the Vietnam War (1992). 

The possibilities here are endless. In my African American litera- 
ture class, a student who was majoring in music did a fantastic paper on 
the influence of African American literary and musical traditions, in- 
cluding that of "Signifyin(g)" jazz on the development of contempo- 
rary rap music. 

For interesting historical informatic i and a wealth of multiethnic 
literature, Ishmael Reed, Kathryn Trueblood, and Shawn Wong's The 
Before Columbus Foundation Fiction Anthology (1992) is a must-buy. So is 
their poetry anthology. Both include a variety of great literary pieces as 
well as commentary Understanding Others: Cultural and Cross-Cultural 
Studies and the Teaching of Literature (1992) is an excellent collection of 
literary analyses of multiethnic work. And MELUS, the journal of the 
Society for the Study of the Multi-Ethnic Literature of the United States, 
is yet another wonderful source of information. The 1991-1992 editions 
featured topics such as "Native American Fiction: Myth and Criticism/ 7 
"Before the Centennial/ 7 and "Varieties of Ethnic Criticism." The edi- 
tors are also pleased to provide an index of all of their past publications 
for first-time subscribers. 

The Genre Approach 

Drama 

The traditions of theater in Chicano, Chinese, Japanese, and Native 
American culture are older than most of the dramatic literature we con- 
sider American. Moreover, there are so many multicultural plays already 
in the new anthologies that we can no longer excuse ourselves for not 
using them in our classes. Til mention a few that have been used suc- 
cessfully by me or someone I know: 

A Soldier's Play by Charles Fuller was very popular with my 
classes. It's a psychological story about the effects of racism on 
African Americans in the military. 

Hansbenys A Raisin in the Sun is an old favorite and has been 
used successfully by many of us. 

Wakako Yamauchi's And the Soul Shall Dance is a very interesting 
look at the mystery of Japanese immigrants from the perspective 
of an American-born Japanese girl. Hiroshi Kashiwagi's Laughter 
and False Teeth portrays with bittersweet humor the betrayal of 



193 



188 



Crossing the Mainstream 



the internment camp. Both of these short plays are in The Big 
Aiiieeeee! collection. 

Tatum's anthology contains Luis Valdez's The Buck Private, a play 
about a young man who proudly goes to war, never to return. 

The Berkeley Repertory Theatre recently put on Zora Neale 
Hurston's play Spunk: Three Tales to a very enthusiastic audience. 

African American women playwrights, beginning with one-act 
plays like Alice Dunbar-Nelson's Mine Eyes Have Seen and They 
That Sit in Darkness by Mary Burrill, have a long history of suc- 
cess on the stage. 

Larry Johannessen lists a number of titles in his book about the 
Vietnam War, Illumination Rounds, including Oliver Stone's Pla- 
toon and Salvador, Tom Cole's Medal of Honor Rag, and the collec- 
tion Coming to Terms: American Plays and the Vietnam War, which 
includes Stephen Metcalfe's Strange Snow. 

Nonfiction 

Any number of titles and topics are possible here. Most of the readers 
we now use for college composition courses contain a number of essays 
by nonmainstrearn authors. I would particularly recommend Colombo, 
Cullen, and Lisle's Rereading America (1989), which I have used for sev- 
eral courses. 

Donna Mahar, a former student and now an outstanding middle 
school teacher in Camillus, New York, notes that students enjoy read- 
ing about real persons with whom they can make a personal connec- 
tion. In this regard, she recommends essays by James Baldwin, Maya 
Angelou's I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings, and Eloise Greenfield's 
"Langston Terrace," "Mama Sewing," "Banker Maggie Walker," and 
"Autobiography of Geronimo." Nonfiction accounts of African Ameri- 
can cowboys turned into a great term paper for another student of mine. 
Researching the Japanese internment period and eventual reparation 
litigation would also make for fascinating and illuminating study. 

Speeches make an excellent area of study as well. I have used 
King's "I Have a Dream" speech as an example of persuasive discourse 
in the classical tradition. Other sources include speeches by Barbara Jor- 
dan, Caesar Chavez, Chief Joseph, and Chief Seattle. 

Short Stories 

This genre is perhaps at once the most popular and the most attainable. 
Since many diverse authors are already in the anthologies, teachers can 
rediscover and use them without having to spend a lot of money order- 



>24 



Approaches to Teaching Multicultural Literature 



189 



ing new material. High schools often have a variety of short story col- 
lections that can be used easily and without much expense. If not, li- 
brarians are usually quite willing to develop a list of suggestions for 
students searching for literary pieces from multiethnic sources. 

With her middle school class, Donna Mahar uses short stories like 
"The Circuit 77 by Francisco Jimenez, "Zlateh the Goaf 7 and 77 Shrewd 
Toadie and Lizer the Miser 77 by Isaac Bashevis Singer, 77 Home 77 by 
Gwendolyn Brooks, and 77 Those Saturday Afternoons 77 by James 
Baldwin. She too points out the wealth of choices available in this genre. 

Poetry 

The work of dozens of nonmainstream poets has been collected into 
numerous anthologies. One of the poems that I have seen my own stu- 
dents use successfully is 77 1910 77 from Chants by Pat Mora. Langston 
Hughes's 77 I, Too, Sing America 77 makes for interesting comparison with 
Whitman's 77 I Hear America Singing 77 ; I think I'd add Claude McKay's 
77 America 77 as well. ^ 

A former student, Mary Atkinson, introduces a unit on African 
American poetry by beginning with Run DMC's "It's Tricky," "You Be 
Illin,'" and "Proud To Be Black," along with DJ Jazzy Jeff and the Fresh 
Prince's "Parents Just Don't Understand" (I love this one; my kids used 
to play and sing it for me all the time). She continues with Hughes's "I, 
Too, Sing America," Nikki Giovanni's "Housecleaning," and Etheridge 
Knight's "For Black Poets Who Think of Suicide." To bring in Malcolm 
X, she includes Ted Joans' s "My Ace of Spades," Larry Neal's "Malcolm 
X: An Autobiography," "Malcolm" by Sonia Sanchez, and "A Poem for 
Black Hearts" by Amiri Baraka (LeRoi Jones). To study the contribu- 
tions of Martin Luther King, Jr., students read '"Martin Luther King, Jr." 
by Gwendolyn Brooks, Haki Madhubuti 7 s (Don L. Lee) "Assassination," 
and Nikki Giovanni's "The Funeral of Martin Luther King, Jr." She adds 
Jean Toomer's "Blood-Burning Moon," Baldwin's essay "If Black En- 
glish Isn't a Language, Then Tell Me, What Is?" and Alice Walker's 
"Beauty: When the Other Dancer Is the Self." 

Young Adult Literature 

An excellent example of work that incorporates "classic," young adult, 
and multiethnic elements is the work of Virginia Hamilton. In a very 
interesting discussion, Moss (1992) shows the influence of the gothic 
conventions of Faulkner and Edgar Allen Poe on Hamilton's work. See- 
ing similarities of style between the "gothic and grotesque effects of 



195 



190 



Crossing the Mainstream 



these writers/ 7 Moss portrays Hamilton's The House of Dies Drear and 
The Mystery of Drear House as extensions of this earlier literary form. A 
similar approach to other popular fcontemporary writers would make a 
great unit of study for junior and senior high school students. 

Shannon (1988), concerned about children "caught between two 
mirrors — two ways of seeing — each presenting a different image of the 
self ' (14), recommends several interesting cross-cultural, multiethnic, 
young adult novels, including Arilla Sun Down, a "biomy thography" of 
belonging by Virginia Hamilton; Laurence Yep's Child of the Owl and 
Sea Glass, both stories about Chinese- Anglo children who struggle with 
their identity; and Annie on My Mind by Nancy Garden, the story of two 
girls who discover their attraction for each other. Shannon further sug- 
gests Richter's The Light in the Forest, a story about a white boy raised by 
Lenni Lenape Indians, and its sequel, A Country of Strangers; Clark's 
Santiago, the story of a Native American child raised as a Spanish don; 
Screen's With My Face to the Rising Sun, "a psychological rite of pas- 
sage"; Jean Craighead George's Julie of the Wolves; poems by Langston 
Hughes, including "Cross"; and Adoff's All the Colors of the Race. Greene 
(1988) adds to this theme with Marshall's Brown Girl, Brownstones, a story 
about a girl whose family has immigrated from Barbados, and Buchi 
Emecheta's story of a young Nigerian woman who moves to London, 
Second-Class Citizen. 

Finally, I asked Donna Mahar to share her thoughts on teaching 
multicultural literature in a middle school in an almost totally Euro- 
pean American suburb in New York. She responded: 

One thing I would like to share with other teachers is the power 
that students gain througb a multicultural approach. They really 
respect the strength of words and realize that it is important to 
take risks. I credit multicultural readings with the great success 
my students have had in publishing their work in Stone Soup, the 
local paper, Merlyn's Pen, and Creative Kids. By having strong, di- 
verse models to work from, their writing, and, in turn, their self- 
esteem, flourished. 

Teaching Strategies: Whole Class, Small Groups, Pairs, 
Individuals 

Laura, a student in my special topics seminar, once referred to the nine- 
ties as "the era of small groups." Indeed, we've learned a lot about the 
importance of grouping, nondirected teaching, and "hands-on" instruc- 
tion; we've embraced this strategy and made it ours. But I don't buy 
this completely, and neither does Laura. Students may tire of the lecture 



l?6 



Approaches to Teaching Multicultural Literature 



191 



approach, but they also get tired of anything that is overdone. And I 
don't blame them. 

I just returned from a three-day workshop in an area only tangen- 
tially related to my field. (I will not be more specific because I don't 
want to hurt the feelings of those who directed the project.) The trainers 
had great energy, were very well organized, and were firmly commit- 
ted to their work. But for three days participants were placed in one 
group after another. Each group was slightly different, and I appreciate 
the modeling the facilitators tried to provide, but enough is enough. 
Brainstorming in areas where one knows very little becomes frustrating 
after a while. Sometimes I just want to listen to someone who knows 
more than I do. 

Don't get me wrong. I strongly recommend grouping for a num- 
ber of reasons. I like workshops, individual projects, jigsaw groups 
(where everyone in the group becomes an expert in a certain area and 
then teaches everyone else), partners, and so forth. And after speaking 
so highly of group interaction for field-dependent students, I certainly 
am not condemning this strategy now. If s just that I think we can overdo 
anything. I try in my classes to model what I think all teachers at all 
levels should do: vary activities. We should never do the same thing all 
the time. 

Thus, I recommend whole class, small group, pairs, and individual 
assignments; I recommend them all. The literature we have been talk- 
ing about can be used in many different ways. Sometimes we want to 
do a close reading of a particular piece. For example, I believe Richard 
Wrighf s Native Son needs thoughtful discussion. I might start out in 
groups providing questions for students to consider. But then I'd have 
the class reconvene so that we could all talk about some of the impor- 
tant issues. (Beginning teachers who are not always successful with a 
whole class discussion should not be discouraged. This teaching strat- 
egy, in my opinion, is the most difficult of all.) When I taught Ishmael 
Reed's Mumbo Jumbo, a fabulous postmodern novel, my class went 
through a very literal interpretation of what, for most students, was so 
abstract that they could not understand it without a great deal of guid- 
ance. And thaf s okay; if s my job to observe and accommodate the needs 
of my students. 

Many times we weave together several pieces that different stu- 
dents have been reading under one theme. That works well too. Some- 
times students lead discussions. Other times they work in groups and 
talk about common readings. At the same time they might do a few 
readings on their own because they are interested in other titles. They 



197 



192 



Crossing the Mainstream 



then tell the rest of the class what they've done. I also lecture. Some- 
times I think that I know more than my students and have more back- 
ground information, which I then share with them while they take notes. 
I think that's okay too. 

I have taught a lot of the literature that I have mentioned in this 
book, both in high school and in college, to "honors'' students and to 
"average" students and to some who might be considered "below aver- 
age." Most of the literature I've talked about can be taught in a number 
of ways. It's up to the instructor to decide the focus of the class, the 
amount of material that needs to be covered, and all of the other cur- 
ricular variables that figure into our plans. 

Idea the Last 

I'll end this chapter by creating another multicultural American litera- 
ture course that I would love to teach. The theme I would choose is 
"war." Not that I like war. On the contrary, I find the topic very disturb- 
ing, especially since over the years I've had a number of students go off 
to war and never come back. But I think this topic fascinates young 
people, and it's pretty common in the literature. 

Take, for instance, Stephen Crane's The Red Badge of Courage, a 
novel typically read in American literature courses. How can this story 
be "multiculturalized"? Along with Red Badge, we might offer Dalton 
Trumbo's Johnny Got His Gun, a horrifying story about a young soldier 
who wakes up in a hospital and can neither see, nor hear, nor taste, 
because his face has been shot off. He has no appendages. About the 
only thing he has left is his mind, which is perfectly intact. I both hate 
and love this story and have used it like Listerine. I do think that it gives 
more "hawkish" students something to think about. 

But these novels are still pretty traditional. So let's add Leslie 
Silko's masterfully crafted Ceremony, a story about a young mixed-blood 
Laguna Indian who goes to war, fights for his country, and returns only 
to be mistreated by everyone. His sickness is in his soul, and his story is 
a quest — through ceremony — for healing. This book gives an interest- 
ing slant to the typical courage theme. 

Next I would add John Okada's No-No Boy t which tells the story 
of a Japanese American who, after his family spends two years in an 
internment camp, refuses to join the army. He is then rejected by every- 
one, raising questions not usually addressed. To show the terrible ef- 
fects the war had on Japanese Canadians, I could use Joy Kogawa's 
Obasan. I would also add the film Glory, a wonderful movie about a 



IBS 



194 



13 Composition Pedagogy 
in a Multicultural Setting 

For students, writing is empowerment. In most disciplines, the ab- 
ility to express oneself well through writing almost guarantees aca- 
demic success. But more than that, good composing skills enhance 
learning and critical thinking, encourage both free and focused data gath- 
ering, establish rhetorical environments in which students create their own 
ideas, and develop within students the confidence that will increase their 
chances for success, not only in school, but in the workplace as well. Ac- 
cording to Haki Madhubuti (1985), "The language is the tool, the weapon, 
and writers must train themselves to use it as a carpenter trains to use 
wood and nails, or as a farmer trains to use earth" (169). 

The result of all this is that students who are poorly prepared for 
college writing often do not get to college. Those who do get there often 
struggle, from their entry-level composition course until they either com- 
plete their degrees or drop out. In fact, in "Killing Them Softly: Why 
Willie Can't Write," Janis Epps (1985) argues that "composition is the 
gatekeeper of the inequalities perpetuated in the American system," that, 
in effect, unequal writing instruction is "one of the most effective in- 
struments in perpetuating an oppressed and impoverished status in 
society" (154-56). 

Nowhere is the division between the "haves" and the "have nots" 
in composition instruction viewed with greater alarm than by educa- 
tors concerned with the status of the nonmainstream student in higher 
education. Although the number of African American students who 
graduate from high school has increased in the last decades, their en- 
rollment in higher education has declined (Rice and Alford 1989, 68). 
The same is true for Latino students (Fields 1988). Although nine per- 
cent more Native American students are graduating from high school 
now than in 1970, their enrollment in higher education has stabilized 
since 1976. And a growing number of students of color attending com- 
munity colleges and vocational schools terminate their educational 



Portions of this chapter first appeared in "Successful Writing Programs and Methods of 
Assessment for Non-mainstream Students" in the Arizona English Bulletin 34 (Spring 
1992): 15-20. Reprinted with the permission of the Arizona English Bulletin. 



200 



Composition Pedagogy in a Multicultural Setting 



195 



careers at the end of two years (Applegate and Henniger 1989). The 
attrition rate for nonwhite students in four-year programs also gives 
educators cause for serious concern (Nickolai-Mays and Kammer 1987). 

We can blame the disappointing results of the last two decades of 
effort on lack of funding, extreme budget cuts, biased assessments, the 
little contact students of color have with nonmainstream faculty and 
professional staff, absence of multicultural curricula, strained relations 
with white students, poor tutoring programs, and more. But we must 
also acknowledge that prominent among these issues is the poor aca- 
demic preparation that many nonmainstream students receive in courses 
that should provide them with the composing skills necessary to meet 
the demands of college writing. Although many entering mainstream 
students suffer from similar writing deficiencies, insufficient prepara- 
tion (Nickolai-Mays and Kammer 1987), little opportunity and experi- 
ence in composing, bicultural ambivalence (Dean 1989), and cultural 
differences (Harris 1986) often put nonmainstream students at a greater 
disadvantage. 

In a compelling argument for positive reinforcement, Glenda Gill 
(1992) discusses the many difficulties that African American students 
face in mainstream colleges. Gill cites the case of a "well-bred, calm, 
quiet African American male" who came to her office and told her "he 
was no' sure he would survive in college." One of four children in a 
single-parent home, he not only felt the burden of succeeding in school 
for himself, but also for his mother, who had pinned so much of her 
hope for his future to his success in college. Besides working full-time 
at a local fast food place to supplement his mother's meager income, 
the young man felt other pressures as well: the sea of white faces he 
encountered each day, his longing for a girlfriend and the social life that 
so many of his classmates seemed to have, the discomfort of having to 
share "chunks" of his papers in front of a class that seemed so alien. 

Crediting Cleo Martin's method of positive feedback, Gill offers 
several suggestions for helping such students, including reader response 
sheets and open assignment topics. She points to the reinforcement Maya 
Angelou received from mentors like John Oliver Killens and James 
Baldwin of the Harlem Writers' Guild and underscores the positive ef- 
fects of encouragement and interest on those students who sincerely 
make the effort. She writes, "Many serious, hard-working African Ameri- 
cans are being relegated to the ash- heap, and teachers can help by pro- 
viding them with positive reinforcement" (226). 

Gill also cites an African American admissions officer at a major 
university, who makes an important observation: "We must keep black 



201 



196 



Crossing the Mainstream 



male students in the most rigorous courses . . . because there is extreme 
pressure on the black male child to be anti-intellectual — an athlete, an 
entertainer, or a criminal" (228). Gill continues by saying that in her 
own twenty-nine years of teaching, she has come to see that many white 
and black teachers are afraid of African American males. While she ad- 
mits that perhaps some black males do not want to study — note that the 
same can be said of many racial majority students as well — "the vast 
majority do. One of the hindrances to their success is teachers who are 
afraid to challenge them" (228-29). 

I agree with Gill and her admissions officer colleague. In the 
twenty-five years I have been teaching, I have noticed the same thing. 
Teachers and administrators sometimes want to be "right on." Instead, 
they are "right off." They handle "their blacks" and other "minorities" 
with kid gloves, and their students see right through it. 

Judging from conversations with my friends and former col- 
leagues still teaching in the San Francisco bay area, in Texas, and in 
central New York, it sounds like this form of discrimination continues. 
Some teachers are wary of nonmainstream students because they think 
that they pose a threat to the equilibrium of the class. They are different 
Their needs are different. Their composing skills are so varied that it is 
difficult to "teach" writing at all. 

How do teachers manage such diversity in experiences, skills, 
culture, and exposure to writing practices? Many do what they have 
been doing all along: they "manage" their classrooms. They anchor their 
students to their desks, giving them skills sheets or workbooks or any- 
thing else that will get them through the period without too much fuss. 
Those who behave get good grades. Those who don't get into trouble. 
Those who show any promise or potential, or those who might like to 
improve their composing skills, often get left behind. And when we 
factor in the issue of multicultural literature, we get into the same prob- 
lems of time limitations and self-censorship that I' ve been talking about 
for the last dozen chapters. 

Recently I visited some classrooms taught by a friend, who was 
at the time teaching predominantly Filipino students. I collected some 
writing samples as part of a study I was conducting on the influence of 
writing prompts. Later, when analyzing my data, I found that many of 
the essays written by these students received high scores from raters. 
Puzzled, I asked my friend why her students had done so well when 
they were, after all, ESL students who, according to my expectations, 
should have fallen far short of such writing quality. Fran then gave me 
a lesson in composition pedagogy. She told me that if ESL students could 



202 



Composition Pedagogy in a Multicultural Setting 



197 



just "hang on" and comprehend what the rest of the c ass was reading, 
she never put them into lower-level ESL classes. In her class these stu- 
dents had the opportunity to write constantly, the opportunity to im^ 
prove their composing skills and become good writers. 

Wo do not need to elaborate on the variety of reasons — none of 
which have anything to do with intelligence or writing potential — that 
many students of color are put into remedial classes early on, with little 
hope of getting out. What is important for us to focus on is that the poor 
self-esteem and academic underpreparedness that results (Fields 1988) 
marks these students for almost certain failure in college unless inter- 
vention is immediate and intense. 

Characterizing the teaching of composition in this country, Fos- 
ter (1983) makes a distinction between what he calls "closed" and "open" 
capacities. He then describes the "closed" capacities of the skills-ori- 
ented classroom, where the pedagogical emphasis is on "correct," sur- 
face-level writing. Yet while the composing process does involve many 
of these conventions, real writing, and the teaching of real writing, de- 
pends on the "open" capacities of imagination, inventiveness, and rea- 
soning power, which, for a variety of reasons, many of our nation's 
nonmainstream students do not have the opportunity to experience. 
Even if we put aside the drug, economic, and morale problems of many 
inner-city communities, where minority populations often predominate, 
the overcrowded, less-than-opf :.*nal conditions of these neighborhood 
schools pretty well preclude teaching composition as it should be taught. 

According to a 1974 National Council of Teachers of English posi- 
tion statement on teaching composition, "Learning to write requires 
writing; writing practice should be a major emphasis of the course. 
Workbook exercises, drill on usage, and analysis of existing prose are 
not adequate substitutes for writing." Yet such activities continue to be 
common in many of our nation's classrooms. Misunderstanding the 
nature of writing instruction, teachers force students into completing 
endless exercises in "getting rid of errors" and word attack skills. Such 
students are not composing. They are, instead, being "managed" in over- 
crowded classrooms, perhaps to the satisfaction of administrators who 
know little about teaching composition. 

What happens to students who receive such substandard oppor- 
tunities to compose? The sad fact is that they not only learn inadequate 
writing skills, but they also develop a negative concept of themselves as 
writers and, thus, as academic achievers. Our literature is replete with 
examples of nonmainstream students who have been thwarted in their 
attempts to express themselves. Given only the most mundane writing 
tasks, they are seldom challenged to think, to posit, to learn. 



203 



198 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Youdelman (1978) cites the example of a professor who refused to 
use such topics as racism, housing discrimination, and the Vietnam War, 
opting instead for topics like "describe your favorite room/ 7 because he 
felt that his students couldn't "handle abstraction/ 7 When the students 
of such professors actually have the chance to write in other classes for 
more enlightened instructors, they often "interrupt themselves . . . and 
ask 7 Is this right? 7 in a purely mechanical way/ 7 Accustomed to intellec- 
tual oppression, these students suspect all teachers. Youdelman points 
out the danger and damage to people living under this kind of intellec- 
tual oppression, who seek 77 to buttress themselves against it, [but] find 
that they have internalized all the limitations which the system itself 
preaches 77 (566). 

Underprepared nonmainstream students have long been ignored. 
When they write, we do not listen to what they have to say. Smitherman 
(1 972) cites the example of a position paper written by an African Ameri- 
can college freshman responding to the then-current Vietnam War: 

I think the war in Viet Nam bad. Because we don 7 t have no busi- 
ness over there. My brother friend been in war, and he say if s 
hard and mean. I do not like war because it's bad. And so I don't 
think we have no business there. The reason the way in China is 
bad is that American boys is dying over there. (65) 

The instructor returned this paper to the student with only one com- 
ment: "Correct your grammar and resubmit/' Two decades later this 
pedagogy still persists in many places. 

The problem for many of us is that we "get stuck"; we attach our- 
selves to dialectal fea< ares and then don't address the more important 
issues. In doing so, we fool ourselves and our students into thinking 
that we are tackling the "true grit" of composition. The irony is that we 
never come close. 

I once conducted a writing workshop where several teachers in- 
sisted that they must teach skills before composition. Fixated on the 
issue of dialect, they could not get past sentence-level errors, which, 
according to them, had to be "taken care of 7 before they could "do any- 
thing with the writing." I showed them a passage from Mina 
Shaughnessy 7 s germinal work Errors and Expectations (1977). In the pas- 
sage, Shaughnessy discusses the impact of open enrollment on the New 
York city college system in the early 1970s. Any student, no matter what 
his or her skills, could enter freshman English. Shaughnessy used the 
following example to show us that there is a big difference between a 
student who "cannot write" and a student who has had no opportunity 
to experience writing: 



204 



Composition Pedagogy in a Multicultural Setting 



199 



Passage written early in semester 

Yesterday I saw something horrible. As I was walking down the 
street. I saw a man and his dog. Though this was a average man 
and his dog. This was a man beating his dog to death. Which 
made me sick. I scream foi him to stop. Though I didnt get any 
answer from the man. 

Passage written one month later 

I am the smartest girl in this class. This isn't a conceited state- 
ment, but a true one. 

I started this class February 4, 1974. 1 didn't know anything 
about English, till I got myself interested in this class. This was a 
very great step for me. For the reason that I'm learning extremely 
fast. 

The first assignment we had was a writing assignment. I made 
so many mistakes that it was truly ridiculous. The teacher re- 
turned my paper for me to correct it. The teacher helped me cor- 
rect it and find the reasons why I made the mistakes. 

The second writing assignment we had was a little more diffi- 
cult. I had my heart in this assignment not to make any mistakes, 
but I was wrong. I made fewer mistakes but they were there. This 
time I had to find them myself and understand why I made them. 
I found most of them but I really couldn't understand how I made 
such idiotic mistakes. This is where proof reading comes in. If I 
had proof read my papers there wouldn't have been that many 
mistakes. 

The third writing assignment was a great challenge for me 
but I was determined to get it right. I wrote with all my new tech- 
nique and I did really great. My teacher thinks if s a great im- 
provement. Now you know I'm the smartest girl in this class. 
(277) 

For me, this example says it all. Many students simply lack the oppor- 
tunity to write. Once we get the juices flowing, then we can begin to 
worry about product. Within one month, this student's ability to gener- 
ate prose increased tremendously, just because she had been given the 
chance. 

Many of my own students — soon to be teachers — ask me why we 
still teach grammar if we have known for at least three decades that the 
formal teaching of grammar has nothing to do with writing improve- 
ment. After lengthy discussions, we come to the following conclusions 
about teaching grammar: 

1. It is "clean," easy to teach and to correct, and acceptable to 
the public. 

2. It is TTiuch easier and faster to grade than compositions, reader 
responses to literature, oral presentations, and the like. 



205 



200 



Crossing the Mainstream 



We should not mislead students or parents or administrators 
by allowing them to believe that a steady diet of formally 
taught grammar will improve composing skills. 

It makes teachers look smart and students look uneducated; 
it drives a wedge between students and their teachers, espe- 
cially language minority students and those who speak a dia- 
lect different from the "language of empowerment." 

On the other hand, we decide the following about teaching language 
skills: 

1. Our language, the history of language development, and 
sociolinguistics are interesting areas of study, and students 
should be given the opportunity to take these courses if they 
wish, 

2. Language skills should be taught on the basis of usage, often 
individually, to improve personal and public writing, to en- 
hance style, and to increase students' ability to follow "ac- 
cepted forms/' 

3. Students should have an opportunity to become exposed to 
an alternative dialect, one we call the "language of empower- 
ment/' which has become, as a result of historical coincidence, 
a dialect commonly accepted by people in economically 
advantaged positions. 

Assessment 

Assessment through essay testing is another important area of college 
writing in which nonmainstream students often do not fare well. Ac- 
cording to Applebee, Langer, and Mullis (1989), topic differences "not 
only produce different estimates of overall writing performance, but 
also may have different effects on the performance of subgroups . . . 
[which] may serve to exaggerate or minimize differences in levels of 
performance" (24-25). Commenting on a recent writing assessment in 
South Carolina, they note that different writing prompts generated un- 
even responses from African American and European American stu- 
dents, illustrating that writing quality is influenced by cultural as well 
as other recognized considerations. 

Analyzing essays from the National Assessment of Education 
Progress, Geneva Smitherman and Sandra Wright found significant cor- 
relation between the frequency of Black English and lower ratings. 
Though raters were told to consider other rhetorical features, they 
focused primarily on dialectal errors. Thus, essays the researchers con- 
sidered "devoid of content, meaning, and message" were rated higher 



Composition Pedagogy in a Multicultural Setting 



201 



if they showed less evidence of dialectal difference (Smitherman- 
Donaldson 1987). 

The sociopolitical dimension of writing competence and 
multiethnic students is an important issue. If the "mainstream perspec- 
tive" in composition pedagogy and assessment of writing quality were 
expanded to include non-value-laden differences, then, according to 
Wagner and Coe (1982), "basic writers, 'dialectal' writers, or poorly pre- 
pared writers would not be held back by the boundaries of their so- 
called remedial or non-traditional characteristics." Wagner and Coe fur- 
ther state: 

If we do not develop abilities to perceive reality from multicultural 
perspectives in writing classes, we reinforce class-bias and sex- 
ism as well as racism by reinforcing the values and concepts of 
the dominant minority only. ... It is one of the functions of En- 
glish teachers to make certain their students have access to ["Stan- 
dard English"]. But [they] must also make clear to their students 
that "Standard English" is in no sense superior to other dialects. 
(18) 

Successful Models 

Fortunately, the news is not all bad. A number of programs around the 
country have identified the connection between writing ability and col- 
lege achievement and are doing something about it. The excellent work 
that the National Writing Project, originally the Bay Area Writing Project, 
has done in the last twenty years is one example. The project reaches 
out to provide research, enrichment, and writing experiences for teach- 
ers from kindergarten through college, who, in turn, bring their exper- 
tise back to their schools and into their classrooms. The Puente Project, 
a particularly exciting extension of the Bay Area Writing Project, has 
turned a fifty to sixty percent first-year dropout rate in fifteen Califor- 
nia community colleges into a seventy to eighty percent retention rate 
(Dean 1989). 

Many states are improving strategies for increasing and retaining 
students who transfer from community colleges to four-year programs 
(Cage 1989). A study of special English writing courses in a sample of 
California community colleges showed positive effects on student par- 
ticipants, including improved writing proficiency, more positive atti- 
tudes, and higher enrollment the following semester (Slark et al. 1987). 
In one California State University study, subscores on writing ability 
were highly related to persistence until the end of the freshman year 
(Stock et al. 1986). Students who showed "high potential" at St. Mary's 



207 



202 



Crossing the Mainstream 



University in San Antonio completed a five-week summer program with 
an English composition component. These students, sixty percent of 
whom were Mexican American, had a much higher retention rate than 
similar students who did not go through the program (Trevino and Wise 
1980). 

Letting Basic Writers Write 

In an attempt to concentrate on the real problems of novice writers, Paul 
Ramsey (1977) once taught a course on "teaching teachers to teach Black 
dialect students to write." According to Ramsey though, "Our discus- 
sions of 'the teaching of writing to dialect speakers' always ended up 
on 'the teaching of writing' " (198). Ramsey reports: 

What I learned from our inability to stay on the topic of the course 
was that maybe we did not really need the course. The real prob- 
lem was not how to teach Black dialect speakers to write, but 
how to teach any student to write. The basics of writing — how to 
organize, how to develop a paragraph, how to write with speci- 
ficity rather than in generalities — are aracial. (198-99) 

Yet because he is his department's one African American profes- 
sor, Ramsey's colleagues often assume that he must "know something 
about . . . dialect problems." Ramsey points out, however, that the pa- 
pers he is asked to look at as a result of this belief usually contain few 
real language errors. Though he agrees that the papers are usually poorly 
written, the issue was that the students really did not understand how 
to write. They didn't understand 

that a paper is about one thing which we call a "thesis" and ... is 
conbtructed in paragraph units . . . about one . . . topic. I suspect 
that if a white student had come with a similar paper, ir*/ col- 
league might have thrown up his hands in dismay . . . but at 
least . . . would have been able to see the student's paper and not 
just the student's pigmentation. (200) 

Our approach to composition pedagogy and its specific applica- 
tion to "at-risk" nonmainstream students should be clear. We know that 
all novice writers share certain characteristics. Royster (1985) points out 
that African American students are not "special problem-ridden writ- 
ers." Looking at national trends in writing achievement, she notes that 
students in general are "at risk" and that African American students are 
no exception. The exceptional writing quality of many nonmainstream 
students involved in good writing programs speaks for itself, and the 
dire need of many mainstream students for adequate writing instruc- 
tion is equally obvious. 



208 



Composition Pedagogy in a Multicultural Setting 



203 



In discussing the special problems that some basic writers do en- 
counter, Mina Shaughnessy (1977) comments that dialectal errors in lan- 
guage use are compounded by the fact that, unlike students who learn 
English as a second language, "native" nonstandard English speakers 
have had no success with written language. Further, they have not iden- 
tified any real or valid reasons for their failure in the classroom. Still, 
Shaughnessy reminds us that while errors count, they don't count for 
nearly as much as most English teachers think. Teachers should keep in 
mind the cost to themselves and to their students of mastering certain 
forms and be ready to cut their losses when the investment seems no 
longer commensurate with the return (120-22). 

For instance, in a study analyzing the composing processes of three 
African American adolescents with low, moderate, and high use of non- 
standard dialect, Fowler (1979) found that the high dialect user had the 
most frequent pauses and transfers and took the most time composing. 
Fowler thus makes a number of suggestions for making the high dialect 
user more comfortable and thus more efficient in a writing program. 
Instructors need to provide such students with more time for nonstop 
writing, more time for sentence-combining exercises, role playing, and 
the like, and more encouragement to develop tone, style, and a sense of 
audience. Instructors should also give students more opportunity to 
develop through groups and better revision opportunities. These in- 
structional strategies impact positively on the writing performance of 
nonmainstream, indeed all, students. 

Defining "basic writers'' as beginners who must learn by making 
mistakes, Shaughnessy (1977) explains that the major problem basic 
writers have is that they have not written enough: 

Compared with the 1000 words a week that a British student or 
even the 350 words a week that an American student in a middle- 
class high school is likely to have written, the basic writing stu- 
dent is more likely to have written 350 words a semester. It would 
not be unusual for him [or her] to have written nothing at all. (14) 

Even when these students are asked to compose, the assignments they 
are given are often artificial strained, and unnatural. Thus, Farr and 
Daniels (1986) suggest that teachers develop student fluency through 
writing, that they understand and appreciate student writing compe- 
tence, have positive expectations, and create writing activities for real 
reasons and wider audiences. They also suggest that teachers maintain 
appropriate readings, encourage collaboration and conferencing, pro- 
vide less grammar instruction, teach mechanics in content, and offer 
cumulative evaluation. 



2U9 



204 



Crossing the Mainstream 



This point is so obvious that it should no longer hsve to be said. 
What Shaughnessy and so many others are encouraging is that students 
need to write in order to improve their writing. They must establish 
their own voices, develop the confidence to express their ideas and opin- 
ions, and be able to organize their thoughts in a meaningful way They 
must be motivated by and feel engaged in the writing they do. 

Further, students of color with good potential yet less than ad- 
equate academic preparation have special needs that can be accommo- 
dated by recognizing them as positive additions to the college commu- 
nity Royster (1985) points to the "unnegotiated mandate of the Black 
college/ 7 which succeeds in making such students competitive and com- 
petent in school and in the work force rather than labeling them as "re- 
medial" or "nontraditional." Indeed, college composition classes do not 
always take into account individual and culturally sensitive learning 
styles or the impact of differing world views (Bennett 1990). Discussing 
the effects of the monocultural teacher in the multicultural classroom, 
Terry Dean (1989) explains that many minority and international stu- 
dents feel a bicultural ambivalence in the English class, suggesting that 
Iheir difficulty in composing is often due to their lack of awareness about 
or interest in commonly assigned topics. 

Incorporating Multiethnic Literature into the Composition Class 

According to Ely (1980), redesigning college composition and humani- 
ties programs to include African, Asian, and other literatures improves 
the academic success and self-esteem of minority students. Similarly, 
Taylor and Bradford (1985) note that incorporating oral histories into 
freshman writing courses, using a variety of foik and rhetorical tradi- 
tions, and including nonmainstream literatures and other worthwhile 
artistic models lessens the alienation that many nonmainstream students 
experience. 

Observing that "many 1990s youth come from families seldom 
reflected in works of the Western literary canon," Athanases, Christiano, 
and Drexler (1992) illustrate an impressive model for promoting good 
writing through the study of multicultural literature. Their article, "Fam- 
ily Gumbo: Urban Students Respond to Contemporary Poets of Color," 
describes a course called "Interlinks," which "integrates U.S. literature 
and history around key social issues." Here's a sampling of issues and 
works from the course: 

American slavery: Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass 

Manifest destiny and westward expansion: Dances with Wolves; 
The Jungle (Sinclair) 



210 



Composition Pedagogy in a Multicultural Setting 



205 



The Great Depression: The Grapes of Wrath (Steinbeck) 

Impact of industrialization: Hard Times (Terkel) 

Chinese iinmigrants: The Kitchen God's Wife (Tan); Strangers from a 
Different Shore (Takaki) 

Struggle for racial equality: The Autobiography of Malcolm X (with 
Alex Haley); Before the Mayflower (Bennett) 

Mexican Americans: The House on Mango Street (Cisneros); 'The 
Ballad of Gregorio Cortez" (Paredes and Paredes) 

Using Nancie Atwell's (1987) strategies for "borrowing mode, 
topic/theme, and technique/ 7 "Interlinks" students borrow from the 
poets they read. Tensions between old ways and new ways, memories 
of the old country and its traditions, and conflict in the mainstream are 
all themes with which immigrant students can identify. Athanases, 
Christiano, and Drexler 's article contains a number of lovely poetic pieces 
produced by students who, without a course like "Interlinks," would 
very likely have dropped out of school. Writing enhances writing! In- 
deed, besides helping them write their own poetry, exposure to poets 

helped make students' later work on autobiographical essays and 
college application essays richer and more genuine than the more 
predictable fare we have all received for such assignments. The 
emphasis on elaboration with concrete detail also served the stu- 
dents well in later writing. (53) 

In "Developing Student Voices with Multicultural Literature," 
Linda Blair (1991) notes that today's classes contain an increasing num- 
ber of language minority students. The challenge, she tells us, is to find 
material appropriate both to these students and to native speakers of 
English. Thus, drawing from Christopher Sten's model course on the 
immigrant experience, Blair has students read autobiographical narra- 
tives in a unit called "Voices in American Literature." Centered on the 
themes of alienation, assimilation, and acculturation, the unit includes 
works like Rudolfo Anaya's Bless Me, Ultima, Willa Cather's My Antonia, 
Maxine Hong Kingston's Woman Warrior, Richard Rodriguez's Hunger 
of Memory, Ole Rolvaag's Giants in the Earth, John Edgar Wideman's Broth- 
ers and Keepers, and Richard Wright's Black Boy (24). 

Using these multiethnic works as models, students create their 
own "strong honest voices" through narratives based on their own 
experiences. Integrating their writing with literature, small-group dis- 
cussion, presentations, and panels, students achieve real success with 
their projects. Blair writes, "I ask students to write about what they know 
best — themselves — using models of writing which underscore the 'pub- 
lic 7 voices which speak 'private' thoughts" (25). Using multicultural lit- 



2ii 



206 



Crossing the Mainstream 



erature as a writing prompt thus becomes a valuable strategy for im- 
proving students' composing skills. 

Greenberg (1982) also mentions the successful use of small groups. 
In discussing dialect differences between students in her college fresh- 
man composition class, she notes that small groups can make "optimal 
use of heterogeneity ... to create opportunities 77 for students to benefit 
from each other 7 s strengths. This technique, she reports, fosters "lan- 
guage experimentation 7 ' by allowing students to interact with each other 
using "mutually acceptable forms in speaking and writing." Helping 
each other "extend the range of their . . . discourse . . . they provide each 
other with immediate feedback about the ways in which their errors 
impede the reader's understanding of their meanings" (106-7). 

Kaleidoscope 

Students of color on white campuses need reinforcement and recogni- 
tion. One of the most successful projects I have witnessed is Kaleido- 
scope, a multicultural magazine sponsored by Dr. Judy Kilborn, director 
of The Write Place at St. Cloud State University in Minnesota. I am proud 
to have been associated with this magazine, both as one of its original 
reviewers and as a moral supporter. 

A collection of student poetry, short stories, essays, artwork, and 
photography Kaleidoscope celebrates the multicultural experiences of 
African American, Native American, Latino, French, Japanese, Pakistani, 
Chinese, Indonesian, Palestinian, and South Korean students struggling 
in an almost totally "Anglo 77 world. Judy Kilborn encouraged students 
from all over the campus to participate, enlisted the help of many of her 
tutors in The Write Place for editing, typing, and other chores, and se- 
cured grant money from the university's Diversity Fund to produce the 
publication. 

The results of her efforts are impressive. This excellent literary 
magazine has become an annual publication and has an increasingly 
enthusiastic audience. When I last spoke to Judy, she was arranging the 
magazine's annual awards reception for exceptional work. Through her 
planning and some great writing, many students of color have crossed 
into the mainstream of campus life. 

Challenging Painful Memories: Writings from Victims of 
Abuse 

Reader response, journaling, free association, and other writing-to-learn 
techniques allow us to know our students better as they continue to 



212 



Composition Pedagogy in a Multicultural Setting 



207 



improve their composing skills. Indeed, when people write in a safe 
environment, they often use this medium to work through personal 
problems. Although a discussion of the therapeutic qualities of com- 
posing would be beyond the scope of this chapter, I would like to at 
least touch on a few examples of what is possible for students who, for 
some painful reason, feel like they are on the margins of their groups. 

One nontraditional student — she was over thirty years of age — 
challenged my interpretation of Sylvia Plath's haunting poem ''Daddy/' 
For this student, the poem was about child abuse. "Not exactly/ 7 1 cor- 
rected her, as if only I knew the right answer. She insisted, telling me 
that she had been an abused child and the "boot in the f ace" and smoth- 
ering images of the poem represented her own horrible childhood. Her 
understanding was different from mine, not incorrect. She told me later 
that reading the poem had had a lasting and positive effect on her, that 
while it had brought back a lot of unpleasant memories, having to write 
about it had helped her acknowledge some hidden feelings about her 
father, feelings she had carried around since her youth. 

Another student wrote a compelling piece about the physical 
abuse she had received from her husband. After a lot of encouragement 
from me and the entire class, she revised the essay, and it is now part of 
the literature available at a local womer/s shelter. 

One student told me through his writing that he had been mo- 
lested as a child and that, after many years, he had told his mother, who 
in turn told his father. He was ignored by both. After a lot of discussion, 
I convinced him that he needed more counseling support. He finally 
agreed to go. 

One young woman in my class struggled with a persuasive piece 
about day camp, counseling, and child abuse. A usually straightforward, 
no-nonsense kind of writer, Cherry had unusual difficulty with this piece. 
After several more revisions than T would ordinarily recommend, she 
worked through her composing troubles, which turned out really to be 
the problem she was having coming to grips with what she was writing 
about: her experiences with a sexually abusive parent who ran a scout 
camp. Her final essay was a masterpiece. But what Cherry gained from 
writing it was even more important. 

After a discussion on child abuse and the use of related multiethnic 
literature in classrooms, one teacher of Scandinavian heritage whom I 
would consider mainstream in every way told me that she had always 
felt marginalized, that she did not "fit in." She presented me with a 
moving poem about childhood abuse, which, she said, "might give com- 
fort to someone else who has gone through similar experiences." I have 



213 



208 



Crossing the Mainstream 



shared this poem with two subsequent students — one male, one female. 
They have both been impacted by it. Although I cannot thank its author 
publicly, she should know how important her words have been to at 
least two others. 

In 1974, the Conference on College Composition and Communi- 
cation passed a policy resolution called 'The Students' Right to Their 
Own Language/' In challenging English teachers to carry on the "un- 
finished business of the resolution," Geneva Smitherman-Donaldson 
(1987) reminds us that we must 

reinforce the need for and teaching of the language of wider com- 
munication . . . and reinforce and reaffirm the legitimacy of 
nonmainstream languages and dialects and promote mother 
tongue instruction as co-equal language of instruction along with 
the language of wider communication. 

If English /language arts educators are interested in the retention 
and success of minority students, then they must be committed to pro- 
viding adequate preparation and strong, effective composition instruc- 
tion at all levels. If writing instruction is, indeed, the gatekeeper of in- 
equality preventing students' access to academic and lifelong success, 
then it is incumbent upon us to open the gate and let everyone in. 



214 



209 



14 Interdisciplinary 
Connections in 
Teaching 

Multicultural Literature 

Years ago, while teaching American literature, I asked the mem- 
bers of our history department if they wanted to join forces. Most 
of the teachers weren't interested. One was, though, and we devel- 
oped a cooperative program for readings, papers, and debates. The pro- 
gram, while not exactly a team course (the two classes were offered at 
different times), was a successful joint effort between two departments 
and two disciplines. It was also an opportunity to bring nonaction into 
the English classroom. 

Today, this team approach is old hat. But it's a smart-looking old 
hat nonetheless. I still like the concept, as do many other educators. I 
have visited many institutions that have incorporated this interdiscipli- 
nary approach into the curricular mainstream. The English-history con- 
nection is particularly popular because the two areas are easily related, 
but literature also is complemented by — and complements — the study 
of art, music, science, philosophy, politics, and other disciplines. If we 
want to understand the Romantic poets, then perhaps we should listen 
to the Romantic composers. If we want to learn more about modern 
novels, then perhaps we should look at the philosophy or art or politi- 
cal climate of the first half of the twentieth century. 

Interdisciplinary approaches to learning are also popular with 
students, and many successful programs have been developed over the 
years using this approach. While supervising in Texas, I observed stu- 
dent teachers who were involved in an environmental unit that took the 
form of a three-day camping trip. In preparation for this activity, stu- 
dents read Thoreau's VJalden. During the trip, they kept journals, con- 
ducted research on ecological issues for science, and learned about the 
historical significance of the national forest they were in. Those taking 
art classes had an art project to complete, while music students were to 
develop instruments and provide accompaniment for various activities. 
The physical education people had a number of options from which stu- 



215 



210 



Crossing the Mainstream 



dents could choose to fulfill their requirements. Both the preservice teach- 
ers and their students came away from this experience feeling connected 
to surroundings that had previously seemed irrelevant to their lives. 

So, if interdisciplinary programs have been so successful, why 
can't we expand this idea to include intercultural connections as well? 
Not only are there connections among disciplines, but also among groups 
and peoples and cultures. My purpose in this last chapter, then, is to 
develop a multicultural approach to interdisciplinary learning. As in 
the "writing across the curriculum'' movement that is now well en- 
sconced in campuses nationwide, we must work with our colleagues in 
other disciplines to pluralize curricula to provide a more realistic ap- 
proach to our view of the world. Literature should not be taught in a 
vacuum. Linking multiethnic literature, both fiction and nonfiction, to 
other disciplines validates the contributions of diverse groups and gives 
students a better picture of what the world is really like. 

Bringing in the Community's Culture 

In October 1992, 1 attended the inauguration of my friend Dr. Josephine 
Dunbar Davis as the third president of York College in Jamaica, New 
York. As part of the celebration, President Davis participated in an 
enstoolment, a West African ceremony signifying the selection of an 
important leader. The festivities were attended by a number of people 
from the community who look to York College and its president as shin- 
ing lights in an otherwise oppressive environment. I asked Dr. Davis 
about the enstoolment, and she responded by telling me that the cer- 
emony was part of the culture of a number of people in the South Queens 
area who probably never would have had the opportunity to view it for 
themselves. She wanted to bring it to them. The enstoolment was an 
extravaganza, as anyone who knows Josephine would expect. There were 
elders leading the procession of dignitaries, ceremonial prayers, exquisite 
African robes, and music and drum orchestras the likes of which I had 
never heard before. 

But my favorite part was the participation of local students. The 
vriolin club from Lyndon B. Johnson P.S. 223Q performed. So did the 
gospel choir. Next came P.S. 123's Dance Presentation Project with "I 
Am Somebody/ 7 The students of Huntington Prep RS. 40, Youth of the 
African Diaspora, did "A Recitation and Tribute." The Martin Players 
of August Martin High School followed with a dramatic presentation. 
Next the Devore Dancers performed. All told, the entertainment ranged 
from African drum ensembles and African dancing to theatrical pieces 



216 



Interdisciplinary Connections 



211 



and lip-sync routines. Young children and adolescents from all over 
South Queens gathered to share their exceptional talents on this excit- 
ing day. 

Countless opportunities like this one exist for making the culture 
or cultures of a particular community the focus of an interdisciplinary 
unit. For example, I recently participated in a workshop at an Ojibway 
reservation in the Midwest. Our task was to come up with an interdisci- 
plinary curriculum that would both appeal to and motivate the reserva- 
tion school's students while covering a number of academic subjects. 
Since ricing is an important activity for the Ojibway people of this re- 
gion — economically, socially, and aesthetically — our group decided to 
use it as the centerpiece of our unit. Employing an interdisciplinary 
model and a few tribal council publications (see Thomas Vennum, Jr/s 
Wild Rice and the Ojibway People, St. Paul, MN: Historical Society Press, 
1988), we came up with the following study plan: 

Ricing: An Interdisciplinary Approach 

English: read Gerald Vizenor's "Ricing Again"; tell a favorite story 
or create a poem about a ricing experience; dramatize an experi- 
ence; describe the meaning of ricing in family lore or personal 
experience 

Ojibway language: select terms/vocabulary for ricing (gather from 
the class, books, or someone on the reservation); learn or create a 
written or oral story or song in Ojibway 

Science: study the effects of pollution on ricing or the relationship 
between water levels and ricing conditions 

Social science: describe the social scene of the harvest; explain the 
laws of the ricing industry and their effect on local bands 

Math: study the economic benefits of ricing for traders and har- 
vesters; evaluate exchange rates for rice and rum; answer ques- 
tions such as how did the credit system work? what percent of 
income came from wild rice? what percent of the work cycle did 
wild rice account for? 

Music: gather some of the songs and music of ricing season and 
perform them 

Art: collect photos or illustrations created for the season; create 
personal sketches, paintings, and the like 

Physical education: re-cTeate a "ricing" sport and play it; create one 
of your own and play it 

Curricula like this creatively showcase the culture and talents of our 
students and help them realize the valuable contributions that they can 
make. 



217 



212 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Teaching Literature through Music 

As part of a final seminar project, two of my students, Melissa Dunkel 
and Annette Wells, presented our class with an array of music written 
as an extension of classical literature (which they recorded for those of 
us who brought blank tapes). Their selections ran the gamut from clas- 
sical music to multiethnic pieces to contemporary songs. Of course, there 
were the more obvious selections, such as Felix Mendelssohn's "You 
Spotted Snakes" from A Midsummer Night's Dream. But they also included 
selections like "Brave Ulysses" from Disraeli Gears by Cream (The Odys- 
sey), "Rock Steady" from Nothing Like the Sun by Sting (the Bible/Noah), 
"Calypso" by Suzanne Vega (The Odyssey again), and a host of others. 
What impressed me most was the variety of multiethnic music they pro- 
vided. A partial list of their selections follows: 

African American: "Bourgeois Blues" by Ledbelly (Huddie 
Ledbetter), an African American blues and folk singer of the 1 920b 
and 1930s. This song deals with the racism African Americans 
face. "I Don't Dig You Jack" by Blue Lou Barker, from Mean Moth- 
ers. Barker talks about the Jack who takes her body and her money 
She tells him to leave. Alice Walker says, "When I started work- 
ing on The Color Purple, I was listening to a lot of Bessie Smith, 
Ma Rainey, and the women on the Mean Mothers album. I loved 
the way they dealt with sexuality, with relationships with men" 
(quoted in Samuel G. Freedman, "Black Writers and Black Mu- 
sic," New York Times, 14 October 1984). Also "Murder's Home" 
and 'Tangle Eye Blues," both prison songs recorded in the 1980s 
at the Mississippi State Penitentiary. Melissa and Annette also 
included a number of jazz selections, the only indigenous Ameri- 
can art form in music— and one created by African Americans. 
All three of the following selections come from the 1960s, when 
African American jazz artists were using their music as an ex- 
pression of art and as a symbol of the then-rising Black National- 
istic (or "Black Power") Movement: "Flamenco Sketches" by the 
Miles Davis Sextet "Solar" by Bill Evans, and "The Promise" by 
the John Coltrane Quartet. 

Greek: "Mistokrasi mou" ("In My Wine"), from Bouzoukee: The 
Music of Greece. Bouzoukee music is about old folk themes and 
became popular after World War II. This is a dance that origi- 
nated as an ancient ritual honoring the moon goddess and Mother 
Earth. The woman dances for the man, illustrating her charms 
with slow movements, while the man dances quickly and awk- 
wardly. "Nisiotikos Choros" ("Island Dance"), from Syrtos. Based 
on an ancient inscription from about the time of Caligula (37-41 
A.D.) found in a temple dedicated to Apollo. 

Indian: "Kafi-Holi" ("Spring Festival of Colors"). Sophisticated 
rhythms. Ravi Shankar, sitar. 



2 IS 



Interdisciplinary Connections 



213 



Japanese: "Ecliigojishi/' from Koto Music of Japan. An eighteenth- 
century folk song based on the ancient Lion Dance performed in 
the festivals of Echigo in the eastern part of Japan. "Shin- 
Takasago," also from Koto Music of Japan. A nineteenth-century 
song based on Takasago, a famous Noh drama. (Takasago is a sea- 
side town near Kobe that is frequently cited in Japanese litera- 
ture for its scenic beauty. Takasago describes happiness and joy.) 

Jewish American: "Jewish Dance" by the Andy Statman Klezmer 
Orchestra. Klezmer music is the product of Jews who migrated 
before and around the time of World War n. The music is both 
happy and mournful and is used for dancing at marriages and 
other celebrations. 

Latino: 'linku/' a love song from Bolivia. "Vientos del Pueblo" 
("Winds of the People") by Inti-Illimani of Chile. 

Native American: "Smoke Song" and "Stop Song/' a war dance 
recorded in 1972 by Nez Perce Native Americans Oscar 
Broncheau, Cyrus Red Elk, and Jim Morris, three drummers re- 
maining from a group of over two dozen in the mid-1 920s. 

South African: "Buya Uz'ekhya" by Ladysmith Black Mambazo, a 
South African a cappella group. 

West African: "Hunter's Dance," from the album Musique d'Afrique 
Occidentale. Composer, performer, and recording date unknown. 

Melissa and Annette offered even more music to encourage dis- 
cussion in the classroom: Sting's "They Dance Alone/' a song about po- 
litical prisoners recorded during his Amnesty Tour of 1986; Tracy 
Chapman's "'Why?" a statement on love, hate, and hunger; Stevie 
Wonder's ''Black Man' 7 ; Bob Marley's "War" and "Redemption Song." 
And at the end of their presentation, Annette and Melissa expressed the 
same thought that many educators have when they make decisions about 
curriculum and materials: 'There's so much more/' Thus the now fa- 
miliar caveat: this is just a beginning. 

Diverse Curricula and Materials for General Education 
Courses 

In a recent conversation with Richard Law, director of the general edu- 
cation program at Washington State University, I learned of the Asso- 
ciation of American Colleges Engaging Cultural Legacies Project. Wash- 
ington State University is one of eleven "resource" or mentor institu- 
tions for this project. So, a few years ago, WSU began an initiative to 
revise its general education program. What Dr. Law and his associates 
initially discovered was "an obvious Western bias" in the courses stu- 
dents were required to take. 'This tradition," Dick told me, "was in direct 



219 



214 



Crossing tlie Mainstream 



conflict with the group's identified efforts to internationalize curricu- 
lum/' (Remembering the required "History of Western Civilization" from 
my own undergraduate days, I concurred.) 

Dick told me, 'It became clear to us that we needed to counteract 
this well-established concept in our liberal arts education. We wanted 
students to learn that much of the development of world civilization is 
non-Western — and that was not the impression they were getting given 
the information they were receiving in their classes" Thus, a ''World 
Civilizations" course was developed by twenty professors from history, 
literature, philosophy, anthropology, and foreign languages. The course 
traced "the emergence of an interdependent world community 7 ' and was 
"global, comparative, [and] interdisciplinary in content and methodol- 
ogy" (Washington Center Newsletter 1992). All students are now required 
to take this course. 

The result of these changes is that Washington State University's 
"humanities core curriculum and integrated general education program 
embodies many of the best components of new core programs nation- 
ally" (Washington Center Newsletter 1992). What is even more remark- 
able, though, is that World Civilizations is linked to the English 
department's entry-level composition course, English 101, through the 
development of a curriculum "designed to further students' cultural 
literacy, foster a global perspective, and develop a sense of enduring 
issues in civilization and culture" ( Washington Center Newsletter 1992). 

Anchoring this curriculum is Writing about the World, a text pre- 
pared by Susan McLeod and some of her graduate students for use by 
all English 101 instructors at WSU. Describing this volume, Dr. McLeod 
points out in her introduction that 

we set out to find readings that . . . help students learn academic 
reading and writing strategies, but that also raised issues of cul- 
tural diversity and of gender. Our work is, therefore, in line with 
the resolution passed at the 1989 Conference on College Compo- 
sition and Communication: "Resolved, that CCCC adopt a cur- 
riculum policy that represents the inclusion of women and people 
of color in the curriculum on all levels." (iii) 

The text is divided into four sections, "organized according to some of 
the ways cultures organize themselves": Science and Technology, Gov- 
ernment and Politics, Art and Literature, and Religion and Philosophy 
Selections come from around the world. Students thus have the oppor- 
tunity to explore the complexity and diversity of many world views. 

Indeed, Writing about the World takes a look at some challenging 
multicultural perspectives. In a review of current multicultural texts for 



* 220 



Interdisciplinary Connections 



215 



composition classes, Shapiro (1991) points out that mosi are developed 
for one of two different audiences: mainstream students or marginalized 
students. She cites Writing about the World as a text for students "already 
able to handle college-level work/ 7 1 agree. The challenging selections 
in this work are definitely designed for students academically prepared 
for the university (although Sue McLeod tells me that a number of com- 
munity colleges have begun to use this text in their composition courses). 

Nonetheless, Writing about the World is only one of a growing num- 
ber of multicultural texts that could be used in interdisciplinary compo- 
sition or general education courses. What follows is an incomplete list- 
ing of some of the excellent materials now available. 

Another volume that Shapiro reviews is Marilyn Smith Layton's 
Intercultural Journeys through Reading and Writing. She describes its se- 
lections as geared toward mainstream students who have had little in- 
teraction with diversity. In her preface, Layton emphasizes that "stu- 
dents, like teachers, can't know who they are or what they might be- 
come . . . unless they encounter ideas and truths that help them to see 
themselves in an expanding world/ 7 She has thus made her selections 
to represent "the full range of voices in an intercultural conversation 77 
(xix). The selections include essays, short fiction, and plays arranged in 
sections that center around "The Challenges of Intercultural Experience 77 
and American cultural values, particularly as defined in work, love, fam- 
ily, and self. Each is well worth inclusion. 

Shapiro also cites Barbara Roche Rico and Sandra Mano 7 s Ameri- 
can Mosaic: Multicultural Readings in Context, which focuses on seven 
ethnic groups and gives a variety of selections to illustrate the inherent 
multiculturalism of the United States. I have used American Mosaic and 
can personally attest to its success in the classroom. Starting with a sec- 
tion on early immigrants, Rico and Mano divide their work into sec- 
tions on Chinese immigrants, the African American migration north, 
the Harlem Renaissance and the civil rights struggles of this century, 
the history of Puerto Rico and its relationship with the United States, 
the Japanese American internment experience, the economic and cul- 
tural boundaries of Mexican Americans, and the pride and cultural heri- 
tage of Native Americans. I was surprised to see how much of this in- 
formation was new to — or had been forgotten by — so many of my stu- 
dents. They certainly gained a much better understanding of what it 
means to be out of the mainstream. One caveat, though: instructors mu*t 
understand that American Mosaic is a multiethnic work and should be 
studied in its entirety; it should not be compartmentalized. 



221 



Crossing the Mainstream 



If put to good use, American Mosaic can be a rich resource for stu- 
dents beginning to conduct research on their own. For instance, a few 
years ago, a controversy over Native American spearfishing erupted 
while I was teaching a class using this text. Many class members were 
fishers and had, in my opinion, great misconceptions about the hunting 
and fishing rights of Chippewa people in northern Wisconsin. Since I 
knew very little about the issue, I attended a lecture where PatSheppo 
of the Lac du Flambeau Reservation spoke. In her talk, she outlined an 
agreement — rediscovered by researching students — between the Lac du 
Flambeau Chippewa (or Anishinabe or Ojibway) and the government 
of the United States (Doyle 1990). Two students who were very inter- 
ested in the issue secured more information from her, interviewed sev- 
eral more people, conducted research on their own, and produced an 
excellent paper on the spearfishing controversy 

American Mosaic precipitated a number of other interesting re- 
search efforts as well, including work on the Chinese Exclusion Act and 
the history of Chinese Americans, research into Columbus's annihila- 
tion of the Arawak Indians, a survey of immigrants from Eastern Eu- 
rope from the turn of the century to the forties, and a look at the Japa- 
nese American experience from the Issei days to the present. All this in 
a composition course! In course evaluations, students remarked over 
and over that they were glad that we took on these topics. They ? aid 
that they now had a much better idea of what "equality" does or does 
not mean for many of our citizens. 

Another good text is Sheena Gillespie and Robert Singleton's 
Across Cultures: A Reader for Writers. Shapiro notes that this text is geared 
toward ESL readers, as it connects students from different backgrounds 
through readily accessible readings. Several of my colleagues also rec- 
ommend it for beginning writers. Intended, as Shapiro indicates, for a 
multiethnic student body, the texf s "Preface for the Student" notes: 

When you look around your classes and your campus, you prob- 
ably see a student body diverse in its many countries, classes, 
and ages. When this inclusive group says, or sings, "We are the 
world," they are right. This is the world of Across Cultures, (xxii) 

Across Cultures contains a wonderful variety of myths, folktales, 
essays, and short stories. The selections are short, interesting, and good 
sources for both class discussion and writing ideas. The section on edu- 
cation, for example, highlights such diverse pieces as a "Hopi Tale" by 
Spider Grandmother and Masauwu, Rendon's "Kiss of Deatt ," Noiman 
Cousins's "Confessions of a Miseducated Man," Paule Marshall's "Po- 
ets in the Kitchen," Richard Wright's "Discovering Books/ 7 Toni Cade 



Interdisciplinary Connections 



217 



Bambara's "The Lesson/ 7 and Gary Soto's "Summer School/ 7 And to 
spur further ideas, each chapter begins with brief, provocative quota- 
tions from international figures. 

Janet Madden-Simpson and Sara M. Blake's Emerging Voices: A 
Cross-Cultural Reader is also described by Shapiro as a text intended pri- 
marily for ESL students and students /7 not immediately prepared to 
handle college work/ 7 According to Madden-Simpson and Blake: 

Grounded in reader-response theory . . . Emerging Voices seeks to 
involve all readers in a dialectic, not only with the selections, but 
also with issues arising from the experience of living in a cultur- 
ally diverse nation This book focuses on immigrant, ethnic, 

and minority experiences in the United States ... to foster an 
awareness of the diverse forces at work in our society, and . . . to 
create a sensitivity to the experiences of all Americans, (v) 

This text, with its large concentration of narrative pieces, is a wonderful 
collection of voices from a variety of cultures in American life. Selec- 
tions include Gloria Naylor 7 s "The Myth of the Matriarch, 77 Vo Thi Tarn's 
7 Trom Vietnam, 1979/' Jack Agueros 7 s 77 Halfway to Dick and Jane: A 
Puerto Rican Pilgrimage/ 7 Maxine Hong Kingston's "Reparation Candy," 
and many, many others. 

Crosscurrents: Themes for Developing Writers, another collection by 
Madden and Blake, uses much the same approach as Emerging Voices, 
but, as the title indicates, targets "developing writers." Using classroom- 
tested materials designed for the developmental writer, Madden and 
Blake arrange pieces thematically and order them from inner-directed 
topics to outer-directed topics. Readings are drawn from popular cul- 
ture and from ethnically diverse writers. 

Anna Joy's We Are America introduces beginning writers to the 
writing process and reading skills using ethnically diverse points of view. 
The text begins with "An Overview of the Writing Process." Part two, 
"A Cross-Cultural Reader," includes a number of excellent readings, 
complete with questions and writing suggestions. Part three concludes 
with "Revising Sentences: A Writing Skills Workbook/' 

Carol J. Verburg's Ourselves among Others: Cross-Cultural Readings 
for Writers is another international treatment, once again with excellent 
selections. The selections here are perhaps more sophisticated, though, 
geared for good readers. There is minimal apparatus at the end of each 
reading. 

Henry and Myrna Knepler's Crossing Cultures: Readings for Com- 
position is another publication geared for college freshmen. The read- 
ings, again, are excellent, a little shorter than the offerings described 



223 



218 



Crossing the Mainstream 



above and less difficult. Moving from "intra- American issues" to more 
global subjects, the text deals with identities, encounters, and customs 
in a new world. 

I end this list of intercultural texts with Gary Colombo, Robert 
Cullen, and Bonnie Lisle' s Rereading America: Cultural Contexts for Criti- 
cal Thinking and Writing because I have used it myself several times and 
love it. A collection of pieces from a variety of American writers, selec- 
tions range from government documents to poetry. Beginning with the 
topic "American Dreams," the text calls upon authors such as Thomas 
Jefferson, Crevecoeur, Langston Hughes, and Louise Erdrich. There are 
poignant pieces like Tran Thi Nga's "Letter to My Mother," pieces on 
the changing family, including some written by members of the gay 
and lesbian community, and pieces on the theme of work, with selec- 
tions from Erich Fromm and Arlie Russell Hochschild. Indeed, there are 
some tough essays here, both in terms of content and level of difficulty. 

It is frustrating to mention only these few books, but it is clearly 
impossible to include them all. As I've said several times throughout 
this book, there's been an explosion of multicultural materials on the 
market, and professors and teachers have only to ask any major pub- 
lisher for information about a number of worthwhile texts. 

If literature mirrors life, then the choices we make for our stu- 
dents must be consonant with the reality of their environment. We must 
actively engage in seeking out the best materials we can so that stu- 
dents will be exposed to a true view of our global community. It is no 
longer enough to seek materials for our own classes. We need to reach 
across our campuses and enlist the help of others in the pursuit of a 
truly pluralistic society. 



224 



Thank You, Mrs. Coleman, 
Wherever You Are 



here once was a little boy; we'll call him Bennie. He was African 



American, the middle child of seventeen, and his prospects for an 



I exceptional future — according to statistics — were very slim. But 
Bennie was ambitious and bright, and he did very well in school, finish- 
ing his studies with a doctoral degree from Stanford University. He is 
presently dean of the college of education at a major research institution 
on the West Coast. 

It must have been very difficult for Bennie to find the motivation 
and to receive the kind of incentives one needs to succeed educationally 
and to rise professionally to such a high administrative level. I once 
asked Bennie if he could identify the motivational forces in his educa- 
tional past that gave him the wherewithal to get as far as he had. He 
told me this: 

Of course, I was lucky that my parents supported education and 
were very strict with all of us about doing our homework, keep- 
ing up our grades, and the like. But both my mother and father 
worked long hours, and when they were home they had their 
hands full just handling dinners, rides to and from sports and 
other school activities, and so on. They didn't have much time to 
read to us or to take us to the library and do all those things we 
know facilitate children's academic skills. 

But Mrs. Coleman, my fourth-grade teacher, recognized that 
the little black kid sitting in the back row loved to read. So she 
asked my parents, and they agreed, to let her take me to the li- 
brary after school. Each Wednesday I'd check out a pile of books, 
read them all week, and return them and get another pile for the 
next week. It was a wonderful opportunity. From that experience, 
I developed the hobby of reading, which, as every student knows, 
becomes his or her greatest asset later on. 

In high school, looking for role models and the chance to iden- 
tify in an academic world, I was lucky again. Ms. Baher, my En- 
glish teacher, introduced me to some of the great black writers of 
the twentieth century — Richard Wright, Ralph Ellison, James 
Baldwin — and I began to see the great talents of people just like 
me. These impressions had a significant influence on my devel- 
opment as a young African American in an academic world. 

In discussing his youth, Bennie also told me about a lot of un- 
pleasant experiences he endured as a result of racism, such as the time 




225 



220 



Crossing the Mainstream 



someone spit in his face and called him "nigger." Although well liked at 
school, he was seldom invited to any of his friends' homes. His high 
school counselor told him that since he was such a good student, he 
could become a fireman. He also told me about working after his sports 
activities so that he could earn extra money and about how little time 
there was for studying. But somehow he made it through all of the nega- 
tives, and he credits the nurturing of his teachers in large part. 

All of us face circumstances that make it difficult to meet the needs 
of our students. Our classes are overcrowded. We have too many cur- 
ricular restrictions. We have too much material to cover. Our students 
are mainstream and don't see the significance of multicultural litera- 
ture. Or, they are from diverse groups and aren't interested in the litera- 
ture that we choose for them. We have tenure pressures. We don't have 
adequate time to meet with students or to prepare our lessons. 

But whatever the reason for our frustrations, whatever the cause 
for our despair, we must not forget about the influence that we have on 
our students. We must take advantage of this influence and use it in a 
positive way. Perhaps Bennie would have made it without Mrs. Coleman 
and Ms. Baher, but you'll never convince Bennie of that. Let us seek out 
the Bennies in our classrooms and provide them with the kind of expe- 
riences they can use to build successes. Let us remember how much 
influence we have on our students. We cannot perform miracles, but — 
given the expertise and the commitment — we can make a difference. 



References 



Allen, Paula Gunn. 'The Sacred Hoop: A Contemporary Indian Perspective 
on American Indian Literature/' In Literature of the American Indians: 
Views and Interpretations, edited by Abraham Chapman, 111-36. New 
York: New American Library, 1975. 

American Alliance for Theatre and Education and the Association for Theatre 
and Disability. 'Theatre: The Art of Inclusion." Conference, Seattle, 6- 
9 August 1992. 

Anaya, Rudolfo. 'The Censorship of Neglect." English journal 81 (September 
1992): 18-20. 

Anderson, James A. "Cognitive Styles and Multicultural Populations." 
Journal of Teacher Education 39 (January /February 1988): 2-9. 

Angelou, Maya. I Know Why the Caged Bird Sings. New York: Random House, 
1969. 

. "An Evening with Maya Angelou." St. Cloud State University, St. 

Cloud, MN, 4 February 1990. 

Anzaldua, Gloria. "How to Tame a Wild Tongue." In Borderlands: The New 
Mestiza. San Francisco: Aunt Lute Books, 1987. 

Applebee, Arthur N. Tradition and Reform in the Teaching of English: A History. 
Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 1974. 

. A Study of Book-length Works Taught in High School English Courses. 

Albany, NY: Center for the Study of Teaching and Learning of Litera- 
ture, 1989. 

. "Stability and Change in the High School Canon." English Journal 81 

(September 1992): 27-32. 

Applebee, Arthur N., Judith A. Langer, and Ina V. S. Mullis. Understanding 
Direct Writing Assessment: Reflections on a South Carolina Writing Study. 
Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service, 1989. 

Applegate, Jimmie R., and Michael L. Henniger. "Recruiting Minority 

Students: A Priority for the '90s." Thought and Action 5 (Spring 1989): 
53-60. 

Asante, Molefi. The Afrocentric Idea. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 
1987. 

Athanases, Steven Z., David Christiano, and Susan Drexler. "Family Gumbo: 
Urban Students Respond to Contemporary Poets of Color." English 
Journal 81 (September 1992): 45-54. 

Atwell, Nancie. In the Middle: Writing, Readiitg, and Learning with Adolescents. 
Upper Montclair, NJ: Boynton/Cook, 1987. 



227 



222 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Baldwin, James. "Sonny's Blues/' 1965. In The Norton Introduction to Litera- 
ture, 4th ed., edited by Carl E. Bain, Jerome Beaiy, and J. Paul Hunter, 
266-300. New York: Norton, 1986. 

Ballinger, Franchot. "Ambigere: The Euro-American Picaro and the Native 
American Trickster." MELUS 17 (Winter 1991-92): 21-38. 

Banks, James A. "Approaches to Multicultural Curriculum Reform." 
Multicultural Leader 1 (Spring 1988): 1-2. 

. "Multicultural Education: Characteristics and Goals." In 

Multicultural Education: Issues and Perspectives, edited by James A. 
Banks and Cherry A. McGee Banks, 2-26. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 
1989. 

. 'Teaching Minority and Ethnic Culture." Fifth Annual Conference of 

the Society for the Study of Multi-Ethnic Literature of the United 
States (MELUS), University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, 13 April 1991. 

Barker, Andrew P. "A Gradual Approach to Feminism in the American- 
Literature Classroom." English Journal 78 (October 1989): 39-44. 

Beach, Richard, and James Marshall. Teaching Literature in the Secondary 
School. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1991. 

Bedrosian, Margaret. "Multi-Ethnic Literature: Mining the Diversity." Journal 
of Ethnic Studies 15 (Fall 1987): 125-34. 

Bennett, Christine I. Comprehensive Multicultural Education: Theory and Prac- 
tice. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1986. 

. Comprehensive Multicultural Education: Theory and Practice. 2d ed. 

Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1990. 

Betances, Samuel. "Multicultural Education." Speech given at St. Cloud State 
University, St. Cloud, MN, March 1989. 

Biklen, Douglas, and Robert Bogdan. "Media Portrayals of Disabled People: 
A Study in Stereotypes." Interracial Books for Children Bulletin (1977): 
4-9. 

Bischoff, Joan. "Fellow Rebels: Annie Dillard and Maxine Hong Kingston." 
English Journal 78 (December 1989): 62-67. 

Bjorklun, Eugene C. "School Book Censorship and the First Amendment." 
The Educational Forum 55 (Fall 1990): 37-48. 

Blair, Linda. "Developing Student Voices with Multicultural Literature." 
English Journal 80 (December 1991): 24-28. 

Blicksilver, Edith. The Ethnic American Woman: Problems, Protests, Lifestyle. 
Dubuque, IA: Kendall/Hunt, 1978. 

Bloom, Allan. The Closing of the American Mind: How Higher Education Has 
Failed Democracy and Impoverished the Souls of Today's Students. New 
York: Simon and Schuster, 1987. 

Buchanan, John H. "The Right to Read: School Book-banning Groups Con- 
tinue Censorship Crusade." Star Tribune: N^vspaper of the Twin Cities, 
24 September 1988. 



22S 



References 



223 



Cage, Mary Crystal "More Minority Programs Now Emphasizing Efforts to 
Keep Students Enrolled in College/' Chronicle of Higher Education, 12 
April 1989, A1,A4. 

Candelaria, Cordelia. ''Hidden Complacencies/' American Book Review 11 
(January /February 1990): 1, 13, 15. 

Carroll, Joyce Armstrong. "Minority Student Writers: From Scribblers to 
Scribes." English Journal 69 (November 1980): 15-18. 

Carver, Nancy Lynn. "Stereotypes of American Indians in Adolescent Litera- 
ture." English Journal 77 (September 1988): 25-32. 

Chan, Jeffery Paul, Frank Chin, Lawson Inada, and Shawn Wong. "An 
Introduction to Chinese- American and Japanese- American Litera- 
tures." In Three American Literatures: Essays in Chicano, Native American, 
and Asian-American Literature for Teachers of American Literature, edited 
by Houston A. Baker, Jr., 197-228* New York: Modern Language 
Association, 1982. 

, eds. The Big Aiiieeeee! An Anthology of Chinese American and Japanese 

American Literature. New York: Meridian, 199L 

Chapman, Abraham. "Introduction" In Literature of the American Indians: 
Views and Interpretations, edited by Abraham Chapman, 1-23. New 
York: New American Library, 1975. 

Chin, Frank. "Come All Ye Asian American Writers of the Real and the Fake." 
In The Big Aiiieeeee! An Anthology of Chinese American and Japanese 
American Literature, edited by Jeffery Paul Chan et al, 1-92. New York: 
Meridian, 1991. 

Chin, Frank, Jeffery Paul Chan, Lawson Inada, and Shawn Wong, eds. 

Aiiieeeee! An Anthology of Asian- American Writers. Washington, DC: 
Howard University Press, 1974. 

Christenbury, Leila, and Robert Small. "From the Editors." The ALAN Review 
18 (Winter 1991): 1. 

Christopher, Renny. "The Unheard: Vietnamese Voices in the Literature 
Curriculum." In Understanding Others: Cultural and Cross-Cultural 
Studies and the Teaching of Literature, edited by Joseph Trimmer and 
Tilly Warnock, 201-12. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of 
English, 1992. 

Cobb, Martha K. "From Oral to Written: Origins of a Black Literary Tradi- 
tion." In Tapping Potential: English and Language Arts for the Black 
Learner, edited by Charlotte K. Brooks, 250-59. Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English, 1985. 

Colombo, Gary, Robert Cullen, and Bonnie Lisle, eds. Rereading America: 
Cultural Contexts for Critical Thinking and Writing. New York: St. 
Martin's Press, 1989. 

Cook, William W. "The Afro-American Griot." In Tapping Potential: English 
and Language Arts for the Black Learner, edited by Charlotte K. Brooks, 
260-71. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 1985. 



229 



224 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Corson, Carolyn M. "YA Afro- American Fiction: An Update for Teachers." 
English Journal 76 (April 1987): 24-28. 

Coughlin, Ellen K. "Scholars Work to Refine Africa-Centered View of the Life 
and History of Black Americans." Chronicle of Higher Education, 28 
October 1987, A6-7, A12. 

Cox, Mitch. "Revising the Literature Curriculum for a Pluralist Society." 
English Journal 77 (October 1988): 30-34. 

Davis, Bonnie. "Feminizing the English Curriculum: An International 
Perspective." English Journal 78 (October 1989): 45-49. 

Davis, James E. "Dare a Teacher Disturb the Universe? Or Even Eat a Peach? 
Closet Censorship: Its Prevention an 2ure." The ALAN Review 14 
(1986): 66-69. 

Dean, Terry. "Multicultural Classrooms, Monocultural Teachers." College 
Composition and Communication 40 (February 1989): 23-37. 

Dorris, Michael. "For the Indians, No Thanksgiving." In Crossing Cultures: 
Readings for Composition, 3d ed., edited by Henry Knepler and Myrna 
Knepler, 199-202. New York: MacmiUan, 1990. Reprinted from the 
Chicago Tribune, November 1988. 

Douglass, Frederick. Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass, An American 

Slave, Written by Himself 1845. In Blackamerican Literature, 1760-Present, 
edited by Ruth Miller. Beverly Hills, CA: Glencoe Press, 1971. 

Doyle, Pat. "Term-Paper Research Spurred Treaty-Rights Battle." Star Tribune: 
Newspaper of the Twin Cities, 15 April 1990, Al, A6. 

D'Souza, Dinesh. "Illiberal Education." The Atlantic Monthly, March 1991, 
51-79. 

Duff, Ogle B., and Helen J. Tongchinsub. "Expanding the Secondary Litera- 
ture Curriculum: Annotated Bibliographies of American Indian, Asian 
American, and Hispanic American Literature." English Education 22 
(December 1990): 220-40. 

Edelman, Marian Wright. Address given at the Essence Awards, 29 May 1992. 

Elbow, Peter. What Is English? New York: Modern Language Association, 
1990. 

Ely, Robert. "The Philosophy of Teaching Composition through a Cross- 

Cultural Approach to Interdisciplinary Humanities." Paper presented 
at the Thirty-First Annual Meeting of the Conference on College 
Composition and Communication, Washington, DC, 13-15 March 
1980. ED185567. 

Epps, Janis. "Killing Them Softly: Why Willie Can't Write." In Tapping 
Potential: English and Language Arts for the Black Learner, edited by 
Charlotte K. Brooks, 154-58. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers 
of English, 1985. 

Farr, Marcia, and Harvey Daniels. Language Diversity and Writing Instruction. 
New York: ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education, 1986. ED274996. 



230 



References 



225 



Fields, Cheryl. "The Hispanic Pipeline: Narrow, Leaking, and Needing 
Repair." Change 20 (May /June 1988): 20-27. 

Foster, David. A Primer for Writing Teachers: Theories, Theorists, Issues, Prob- 
lems. Upper Montclair, NJ: Boynton/Cook, 1983. 

Fowler, Robert. "An Analysis of the Composing Processes of Three Black 
Adolescents/' Research report for the University of Pittsburgh, 1979. 
ED188207. 

. "The Composing Process of Black Student Writers." In Tapping 

Potential: English and Language Arts for the Black Learner, edited by 
Charlotte K. Brooks, 182-S6. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers 
of English, 1985. 

Frangedis, Helen. "Dealing with the Controversial Elements in The Catcher in 
the Rye." English Journal 77 (November 1988): 72-75. 

Frankson, Marie Stewart. "Chicano Literature for Young Adults: An Anno- 
tated Bibliography." English Journal 79 (January 1990): 30-38. 

Gallo, Donald R., chair, and the Committee on the Senior High School 

Booklist of the National Council of Teachers of English. Books for You: 
A Booklist for Senior High Students. 9th ed. Urbana, IL: National Council 
of Teachers of English, 1985. 

Garcia, Ricardo. "Overview of Chicano Folklore." English Journal 65 (Febru- 
ary 1976): 83-87. 

Garciagodoy, Juanita. 'The Wake-Up Call: An Introductory Essay/' In Braided 
Lives: An Anthology of Multicultural American Writing, 81-64. St. Paul: 
Minnesota Humanities Commission; Minnesota Council of Teachers of 
English, 1991. 

Gates, Henry Louis, Jr. The Signifying Monkey: A Theory of Afro-American 
Literary Criticism. New York: Oxford University Press, 1988. 

. 'The Master's Pieces: On Canon Formation and the Afro- American 

Tradition/' In Conversations: Contemporary Critical Theory and the 
Teaching of Literature, edited by Charles Moran and Elizabeth F. 
Penfield, 55-75. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 
1990. 

Gay, Geneva. Ethnic Minorities and Educational Equality/ 7 In Multicultural 
Education: Issues and Perspectives, edited by James A. Banks and Cherry 
A. McGee Banks, 167-88. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1989. 

Gilbert, Sandra M., and Susan Gubar, eds. The Norton Anthology of Literature 
by Women: The Tradition in English. New York: Norton, 1985. 

Gill, Glenda E. 'The African-American Student: At Risk." College Composition 
and Communication 43 (May 1992): 225-30. 

Gillespie, Sheena, and Robert Singleton, eds. Across Cultures: A Reader for 
Writers. Boston: Allyn and Bacon, 1991. 

Glancy, Diane. "The Fire Dragon and Sweat: An Introductory Essay." In 
Braided Lives: An Anthology of Multicultural American Writing, 13-15. 



231 



226 



Crossing the Mainstream 



St. Paul: Minnesota Humanities Commission; Minnesota Council of 
Teachers of English, 1991. 

Goldberg, Mark R "Portrait of Shirley Brice Heath." Educational Leadership 49 
(April 1992): 80-82. 

Gomez, Alma, Cherrie Moraga, and Mariana Romo-Carmona, eds. Cuentos: 
Stories by Latinas. New York Kitchen Table-Women of Color Press, 
1983. 

Greenberg, Karen L. "Dialect Differences in the Composition Class." In Non- 
native and Nonstandard Dialect Students, edited by Candy Carter, 106-7. 
Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 1982. 

Greene, Brenda M. "A Cross-Cultural Approach to Literacy: The Immigrant 
Experience/' English Journal 77 (September 1988): 45^*8. 

Guild, Pat Burke, and Stephen Garger. Marching to Different Drummers. 

Alexandria, VA: Association for Supervision and Curriculum Devel- 
opment, 1985. 

Haberman, Martin. Recruiting and Selecting Teachers for Urban Schools. New 
York: ERI Z Clearinghouse on Urban Education; Institute for Urban 
and Minority Education, 1987. ED292942. 

Harris, Muriel. Teaching One-to-One: The Writing Conference. Urbana, IL: 
National Council of Teachers of English, 1986. 

Henry, William III. "Beyond the Melting Pot." Time, 9 April 1990, 28-31. 

Hertzel, Leo J. "Review of Braided Lives" Minnesota English Journal 22 (Win- 
ter/Spring 1992): 1-12. 

Hill, Roberta. Panel discussion participant at the Native American Women's 
Institute, Augsburg College, Minneapolis, 26-28 October 1989. 

Hirsch, E. D., Jr. Cultural Literacy: What Every American Needs to Know. Boston: 
Houghton Mifflin, 1987. 

Hodges, HeLene. "I Know They Can Learn Because I've Taught Them." 
Educational Leadership 44 (1987): 3. 

Hoeveler, Diane Long. 'Text and Context: Teaching Native American Litera- 
ture." English Journal 77 (September 1988): 20-24. 

Hogan, Patrick Colm. "Mo' Better Canons: Whafs Wrong and What's Right 
about Mandatory Diversity." College English 54 (February 1992): 
182-92. 

hooks, bell. "Racism and Feminism." In Rereading America: Cultural Contexts 
for Critical Thinking and Writing, edited by Gary Colombo, Robert 
Cullen, and Bonnie Lisle, 303-11. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1989. 
Reprinted from Ain't la Woman? Black Women and Feminism (1981). 

Hughes, Langston. "Harlem (Dream Deferred)." 1951. In The Norton Introduc- 
tion to Literature, 4th ed., edited by Carl E. Bain, Jerome Beaty, and J. 
Paul Hunter. New York: Norton, 1986. 

Jackson, Jesse. "Why Blacks Need Affirmative Action." In Emerging Voices: A 
Cross-Cultural Reader, edited by Janet Madden-Simpson and Sara M. 



232 



References 



227 



Blake, 266-67. Fort Worth: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1990. Re- 
printed from Regulation, September/ October 1978. 

Jay, Gregory S. 'The End of 'American 7 Literature: Toward a Multicultural 
Practice/ , College English 53 (March 1991): 264-81. 

Johannessen, Larry. Illumination Rounds: Teaching the Literature of the Vietnam 
War Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 1992. 

Joy, Anna, ed. We Are America. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1989. 

Kiah, Rosalie Black. "The Black Teenager in Young Adult Novels by Award- 
winning Authors/' In Tapping Potential: English and Language Arts for 
the Black Learner, edited by Charlotte K. Brooks, 286-96. Urbana, IL: 
National Council of Teachers of English, 1985. 

Kilborn, Judith, ed. Kaleidoscope: St. Cloud State University's Multicultural 
Magazine. St. Cloud, MN: The Write Place, 1990+. 

Kim, Elaine H. Asian American Literature: An Introduction to the Writings and 
Their Social Context. Philadelphia: Temple University Press, 1982. 

. '"Such Opposite Creatures': Men and Women in Asian American 

Literature." Michigan Quarterly Review 29 (Winter 1990): 68-93. 

Kirkpatrick, Ken. "Recent African- American ScholarshiD." College English 52 
(November 1990): 812-21. 

Kissen, Rita M. "Multicultural Education: The Opening of the American 
Mind." English Education 21 (December 1989): 211-18. 

Knepler, Henry, and Myrna Knepler, eds. Crossing Cultures: Readings for 
Composition. 3d ed. New York: Macmillan, 1990. 

Kolb, David A. Learning Style Inventory. Boston: McBer and Company, 1986. 

Kondo, Dorinne, "M. Butterfly: Orientalism, Gender, and a Critique of 
Essentialist Identity." Cultural Critique 16 (1990): 5-29. 

Lake, Patricia. "Sexual Stereotyping and the English Curricuium." English 
Journal 77 (October 1988): 35-38. 

Laskin, David. "Gabriel Garcia Marquez." Literary Cavalcade 42 (November/ 
December 1989): 4-7. 

Lauter, Paul. "Publication of The Heath Antholcgy of American Literature/' Fifth 
Annual Conference of the Society for the Study of Multi-Ethnic 
Literature of the United States (MELUS), University of Minnesota, 
Minneapolis, 13 April 1991. 

Lauter, Paul, et al., eds The Heath Anthology of American Literature. 2 vols. 
Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 1990. 

Layton, Marilyn Smith, ed. Intercultural Journeys through Reading and Writing. 
New York: HarperCollins, 1991. 

Li, David Leiwei. "Filiative and Affiliative Textualization in Chinese Ameri- 
can Literature." In Understanding Others: Cultural and Cross-Cultural 
Studies and the Teaching of Literature, edited by Joseph Trimmer and 
Tilly Warnock, 177-200. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of 
English, 1992. 



233 



228 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Lincoln, Kenneth. "Native American Literatures: 'old like hills, like stars/" 
In Three American Literatures: Essays in Chicano, Native American, and 
Asian-American Literature for Teachers of American Literature, edited by 
Houston A. Baker, Jr., 80-167. New York: Modern Language Associa- 
tion, 1982. 

Lowe, Lisa. "Heterogeneity, Hybridity, Multiplicity: Marking Asian Ameri- 
can Differences." Diaspora 1 (1990): 24-44. 

Madden, Janet, and Sara M. Blake, eds. Crosscurrents: Themes for Developing 
Writers. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. 

Madden-Simpson, Janet, and Sara M. Blake, eds. Emerging Voices: A Cross- 
Cultural Reader. Fort Worth: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1990. 

Madhubuti, Haki R. [Don L. Lee]. "Hard Words and Clear Songs: The 

Writing of Black Poetry." In Tapping Potential: English and Language Arts 
for the Black Learner, edited by Charlotte K. Brooks, 168-75. Urbana, IL: 
National Council of Teachers of English, 1985. 

. "Exclusion, Intrusion, Infusion: What Do We Do with the Canon?" 

Annual Convention of the National Council of Teachers of English, 
Seattle, 23 November 1991. 

Margolis, Howard, and Arthur Shapiro. "Countering Negative Images of 
Disability in Classical Literature." English Journal 76 (March 1987): 
18-22. 

Martin, Reginald. "The New Black Aesthetic Critics and Their Exclusion 
from American 'Mainstream' Criticism." College English 50 (April 
1988): 373-82. 

. "Current Thought in African-American Literary Criticism: An 

Introduction." College English 52 (November 1990): 727-31. 

Mayher, John. "Interaction with the Local Censor: Moffetf s Storm in the 
Mountains." English Journal 79 (February 1990): 83-85. 

McCarthy, Bernice. The 4MAT System: Teaching to Learning Styles with Right/ 
Left Mode Techniques. Barrington, IL: Excel, 1980. 

McDonald, Frances Beck. "Freedom to Read: A Professional Responsibility." 
Appendix B in Teaching Literature in the Secondary School, edited by 
Richard Beach and James Marshall, 548-58. San Diego: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1991. 

McKendy, Thomas. "Gypsies, Jews, and The Merchant of Venice" In Expanding 
the Canon: Bridges to Understanding, edited by Faith Z. Schullstrom, 18- 
21. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 1990. 

McLeod, Susan, with the assistance of Stacia Bates, Alan Hunt, John Jarvis, 
and Shelley Spear, eds. Writing about the World. San Diego: Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1991. 

McMillan, Terry, ed. Breaking Ice: An Anthology of Contemporary African- 
American Fiction. New York Viking, 1990. 

Meade, Jeff. "A War of Words." Teacher Magazine 2 (November/December 
1990): 36-45. 



234 



References 



229 



Miller, Carol 'Tellers of the Circle: The Novels of Leslie Marmon Silko, Paula 
Gunn Allen, and Louise Erdrich." Unpublished manuscript, 1989. 

Minnesota Department of Education. A Policy on the Freedom to Teach, to Learn, 
and to Express Ideas in the Public Schools. St. Paul: Minnesota Depart- 
ment of Education, 1985. 

Minnesota Humanities Commission and the Minnesota Council of Teachers 
of English. Braided Lives: An Anthology of Multicultural American 
Writing. St. Paul: Minnesota Humanities Commission; Minnesota 
Council of Teachers of English, 1991. 

Mizokawa, Donald T. "The Problem with Lumping Data." Paper presented 
at the American Educational Research Association Conference, 22 
April 1992. 

Momaday, N. Scott. "The Man Made of Words." In Literature of the American 
Indians: Views and Intei-pretations, edited by Abraham Chapman, 96- 
110. New York: Meridian, 1975. 

Moore, Lisa. "One-on-One: Pairing Male and Female Writers." English journal 
78 (October 1989): 34-38. 

Moore-Foster, Musa. "The Kaleidoscope of Self: An Introductory Essay." In 
Braided Lives: An Anthology of Multicultural American Writing, 141-44. 
St. Paul: Minnesota Humanities Commission; Minnesota Council of 
Teachers of English, 1991. 

Morrison, Toni. Playing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary Imagination. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 1992. 

Moss, Anita. "Gothic and Grotesque Effects in Virginia Hamilton's Fiction." 
The ALAN Review 19 (Winter 1992): 16-28. 

Mullican, James S. "Cultural Literacy: Whose Culture? Whose Literacy?" 
English Education 23 (December 1991): 244-50. 

National Coalition Against Censorship (NCAC). Books on Trial: A Survey of 
Recent Cases. New York: National Coalition Against Censorship, 1987. 

Native American Authors Distribution Project. Fall 1992 Book List. Greenfield 
Center, NY: The Greenfield Review Press, 1992. 

Native American Women's Institute. Augsburg College, Minneapolis, 26-28 
October 1989. 

NCTE. "Censorship: Don't Let It Become an Issue in Your Schools/' Language 
Arts 55 (February 1978): 230-42. 

. "Statement on Censorship and Professional Guidelines." Urbana, IL: 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1982. 

NCTE Commission on Composition. "Students' Right to Their Own Lan- 
guage." College Composition and Communication 25 (Fall 1974, special 
issue): 5-10. 

. 'Teaching Composition: A Position Statement." College English 36 

(October 1974): 219-20. 



235 



230 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Nickolai-Mays, Susanne, and Phyllis Post Kammer. "Non-white Students' 
Concerns about Attending College/' School Counselor 34 (May 1987): 
379-83. 

Norton, Donna E. 'Teaching Multicultural Literature in the Reading Curricu- 
lum." The Reading Teacher 44 (September 1990): 28-40. 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI). Youth Indicators 
1991: Trends in the Well-Being of American Youth. Washington, DC: 
United States Department of Education, 1991. 

Oliver, Eileen, "An Afrocentric Approach to Literature: Putting the Pieces 
Back Together." English Journal 77 (September 1988): 49-54. 

Oliver, Eileen, and Tamrat Tademe. "Students of Color on White Campuses: 
Building Self-Esteem in a Hostile Environment" In Proceedings of the 
Conference on the Troubled Adolescent, 9-11 April 1991 , 118-21. 

Pace, Barbara G. "The Textbook Canon: Genre, Gender, and Race in U.S. 
Literature Anthologies." English Journal 81 (September 1992): 33-38. 

Page, Ernest R. "Black Literature and Changing Attitudes: Does It Do the 
Job?" English Journal 66 (March 1977): 29-33. 

Perry, Jesse. "A Selected Bibliography of Multi-Ethnic Literature." Minnesota 
English Journal 22 (Fall 1991): 32-37. 

Peterson, Judith E. "Golden Discoveries: Literature of the Americas." English 
Journal 81 (September 1992): 39-44. 

Raines, B. G. "A Profile in Censorship." Virginia English Bulletin 36 (1986): 
37-45. 

Ramsey, Paul A. 'Teaching the Teachers to Teach Black Dialect Writers." 
College English 41 (October 1979): 197-201. 

Raymond, James C. "Authority, Desire, and Canons: Tendentious Medita- 
tions on Cultural Literacy." In Conversations: Contemporary Critical 
Theory and the Teaching of Literature, edited by Charles Moran and 
Elizabeth F. Penfield, 76-86. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers 
of English, 1990. 

Reed, Ishmael. 'The History of the Before Columbus Foundation." Speech 
given at Washington State University, Pullman, April 1991 . 

Reed, Ishmael, Kathryn Trueblood, and Shawn Wong, eds. The Before Colum- 
bus Foundation Fiction Anthology: Selections from the American Book 
Awards, 1980-1990. New York: Norton, 1992. 

Reimer, Constance, and Marcia Brock. "Books, Students, Censorship: Reality 
in the Classroom." English Journal 77 (November 1988): 69-71. 

Rice, Mitchell, and Bonnie Alford. "A Preliminary Analysis of Black Under- 
graduate Students' Perceptions of Retention/Attrition Factors at a 
Large, Predominantly White State Research University in the South." 
Journal of Negro Education 58 Winter 1989): 68-81. 

Rico, Barbara Roche, and Sandra Mano, eds. American Mosaic: Multicultural 
Readings in Context. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1991. 



236 



References 



231 



Rosenblatt, Louise M. Literature as Exploration. 3d ed. New York: Noble and 
Noble, 1976. 

Royster, Jacqueline. "A New Lease on Writing." In Tapping Potential: English 
and Language Arts for the Black Learner, edited by Charlotte K. Brooks, 
159-67. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 1985. 

Sacco, Margo. "ALAN Intellectual Freedom Committee Report." The ALAN 
Review 18 (Winter 1991): 6-7. 

Savery, Pancho. '"Who Was That Masked Man?': Literary Criticism and the 
Teaching of African American Literature in Introductory Courses." In 
Practicing Theory in Introductory College Literature Courses, edited by 
James M. Cahalan and David B. Downing, 189-98. Urbana, IL: Na- 
tional Council of Teachers of English, 1991. 

Scott, Jerrie Cobb. "Nonmainstream Groups: Questions and Research Direc- 
tions/' In Counterpoint and Beyond: A Response to Becoming a Nation of 
Readers, edited by Jane L. Davidson, 27-32. Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English, 1988. 

Shannon, George. "Making a Home of One's Own: The Young in Cross- 
Cultural Fiction." English Journal 77 (September 1988): 14-19. 

Shapiro, Nancy. 'Textbooks in Focus: Cross-Cultural Readers." College 
Composition and Communication 42 (December 1991): 524^30. 

Shaughnessy, Mina. Errors and Expectations: A Guide for the Teacher of Basic 
Writing. New York: Oxford University Press, 1977. 

Shirley, Carl, and Paula Shirley. Understanding Chicano Literature. Columbia: 
University of South Carolina Press, 1988. 

Simmons, John. "Censorship in the Schools: No End in Sight." The ALAN 
Review 18 (Winter 1991): 6-8. 

Slark, Julie, et al. "Learning Assessment Retention Consortium of the Califor- 
nia Community Colleges." Research report for the California Commu- 
nity Colleges, Sacramento, Office of the Chancellor, September 1987. 
ED286566. 

Smagorinsky, Peter. 'Towards a Civic Education in a Multicultural Society: 
Ethical Problems in Teaching Literature." English Education 24 (Decem- 
ber 1992): 212-28. 

Small, Robert C, Jr., and M. Jerry Weiss. "What Do I Do Now? Where to Turn 
When You Face a Censor." Paper presented at the Annual Convention 
of the National Council of Teachers of English, Seattle, November 
1991. 

Smitherman, Geneva. "English Teacher, Why You Be Doin' the Thangs You 
Don't Do?" English Journal 63 (January 1972): 59-65. 

Smitherman-Donaldson, Geneva. "Opinion: Toward a National Public Policy 
on Language." College English 49 (January 1987): 29-36. 

Spurlin, William J. "Theorizing Signifyin(g) and the Role of the Reader: 

Possible Directions for African- American Literary Criticism/' College 
English 52 (November 1990): 732-^2. 



337 



232 



Crossing the Mainstream 



Staples, Brent. "Night Walker." In Crossing Cultures: Readings for Composition, 
3d ed., edited by Henry Knepler and Myrna Knepler, 172-76. New 
York: MacmiUan, 1990. Reprinted from Ms., September 1986. 

Stensland, Anna Lee. Literature by and about the American Indian: An Annotated 
Bibliography. 2d ed. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of 
English, 1979. 

Stock, William, et al. "A Study of Placement Test Subscores and Their Use in 
Assigning CSU, Fresno Freshmen to Beginning English Courses." 
Research report presented to the English Placement Test Development 
Committee, California State University, Fresno, 15 August 1986. 
ED289453. 

Swing, Georgia Hanshew. "Choosing Life: Adolescent Suicide in Literature." 
English Journal 79 (September 1990): 78-82. 

Takaki, Ronald. Workshop on multicultural education. St. Cloud State 
University, St. Cloud, MN, 30 January 1991. 

Tatum, Charles, ed. Mexican American Literature. San Diego: Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1990. 

Taylor, Ethel, and Ernest Bradford. "Using the Oral History Approach to 
Teach Freshman Writing." In Tapping Potential: English and Language 
Arts for the Black Learner, edited by Charlotte K. Brooks, 214-18. 
Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 1985. 

Tchudi, Stephen, and Diana Mitchell. Explorations in the Teaching of English. 3d 
ed. New York: Harper and Row, 1989. 

Thompson, Julian. "Defending YA Literature against the Pharisees and 

Censors: Is It Worth the Trouble?" The ALAN Review 18 (Winter 1991): 
2-5. 

Trevino, Consuelo, and Bette Wise. "Summer Acceptance Programs: A Viable 
Option for Provisional Students Entering a Private University." Paper 
presented at the Thirteenth Annual Meeting of the Western College 
Reading Association, San Francisco, 27-30 March 1980. ED188118. 

Truth, Sojourner. "Ain't I a Woman?" 1851. From 'Reminiscences by Francis 
D. Gage of Sojourner Truth, for May 28-29, 1851." In The Heath Anthol- 
ogy of American Literature, edited by Paul Lauter et al., 1: 1911-13. 
Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 1990. 

Turner, Darwin T. "Black Experience, Black Literature, Black Students, and 
the English Classroom." In Tkpping Potential: English and Language Arts 
for the Black Learner, edited by Charlotte K. Brooks, 297-307. Urbana, 
IL: National Council of Teachers of English, 1985. 

Verburg, Carol J., ed. Ourselves among Others: Cross-Cultural Readings for 
Writers. New York St. Martin's Press, 1988. 

Villegas, Ana Maria. Culturally Responsive Teaching. Princeton, NJ: Educa- 
tional Testing Service, 1991. 

Wagner, Dori, and Rick Coe. "Multicultural Perspectives and Development 
of Writing Abilities." Working Teacher (1982): 17-22. 



238 



References 



233 



Walker-Moffatt, Wendy. "The Hmong Paradigm." Paper presented at the 
American Educational Research Association Conference, 22 April 
1992. 

Warner, J. Sterling, Judith Hiiliard, and Vincent Piro, eds. Visions across the 
Americas. San Diego: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. 

Washington Center for Improving the Quality of Undergraduate Education. 
"Core Curriculum Profile: Washington State University." Washington 
Center Newsletter 7 (Fall 1992): 11. 

Wells, Ida B. "Lynching at the Curve." In Rereading America: Cultural Contexts 
for Critical Thinking and Writing, edited by Gary Colombo, Robert 
Cullen, and Bonnie Lisle, 168-74. New York: St. Martin's Press, 1989. 

Whetten, Clifford L. "Culture and learning Styles." Community Education 
Journal 18 (1991): 17-19. 

wiger, flo. "Native Americans and Curriculum Change." Native American 
Women's Institute, Augsburg College, Minneapolis, 27 October 1989. 

Wiget, Andrew, and Carla Mulford. "Native American Traditions." In The 
Heath Anthology of American Literature, edited by Paul Lauter et al v 
1: 22-24. Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath, 1990. 

Williams, Carole A. "Studying Challenged Novels: Or, How I Beat 
Senioritis." English Journal 77 (November 1988): 66-68. 

Williams, William F. 'Teaching Literature, Canon Formation, and 

Multiculturalism." English Leadership Quarterly 13 (1991): 2-3. 

Winkler, Karen J. "A Scholar's Provocative Query: Was Huckleberry Finn 
Black?" Chronicle of Higher Education, 8 July 1992, A6-8. 

Wright, Richard. Black Boy. New York: Harper and Row, 1945. 

Yep, Laurence. "A Garden of Dragons." The ALAN Review 19 (Spring 1992): 
6-8. 

Youdelman, Jeffrey. "Limiting Students: Remedial Writing and the Death of 
Open Admissions." College English 39 (January 1978): 562-72. 

Zeichner, Kenneth M. "Educating Teachers for Cultural Diversity." Unpub- 
lished manuscript, University of Wisconsin-Madison, 1992. 



233 



Author 



Eileen Iscoff Oliver is assistant professor of 
English and coordinator of English education at 
Washington State University. She has taught in 
high schools, continuation and correctional 
schools, community colleges, and university pro- 
grams in California, Texas, New York, Minne- 
sota, and Washington. Her interests in composi- 
tion, English education, literature, and multi- 
cultural studies are reflected in articles and book 
chapters that have appeared or are forthcoming 
in English Journal, English Leadership Quarterly, 
English Quarterly, Arizona English Bulletin, Ex- 
panding the Canon: Bridges to Understanding, Teach- 
ing Culturally Diverse Populations: From Theory to 
Practice, and Whole Language in the Secondary and 
Post-Secondary Classroom. She received a B.A. 
from the University of California at Berkeley in 
1965, a Secondary Teaching Credential from Cali- 
fornia State University at San Francisco in 1967, 
and a Ph.D. from the University of Texas at Aus- 
tin in 1984. 




240 



