DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 375 klk CS 21A 576 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 



Bishop, Rudine Sims, Ed, 

Kaleidoscope: A Multicultural Booklist for Grades 
K-8. NCTE Bibliography Scries. 

National Council of Teachers of English, Urbana, 
111. 

ISBN-0-81A1-2543-3; ISSN- 105 1-A740 
94 

205p.; Edited with the Multicultural Booklist 
Conuaittee of the National Council of Teachers of 
Engl ish« 

National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 W, 
Kenyon Road, Urbana, IL 61801-1096 (Stock No. 
25433-3050; $10.95 members, 514.95 nonmembers). 
Reference Materials - Bibliographies (131) 



EDRS PRICE MF01/PC09 Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS '''Ado 1 esc en t Literature; Annotated Bibliographies; 

Anthologies; '*Childrens Literature; -'Cultural 
Differences; Elementary Education; *Folk Culture; 
Foreign Countries; Immigrants; Junior High Schools; 
"Multicultural Education; Novels; Picture Books; 
Poetry 

IDENTIFIERS ''Mult icultural Materials 



ABSTRACT 

Serving as a resource for K"8 teachers who wish to 
offer children books that reflect the cultural diversity of Aioerican 
society, this book presents annotations of nearly 400 books 
(published between 1990 and 1992) about African Americans, Asian 
Americans, Hispanic Anericans/Lat inos , and Native Americans. The 
annotated bibliography also lists books involving people and 
countries in Africa, Asia, South and Central America, and the 
Caribbean, as well as relevant books set in Mexico, Canada, or 
England. Also included are works that focus on interracial and 
intercul tural topics, issues, and relationships. The book groups the 
entries according to 15 genres or themes: (1) Poetry and Verse; (2) 
the Arts; (3) Ceremonies and Celebrations; (4) People to Know and 
Places To Go; (5) Concepts and Other Useful Information; (6) 
Biography: Individuals Who Made a Difference; (7) History: The Way We 
Were; (8) Immigrants and Immigration: Coming to America; (9) 
Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New; (10) Books for the Very 
Young; (11) Picture Books: Primary and Beyond; (12) Fiction for 
Middle Readers; (13) Novels for Older Readers; (14) Anthologies: 
Gatherings of Poems and Stories; and (15) A Potpourri of Resources. A 
listing of award- winning books and a directory of publishers is 
attached. (RS) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
from the original document. ^ 




ERIC 



NCTE Editorial Board: Hazel Davis, Keith Gilyard, Ronald Jobe, Joyce 
Kinkead, Louise W. Phelps, Charles Suhor, Chair, ex officio, and Michael 
Spooner, ex officio 

Multicultural Booklist Committee 

Rudine Sims Bishop, The Ohio State University, Chair 

Rosalinda Barrera, New Mexico State University 

Barbara M. Flores, California State University, San Bernardino 

Patricia Grasty Gaines, West Chester University, Pennsylvania 

Corisuelo W. Harris, Public Library of Cincinnati and Hamilton County, Oh 

Violet J. Harris, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 

Mary B. Howard, Central State University, Wilberforce, Ohio 

Michael Lacapa, artist, Taylor, Arizona 

Junko Yokota, University of Northern Iowa 

Terry Li, Cover to Cover Bookstore, Columbus, Ohio 

Sonia Nieto, University of Massachusetts 

Ngoc-Diep Nguyen, Illinois Resource Center, Des Plaines 

Vcrna Tullie, Nazlini Boarding School, Ganado, Arizona 

Michael Spooner, NCTE Staff Liaison 



Bibliography Series 



Kaleidoscope 



A Multicultural Booklist for Grades K-8 



Rudine Sims Bishop, Editor, 

and the Multicultural Booklist Committee 
of the National Council of Teachers of English 



National Council of Teachers of F',n>;lisli 
nil W. Kenyon Road, Urbana, 11,61801-1096 



Manuscript Editor: Jane M, Curran 
Production Editor: Rona S. Smith 
Interior Design: Doug Burnett 
Cover Design: R. Maul 

Cover Illustration: Ashley Br>'an, From All Night, All Day: A Child's first Book of 
African-American Spirituals. Atheneum, 1991. © 1991 by Ashley Bryan. Re- 
printed by permission of the artist. 

NCTE Stock Number: 25433-3050 

© 1994 by the National Council of Teachers of English. All rights reserved. 
Printed in the United States of America. 

Permissions acknowledgments for photographs begin on page 168. 

It is the policy of NCTE in its journals and other publications to provide a 
forum for the open discussion of ideas concerning the content and the teaching 
of English and the language arts. Publicity accorded to any particular point of 
view does not imply endorsement by the Executive Committee, the Board of 
Directors, or the membership at large, except in announcements of policy, 
where such endorsement is clearly specified. 

Library of Congress Cataloging-tn-Publication Data 

Kaleidoscope : a multicultiiml booklist for grades K-8/ Rudine Sims 
Bishop, editor, and the Multicultural Booklist Committee of the 
National Council of Tecuhers of English. 

p. cm. — (NCTP: bibliography series, ISSN 1051-4740) 
Includes index. 
ISBN 0-8141-2543-3 : $14.95 

1. Minorities — Unitt\1 States — Juvenile literature — Bibliography. 
2. Afro-Americans— Juvenile literature — Bibliography. 3. Asian 
Americans — Juvenile literature — Bibliography. 4. Hispanic 
Americans — Juvenile literature — Bibliography. 5. Indians of North 
America— Juvenile literat\.ire — Bibliography. I. Bishop, Rudine 
Sims. II. National Council of Teachers of English. Multicultural 
Booklist Committee. 111. Series. 
Z1361.E4K34 1994 
IE184.A1] 

016.3058'00973— dc20 94-22268 

CIP 



The bottom line is this: You write in order to change the world, 
knowing perfectly well that you probably can't, but also knowing that 
literature is indispensable to the world. In some way, your aspirations 
and concern for a single uian in fact do begin to change the world. 
The world chan((es according to the way people see it, and if you alter, 
even by a milL.iieter, the way a person looks or people look at reality, 
thai you can cliange it. 

James Baldwin, 1979 interview. 
The New York Times Book Review 



Contents 



Acknowledgments ix 

Foreword xi 

Introduction xiii 

1. Poetry and Verse 1 

2. The Arts 8 

3. Ceremonies and Celebrations 12 

4. People to Know and Places to Go 16 

5. Concepts and Other Useful Information 25 

6. Biography: Individuals Who Made a Difference 29 

7. History: The Way We Were 40 

8. Immigrants and Immigration: Coming to America 46 

9. Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 48 
Origins: How and Why Things Came to Be 48 
Animals 53 
Wonder Tales: Romance, Magic, and the Supernatural 57 
Realistic Tales 66 
Collections 68 

10. Books for the Very Young 72 

11. Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 76 

12. FicHon for Middle Readers 100 

13. Novels for Older Readers 106 

14. Anthologies: Gatherings of Poems and Stories 117 

15. A Potpourri of Resources 121 

Award-Winning Books 131 

Directory of Puhliahers 141 



Acknowledgments 



Many people had a hand in the completion of this booklist. Thanks to 
the publishers who generously sen. review copies of their books, with- 
out which the job would have been a great deal more difficult, if not 
impossible. 

This was indeed a group project. Members of the committee spent 
long hours reading and annotating books, a task more difficult than it 
appears. I thank them for that, and for their advice and support. 

A number of other people stepped in to help clear up the backlog 
of books waiting to be annotated as the deadline for submission of the 
manuscript came and went. For little or no compensation, the following 
people generously gave their time, their support, their sometimes ada- 
mant opinions, their expert knowledge, and their skill at writing concise 
annotations. I am grateful to them all and extend my heartfelt thanks. 

I'atricia M. Dashicll, The Ohio State University 
Laura E. Desai, The Ohio State University 
Shu-Jy Duan, The Ohio State University 
Filiz Shine Fdizer, The Ohio State University 
Jui-Yi Huang, The Ohio State University 
Huey-Jen Lin, Tlie Ohio State University 
Mei-ying Liu, The Ohio State University 
Melanie Myers, Tlie Ohio State University 
Christine Nees, Akron, Ohio 
Nikki Nwosu, The Ohio State University 

Alicia P. Rodriguez, Universit)' of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign 
Mary E. Shorey, The Ohio State University 
.'..lizabeth Smith, The Ohio State University 
Luella Tape, Columbus, Ohio 

Cynthia Tyson, The Ohio State University/Columbus City Schools 
Carol Wolfenbarger, Thu Ohio State University 



9 



xi 



Foreword 



The National Council of Teachers of English is proud to publish five 
different booklists, renewed on a regular rotation, in its bibliography 
series. The five are Adventuring with Books (pre-K through grade 6), Your 
Reading (middle school/junior high). Books for You (senior high). High 
Interest — Easy Reading (junior/senior high reluctant readers), and Kalei- 
doscope: A Multicultural Booklist for Grades K-8. Conceived as resources 
for teachers and students alike, these volumes reference thousands of 
the most recent children's and young adults' trade books. The works 
listed cover a wide range of topics, from preschool ABC books to science 
fiction novels for high school seniors; from wordless picture books to 
nonfiction works on family stresses, computers, and mass media. 

Each edition of an NCTE booklist is compiled by a group of 
teachers and librarians, under leadership appointed by tfie NCTE Ex- 
ecutive Cominittee. Working with new books submitted regularly by 
publishers, the committee members review, select, and annotate the 
hundreds of works to be listed in their new edition. The members of the 
committee that compiled this volume are listed on one of the first pages. 

Of course, no single book is right for everyone or every purpose, 
so inclusion of a work in this booklist is not necessarily an endorsement 
from NCTE, However, it is an indication that, in the view of the profes- 
sionals who make up the booklist committee, the work in question is 
worthy of teachers' and students' attention, perhaps for its informative, 
perhaps its aesthetic, qualities. On the other hand, exclusion from an 
NCTE booklist is not necessarily a judgment on the quality of a given 
book or publisher. Many factors — space, time, availability of certain 
books, publisher participation — may influence the final shape of the list. 

We hope that you will find this booklist useful and that you will 
collect the other booklists in the NCTE series. We feel that these volumes 
contribute substantially to our mission of helping to improve instruc- 
tion in English and the language arts. We think you will agree. 

Charles Suhor 
Deputy Executive Director 
National Council of Teachers of English 



ERiC 



10 



Introduction 



This book is an annotated bibliography of selected books about or 
related to African Americans, Asian Americans, Hispanic Ameri- 
cans/Latinos, and Native Americans. It also lists books involving peo- 
ple and countries in Africa, Asia, South and Central America, and the 
Caribbean, as well as relevant books sot in Mexico, Canada, or England. 
In addition, it includes v^orks that focus on interracial and intercultural 
topics, issues, and relationships. The books, all of v^hich v^ere published 
in 1990, 1991, or 1992, are suitable for children from kindergarten 
through eighth grade. Kaleidoscope is intended to serve as a resource for 
teachers who wish to offer children books that reflect something of the 
diversity of American society. 

An educated guess is that during the years 1990-92, five to six 
thousand new books were published per year, the total depending on 
how and whether one counts paperbacks and reissues. Judging from the 
publishers' catalogs, we received most of the relevant books from the 
major children's book publishers, and many from smaller presses. Alto- 
gether we were sent about six hundred books. If our estimates are 
correct, that means that the books we received for this list — books 
relating to people of color — constitute 3 to 4 percent of the fifteen to 
eighteen thousand new books published in those years. This is a wel- 
come increase over past years, but still a small percentage compared to 
the proportion of people of color in the population, and in the schools. 

Until quite recently in the history of English- language children's 
literature, children of color have been virtually invisible in books oi; 
worse, visible only as stereotypes or objects of ridicule. Only in the past 
quarter century has children's literature from the major publishers be- 
gun to include children of color in a positive way in any appreciable 
numbers. In this last decade of the twentieth century, with one face 
toward the next milennium and, like two-headed Janus, with another 
toward the past, we have begun to recognize the harm that is visited on 
all our children when important segments of the population are ren- 
dered invisible in the literature sanctioned by their teachers and other 
adults in their lives. 

Literature is one of the vehicles through which we adults transmit 
to children our values, our attitudes, our mores, our world views, our 
philosophies of life. The cumulative message inherent in years of school- 
ing in which children seldom see anyone in a book who resembles 



11 



xiv 



Introduction 



themselves and who shares their cultural values, attitudes, and behav- 
iors, or in which children see themselves portrayed as laughable stereo- 
types, is that these children do not count and are not valued by the 
society at large. We should not be surprised, therefore, when such 
schooling also results in negative attitudes toward that society and its 
institutions, and to literature itself. 

The cumulative message for the children, mainly white and mid- 
dle class, who see their own reflections almost exclusively, is that they 
are inherently superior, that their culture and way of life is the norm, 
and that people and cultures different from them and theirs are quaint 
and exotic at best, and deviant and inferior at worst. In a shrinking 
world where whites arc in the minority, this attitude can lead to serious 
conflict. And in the United States of today, such an attitude can only 
reinforce and perpetuate the practices of discrimination and racism that 
have already marred the history of this nation, and that continue to be 
the most critical social issue this country must face. 

Literature educates not only the head, but the heart as well. It 
promotes empathy and invites readers to adopt new perspectives. It 
offers opportunities for children to learn to recognize our similarities, 
value our differences, and respect our common humanity. In an impor- 
tant sense, then, children need literature that serves as a window onto 
lives and experiences different from their own, and literature that serves 
as a mirror r^eflecting themselves and their cultural values, attitudes, 
and behaviors. Until recently, children of color have had almost exclu- 
sively the book as window, while white, middle-class children have 
almost exclusively been offered the book as mirror. The current empha- 
sis on multicultural children's literature seeks to correct that situation, 
and this book is intended as a contribution to that effort. We hope that 
the books listed in this bibliography and others reflecting America's 
cultural diversity will be read aloud, incorporated into the curriculum, 
and made available for children's independent reading. 

How the Books Were Selected and Organized 

From the books received, the committee selected nearVy four hundred 
to annotate, based on a few principles and criteria. We tried, first, to 
choose well-written books that will appeal to children in kindergarten 
through eighth grade. We eliminated some excellent books because we 
thought they were more suitable to high school than middle or elemen- 
tary school. In keeping with the rationale for developing the booklist, 
our two other main criteria were (1) that the book should contribute in 



ERiC 



12 



Introduction 



XV 



a positive way to an understanding and appreciation of persons of color 
and their cultures, or (2) that the book should offer a positive vision of 
a diverse society and a multicultural world. Our intent was to bring 
new books to the attention of our readers. Therefore, we generally 
omitted reissues of books that had been previously published, although 
we included new editions that had been updated in some way, usually 
through new illustrations. 

The chapters in this booklist emerged from the reading and anno- 
tating of the books. Nonfiction was divided into topics such as "The 
Arts," "Ceremonies and Celebrations," "History: The Way We Were," 
and "People to Know and Places to Go." In a few cases, particularly 
relevant fiction books were also listed under these topics. "Poetry and 
Verse," "Biography: Individuals Who Made a Difference," and "Folk- 
tales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New" each constituted a separate 
category. Fiction, for the most part, was divided by age level, beginning 
with the very young and advancing through middle school. The desig- 
nation of age levels is always problematic. We either adopted the pub- 
lishers' suggested age levels or tried to give a reasonable age-range 
estimate for the books. It is well to remember, however, that good 
literature has no real age limits, and that a book suggested for one level 
may well be enjoyed by readers older or younger. The subject index lists 
books under the appropriate sociocultural group as well as the appro- 
priate subject matter for each book. 

Whaf s New? Current Themes and Topics 

As we read and annotated the books, some themes and topics seemed 
to recur Some were relevant across groups; others were related more 
specifically to one group or another. A discussion of a few of those 
themes and topics may be useful for teachers who arc making decisions 
about incorporating multicultural literature into their own classrooms. 

Among the books about people of African descent, there is now 
some attention to the diversity that is present within that group. These 
books can help to make students aware of the African diaspora and the 
similarities and differences that exist between and among Black peo- 
ples. Several books, for example, fiK iis on IlK^ck people from the West 
Indies, the islands of the Caribbean. Uecause of the colonial relationship 
th.it existed between Rngland and some of those Islands, there is now a 
considerable Black populaliiMi in f jigland as well, and some of the 
newer books about Ulack p(»o(iU\ siuh as Antaztn;^ Grace by Mary Hoff- 
iiirin, are not ah4)ul African Americans, but nbout Black Britons. In 



xvi 



Introduction 



addition, there rre a few books of contemporary fiction set in Africa. 
Some, such as Gmin of Fire by Beverley Naidoo, relate to racial strife in 
South Africa, but others, such as Galimcto by Karen Lynn Williams, are 
about the everyday lives of African children. Unfortunately, some 
authors refer to the setting only as "Africa,'' urithout being more spe- 
cific, feeding into the erroneous impression of Africa as one undifferen- 
tiated geographical and sociocultural mass. 

The early 1990s have also seen a good deal of attention given in 
children's books to slavery in the United States and to the continuing 
struggle for freedom during the civil rights movement of the 1960s, a 
hundred years after emancipation. Novels such as Steal Away by Jen- 
nifer Armstrong and Letters from a Slave Girl: The Story of Harriet Jacobs 
by Mary E. Lyons, biographies such as Sojourner Truth: Ain't la Woman? 
by Patricia C. and Fredrick McKissack and Rosa Parks: My Story by Rosa 
Parks v^ith Jim Haskins, and historical accounts such as Mississippi 
Challenge by Mildred Pitts Walter all help to tell the story of Black 
Americans as an essential part of American history 

Although this bibliography focuses on books for kindergarten 
through eighth grade, wc also included several books intended for 
children a bit younger Some schools include preschool centers, and 
some of the books might profitably be used in kindergarten. Some of 
these books feature individual children who are Black, Asian, or Native 
American. Others feature a variety of children of different backgrounds. 
The number of books for the very young featuring such children, while 
still small, seems to be increasing. 

In keeping with the tendency of children's literature to reflect 
current and recent issues, several books — some fiction, some nonfic- 
tion — are related to immigrants and immigration. These newer books 
pay particular attention to immigrants from Korea and from Southeast 
Asia, especially Vietnam. Not surprisingly, other books involve people 
from Mexico and from South and Central America and often involve the 
issue c^f illegal immigration. They tell the stories of how and why people 
come to America and what their lives are like in this country. 

Some of the books focusing on immigrants and immigration are 
in the form of photo essr.ys or photo-illustrated books. This format is 
also prevalent in the "People to Know and Places to Go" chapter At 
least ten of the books in that chapter are related to Native Americans. 
Diane Hoyt-Goldsniith, for example, has produced such books as 
Totem l\)U\ Pueblo Storijlellcr, and Arctic Hunter, each featuring an 
Indian child and his or her family and community and each illustrated 



Introduction 



xvil 



with photographs by Lawrence Migdalc. Most of what we received 
about contemporary Native Americans came in this form. 

There is a small and welcome increase in the number of picture 
books with Hispanic/Latino characters. Abuda by Arthur Dorros, 
Abuelita's Paradise by Carmen Santiago Nodar, and A Birthday Basket for 
Tia by Pat Mora all feature contemporary Hispanics /Latinos (indeter- 
minate, Puerto Rican, and Mexican American, respectively). Interest- 
ingly, those three books are also examplars of a prominent theme in the 
Hispanic picture books that we received — intergenerational relation- 
ships. Grandparents and other older relatives play an important role in 
these books. If not grandparents, then the immediate family is at the 
center of most of the Hispanic-related picture books that we received 

Another welcome mini-trend in books related to Hispanics is the 
publication of bilingual English/Spanish books, such as Family Pic- 
turcs/Cuardros de Familia by Carmen Lomas Garza. There are also a few 
books in English and other languages, such as some Native American 
languages and some Asian languages. Such books recognize and re- 
spect the dual heritages of many of today's Americans. 

Folktales account for about 20 percent of the total number of 
books. For three nf the four general umbrella groupings — Asian Ameri- 
can, Hispanic/Lfilino, and Native American — the largest number of 
books fall into this category. Included here are legends and myths and 
literary folktales; that is, original tales written in the folk tradition. It is 
important to note that in the case of Asian, African, and Latino folktales, 
the place of origin and the setting of the tales are outside the United 
Stales. This Is signifit ant because, although such stories offer a sense of 
some o( the traditional values and mores of the people who created 
them, Ihey have luss to say about the lives of contemporary Asian 
Americ ans, African Americans, or Hispanic Americans/ Latinos, par- 
ticularly those who have been in this country for several generations. 
Although many of the Native American tales originated on this conti- 
nent, they, loo, oiler insight into the traditional culture of Indian peo- 
ples, hul little insight into the lives and experience of contemporary 
Nalive Americans. This is not to devalue folktales. The stories of our 
ancestors play an important role in helping us understand how we have 
come to be who we are, and they should be a part of our classrooms. In 
one sense, folktales offer an easy multiculturalism, but teachers and 
librarians seeking nniltii iilHiral literature for today's classnioins and 
libraries will also want to search beyond the folktales for other materials 
that help us see ourselves in the contemporary world. 



xviii 



Introductiou 



Issues and Concerns 

Names and Peoples 

It is quite convenient, and sometimes a useful shortcut, to speak of 
Asian Americans, Hispanic Americans/Latinos, and Native Americans. 
The labels do not serve us well, however, if we use them as if each one 
referred to one distinct monolithic group. It is important lo note thiit 
included under those large umbrella groupings are different and dis 
tinct groups of people. Growing up Puerto Rican is not the same as 
growing up Mexican American, although both groups may be called 
Hispanic or Latino. It is also wrong to assume that Japanese Americans 
and Chinese Americans are interchangeable, or that there are no differ- 
ences between the Navajos and the Iroquois, for example. We also need 
to remind ourselves that Chinese American, for instance, is different 
from Chinese; growing up in the United States is different from growing 
up in China, and if you are looking for books about contemporary 
Chinese Americans, books about Chinese living in Beijing will not do. 
Wo have tried, where possible, to designate the specific sociocullural 
group to which each book is related. As with the folktales, books aboul 
or st»t in the homelands from which our ancestors came to this country ran 
help us lo understand our cultural heritagc\ but when selecting books 
for the classroom it is well to keep these distinctions in mind so thai the 
literature collection presents as full and accurate a picture as possible 

A different concern related to names is what tc»rms lo use lor what 
j^roups. Do people want lo be called Mexican American or C hicano? 
Hispanic American or l.alino? Native American or American Indian? 
African American or Black? Answers to imjuiries addressed to people 
who are members of those groups varied with the person being asked. 
Written references also varied, and sometimes the same person used 
terms interchangeably. Where possibh*, we Iried lo use the most specific 
name that we could find. For example, we tried lo use the names of 
tribal groups when referring to Nalive Americans. When that was not 
possible, we used both Native American and Indian. The same is true 
of Hispanic American and Latino. We hope that if any readers are 
offended by our terminology, they will forgive ihe error on the basis thai 
we made a good -faith effort 

Avoiding Ihe Ni'gdlive: SlerecilypeN, Inaccuracies, 
l unny Language 

lioine honks wcw disqiictlilird linni this booklist Ihm ause they wvw 
1 Diisideretl iniippnipriate in icwm of thiMi treaUnenl nl the people and 



1i> 



Introduction 



xix 



places that were their focus. A listing of some of our concerns provides 
a beginning guide to the issues to which teachers might try to become 
sensitive and the problems that teachers might learn to avoid in their 
selections. The chapter titled "A Potpourri of Resources" can provide 
further information. 

Stereotyped images in text or illustrations. Unfortunately, such im- 
ages continue to exist, although their numbers seem somewhat dimin- 
ished. One example that turned up more than once is the little Black girl 
with Topsy-like braids protruding willy-nilly from all over her head. 
This plantation image makes Black children objects of amusement and 
simply does not reflect today's reality. Another example came from a 
book set in China that offended the reviewer with its illustrations of 
people with slant eyes and buck teeth, a traditional negative caricature 
of Asian peoples. Teachers need also to be aware of stereotypes in the 
text, such as the Mexican American father who is described as "hot-tem- 
pered" and as behaving in foolish ways because he acts out of emotion 
rather than reason. Such a depiction reinforces the myth of the "hot- 
blooded Latin." Native American stereotypes found in some books 
include the noble savage, the Indian princess, and the brutal savage of 
old. The continued presence of these sorts of representations helps to 
perpetuate racism by reducing whole groups of people to a set of 
stereotypes that permit some people to avoid confronting them as fel- 
low human beings. 

Problems with language. We refer here to two kinds of problems. 
The first is the inaccurate, inappropriate, or demeaning use of language 
by the characters in a book. An example is the Japanese character who 
is consistently portrayed as pronouncing "Honolulu" as "Honoruru," 
making him appear linguistically incompetent and laughable. Another 
example would be the Indian who talks like Tonto (e.g., "Me Tonto. You 
Indian now."). A related concern is the use of language that is inappro- 
priate to the time and place of the setting. For example, in one story set 
in nineteenth-century Japan, the Japanese characters remarked that all 
they could hear from the English-speaking characters was "Thee" and 
"Thou," yet the English-speaking characters spoke modem twentieth- 
century American English. 

The other problem is inaccuracies in the use of a language other 
than English. This was particularly prevalent in books related to His- 
panic peoples. There were many cases of incorrect vocabulary choices 
and misspelled words in books incorporating Spanish into the text. 

Inaccuracies. Several books were rejected because there were 
inaccuracies in the pictures or text. A story from India was illustrated 



17 



XX 



Introduction 



with clothing and architecture from a different time period than the one 
in which the story was set. A book set in Japan was omitted because 
there were inaccurate depictions of clothing, customs, and the setting. 

Problems with perspective. Not all authors are sensitive to the per- 
spectives of the people about whom they are writing; some are unable 
to move beyond their own ethnocentric viewpoint. One of the commit- 
tee members h d this to say about a book on Southeast Asians: "a 
European, colonistic view. ... It treats the histories of these people as 

only beginning with contacts with the Western World I was appalled 

at the analogy made between Ho Chi Minh and George Washington. At 
the least it is historically incorrect; at the most it disregards totally the 
refugee's perspective of over a million NTietnamcsc-Americans. . . . the 
treatment of the people of Southeast Asia in the book is simplistic and 
condescending." Another example: In a story about Mexican Ameri- 
cans, a little girl sometimes wishes she had been born "gringa blond." 
She is ashamed of being Mexican American, of not being wealthy, of 
their rundov/n truck, and so on. Neither of these books is likely to 
contribute in a positive way to an understanding of the people and 
cultures portrayed. 

Tokenism, A few books seemed to offer only tokenism. Such books 
might, for example, interject a Spanish word or name to give the impres- 
sion that the book is relevant to Hispanic Americans. Or there might be 
a Black child as a member of a group in a story centered on someone 
else. Another example is the "color-me-gray" sort of indeterminate il- 
lustrations in which there is just enough shading to suggest that the 
characters may be persons of color, but no other clue to their racial or 
cultural identity is present. 

Multicultural Literature in the Classroom 

Teachers often ask how books such as the ones listed in this bibliog- 
raphy can be used in the classroom. The short answer is that they can 
be used in the same way as any other literature. There is no need to 
make these books appe«ir alien or exotic. Nor is it necessary to treat 
fictional works as if they were textbooks on a given culture. Even 
though each book generates its own specific questions and discussion 
points, classroom book discussions often tend to get at a few basic 
things: the meaning that the readers make of a book, their emotional 
and intellectual responses to it, the n»l(»vance that they think it has to 
their own lives. Such discussiim points are as appropriate for the books 
in this bibliography i\s they are for any other When the literature pro- 



18 



Introduction 



xxi 



gram has a multicultural focus, all literature is treated as one small part 
of the human story. Specific teaching suggestions appear in some of the 
resources listed in "A Potpourri of Resources/' There are, however, two 
general suggestions that can be offered here. 

Make these books and others like thetn an integral part of the literature 
program. Select these books and others like them for read-aloud time, for 
independent reading, for literature study groups. Groups of books fo- 
cusing on the same topic or theme can be read, compared, and dis- 
cussed in relation to each other, providing opportunities for appreciat- 
ing various perspectives on the same topic. Many books from these 
cultures focus on relationships in the family, for instance, offering op- 
portunities for understanding how families are similar and different 
across social groups. Different versions of the same folktale appear in 
many different cultures. Certain motifs, such as the trickster, appear 
across cultures and can be examined for their similarities and differ- 
ences. Author studies can introduce students to the writings of diverse 
peoples. Multicultural literature can be a natural part of any classroom 
literature program. 

Use these books to enhance study in the content areas. Good teachers 
go beyond textbooks. Sometimes it requires a bit of imagination, but 
often books like the ones listed in this bibliography can enrich the 
curriculum. For example, the study of science or social studies is en- 
hanced when students learn about some of the people who have made 
important contributions in their fields. When studying inventions, for 
instance, take a look at the life of Thomas Edison, but also remember 
Jim Haskins's book Outioard Dreams: Black Inventors and Their Inventions. 
Mathematics can be enriched by examining counting systems from 
various cultures. For young children, merely using a counting book that 
features a Black child, for example, implies that the presence of such a 
child in a book is a normal thing to expect. It is not necessary to preach 
a sermon about differences (nor, incidentally, to pretend to be color 
blind). 

On the other hand, many of these books offer opportunities to 
examine critically the society in which we live, and the values and 
assumptions that underlie conflicts, events, and behaviors. When such 
concerns are an inherent aspect of a book — either fiction or nonfjction — 
it is important that they be confronted and discussed. Certainly any 
study of history needs to include the perspectives of people who have 
traditionally been omitted or who have been seen only through the eyes 
of their oppressors or conquerors. The story of the "westward move- 
ment," for example, is usually studied from the persptKlive of the 



xxii 



Introduction 



European "settlers" who lived on the East Coast. What about the people 
who were already there on the plains? As another example, do the 
stories of cowboys include the vaqueros and the Black cowboys? 

Incorporating these books into the existing curriculum is an im- 
portant first step toward rethinking the curriculum so that multicultu- 
ralism or pluralism is at its core. At minimum we need to avoid the 
"holidays and celebrations" syndrome. To confine the use of literature 
about specific peoples to certain months or holidays — African Ameri- 
cans in January and February, Native Americans in November, Chinese 
at the Chinese New Year — serves only to keep people marginalized, A 
commitment to multiculturtilism requires much more. It is our hope that 
this booklist will prove useful to the teachers who are its intended 
readers, and that it will be used in a way that helps to enrich the lives 
of the children who are its intended beneficiaries. 



2i) 



1 



1 Poetry and Verse 



1.1 Adoff, Arpjid. In for Winter, Out for Spring. Illustrated by 
Jerry Pinkney, Harcburt Brace Jovanovich, 1991, ISBN 0-15- 
238637-8. 48p. 5-9 (est). 

These poems follow Rebecca and her family — brother Aaron, 
mother, father, grandmother — through a year of changing sea- 
sons, changing weather, and special times together. They cele- 
brate the small things (a butterfly, a mouse, fireflies) and the 
special moments (picking mulberries, playing in mud, digging 
holes for saplings). Arnold Adoff's poems need to be seen as 
well as heard, and Jerry Pinkney's watercolor paintings capture 
the moods of the poems and the emotions of this close-knit 
African American family. 

1.2 Allison, Diane Worfolk. This Is the Key to the Kingdom. Illus- 
trated by Diane Worfolk Allison. Little, Brown, 1992. ISBN 0-316- 
03432-0. 32p. 5-7. 

An African American girl steps out of her urban neighborhood 
and into an imaginary kingdom in which she visits a small, 
green, flowering town and meets a friend. Then she returns to 
the city with its contemporary problems. Hut did she really 
imagine it all? The muted wntercolors seem drenm-like. Svc also 
The Keys to My Kingdom: A Poem in Throe Lnfts^uaj^es by Lydi.i 
Dabovich (1.8) for a very different treatment of the snme rhynnv 

1.3 Berry, James. When I Dance. Illustrated by Karen H.irbour. Hnr- 
court Brace Jovanovich, 1991. ISBN 0-15-29556H-2, 12np, 12 and 
up. 

James Berry celebrates Black inner-city youths in Britain and 
their ties with Caribbean cultures in these fifty-nine poems. Ca- 
dence and rhythm are strong in the call-and-response and 
"work-song" poems written in Caribbean Nation Language. The 
poems are British, Caribbean, or mixed in voice. The varied and 
culturally rich collection lets the reader peek at the Black British 
youths' experiences on the street, relationships with friends and 
family, and feelings of joy and loneliness. 

1.4 Brut hiU', Joseph, and jonathan London. Thirteen Moons on Tur- 
tle'§ Hack: A Native American Year of Moons. Illustrated by 



ERiC 



2 



Poetrx/ and Verse 



Thomas Locker. Philomel Books, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22141-7. 32p. 
5-7. 

This collection of poems was inspired by Native American leg- 
ends. Chosen from various Indian cultures, the poems are intro- 
duced by an Abenaki grandfather explaining how the thirteen 
scales on the turtle's shell correspond to the thirteen moons of 
the yean Storyteller Joseph Bruchac, drawing on his Abenaki 
heritage, collaborates with poet Jonathan London to explain ani- 
mals' actions and natural occurrences. Thomas Locker's dark, 
sometimes-harsh but dramatic paintings capture the mood of 
the seasons and depict sunsets and variou., scenes of twilight 
and nightfall in the wilderness. Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

1.5 Bryan, Ashley Sing to the Sun. Illustrated by Ashley Bryan. 
HarperCollins, 1992. ISBN 0-06-020829-5. 32p. All ages. 

These twenty-three poems sing not only to the sun, but to the 
sea, the wind, the birds, and life on a warm sunny Caribbean 
island. But while the pix^ms celebrate steel drums, frangipani, 
and carnival, thoy also celebrate joy, love, beauty, and family. 
The feelings that they evoke will be recognized and shared by 
readers of all a^es and backgrounds. Ashley Bryan's kaleido- 
scopic artw(7rk make his first book of poc^try sparkle. Notable 
1992 Children's Dvdc Hooks in the Field of Social Studies. 

1.6 Carlstrom, Nancy White. Northern Lullaby. Illustrated by Leo 
and Diane Dillon. Philomel Books, 1992. ISBN 0-399-21806-8. 
32p. 4-8. 

A Native American baby says goodnight to all those objects in 
nature that are important to the people of the North: the moun- 
tains, the rivers, the animals, the trees. This poetic lullaby is 
accompanied by striking full-page airbrush illustrations which 
personify earth and sky The Dillons note that their illustrations 
ptirtray the spirit of all native peoples from Alaska and do not 
represent one specific group. 

1.7 Cassedy, Sylvia, and Kunihiro Suetake, translators. Red Dragon- 
fly on My Shoulder, illustrated by Molly Bang. HarperCollins, 
1992. ISBN 0-06-022625-0. 32p. 5-10. 

These thirteen haiku have been translated from the Japanese by 
the late Sylvia Cassedy and Kunihiro Suetake, a Japanese stu- 
dent of haiku. Each brief seventeen-syllable poem features a 
different animal— a fish, a crow, a frog, a cicada, a pony, and a 



Poetry and Verse 



3 



cat are among the creatures represented. Each haiku is strikingly 
illustrated by one of Molly Bang's big, bold, and colorful col- 
lages containing such common items as cookies, beads, tinfoil, 
cloth, screws, clothespins, wire, feathers, buttons, shells, and, of 
course, paper. ALA NoUihle Children's Books, 1993. 

1.8 Dabovich, Lydia. The Keys to My Kingdom: A Poem in Three 
Languages. Illustrated by Lydia Dabovich. Lothrop, Lee and 
Shepard Books, 1992. ISBN 0.688-09775-8. 32p. 5-7. 

In this version of the inulitional rhyme, the keys to the kingdom 
are paints and brushes. Follow a little girl on her imaginative 
journey, narrated in Sp*inish, French, and English, into the king- 
dom and the city, town, house, and room beyond. The colorful 
pen-and-ink drawings invite readers back to the pages again 
and again. See also This Is the Key to the Kinndivn by Diane 
Worfolk Allison (1.2). 

1.9 Demi, compiler (translated by T/.e si I luiUi}»). In the Eyes of the 
Cat: Japanese Poetiy for All Seasons. Illustrated by Demi. 
Henry Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-1955-3. 77p. All ages. 

A collection of classic Japanese poetry presents the poets' keen 
observations about nature. Organized by the four seasons, the 
poems feature animals both wild and domestic. Gn^its, frogs, 
monkeys, cats, bats, deer, wild boar — these nnil many others 
populate the pages of this small book. Demi's brightly colored 
illustrations add action to the poems. 

1.10 Glenn, Mel. My Friend's Got This Problem, Mr. Candler: High 
School Poems. I'hotographs by Michael j. Bernstein. Clarion 
Books, 1991. ISBN 0-H9919-833O. U)3p. 10 and up. 

iMCtional composites of students whom the author has taught 
over the yenrs help this poetry collection address some of the 
typical problems tnat adolescents confront every day, from ra- 
cism to uncaring teachers to teen pregnancy The poignant po- 
ems are directed at Mr. Candler, the guidance counselor, over the 
period of a week and are accompanied by photographs. Some of 
the poems arc about mature subjects, but middle school students 
will recognize themselves and their concerns as well. Notable 
1991 Children's Trade Books iu the Field of Social Studies, 

1.11 Greenfield, Eloise. Night on Neighborhood Street. Illustrated 
by ]an Spivcy Gilchrist. Dial Books for Young Readers, 1991. 
ISBN 0-8037-0778-9. 27p. 5 and up. 



Poetry and Verse 



These seventeen poems celebrate life in a vibrant urban African 
American community. They describe such ordinary experiences 
as street games, bedtime, sleep-overs, and "fambly time/' and 
they evoke such familiar emotions as joy, love, and nighttime 
fears. The focus is on both family and community. The poems 
vary in form and take added energy from the watercolor illus- 
trations. They will speak to contemporary children in any neigh- 
borhood. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992; Coretta Scott King 
Writing Honor Book, 1992; Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. 

1.12 Hale, Sarah Josepha. Mary Had a Little Lamb. Photographs by 
Bruce McMillan. Scholastic Hardcover Books, 1990. ISBN 0-590- 
43773-9. 32p. 3-7 (est). 

In this contemporary interpretation of Sarah Josepha Hale's tra- 
ditional verse, illustrated with color photographs, Mary is a 
young African American girl who wears glasses. The photo- 
graphs were taken in Maine on a farm and at a racially mixed 
school. An afterword that includes the original verse and a page 
from a McGuffey reader help to complete the book. Be sure to 
look for Mary's lamb on the endpapers. 

1.13 The House That Jack Built. Illustrated by Jenny Stow. Dial 
Books for Young Readers, 1992. ISBN 0-8037-1090-9. 28p. 5-8. 

In this fresh version of the traditional rhyme, the "maiden all 
forlorn" and the other human characters arc^ West Indians of 
African descent. The plants, animals, and architecture are all 
typical of the Caribbean. The collage illustrations reflect the 
colors of a sunny island day from bright morning through an 
orange and purple sunset and into a moonlit night. 

1.14 Joseph, Lynn Coconut Kind of llay; hland Poems. Illustrated 
by Sandra Spi»idel. Lotlirop, Lcc and Shepard Books, 1990. ISBN 
0-688-09120-2. 32p. 6-12. 

These thirteen poems evoke the sij^hts and sounds of a "coconut 
kind of day" on the island of Trinidad. They follow a younj; pirl 
from the morninj» sonj; of the rooster to the night sonj^s of the 
fro^H, birds, and other animals. Her experiences include buying 
icecream and helping the fishermen "pull seine," or pull in their 
fishing nets. Lynn Joseph has written the poems to keep her 
memories of home alive, and Sandra Speidel's Illustrations cap- 
ture the mood and convey the colors of a CarlblK»an island. 
Notable 1990 Children s Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 




I'niher afid Son 


1 




1 






p 


1 

li 






Ul ;>II/I lAI'M NI 



B. 





APER BOATS 



ftiAt^^A^A^^ ^^^f ^^^^^ 



tiiidiiit 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



A. Father and Son by Denize Lauture; Illustrated by Jonathan Green (see 1.15). B. 
Narlhern Luffaby by Nancy White Carlstrom; illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon (see 
1 fi) C. In for Wmtor, Out for Spring by Arnold Adoft; illustrated by Jerry Pinkney (see 
1 1) 0. Papor Bonts by Rabindranath Tagore; illustrated by Grayce Bochak (see 1 .23). 



?5 



Ernie Wanls Clilne^ Ne>^ Year 





c. 



My First Kwanxaa Book 

By Deborah M.NcwtenChocoHH « UlMtr«t«dtiyC«lMiM<v 




D. 



BEST COPY AVAILABU 



A. Uon Dancer: Ernie Wan's Chinese New Vear by Kate Waters and Madeline Slovenz- 
Low; illustrated by Martha Cooper (see 3.9). B. My First Kwamaa Book by Deborah M. 
Newton Chocolate; Illustrated by Cal Massey (see 3.1). C. Las Navidades: Popular 
Chfistmas Songs from Latin America compiled and illustrated by Lulu Delacre (see 2.5). 
D. Aida retold by Leontyne Price; illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon (see 2.9). 



Poetry and Verse 



5 



1.15 Lauturc, Uonj/iV Fatlior and Son. Illustrated by Jonathan GrecMi. 
Philomel licxiks, ISUN 0-399-2 1867-X. 32p. 6-9. 

"Father and son / hand in hand / Up on the road / in the sun. 
. . In strong, sin^ple words, this poem evokes the relationship 
between an African American father and son. They move up the 
road in perfect synchrony, "the soul of one / knowing the soul 
of the other/' until at the end of the day, when it is time to go 
down the road again. Illustrator Jonathan Green sets the piK?m 
in the Gullali country of South Carolina, but children every - 
where will understand the special bond between a child and his 
father 

1.16 I K in);ston, \fyra Cohn Let Freedom Ring: A Biliad of Martin 
Luther King, Jr. Illustrated by Samuel Byrd. Holiday House, 
1 W2 ISBN ()-H214-i)9fS7-0. 32p. All ages. 

Myra C ohn Livingston combines her pwtry with the oratory of 
M.irtin Lulher King Jr to create this biographical tribute to the 
Alrican American leader Samuel Byrd'soil paintings are realis- 
tic representations of significant events in King's life. The final 
page gives specific dales for quotations from King's sermons 
and speeches as well as infi>rmation about each scene depicted 
by the artwork. 

1.17 Mado, Michio (translated by the Empress Michiko of japan) 
The Animals: Selected Poems. Illustrated bv Mitsumasa Anno 
Margaret K. McElderry Books, 1992. ISBN 0-689-50574-4. 4Hp 
All ages. 

Twenty poems about animals are artfully presented in both )apa 
nese and English versions. The poems catch the essence of a 
variety of animals and celebrate the wonder and joy of nature 
I he imagery is accessible to children. This is a delicate piece ol 
bnokmaking in which Anno's ornamental cut-paper animals 
echo the elegant sensitivity of the poetry. 

1.IH Mathis, Sharon Bell Red Dog, Blue Fly: Football Poems. Illus 
trated bv jan Spivev Gilchrist. Viking Penguin, 199L ISBN 0-670 
32p. iy-U)' 

These fourteen pcx^ms carry the reader through a football sea 
son. The players are elementary school boys — and one girl — 
and sometimes the going is rough. The action-filled piKMUs r^ 
mmI a varielv of emotions, from beginners' ptters to the elati4)n 
ol winnni); tliech.mipioiiship. 1 he African American voices ring 
true, and jan Spuev Gilchrist captures both the action and the 



Poetry aud Verse 



emotions in her lively watercolor illustrations. Young partici- 
pants in team sports will recogni/e themselves in these pix?ms. 

1.19 Nye, Naomi Shihab, compiler. This Same Sky: A Collection of 
Poems from around the World. Four Winds Tress, 1992. ISBN 
0-02-768440-7. 212p. 8-13 (est). 

This collection of 129 pcwms from sixty-eight countries resulted 
from Naomi Shih.ib Nye's request, during the Gulf Crisis, for 
poems celebrating people and life outside the United States. 
Readers are treated to a rich variety of form, rhythm, and voice. 
Nye achieves her goal of showing American children that others 
around the world share many experiences and "this same sky." 
Notes about the pc>ets, a map indicating their homelands, a 
bibliography, and indexes to the poets by name and country are 
valuable extras. ALA Notable CfuhUvn's Hooks, 199.3. 

1.20 Slier, Deborah, editor. Make a Joyful Sound: Poems for Chil- 
dren by African-American Poets, Illustrated by Cornelius Van 
Wright and Ying-Hwa Hu. Checkerboard Tress, 1991. ISBN 1- 
56288-lKHM. U)8p. 3-12. 

l.angston Hughes, Kloise Grivnfield, Nikki Giovanni, Gwen- 
dolyn Brooks — these are some of the familiar African American 
not»ts whose work appears In this hook They are joined by some 
less familiar voices, such as Useni Hugene Perkins and Alfred 
W(K)ds. This collection, illustrated in lolor and in black and 
while, is a useful resource for busy teachers. Ignore the errone- 
ous inclusion c)i l ee Bennett Hopkins as an African American 
poet. 

1.21 Snto, Gary A Fire in My Hands: A Book of Poems, Scholastic 
I lardcover Hooks, 1990. ISBN 0-590 45021-2 64p. 10 and up. 

1 hese twenty three piunns, according to Gary Soto's foreword, 
"keep alive the small moments which add up to a large moment: 
life itself " They derive from Snito's experiences growing up as a 
Mexican American in the San Joaquin Valley of California. Each 
poem is preceded by an anecdote that places the poem in con- 
text At iheiMid ol iheiiook, in a useful section titled "Questions 
and Answers about l'(H»try,'' Soto answers i|uestions frequently 
asked of pcH»ts Notiihle Chthiren's fymie Hooks in tfie held of 
Stu tal Sfuiiie^ 

1.22 Solo, (.cUV Neighborhood t)des. Illustrated by David IJi.i/ 
llarcourt j^ra^e |ovanovich, 1992 ISBN 0 IS 256M79. eHp 7 and 
up 



ERiC 



Poclrxf (Uhi Verse 



7 



Those tu^cnty mic p(H»ms evoke an ordinary Mexican American 
neighborhood, but readers of all backgrounds will recogni/e 
and enjoy the humor, the joy, the familiarity of everyday experi- 
ences. Senor Leal's goal steals his pipe; one child urrites a letter 
to the moyor about a pesky brother; another child feels owner- 
ship of "his" library when he reads thirty books for the summer 
read a-thon. Gary Soto brings to life this neighborhood and the 
people who live there. Notable 1992 Children's TVade Books in the 
f leU of Social Studiei^. 

1.23 Tagore, Kabindranath. Paper Boats. Illustrated by Grayce Bo- 
chak. Caroline House, 1992. ISUN 1-878093-12-6. 32p. 6-10. 

Kabindrath Tagore, India's Nobel Pri/e-winning essayist, pot^t, 
and playwright, provides a simple and ekxjuent poem about a 
young boy who launches paper boats and hopes that they will 
reach people in another country. The paper illustrations accu- 
rately highlight the simplicity of the piece and the Indian coun* 
tryside Tagore's work is widely read and admired across India. 

1.24 Yolen, Jane, editor Street Rhymes around the World. Illustrated 
by Sc»venteen International Artists. Boyds Mills Press/Word- 
song, 1992. ISUN 1-878093-53-3. 40p. 4-10, 

This anthology of children's street rhymes and counting songs 
Irom seventeen countries has three features that set it apart from 
similar collections. Tirst. the illustrations are drawn by artists 
Irom the respective coiinlries. Sc^cond, most of the rhymes have 
been transliterated to maintain their original sounds. Third, each 
country has a full Uvo-page layout to enable simultaneous ap 
preciation of rhymes and accompanying artwork. Teachers 
could easily incorponile Ihe rhymes fnini this unii)uebook into 
a multicultural celehrahon in the classroom 



2 The Arts 



2.1 hcirho/ii, Stov(»n I Feel Hke Dancing: A Year with Jacques 
d'Ambnise and tlie National Dance In§litute. rhntngraphs by 
Cariilyn Cii>oi>»p d'Ainboise. Crown, 1992. ISBN CN517-5H455-7. 
4Hp All af»i»s. Nonfiilinn. 

llliislrrilcul vvilh lolnr photographs, this book iK'scribos, month 
by ninnth, a school year of preparations for the National Dance 
Insiilijie's I veni of the Year. Led by Jacques d'Ainboise, who is 
known as the Pied Piper of Dance, a multiethnic group ot New 
York ( ily children put together a spectacular dance evi»nt called 
"t hakra: A C elebrrilion of India." The text includes photographs 
of ihe event in which a thousand children look pari 

2.2 liryan, Ashley, compiler. All Night, All Day; A l^hild'8 l irst 
Book of African-American Spirituals. llhislr.Ued by Asliley 
Uryan. Alheneum, 1991. ISBN ()"6H9-31662 3. 4Hp. All ages (esl). 
NonHction. 

Ihis is another in the set of collections of Afriian Aineriian 
spirituals compiled by Ashley Bryan. Sonu* familiar songs 
"This Little Light of Mine/' "O When the Sainis Co M.iirhing 
In" — are Interspersed with lesser-known ones in Ihis inlioihu 
lion to twenly nf tliese uniquely African American creations A 
closing note suggests thai this collection "could n-ally hi* i allcil 
Spirituals lor Ihe ^oung and ALL!" Bryan's jewc»l toned illui.lia 
lit)ns sparkle like sunlit slaineil glass. I he hook int hides piano 
accompaniment and guitar i hords CotvUa Sioll Krnv; llhr^ttatum 
Honor IU)ok\ I'-h)? 

2.1 Burgle, irvinf^ C «uihbean C arniv.il: Songs of the West Indies. 
Illuslialed h^ l iane I essat lambouiine Books, |99,? ISBN U 
hHH-)i)77H (I ^Up 4 anil up Nonfidion 

I his (ollei Don ol C cn ibbean lolk son}»s begms wjlh llairv Bel.i 
lnnu»'s signaturr, ' l)a> n " It nu lud(»s IwoKc olh(»r smif's ot 
\in')ing types, unhiding play songs and hall««ds Ihe inusii, 
ainng with I iaiu» I essai 's lolorfuL fwn dimensit»nal ilhislia 
tion^^, ( onjures up images of palm lieos, bauiUia boats, ( ool bhu* 
waters, and hoi s.md Musical arrangements for xoiie, piano, 
.uiil guiicU ai * oinp.my the pi( luies An afterword by writer Uosa 
Ciuy pio\idesa useliil hisloiital (onl(»xl Nott^hh' /')9,M /^////n'M s 
htuU' Hook^ in ihr I ii'U of Soaal '^tufho^ 



The Arts 



9 



2.4 Cummings, Pat, complier and editor. Talking with Artists: Con- 
versations with Victoria Chess, Pat Cummings, Leo and Diane 
Dillon, Richard Egielski, Lois Ehlert, Lisa Campbell Ernst, 
Tom Feelings, Steven Kellogg, Jerry Pinkney, Amy Schwartz, 
Lane Smith, Chris Van AUsburg and David Wiesner. Bradbury 
Press, 1992. ISBN 0-02-724245-5. 96p, 8 and up. NonficlicMi. 

Pat Cummings has compiled and edited conversations with 
fourteen contemporary artists, several of whom arc African 
Americans. Each entry begins with a brief autobiographical 
sketch, followed by a question-and-answer format describing 
sources of inspiration, techniques, materials, family and pets, 
and how that artist got to do his or her first book. This work 
doubles as an art catalog, describing sample i llustrafclons by each 
artist by name, medium, and size. Childhood photos of each 
artist will captivate young readers. This will be practical, inspi- 
rational, and useful in many ways in the classroom. ALA Notable 
Children s Books, 1993; Boston Globe-Horn Book Nonfiction Awmi, 
1992: NCTE Orbis Pictiis Honor Book, 1993. 

2.5 Dclacre, Lulu, compiler. Las Navidades: Popular Christmas 
Songs from Latin America. Illustrated by Lulu Dclacre. Scholas- 
tic Hardcover Books/ Lucas Evans Books, 1990. ISBN 0-590- 
43548-5. 33p. All ages (est). Nonfiction. 

This bilingual (Spanish-English) edition of twelve traditional 
songs traces the celebration of the Christmas season — Las Navi- 
dades — in Latin America from Christmas Eve to the Epiphany 
in January. The songs are mostly from Puerto Kico, Delacre's 
native country; t.owevcr, reference is made in footnotes to 
Christmas customs and traditions from various other Latin 
American countries, including Mexico, Venezuela, and the Do- 
minican Republic. Musical scores are provided at the end of the 
book. The illustrations depict scenes typical of the holiday sea- 
son. 

2.6 Haskin.s, James. Black Dance in America: A History through Its 
People. Thomas Y. Cmwell, 1990. ISBN 0-690-04659-6. 232p. 11 
and up. Nonfiction. 

This photo-illustrated survey of the history of Black dance in 
America begins with a description of the practice of "dancing 
the slaves" on ships for exercise. Tracing the roots of dance to 
Africa, author James Haskins focuses on people who have 
adapted and perpetuated the ancient dance forms and devel- 
oped them into such varieties as ballet, tap, and ja//. Dancers 



erIc 



10 



The Arts 



introduced include Ucrt Williams, Bill "Bojanglos" Robinson, 
Kalherine Dunham, Chubby Checker, and Gregory Hines, as 
well as companies, schools, and choreographers. This is a solid 
companion to |ames Haskins's Black Music in America and Black 
Theater iu Aineriai Bet^l Oooits/or Young Adulh, 1991; Coretta Scott 
King Writing Honor Book, 1991 

2.7 Langstaff, John, compiler and editor Climbing Jacob's Ladder: 
Heroes of the Bible in African-American Spirituals. Illustrated 
by Ashley Bryan. Margaret K. McElderry Books, 1991. ISBN 
0-689-50494-2. 30p. 4 and up. Noiifiction. 

Old Testament heroes are the focus of the songs in this collection. 
The spirituals celebrate the triumph of good over evil, kindness 
over selfishness, and hope over hopelessness. Songs such as 
"Rock-a My Soul" and "Go Down Moses" capture the determi- 
nation of the oppressed to liberate themselves. The illustrations 
are notable for their style and color as well as for the depiction 
of the biblical heroes as people of African descent. Musical 
scores for piano, guitar, and voice are provided for each spiri- 
tual. 

2.8 Medearis, Angela Shelf, compiler. The Zebra-Riding Cowboy: 
A Folk Song from the Old West, Illustrated by Maria Cristina 
Brusca. Henry Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-1712-7. 32p. All ages. 
Nonfiction. 

In this Western folksong, an "educated fellow" shows up at the 
camp and asks to borrow a horse. Thinking he is just a green- 
horn, the cowboys give him the wild Zebra dun and expect to 
have some fun at the stranger's expense. But the cowboys are in 
for a big surprise. An afterword places the song in historical 
context and explains the casting of the stranger as African 
American and tne presence of African American and Hispanic 
cowboys. The musical score appears on the endpapers. 

2.9 Trice, Leontyne, reteller. Ai'da. Illustrated by Leo and Diane 
Dillon. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich/Gulliver Books, 1990. ISBN 
n-15-20lM05-X. 32p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

One of the best known opera singers to perform the role of the 
Egyptian Princess Aida is Leontyne I'rice, the African American 
diva. Illustrated with paintings of Egyptian friezes, her retell- 
ing of Giuseppe Verdi's opera "Aida" captures the drama of 
war, palace intrigue, and tragic forbidden love. An appended 
"Storyteller's Note" adds a special curtain call. The piciure book 



32 



format notwithstanding, the lengthy text makes this book suit- 
able for older readers. ALA Notnhle Children's Books, 1991; Coretta 
Scott King IllKStration Award, 1991, 

2.10 Sullivan, Charles, edilor Children of Promise: African-Ameri- 
can Literature and Art for Young People. Harry N. Abrams, 
IWL ISBN 0-8109-3170-2. 126p. 10 and up (est). Nonficlion. 

This anlholoRy for older readers includes literature and art se- 
lected to tell the history of African Americans from the time of 
slavery lo the twentieth century. It includes such poets and writ- 
ers as James Ualdvvin, Gwendolyn Brooks, and W. E. B. DuBois 
juxtaposed with the art of people like Komare Bearden, Jacob 
I awrence, and William H. Johnson. It also includes work by 
Walt Whitman, Thomas Jefferscm, Winslow Homer, and other 
prominent whites whose lives or works touched on African 
American life and history Host Hooks for Youn^i Adults, 1992. 



3 Ceremonies and 
Celebrations 



3.1 Chocolate, Deborah M. Newton. My First Kwanzaa Book. Illus- 
trated by Cal Massey. Scholastic/Cartwheel Bixiks, 1992. ISBN 
0-590-45762-4. 28p. 5^ (est). Nonfiction. 

"When Mama says, 'It's Kwanzaa time/ Daddy flies our red, 
black and grwn tla^^." In this introductory book, an unnamed 
boy describes the family's preparations for and activities during 
the seven day*^ of Kwan/aa, a holiday celebrated in December to 
hooiir African American history and culture. An afteru'ord pro- 
\ ides factual information about the origins of the holiday. The 
ln)ok also includes an explanation of Ngu/o Saba, or the "seven 
principles" of Kwan/aa, and a glossary of Swahili words used 
during Kwan/aa. C olorful illustrations in acrylics and colored 
pencil extend the text. 

3.2 C liflnn, I ucille Everett Anderson's Christmas Coming. Illus- 
trated by Jan Spivev Gilchrist. Henry Holt, 1991. ISBN O-KDSO- 

2Kp.4-H Fiction. 

"i-verelt Andersun / loves the sound / of Merry Christmases / 
all around" In simple, lyrical verse, Lucille Clifton expresses the 
excili'ment of a little African American boy at Christmastime — 
from IVcember 2t)lli to Christmas Day. Everett lives in the hous 
ing projucls with his mother and, like many children in many 
places, finds jny in the season. Newly reissued with red-bor- 
dered color illustrations by Jan Spivey Gilchrist, this book will 
c()nn(»cl with any youngster who just cannot wart until Christ- 
mas day. 

3.3 Dorros, Arthur Tonight Is Carnaval. Illustrated by the Club de 
Madras Virgin del Carmen of Lima, l^eru. Dutton's Children's 
Hooks, 1991. ISBN 0-525-44641-9. 28p. 5 and up. Fiction. 

Set in the Andes Mountains and narrated by a young fVruvian 
buy, this story tells of the boy's eager preparation for and antici- 
pation of Carn.u al, a i debration in curring just before Lent. The 
text is illustrated with (oik art wall hangings called arpillem^, 
criMli'd and dt^sjgncd by menUiers of a c cMipcTalive in Lima, 
Peru. A glossal V t>l Spanish i*. at the end o\ the W\{ as an» 



Ceremonies and Celebnitions 



13 



explanations of aspects of the pictures that might be confusing 
to young KMders. Notable 1991 Childreu's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. 

3.4 S {oyt-Goldsmtth, Di.ino. Totem Pole. Photographs by Lawronce 
Migdale Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8234-0809^. 32p. 8-12. 
Nonliction. 

DcU'id, a young niiMnbcr of the Tsimshian tribe in Washington, 
laki»s pridt* in being the son of a woodcarver. Aided by color 
phott)giaphs, lie describes his father's step by-step process of 
t ar\ ing .i toieni [loK* for the neighboring Klallam tribe and the 
ceuMnonies \\\M acionipany the raising of the pole. The book 
makes (ie.u that while ihe Tsimshian Indians maintain their 
am lent uisloms, llu'y are also ijuile contemporary A glossary 
and intlex are included NotMc /99() Cluldren s Trade Hooks tn the 
I leld of tioi tal Studies 

3.5 J«)senh, Lynn An island Christmas. Illustrated by C atherine 
Stckk C larion H(H)ks, Vm. ISUN 0 395-SH76I -1. 30p. 4-H. Fiction 

"IJ(» first day of Christmas holidays . . /' Rose yells "Is beach 
lime!" Hut first she must help with the sorrell drink, and tin* 
black currant cake, and the decorations, and the gifts. The whole 
family joins in this Trinidadian Christmas celebralion. An 
author's note gives information about Trinidad and Tobago and 
their Christmas customs. In spite of Catherine StiKk's depiction 
of Kosie in Topsy-like braids, the biK)k works as a lively celebra 
tion of an important family and community tradition in a place 
where Christmas is never white. Notable 1992 Chddreit's Trade 
Hooks tft the Field oj Social Studtes. 

3.6 Peters, Russell M Clambake: A Wampanoag Tradition. Photo 
graphs by John Madama. Lerner, 1992. ISBN 0-8225-2fi51 4 4Hp. 
8-11. Nonfiction 

This book is part of the We Are Still Here series focusing on 
contemporary Native Americans. In this photoessay, written by 
members of the Wampanoag tribe in southern Massachusetts, 
Steven Peters, a twelve-year-old Wampanoag, is learning how to 
prepare and host a traditional appaiiaui^, or clambake. The book 
lollows him through the preparations and the clambake itself, 
and then leaves him getting ready to play baseball the next day. 
A word list, pronunciation guide, and bibliography are in- 
cluded. See also People of the lireakift\{ Day by tVlarcia Sewall 



3?t 



14 



Ccnnnonirs md CcMnalions 



(7.13). Notnhic 1992 CluliUvn's Imir Honks m llw I icUi oj Snnal 
Studicti. 

3.7 Porter, A. P. Kwanzaa, IllustraUul liy j.niiu' I w Vmivr C'arol- 
rhoda Books, IWl. ISUN t)-H7hl4-f)f)H X. S~7. NonficUon. 

This book in the On My Own series ac t urately dc»8cribes the 
purposes and principles surround in^ the African American 
Kwanzaa celebration. Written much like an easy reader, the text 
is simple enough for early readers, but detailed enough to in- 
clude SwahiU phrases as well as the concepts of African Ameri- 
can pride and self-esteem. Realistic watercolors complement the 
informational text. This book would be particularly helpful for 
those without background knowledge of Kwanzaa or those 
wanting to start their own Kwanzaa celebration. 

3^H Rosen, Michael J. Elijah's Angel: A Story for Chanukah and 
Christmas* Illustrated by Aminah Brenda Lynn Robinson. Har- 
court Brace Jovanovich, 1992. ISBN 0-15-225394-7. 32p. 8 and up. 
Fiction. 

Michael, a nine-year-old Jewish boy, makes friends with Elijah, 
an elderly African American barber and woodcarver. One year 
when Christmas and Chanukah fall at the same time, Elijah 
gives Michael a carved angel. Michael fears he cannot keep a 
"graven image," but his parents help him understand the true 
meaning of Elijah's angel. Elijah Pierce was a renowned wood- 
carver from Columbus, Ohio, and both the writer and the illus- 
trator were inspired by him and his work. Notable 1992 Cluldrcuiy 
Trade Books in ihv Field of Social Sludten. 

3,9 Waters, Kate, and Madeline Sloven/ Low Lion Dancen Ernie 
Wan's Chinese New Yean Photograplis by Martha Ct)ope! 
Scholastic Hardcover Books, 1991). ISBN 0-59(1-4.3046-7. 3Up. 4-10 
(est). Nonfiction. 

Ernie Wan, the young narrator lives in New York's Chinatown 
and invites us to celebrate the Chinese New Year with his family. 
The many color photographs d(»tail the preparations for this 
important holiday and the rituals associated wMlh it. For exam- 
ple, we learn about the old belief that wearing something new 
renders a person unrecognizable to the evil spirits. 1 he highlight 
of the holiday is Ernie's performance of the dramatic lion dani e 
in the New Year's parade. Notahir 1990 Chddrens Trade Hooks in 
Ihe iteld of Soaal Studies. 



.1.10 VVnuil, (v\!(lv VV.n.hli NHmpa Afraid nf Hnvvk). A Boy Be- 
lonu's 4 Man M iViUiMikil Kiuj4?. Wrtlkt>r, 1W2. ISliN 0-H027- 
Hi;'> i> Ihj) H id NoiiHiiinn 

W.inhli Num[),i Ati.iitl cit Hawk n^laU's llu* story of his participa- 
\un\ in Jlu- \V\^\ I on! Mi'iiHirial Kitlt' i^n ll^e lOOlh anniversary of 
Hu^ niassai rr of ovim Viil I akoia (Sinux) Indians at Woundod 
Knro in thi' Hacllamis ol Soi.ili Dakota. For Wanbli Numpa, the 
diHii uh journi'v on liorneliai k is an initiation into manhood. 
C olor pliotoj>rapjis l aptinv tlie important details and the cold 
December landsiapi's as the l.akota honor their ancestors and 
try to "mend tlie saired lioop" of their lives. An introduction 
tells the story ol Wounded Knee, Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
linoks in the Field of Socuil Studies. 



4 People to Know and 
Places to Go 



4.1 Uoirno, Uiirb.mi. A Pianist's Debut: Preparing for the Concert 
Stage* I*hologriiphs by Uarbara Beirne. Camli liocla IJooks, Wi). 
ISI3M 0-87614-432-6. 56p. 9-12 (esi). Nonficlion. 

This book is pari of a series depicting young children in roles 
thai could lead lo fulure careers. Leah Yoon, an oleven-year-old 
Korean AmeriCiUi pianist, spends many hours a day pi acticing 
the piano. She aspires to be a concert pianist and moves with her 
grandmother from California to New York in order to attend the 
Julliard School ol Music. The book gives glimpses of hor daily 
life and the role ot family meinbers in supporting her piano 
playing. 

4.2 lierck, Judith No Place to He: Voices of fioinckss Children, 
Houghton Mifdin, IW. ISIIN (K395-53350-3. 14Kp. U) and up. 
Nonficlion. 

Through the words, poems, and stories of homeless children, 
author Judith Uerck presents a devastating account of homeless 
youth in Now York City. The book is meticulously researched 
and includes chapters that focus on the problems that arise 
when homeless families are forced lo live in shelters or welfare 
hotels— finding privacy, Retting an education, family separa 
lion., health risks, identity, and stress. ALA Notahh C/ii/r/rn/s 
Ms, 1992. 

4.3 Brusca, Maria ( rislina. On the Pampas. [llustrdtiHi by Maria 
Cristina Brusca, I lenry Holt, m\ . ISUN 0-Hl)5lM54M-5. 32p. 5-8 
Nonficlion. 

The author shan»s t hiliihood memories ot an unforgellable sum 
mer on Ium gramlpiuenls' ranch cin the pampas (grasslands) of 
Argentina. Marfa t rislina Hrusca and a younger cousin join in 
Ihe work ol Ihe j'^aiu hos (cowboys): caring for horses, lassoing 
calves, herding c .Ulle. Ihey also enjoy the social life of the coun- 
Iryside: listening lu hlorii»s, idlending an outdoor party, singing, 
and diint ing Hrusi a's vviUcMi olor iUuslrations depict these r(»- 
giooiU scenes anti more. Ihe inside cover contains a map and a 



Ih'ople fo Know uiui Pliuvs to do 



17 



"piclionaiy" ii! Sp.inisli wiirtls, inrliiJiiif^ a prnnuiKicition 
guide. Nottihic Childfvn's Ihuic lUwks nt flw l icld of Social 
Studies, 

4.4 Rkooiuiak, Niuimv Anik Meinniips. Illiislnikni by Ni)rniL*i» 
HkoDmlak. Henry Holt, mn ISBN ()-Hi)5(M2!i4 0. :\2p. All ages. 

Nnrmee likonmlak; an Inuk iioni near jiiiues Hay In Aixlie Que- 
bec, sh.ircshis ihiKiliniul with readers llirnugh his arl ami this 
bilingual {Innklitnl/FMiglisli) tt^xl. Yes, he slept in an iiflu In 
winter, bnl his nuMnnries ari^ cilsn full nf active play and of a 
severe ami demanding natural world inhabited by snowy owls, 
polar hiMrs, seals, ami ge(»se, as well as by rarer spirits such as 
lhi» SiMlna (the iniMni.iiii sea goildess) and the narwhal (sun uf 
till* SeducO Ai rylii and ap()liijue illustrations take us into the 
world i)\ 1 kounuak's [)ast, a wodd permanently changed by the 
iMeUion ul a largi* hytlruelei trie dam. NCTE Orhh Picln^ Honor 
lUwk, NotMc Pm ( hihimt'a Ihuie lionks in llw Mi ofSoml 
Siiiiiws. 

4.5 Haskins, 1 rancini* I Uenieinber "121." Illustrated by Francine 
liaskins. c hildren's Unok l^ress, IWl. ISUN 0-89239-100-6. 32p. 
5 -7. Nunfictiun. 

Using brightly roloreil, slyli/i'd illustrations, Francine Haskins 
introduces reailers In an African American family of the 1950h. 
C entered on the house in Washington, P.C., where she grew up, 
this autobiographical pitline book recalls large family dinners, 
Howdy-Dooily, the birlh of a baby brother, her father's days off, 
ami other details ot I'rancino's daily life from age three to age 
nine. Contemporary chiklren can still find something to connect 
with in this look at a traditional exteniled family 

4.() I buskins, Jim. Count Your Way through India. Illustrations by 
l.i/ Urenner iJoilson. C an)lrhi)da Hooks, 1990. ISUN 0-H7hl4-414- 
H 32p.7-UI(cst) Nonticlion. 

I'art of the Count Your Way series, this book introduces readers 
to counting hnm one to ten in the Hindi language. The focus is 
on introducing various aspects of India, including banyan trees, 
the flag of India, Mohantiiis Gandhi, the Taj Mahal, the Diwali 
festival of lights, the l ountrivs bordering India, the spices of 
Indian l ooking, wihllifi* in India, and Kavana. The text and color 
illuhtratiuns si>rvi» as an intnuluction to an Uast Indian culture, 
lUui many M S. i hihiriMi will enjoy counting to ten hi a new 
langfUage 



3y 



18 



Ih'oplc to Kmno and PI(UVi^ to Co 



4.7 Hciuplly, DtMits J. Puerto Hico: An Unfinished Story. Alheiieiim, 
1991. ISBNU-6K^)-3I43M) 133p. 12 and up. Nonfu lkin. 

Replete with iifinies, dcHes, laws, and other details, this book 
focuses on the status ol Tuerto Kiro and whether it should re- 
main a cnmnionwe.dth, hiHome a state, or become an inde 
pendent nation. Author IJenis Hauptly presents a detailed ami 
balanced Ireatnient of the history of the island from before thi» 
time of Columbus, throufjh its colonization by both Spain and 
the United Stales, to the present day. He discusses the options 
for the future that must be determined by the Puerto Hican 
people. 

4.8 Hewelt, Joan Laura Luve§ HorKes. Photoj^raphs by Richaril 
Hewett. Clarion books, 1990. ISBN 0-89919-H44-9. 40p. 7-U). i it- 
tion. 

Having a father who works at a California boarding; and riding; 
stable and living right next to the stable have fueled Laura 
Santanna's desire not only to ride but to compete in horse 
shows. This book chronicles some of eight-year-old Laura's 
early riding adventures as well as her experiences at her first 
horse show. Horseback-riding enthusiasts will enjoy reading 
about her experiences as well as looking at the full-color pic 
tures. 

4.9 Hoig, Stan. People of the Sacred Arrows: The Southern Chey- 
enne Today. Cobblehill Hooks, 1992. ISBN ()-525-65()HH. 1 . 130p. 
10 and up. Nonfiction. 

This volume offers an honest and sympathetic view of contem- 
porary Cheyenne Indians in Oklalioma. Stan Hoig tells some- 
thing of the Cheyenne'*; history, especially the injustices that 
they have suffered at thu hands of whites. The focus, however, 
is on today and the ways in which the Cheyenne manage to live 
in two worlds, overcoming injustices and keeping their tradi- 
tions and values alive. Hoig briefly profiles the work of individ- 
ual Cheyennes and ends on a hopeful note. Black-and-white 
photographs and old prints complement the readable text. 

4.10 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. Arctic Hunter Photographs by Law- 
rence Migdalc. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0972-4. 32p. 
8-12. Nonfiction. 

Reggie lives in Alaska above the Arctic Circle, hi June, he and his 
family go to their camp to hunt and fish in the traditional 
Inupiaq way. Then they return to their village and live the mod- 



■10 



I\\)f)lc to Know and Places to Go 



19 



orn Wiiy — with supermarkets, piz/a, and video j^fimeb. With the 
ht'lp of color photographs, Keggie describes his life as a promi 
hiupiaq, how his people have chanj^ed with the limes, and how 
they still keep the old traditions. Section titles are in nngli^h and 
in Inupiak. A glossary and index are included. See also Ei^kmo 
Hoy: Life in au hnipuiq Eskimo Villa}i;c by Russ Kendall (4. 14) 
Notable 1992 Chiliirept's Trade Hoi^ks in the Field of Social StutUes. 

4.11 Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. Pueblo Storyteller. Photographs hy 
Lawrence Migdale. Holiday House, 1991, ISUN 0-K234-l)H64'7 
32p. H-12. Nonfiction. 

April, a young CtKhiti Indian girl who lives with her grand|)iU' 
ents in the 0>chiti Pueblo near Santa Fe, New Mexico, describes 
the life and customs of her people. Her grandparents are potters 
who niiike, among other things, storyteller figurines. As in !.)i 
ane Hoyt-Goldsmith's companion volumes, Totent Pole (3 4) and 
Artie Hunter (4.10), the text and photographs offer a clear sense 
of mcHlern Native Anu»ricans keeping old tnulitions alive vvhili* 
living thoroughly modern lives. An index, glossary, and proniiiv 
ciation guide are helplul, ns are the informative photo captions. 
See also Pueblo f]o\f: Crowtni^ Up in Two Worldi^ by Marcia Keegan 
(4.13) and Children of Cloir A rantily of Puehh Potters by Kina 
Swent/ell (4.24). Notable 1991 Children'^ Trade linoks in the Fwld of 
Social Studies. 

4.12 Hunter, Latoya. The Hiary of Latoya Hunter: My First Year in 
Junior High. Crown, W2. ISliN 0-517-5851M. 131p. 10-12. 
Nonfiction. 

Twelve-year-old Latoya Hunter records, in her diary named 
JiUiice, the events of her lirst year of junior high school in the 
Hronx. For her, it is a dilliiult year: shtM»xperiences conflict with 
her mother; her visit "haik home" to Jimiiiica is a big disappoint- 
ment; her "lirst love" turns sour. On the othc»r hand, she is n 
liridesmaiil at hi»r hrotlu'r's wedding and a loving aunt to her 
ni»w neph(»w Her perceptivi* and sensitive observations will 
strike a |iUnili<u ( honl witli many pre adiilescents. 

4.13 KeegiUi, Mania I'uebln Hoy: Cirowing Up in Two Worlds. IMuv 
tographs hy Marc i.i Kirgan C ohblehill Hooks, 1991. ISHN 0-525- 
O^OhO-l. 4Hp 7 9 (est). Nonfiction. 

limniy Koyhal is (en, anil in many ways he is typical of contem 
porary Anu»rii an hoys Ins agiv Althi)ugh he lives in the ancii'nt 
Pueblo village* ol San IKIelonso in Ni»w Mexico, he riili>s a bike 



11 



20 



/Vi7>/i' to Know ami Phho^ to Co 



In sthnni, dnos sthnol work iMi i\ ioni|niloi; Idvcs sports, .iiul 
p-Mijoys lishin^; Al Iho sdnii* liiiio Un is kvuning .iboul his Pudilo 
Indiiin hi.*ritcigi' .uul IrdJiHniis nnd is prirtliipiiling in Iho Irihal 
rilu.ils aiitl aiivnioiiies of his pooplo. Color photographs liopirl 
linuny's daily .a li\ iljos in two worlds. Sei» also rurhio ^tonftclhn 
by Piano Hoyt-Goldsmith (4.11) and CInltiivn ofChuf: A hminh/ of 
Piicbln Pollers by Kiiia Swenl/oll (4.24). NoUM' 1991 Cliildivft'^ 
Troiic fioah; tii the Fu'ld of Stoaal Studn's, 

4.14 Kundall, Russ. Eskimo Boy: Lift! in an Inuplau IZHkiino Villa);i\ 

Photographs by Uuss Kendall. Scholdhtii ifardiovi'r Hooks, 
ISBN 0-590-43(195-3. 40p. 5-7 (est). Nonliilion. 

Norman Kokeok is a sovon-year-old Iniipiao I skinu) living in 
tho island village of Shishmarof, Alaska. This book ili»srribf»s for 
young readers vvh.it his life is like. It i»niphas!/es how inm h 
Nt)rman is like "typit al" American seven year olds, allhoiigh il 
shows how the harsh climate affects village lite I he book in 
I ludes a glossary of Inupiaq liskimo words and an afterword 
with information about modern-day Eskimos. C\)lor photo 
graphs will appc»al to young readers. Svo also Arcfic Ituufn hy 
iJiane Moyt-Goldsmith (4.10). Notable 1992 CInhimt's Tmle Hooks 
tfi fliv I iclii of Soi hltulies, 

4.15 Knight, Mar^»y lJurns. Talking Walls. Illustrations by Anne Sib 
ley O'lirien lilbury House, 1992. ISI3N 0-88448-102-6. 34p. H-10. 
Nonfiction. 

I>nm endpaper to endpaper, Tnlkifi^ Walh takes the reader on an 
internaliona! tour of the world's walls, honi the Great Wall of 
China to the llerlin Wall. Was the wall built to divide or unite? 
What dtH»s tlie wall say about the language, conflicts, and reli- 
gions of a people * C an we iniay»ine a world without Wiills? The 
vibrantly roloied pastel illllslr.Mion^l vividly portray voices of 
the talking; walls as they iinpac i on i hlldren globally. 

4.10 I evviof^tnn; Anna, a<lapt(M' Aiilonio'fi Uain I ntesl. Iliotographs 
by I dward Marker ( anjhhoda Hi)!)ks, VN \ ISHN 0 H7hl4 749 X. 
4t^p 7 It) Nontiitinn 

Aninnii) |ose is an eiglil year nld hoy who lives in the AnM/nn 
lain h)iest ul Mra/ll I le desi nln's es'eryd.iy lib' {\\oiv, whiMi» his 
(ath(M is a rnbbei tapper I le alsu inaki^s \\w i ase lor piesei ving 
thi* rain lonva antt his lainilyS Wiiy ot lib' Photngjaphs, maps, 
and diavvlnp,s help tell the slory, while interspi'i'sed expository 
text adds lai liial matiMl.il I hi* hot)k also explains Ihe pohtl( al 



4;.' 

erIc 






A. r/i/ luuni A t\oiant\ (itti ljy l^ilricia Mf.Mnhnn; photogmphs by Michael F. O'Unon 
(HfHj 4 III) B liilkit\u Wiillfi l)y M.uyy hiirnR Knlohli Klimtraifld by Anne SIbloy O'Brien 
inm 4 tfi) C. Ihnuilfiyii Vr4nmlunu (hilUiftis by Jnn Roynoids; photopraphs by Jun 
MHyi)i)l(lij (Gtio 4 ^1) 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

ERIC 



Count NNir mythtvugH 

India 



mi 




AKCTIC MEMORIES 




Norince fikoDiiiiak 



A. CniJtU Vnui Way thiough iiufui hy lifii HaHkiiiij illufiti.itiui hy I 1/ IIkidmmi 

(!,fjo 4 6) H. A f tW)ily in UmiV) ijy liny Yii, |ilio((»(jni|)li!i liy i Iimii (ijimi 

4 ?/) C. Afcifc Memories ^uWhw rtrid illiisliHlnd hy Ihnnmi I koniniiik (hMH 4 4) 



BEST COPYAVAILABU 



People to Kmnv ami Places to Go 



21 



ionlext in which Antonio's family lives. Agkissary and index arc 
included. 

4.17 Lomas Gar/a, Carmen (as told to Harriet Rohmer). Family IMc- 
lures/Cuadros de Familia. Illustrated by Carmen Lomas Gar/a. 
Children's Book Press, 1990. ISBN 0-89239-050-6. 31 p. 7 and up. 
Nonfiction. 

Through the art and text of Family Pictures, artist Carmen Lomas 
Garza weaves together a rich cultural fabric that tells of her 
childhood in the border town of Kingsville, Texas, incluclinf* 
detailed scenes of her Hispanic American family and < ommii 
nity. Fourteen "story pictures" chronicle her life from ago five to 
age twelve, when she knew she wanted to become an artist 
Presented in English and Spanish, Family Pictures is long on 
instructional possibilities that span the elementary school cur- 
riculum. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991. 

4.18 McMahon, Patricia. Chi-hoon: A Korean GirL Photographs by 
Michael F O'Brien. Boyds Mills Press/Caroline House, 1993. 
ISBN 1-56397-026-0. 48p. 8-10. Nonfiction. 

"All Korean children are expected to keep a diary." Kim Clii- 
hoon, an eight-year-old girl living in Seoul, is no exception. 
Excerpts from her diary help to frame this account of a week in 
the life of Chi-hoon and her family. Color photographs aiid 
extensive text introduce the details of daily life in this modern 
city. American readers will find many similarities to their own 
lives, as well as many differences. 

4.19 Mennen, Ingrid, and Niki Daly. Somewhere in Africa. Illus- 
trated by Nicolaas Maritz. Dutton Children's Books, 1992. ISBN 
0-525-44848-9. 32p. 6-8 (est). Fiction. 

Ashraf knows that somewhere in Africa lions and zebras and 
crtKodiles live in the wild, but he has met them only between the 
pages of his favorite book. He lives in a large, bustling city, and 
as he treks to the library to "stalk the shelves" of the "jungle of 
books," the reader accompanies him in taking in the colorful 
urban sights and sounds. The authors and artist, all from Cape 
Town, South Africa, pay tribute to their city and also correct a 
commonly held misconception about the continent of Africa. 
Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies, 

4.20 Regguinti, Gordon. The Sacred Harvest: Ojibway Wild Rice 
Gathering. Photographs by Dale Kakkak. Lerner, 1992. ISBN 
0-8225-2650-6. 48p. 8-11. Nonfiction. 



22 



People to Kfww and Places to Go 



l^lrl of Ihe We Arc Still Here scries aboul Native Americans 
today, this book tollows Glen Jackson Jr. as he learns to harvest 
wild rice. Glen lives on an CDjibway reservation in northern 
Minnesota. For the Cljibway, wild rice is a sacred food, and in 
learning to harxesl it, Glen is carrying on the traditions of his 
people. Photographs provide much of the information for this 
nook, which also includes a word list and suggestions for further 
reading. Author Ciordon Kegguinti is a member of the Leech 
Lake hand of Ojilnvay Notable 1992 Children s Trade Hooka in the 
Field of Soi Ud StudwH. 

4.21 KeynoUls, Jcur lliinalay.i: Vanishing Cultures* Photographs by 
Jan Keyni)hls llarcouri Urace Jovanovich, l^^L ISUN 0-15- 
2344hS^. l(lp M il (est). Nonficlion. 

Yangshi, a young Sherpa living in a Himalayan village, intro- 
duces readeni to [ho origin of the Sherpa people, drinking chia, 
buying food and trading goods at the market, and going to the 
monastery to meet the Lama and spin the prayer wheels. Read- 
ers will experience a taste of what life is like in the Tibetan 
highlands of the Himalayas and will gain an understanding of 
one of the w^orld's vanishing cultures. Notable 1991 Children's 
Trade lUiok^ ifi the l ieid of Social btudie^^. 

4.22 Reynolds, Jan Sahara: Vanishing Cultures. Photographs by Jan 
Reynolds. Harcourl Hrace Jovanovich, IWL ISliN 0-15-269959-7. 
30p. 8-n. Nonfiction. 

Through the story of the daily life of a boy named Manda, 
author Jan Reynolds describes the contemporary social customs 
of the nomadic Tuareg people of the Sahara. Readers are intro- 
duced to real personalities through the eyes and experiences of 
Manda and his family. The Tuareg culture comes to the reader in 
the voice of a storyteller and is strengthened by vivid, realistic 
photographs. Like its companion, Himalaya (4.21), this book of- 
fers an empalhelic understanding of one of the world's vanish- 
ing cultures. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies. 

4.23 Schmidt, Diane. I Am a Jesse While Tumbler. Photographs by 
Diane Schmidt. Albert Whitman, 1990. ISliN 0-8075-3444-7. 40p. 
All ages. Nonliclion. 

"Last year we did 570 shows and went to twenty different 
stales." Ik'ing a niember of the Jesse White Tumblers, a team 
mostly made uf) of African American youngsters from the 



10 



People to Know md Places to Go 



23 



Cabrini-Grecn housing project in the iniUM* city of Chicago, is an 
exciting part of Kenyon Conner's life. The mover and shaker 
behind tne team is Jesse White, a former teacher who is an 
Illinois state representative. In this photoessay, Kenyon helps us 
see just how impressive these dedieateii and talented young 
people really are. 

4.24 Swent/ell, Kina ChildrtMi of Cidy: A I aiiiily of Pueblo Potters. 

rhotographs by Hill Steen l.orner, 1942. IbUN 0-8225-2654-9. 
40p. H-10. Nonfiction 

An extended (ainily ol lew.i Indian jiotters from the Santa Clara 
Pueblo in New Mexico follow ancient customs In create their 
distinctive pottery. Led by Cila (nnUher) Kose, they gather the 
clay, clean it, shape it, dry it, polish it, fire it, and sell some of the 
pieces. The author is herself a Santa Clara potter, and her text, 
with many Tewa words interspersed, has the ring of authentic- 
ity. Color photographs make the pottery process accessible to 
young readers. A word list and bibliography are included in this 
book in the We Are Still Here series about Native Americans 
today. See also Pueblo Storyteller by Diane Hoyt-Goldsmith (4.11) 
and Pueblo Hoy: Growin}^ Up hi Two Worlds by Marcia Keegan 
(4.13). 

4.25 Thompson, Peggy. City Kids in China. Photographs by Paul S. 
Conklin. HarperCollins, 199T 1S13N 0-06-021655-7. 144p. 10 and 
up (est). Nonfiction. 

The author and photographer provide the flavor of life from a 
child's point of view in present-day Changsha, a city located in 
central China. Captivating black-and-white photographs depict 
people shopping in open-air markets, the noodle maker frying 
noodles, and the barber giving a shave outdoors. Special events 
and individuals are highlighted in boxes. The index aids the 
beginning researcher in this highly informative and entertaining 
book. 

4.26 Wells, Kuth. A to Zen: A Book of Japanese Culture. Illustrated 
by Yoshi. Picture Book Studio, 1992. ISBN 0-H870H- 175-4. 24p. 7 
and up. Nonfiction. 

khi, HI, san (1, 2, Open this sophisticated alphabet book — with 
the spine on the right — and meet modern japan, its language, 
and its culture. The topic on each page is given in Japanese — on 
the right, read fnini top to bottom — and in English. Learn about 
aikidn, orijfmui, si/s///, and yen. Meet a daruma, a doll that can help 



24 



People to Know iUhi Pliices to Co 



you mcvi a S.uor the colorful illuslMlions, orij^inaliy tlono 
in delatliHi batik, lhal maki* Ihis biK)k an inforniative work o( art 
Notable 1992 ChtUren's Iriuie lhu)ks at the I telii of Sonnl Sfwiieh 

4,27 Yii, Ling A Tainily in Taiwan, rhologriiphs by Chvu Ming ji»ng 
Urnor, 1990. ISI3N 0 H225-16H5 3. 32p. 10 ami up(esl). Nonfution 

Tht^ anpL'aling phologranhs imnu»c1ialely ilraw llu» rwilor init) 
the life of twelve-year-old Fang hsin and her (aniily In laipei, 
Taiwan. On each page, readers see the family members pie lured 
in their daily niuiines at home, school, and work. Celebrations 
of special holidays are also depicled. hi addition, facts about 
Taiwan and its geography are presented at the front and back of 
the book. 



48 



5 Concepts and Other 
Useful Information 



5.1 Ijiiberluy, KobiutiV Taking a Wiilk: A Book in Two Lan- 
guages/Caminandot Un l.ihro en Hos Lenguas. Illustrated by 
Kohccca Kmbi-Miey. l.itllu, Itrovvn, mO. ISUN 0-316-23640-3. 28p. 

This book inviU»s iho ymini; diilii to tiikc n walk— through the 
neighborhnixl, Id lhi» st hool and playground, down the street, 
across llu» brid}^,t», by ihv park, and back home. Scenes and ob- 
jects alonj; the way are shown in simple, colorful forms. The text 
consists of identifyinj; labels and a sentence or phrase at the 
bottom of the page, all in English and Spanish. Older learners of 
either English or Spanish as a second language might also find 
this book useful. 

5.2 Falwell, C alhryii. Shape Space. Illustrated by Cathryn Falwell. 
C larion Hooks, I W2. ISBN 0-395-61305-1. 32p. 4-8. 

A young African American gymnast opens a box only to find 
bright, vibrant, colorful geometric shapes. She empties the box 
n( rectangles, triangles, semicircles, circles, and squares and, 
altiT a brief contemplation, decides to dance, rock, step, stack, 
wear, and share the shapes. Following a romp with a "shapely" 
friiMid, the gyninast returns the shapes to the box and sits on top. 
Author Cathryn Falwell's playful, sometimes-rhyming verse, 
along with her full-color illustrations, creates a whimsical explo- 
ration into geometric shapes. 

5.3 Carne, S. T. One White Sail. Illustrated by Lisa Etre. Green llger 
I'ress, 1992. ISBN 0-671 -75579-X. 26p. 3-6. 

Rhythmic verse and bright watercolor paintings make this 
counting book attractive and appealing. We see one white sail at 
sunrise, and go through the day to "ten boats asleep 'neath a 
pale island moon." Although the numerals are not included, the 
pictured people can be easily counted. (Unfortunately the "three 
girls walking / with baskets of bread" look more like women 
than girls.) Even children beyond the "counting book" age can 
enjoy this book for its vivid pictures of island life. 



26 



Cofurpts (uui Other Usi[ful htfonunUoft 



5.4 ciivtMispun, AiUAv Aron. Daddies. Illiislraled by Adelu Aron 
CinHMispiin. niilimiol Books IWl. ISBN 0-349^22259-6. 4Hp. 4-(». 

Willi d hu^ iind .1 kiss on the front cover, Daddii'ii iiilrodiifos the 
spoiidl reliilionship between fathers and children across cul- 
tures, hroin the first hello to a baby through the teaching, guid- 
ing, and pifiying of childhood, Daddiea celebrates the loyalty, 
devotion, and joy that can make a special bond between a father 
and child. The black-and-white photographs accompany a po- 
etic loxt to depict an array of emotions experienced by fathers 
and their children. 

5.5 I lausherr, Uostnarie. What Instrument Is This? Scholastic liard- 
( over Books, IW2. ISBN 0-590-44644-4. 38p. 5-10. 

Color photographs of multicultural children holding instru- 
intMith, their faces full of curiosity, are coupled with the lead-in 
caption that asks: "What instrument is...?" For each of llie 
eighteen mslruments, the answer is revealed on the following 
[lage in a black-and-white photograph, along with information 
about the instrument, its construction, and its use. From cover to 
cover, including the glossary and final notes, music is portrayed 
as a source of )oy for everyone — young and old, the physically 
and mentally challenged, male and female. 

5.6 ,c*nness, Aylette. Families: A Celebration of Diversity, Commit- 
ment, and Love. Photographs by Aylette Jenness. Houghton 
Mifflin, 1990. ISBN! 0-395-47038-2. 47p. 7 and up. 

The changes in the "traditional" family unit are compellingly 
presented in this black-and-white photo essay. Seventeen young 
people from varied cultures describe in the first person their 
ideas of family structure and its joys and challenges. The hook 
begins by asking, "Families — what are they?" The answer lies in 
the faces, voices, and artwork of the adults dnd children that 
partk ipated in this special project of the Children's Museum ol 
Boston. Nolnhic 1990 Chihimt's Imie Hooks in Ihc lirUi of sot uil 
Siuiiics. 

5.7 l.ankford, M.irv U Hopscotch around the World. Illiislraleil h\ 
Kan^n Mih)ne. Morrow Junior Hooks, 1992 ISHN (I hMH IIH LMI h 
4Hp. 5-10. 

"1 lopscolch has been played throughout history in almost v\ o\ \ 
country of the world," lucording to aulhiu* Mary 1 anktortl 1 hhi 
hook presents nineteen versions ot hopscoii h, with ditigr«inis 
and directions tor filay. The variants l cnne from places ds diverse 



27 



Anih.i rinci ( hin.i, Ni(»i»iiii «uitl AldskiV Allhnuj»h piittLMiis 
vnry aiul lln* t)l))i'il in be thrown li^kt's diffurenl shdpus nnd 
ililliToiil iirinuvs, llu* l)iisii luk's iiiv siiiiiliir wiirkiwidt*. A mnp 
and (1 bibliof^r.iphy ,nv ini kidcd. M.iny ilkislialions give a brief 
stinsi'of a parlicuku t oiinlry'silimali', j»i'nji;raphy, nr Ini al arrho- 
nk)j^y. Nalnhli' 1992 Clultiivn's Tmie Hooks iu the Field of Social 
Sluihes. 

5.8 Linden, Ann Marie One Smiling Grandma: A Caribbean 
Counting Book. Illustrated by Lynne Kussell. Dial Books for 
Ynung Keaders, 1W2. ISHN 0-8037-1 132~H. 26p. 4-^. 

"One smilinj; grandma in a rocking chair / Two yellow bows 
lied on braided hair." This rhymed and rhythmical counting 
l)oi)k evokes the flavor of a Caribbean island. A young Afro- 
C aribbiMn girl introduces readers to steel drums, flying fish, 
t onch shells, mongooses, and other island sights, st^unds, and 
l.isli»s I he brightly colori'd acrylic paintings of people, animals, 
and objects to count give a sense of warmth and sunshine. 

5.9 Mai Kinnon, |)e|ihie My First ABC. Photographs by Anthea 
Sieveking Barron's kducalional Series, 1S)S)2. ISBN 0 8120-6331 - 
7 2Hp. 2 S 

I his alphahel bonk is illuslraled with photographs of children 
from many «»Uinii f'ronps hach child's name ami the object 
(ealured begin with Ihesanie lelli»r, allowing for both uppiT-case 
and lower c,u:i> leUers (sik h .is "Allison's ««pple") kniries like 
"Cathy's lar" and "|)a\ iirs doll" previMil gt»nder bi<is Ample 
while space ki»eps llu* la\ oul nnt hillenul, whilt^ hripjil borders 
around lt»xl cHuI pii Uues svwv lo both sefjarale t\\u\ unity tlu» 
elements on the page 

5.10 MiMillan, Bruii* Laliiig iraclions. Photographs by Bruce 
McMillan. Scholashc Marik nver Books, 1W| IhBN O-WU-43771)- 
4. 3()p. 2-7. 

One African Amerit an hoy, f)ne wlillt^ boy, ami a shaggy dog 
take us on a delicious IraHional journi'V S|,uting with bananas 
and ending with pi//a, lhi» threi>somi' eal llu'lr way through tlu' 
simplest fractional units- halvi»s, thirds, and fourths. The full- 
color photographs introdui e Ihe bastr n«athemalical i oncepts of 
fractions and reinforce lhi» loncepls ol friendship .nul sharing. 
Recipes are also incluiUHl, with hps lor t hild involvenienl with 
the cooking. ALA Nolohh' CluUien'H Hookh, I99A. 



28 



Comrpti; and Other Iheful Infomntkm 



5.11 Miller, Mary Beth, .ind George Ancona. Handtalk School, I'ho 
lo}»raphs by Gei^r^^e Ancona. Four Winds IVess, 1991. ISUN 04)2- 
7(HN!2-2. 32p. 4-11. 

What is the sign for shower? teacher? juice? Jen Johnnie Ma Jeff, 
lara, and Shira introduce readers to American Sign Language 
(ASL) and the world of the deaf. We are led through a routine 
day for Jen — at home, at school, and preparing for the Thanks- 
giving play. Shira even calls home using the Telephone Device 
lor the beaf ( I DD). The full-color photographs make it possible 
for readers to see the signs and try their "hand" at signing. 

5*12 Morris, Ann. Tools. IMiotographs by Ken Heyman. Lothrop, Lee 
and Shepard Hooks, 1992. ISUN (L6HH-10171-2. 32p. 3-7. 

Through full-color photographs and simple text, this book ex- 
plores tools, both familiar and unfamiliar, used in daily life 
around the world. An axelike adz from Bali, twetvors used by a 
shoemaker in Peru, and a brush used by an artist in Chinii are 
some of the many tools represented in this book. An index 
briefly explains the context and use of each tool, and a map helps 
children to hxate all the countries mentioned. 

5.13 Rosenberg, Maxine H. Brothers and Sisters. Photographs by 
George Ancona. C larion Hooks, 1991. ISUN 11-395-51121-6. 32p. 

K-in. 

Urothius and sistcMS titim three different families share tluMr 
liH»lings about their siblings. Jessica, a biracial child ami the 
old(»ht o( lhrei», is responsible for her younger sisters. Justin, the 
youngest of two boys, found a real friend in his older brother. 
Ihian, an Aliit an American middle child, appreciates his sisters 
but wislies for a brother. These children's narratives reveal the 
essence nl daily interactions of brothers and sisters. The fulL 
color photographs enhance this portrayal of the strong bonds 
|H>lw(»en siblings. 



%) ^ 



Biography: Individuals 
Who Made a Difference 



Adior, Urivid A, A Picture Book of Jesse Owens. Illustrated by 
Kobort Casilla. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0966-X. 32p. 
5-H. Nonfictinn. 

Jussc Owens was ihv hero of the 1936 Olympic Games in Berlin, 
proving Hitler was wron^ to believe that Blacks were inferior. In 
this contribution to his Picture Book Biography series, David 
Adler re-creales Owens's life story from his birth as the son of 
sharecroppers, throuj^h bis career as a track star and the disap- 
jiolnlmenls thai followed, to his death in 1980. The watercolor 
Illustrations capture the action and drama of Owens's life. An 
author's note and chronoloj-;y provide additional information. 

AdK»r, David A A Picture Hookof Sim6n Bolivar. Illustrated by 
Koberl C'asilla. 1 loiiilay House, 1992. ISBN 0-82344)927-9. 32p. 
K- 10 (est). Nonficlion. 

I he early nineli»enth ci»/Uury wa.s a time of rebellion and war in 
South Ann»rica as llie Spanish-ruled colonies fou[];ht for inde- 
pi>ndenii' Ironi Spain. Simon Bolivar, a Venezuelan by birth, 
playtui a ki\v J'^l^* 'n freeinj^ five of the republics from Spanish 
rule. This book ri»i'ounls some of the political and military ac- 
coniplishini»nls that earned Bolivar the title of El Lilurtiuior (the 
IJbiMatoi) and recof^nitiim tis "the Second Washinf^lon of the 
New World." Untorlunalely, the book contains misspellings 
("('ara<'us" for aracas" and "Lebertador" for "Libertador") 
and an iniplied connection between physical features and be- 
havior (blond hair ami blue eyes to indicate a quiet manner, dark 
curly hair and black eyes lo indicate a loud and difficult person). 

Collier, James Lincoln. Duke Ellington. Macmillan, 1991, ISBN 
0-02-722985-8. MOp. 10 and up. Nonliction. 

Duke Ellington always knew he Wiis someone special. I le grew 
up in a middle-class Black family in Washington, I ).C ami even 
though he was a self-laoghl pianist and roniposi'r, he became 
one of the world's best known musicians. This hiograpliy traces 
his development from lhi» kMdiM' o( a siiuill Uual hamj to llu» 
creator of the Sacreil C onci»rls. Although the book otiers insight 



30 



lUoi^^niphij: huluHiiunl^ Who Miulai Uiffcrcihr 



into Ellington's pi'isonrilily, it loi uses ciiniosl i»xi lusivcly (in his 
music and his cdiwr; it will iippcal inoslly lo jii// tfins or others 
interested in nni.sii'. Nolahlr IWI C /nMn'// s lYmlc Hooks iit the FichI 
of Social Studios. 

6.4 Crews, Donald. Uigniiim«i's. lllLislraled by Donald Crews. 
Greenwillow Books, IWl. ISliN l)-6HH-()995l''3. 32p. 5 and up. 
Nonfiction. 

Young Donald Crews and his family ride the train south to 
Florida to spend the summer at Bigmama's farm. As soon as 
they arrive, the children in this African American family shed 
their shoes and go off to explore and make sure everything is the 
same as always. Satisfied, they all sit down to a big family dinner 
and close Ihe day looking at millions of stars. This is an autobio- 
graphical celebration of a past time remembered, but today's 
young readers will understand. Sec also Shortcut by Donald 
Crews (11.12). ALA Notable Children^ Books, 1992. 

6.5 Demi. Chingis Khan. Illustrated by Demi. Henry Holt, 
ISliN 0-H05U-170H-9. 54p. 8 and up. Nonlictiun. 

Based upon both historical documents and folklore, this is 
I Demi's unique interpretation of Ihe life of iUo Mtingol leader and 
military genius Chingis Khan, the king of lln» spiril ol lif»hl I he 
details contained in the book enable reiidi»rs In sei» him both as 
a legendary figure who, at the heighl ol his ptuver, was siiprenu' 
master of the largest empire ev(>r cn»aleil \\\ Ihe lileliiiu* ot one 
man, and also as a man of emotions anil wi'akness I \\r w Mvv 
color illustrations, decorated with gilt, evoki* imagi^s ol ii jiasl 
golden kingdom. 

6.6 Denenberg, Barry Nelson Mandela: "No liasy Walk lo I ree- 
dom." Scholastic Hardcover Books, 1W| ISliN ()-5^il)-441nJ-M. 
164p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

The cause of Blacks in South Africa came to the allenlion ot the 
world in part because of the efforts of Nelson Mandela. This 
biography of the uncompromised leader of the African National 
Congress is also a history of the Black struggle for freedom. 
Barry Denenberg makes clear the hardships that South African 
Blacks face in their daily lives and the extreme sacrifices that 
many have made for the cause. Illustrated with photographs, the 
book includes a chronology, bibliography, and index. Sec also 
Nelsou Mandela: Voice of Freedom by Libby Hughes (6.15). 



54 




A. 



HOPSCOTCH 

AROUND THE WORLD 




JAary D. Lankford ' uu:mAm>irKaren Milone 



c. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



A. Shape Space written and illustrated by Cathryn Falwell (see 5.2). B. Eating Frac- 
tions w'mn and with photographs by Bruce McMillan (see 5.10), C, Hopscotch around 
the World by Mary D. Lankford; illustrated by Karen Milone (see 5.7). 







A. Nelson Mandela: "No Easy Walk to Freedom" by Barry Dononborg (coo (i.fi) H. 
Diego by Jonah Winter (translated by Amy Price); illustrated by Jeanello WIntoi (um 
6.28). C, El Chino written and illustrated by Allen Say (see 6.23). D. i'll SIh wni ihaln 
Willie: A Story Based on the Life and Paintings of William H. Jofinson by Qwan tivyruU, 
illustrated by William H. Johnson (see 67). 



5^ BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Biography: Individuals Who Made a Diffcrcmr 



6.7 Everett Gwen. Li'l Sis and Uncle Willie: A Story Based on the 
Life and Paintings of William H. Johnson. Illustrated by Wil- 
liam H, Johnson. Rizzoli International Publications/National 
Museum of American Art, Smithsonian Institution, 1991. ISBN 
0-8478-1462-9. 32p. 7-10, Fiction. 

The paintings of African American artist William H. Johnson are 
the illustrations for this fictional story based on actual events in 
Johnson's life. Born in South Carolina, Johnson lived in Europe 
for twelve years, married a Danish v^eaver, and returned to the 
United States v/ith the outbreak of World War II. Told from the 
perspective of his niece, ''Li'l Sis," the story focuses on Johnson's 
visit to his South Carolina home v^hen Li'l Sis v^as six. Her 
authentic-sounding voice, along v^ith the paintings, offers an 
engaging introduction to Johnson's art and African American 
culture, ALA Notable Childmis Books, 1993; Notable 1992 C///7- 
drcn's Trade Books in tlw Field of Social Studies. 

6.8 Fradin, Dennis Urindell, Hiawatha: Messenger of Peace. Mar- 
garet K. McElderry Books, 1992. ISBN 0-689-50519-1. 40p. 11 and 
up. Nonfiction. 

When you hear the name Hiawatha, you probably think of 
Longfellow's poem. That Hiawatha is an imagined character. 
The real Hiawatha probably lived in the 1400s. He was the 
peacemaker v^ho helped create the Iroquois Federation of five 
tribes in what is now New York, Some historians believe the U,S. 
Constitution used ideas taken from the laws of the Iroquois 
Federation. Hiawatha's life story is re-crealed from available 
data and illustrated with photogr^iphs, Notable 1992 Children'^ 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

6.9 Golenbock, Peter. Teammates. Illustraleil by Pnul Bacon. Har- 
court Brace Jovanovich/C.ulliver Books, 1^91). ISBN 0-15-200603- 
6. 32p. 7-10. Nonfiction. 

When Jackie Robinson bcvame the first African American on a 
major league baseball tenni, he htui lo put up vs^ith racist behav- 
ior from fans and other phiyers alike, He knew that if he fought 
back, he would be dropped, and no other "Negro" would be 
allowed to play for many years. One dny his Dodger teammate 
Pee Wee Reese decided to do the right thing and stand up for 
Robinson, Illustrated writh paintings and vintage photographs, 
this moving story brings lo life a dramntic moment in sports 
history Notable 1990 Chddren's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies, 



32 



Bio;^mphy: Individuals Wfio Miulc n Oiffcrm c 



6.10 Hart, Philip S. Flying Free: America's First Black AviatntK. 

Lerner, 1992. ISBN 0-8225-1598-9. 64p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

At one time in our history, even the skies were racially segre- 
gated! This book tells the story of the pioneer Black pilots who 
had to overcome not only the common dangers associated with 
flying airplanes but also racism and discrimination. It profiles 
four individual pioneers of the 1920s and 1930s, a group of 
Chicago flyers, and the famous Tuskegee Airmen. A final four- 
page chapter looks at the current status of Black flyers. The book 
provides an introduction to a little known aspect of Africcui 
American life. Notable 2992 Children'^ Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies, 

6.11 Haskins, James. Thurgood Marshall: A Life for Justice. H(»nry 
Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-2095-0. 149p. 11 and up. Nonfiction. 

As a lively cutup of a youngster, Thurgood Marshall was fre- 
quently sent to the school basement to memorize the U.S. Con- 
stitution. Little did his teachers know how important that activ- 
ity would be in the life of the first African American Supreme 
Court justice. This biography recounts Marshall's lifelong fight 
for civil rights and justice, gives background information on 
many of his famous cases, and emphasizes his importance to the 
struggle for equal treatment under the law. It includes a bibliog- 
raphy, but no photographs. Notable 1992 Children s Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies, 

6.12 Haskins, Jim. Against All Opposition: Black Explorers in 
America, Walker, 1992. ISBN 0-8027-8138-1. 86p. 10 and up. 
Nonfiction. 

Estevanico, Du Sdble, York, Beckwourth, and Henson are among 
the historical figures introduced in this collection of biographi- 
cal accounts of black explorers. Author Jim Haskins begins with 
a historical context that relates information about pre-Colum- 
bian African explorations to the "New World" and that provides 
evidence of Black presence in civilizations around the world. 
Biographies of space explorers Guion Bluford and Ronald 
McNair round out thesurvey. Portraits, photographs, and repro- 
ductions add to the appeal of this volume. Svc also Reflections of 
a Black Cowboy: Hook Four, Mountain Men by Kobert H. Miller 
(6.18). Notable 1992 Children s Trade liook^ in the Field of Social 
Studies, 



58 



Biography: Individuals Who Made a Difference 



33 



6.13 Haskins, Jim. One More River to Cross: The Stories of Twelve 
Black Americans. Scholastic Hardcover Books, 1W2. ISHN 
590-42896-9. 215p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

Who was the first American woman to earn a million dDlLusi' 
Who is the "winningest coach" in college footbiill? Who in 
vented a way to make emergency blood transfusions fxrsslhli'? 
Madame C. J. Walker, Eddie Robinson, and Charles Drew iwv 
three of the tw^elve African Americans featured in this colleclion. 
It profiles four women and eight men, from Crispus A Mucks U> 
Ron McNair, who overcame many obstacles to makt' important 
contributions to American life. A bibliography and index are 
included. Best Books for Young Adults, 1993; Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

6.14 Haskins, Jim. Outward Dreams: Black Inventors and Their 
• Inventions. Walker, 1991. ISBN 0-8027-6994-2. lOlp. 10 and up. 

Nonfiction. 

These brief biographies recount the ingenuity and creativity of 
African American inventors as well as their struggles to over- 
come obstacles to success. Beginning with inventions patented 
during the colonial period, the book concludes with inventors of 
the 1990s whose creations are important components to commu- 
nications and to future space endeavors. A valuable appendix 
lists "Inventions by Blacks; 1834-1900" and includes the dates 
and numbers of their patents. Notable 1991 Children s Trade Books 
in the Field of Social Studies. 

6.15 Hughes, Libby. Nelson Mandela: Voice of Freedom. Dillon 
Press, 1992. ISBN 0-87518-484-7. 144p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

Illustrated with black-and-white photographs, this biography of 
Nelson Mandela begins with his release from prison and goes 
back to trace his life from childhood to the present. Author Libby 
Hughes lived in South Africa for ten years, and that experience 
provided an insider's perspective on the political and social 
context in which Mandela operates. Hughes includes details that 
help highlight Mandela's life in this People in Focus book. A 
bibliography and index are also included. See also Nelson Miui- 
dcia: "No Easy \yalk to Freedom" by Barry Denenbcrg (6.6). 

6.16 Lyons, Mary E. Sorrow's Kitchen: The Life and Folklore of 
Zora Neale Hurston. Charles Scribner's Sons, 1990. ISBN 0-684- 
19198-9. 158p. 12 and up. Nonfiction. 



34 



B\o;^raph\j: Uuiividuah Who Made a Diffcrcticc 



Mixing the words and stories of Zora Ncale Hurston with her 
own, Mary Lyons weaves an engaging yarn about the life of this 
talented and once-forgotten writer. The lyrical writing style of 
the author complements the generous dose of folklore and sto- 
ries written by Hurston. The well -researched text will provide 
good reading for mature readers. Included are reproductions of 
many photographs taken throughout Hurston's life and now 
located in such places as the Library of Congress and rare book 
collections. See also jump at de Sun: The Story of Zora Neale Hur- 
ston by A. H Porter (6.21). Recommended Books for Reluctant Young 
Adult Readers, 1991. 

6.17 McKissack, Patricia C, and Fredrick McKissack. Sojourner 
Truth: Ain't i a Woman? Scholastic Hardcover Books, 1992. 
ISBN 0-590-44690-8. 188p. 9 and up. Nonfiction. 

Sojourner Truth was born a slave in 1797 in New York. By the 
time she died eighty-six years later, she had become a famous 
abolitionist who had traveled the country to tell the truth about 
slavery and about women's rights. This well-documented and 
clearly written biography will hold readers' attention with its 
straightforward style. It includes many photographs and repro- 
ductions of historical documents, biographical sketches of "peo- 
ple Sojourner knew," an index, and a bibliography ALA Notable 
Children s Books, 1993; Best Books for Young Adults, 1993; Boston 
Globe-Horn Book Nonfiction Award, 1993; Coretta Scott King Writ- 
ing Honor Book, 1993. 

6.18 Miller, Robert H. Reflections of a Black Cowboy: Book Four, 
Mountain Men. Illustrated by Richard Leonard. Silver Burdett 
Press, 1992. ISBN 0-382-24082-0. Sip. 9-12. Nonfiction. 

Esteban, Jean Baptiste Pointe Du Sable, Jim Beckwourth, George 
Mcjunkin — each of these Black men played an important role in 
United States history. In this book, "The Old Cowboy" narrates 
the exploits of the Moroccan slave who became an explorer in 
the Southwest, the Haitian trader who founded Chicago, the 
blacksmith who temporarily became a Crow Indian chief, and 
the cowboy who discovered an important archeological site. 
Written in an easy, informal style incorporating much dialogue, 
the book contains a bibliography and a few black-and-white 
sketches. See also Against All Opposition: Black Explorers in Amcr- 
iai by Jim Haskins (6.12). 



60 



Biography: Individuals Who Made a Difference 



35 



6.19 Morey, Janet Nomura, and Wendy Dunn. Famous Asian Ameri- 
cans, Cobblehill Books, 1992. ISBN 0-525-65080-6. 170p. 10 and 
up. Nonfiction. 

This collection of short biographical sketches of fourteen famous 
Asian Americans will provide great insight into the hardships 
that these individuals faced in their struggles to succeed. They 
are a diverse group, representing a variety of Asian and Asian 
American cultural heritages: China, Japan, Korea, Vietnam, 
Cambodia, and the Philippines. Senator Daniel Inouye, writer 
Maxine Hong Kingston, architect 1. M. Pei, and illustrator Jose 
Aruego may be familiar names to some readers. A foreword 
provides useful context. The book is illustrated with numerous 
black-and-white photographs. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books 
in the Field of Social Studies. 

6.20 Parks, Rosa (with jim Hdskins). Rosa Parks: My Story. Dial 
Books, 1992. ISBN 0-8037-0673-1. 192p. 12 and up (est). Nonfic- 
tion. 

When the bus driver told Mrs. Rosa Parks to give up her seat to 
a white man, the African American woman refused. It was De- 
cember 1, 1955, and her arrest led to the Montgomery, Alabama, 
bus boycott and the rise to prominence of Martin Luther King Jr. 
Mrs. Parks became known as the mother of the civil rights move- 
ment. This autobiography places her act of courage in the con- 
text of a lifetime devoted to the struggle for equal rights. The 
book has the ring of nearly eighty years of oral history. See also 
The Year They Walked: Rosa Parks and the Montgomery Bus Boycott 
by Beatrice Siegel (7.14). ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Best 
Books for Young Adults, 1993; Recommended Books for Reluctant 
Young Adult Readers, 2993. 

6.21 Porter, A. R Jump at de Sun: The Story of Zora Neale Hurston. 
Carolrhoda Books, 1992. ISBN 0-87614-667-1. 96p. 8-11. Nonfic- 
tion. 

Zora Neale Hurston grew up in an all-Black town in Florida in 
the early twentieth century. Thrust out on her own early in life, 
she always remembered her mother's encouragement: "Jump at 
de sun!" Even though she was always in need of money, Hur- 
ston almost always found ways to fulfill her soaring ambitions. 
This well-written biography brings to life the determined "free 
spirit" who became an anthropologist, folklorist, and the author 
of Their Eyes Were Watching God, See also Sorrow's Kitchen: The 
Life and Folklore of Zora Neale Hurston by Mary E, Lyons (6.16). 



ERIC 



61 



36 



Biography: Individuals Who Made a Difference 



Notable 1992 Children^ Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies; 
Recommended Books for Reluctant Young Adult Readers, 2993. 

6.22 Sabin, Louis. Roberto Clemente: Young Baseball Hero. Illus- 
trated by Marie Dejohn. Troll Associates, 1992. ISBN 0-8167- 
2509-8. 48p. 6-9. Nonfiction. 

An engaging story that focuses more on the childhood and up- 
bringing of legendary baseball player Roberto Clemente than on 
his professional career, this biography is certain to appeal to a 
wide range of readers. By giving details of life in his native 
Puerto Rico and centering on the values and dignity w^ith which 
Clemente's parents raised him, the book introduces young read- 
ers to the island and its culture. Sec al.so Vridv of Puerto Rica: The 
Life of Roberto Clementchy Paul Robert Walker (6.27). 

6.23 Say Allen. El Chino. Illustrated by Allen Say Houghton Mifflin, 
1990. ISBN 0-395-52023-1. 32p. 7-12 (e.st). Nonfiction. 

"In America, you can be anything you want to be." Billy Wong 
wants to be a professional athlete, and his father's words are his 
inspiration. Although trained as an engineer, Wong becomes 
fascinated by bullfighting and, against the odds, becomes one of 
Spain's most famous matadors, "El Chino." Allen Say's vivid 
watercolors capture the style and grace of this Chinese American 
bullfighter. He uses the transition from black and white to color 
for dramatic effect. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. 

6.24 Senna, Carl. Colin Powell; A Man of War and Peace. Walker, 
1992. ISBN 0-8027-8181-0. 150p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

General Colin Powell, the first African American chairman of the 
Joint Chiefs of Staff, grew up in Harlem, the son of hard-working 
Jamaican immigrants. Beginning with college ROTC, he over- 
came many obstacles to become one of the most highly respected 
men in the nation, the strategist behind Desert Storm, and a 
potential candidate for vice president of the United States. Infor- 
mative details add to the story of the general and his times, and 
a bibliography and source notes verify the author's research. 

6.25 Stanley, Fay. The Last Princess: The Story of Princess KaMulani 
of Hawai'i. Illustrated by Diane Stanley Four Winds Press, 1991. 
ISBN 0-02-786785-4. 40p. 7 and up (est). Nonfiction. 

When Princess Ka'iulani was born in 1875, people expected her 
to become queen of the Kingdom of Hawai'i. She spent many 



62 



Biography: Individuals ]Nho Made a Difference 



years preparing for her royal duties, but she never ascended the 
throne. Fay Stanley relates the story of Hawaii's last princess 
and her valiant fight against the pov^erful U.S. government, 
which toppled the monarchy and annexed Hawaii in 1898. This 
sympathetic portrait is enhanced by daughter Diane Stanley's 
realistic paintings. Notes on the Hawaiian language and an in- 
dex are included. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. 

6.26 Uchida, Yoshiko. The Invisible Thread. Julian Messner, 1991. 
ISBN 0-671-74163-2. 136p. 10 and up (est). Nonfiction. 

In this autobiography the late author of journey to Topaz and A 
jar of Dreams relates what it was like to grow up as a Japanese 
American during the 1930s and 1940s. Yoshiko Uchida, who was 
a Nisei, or a Japanese American born in the United States, grew 
up in Berkeley, California. Her family was among those Japanese 
Americans taken to concentration camps after the Pearl Harbor 
bombing. In straightforward prose, Uchida evokes both the hor- 
ror of that experience and the strengths that helped these Ameri- 
cans come through their ordeal without having their spirits de- 
stroyed. See also The journey: japanese Americans, liacism, and 
Renewal by Sheihi Hamnnaka (7.6). 

6.27 Walker, Paul Rnbvvi. Pride of Puerto Rico: The Life of Roberto 
Clemente. l larcourl Br.ue Jovanoviih/Odysscy Books, 1991, 
ISBN ()-15-2h342()-7. I57p. ^^-12. Nonfiction. 

Certain to delight h«ischiill lovers, this biography of Roberto 
Clemente, the Puerto Kiran right fielder for the Pittsburgh Pi- 
rates, offers insights \\\\{^ his life and values. Clemente suffered 
many indignities beiMusi» of his Spanish accent and dark skin, 
but his spirit, his love lor baseball, and the support from family 
and friends helped him become one of the greatest baseball 
players ever. C'lemenie died at age thirty-eight on a mission to 
help the victin. ; of the Nicaraguan earthquake of 1972. See also 
Roberto Clemente: Youn;^ liasehall Hero by Louis Sabin (6.22). 

6.28 Winter, jeanette (text by Jonah Winter; translated by Amy Price). 
Diego. Illustrated by Jeanette Winter. Alfred A. Knopf/Borzoi 
Books, 1991. ISBN 0-679-81987-2. 32p. 5-8. Nonfiction. 

When Diego Rivera was a boy, he drew everywhere, even on the 
walls. He cUso made five thousand toy soldiers all by himself. As 
a man, Rivera luV(Une one of Mexico's best-known artists. His 
fannais murals celebrate working people all over the world. 



38 



Biography: Individual V^Uo Mihk n Ihflcmuv 



With simple text — in both English and Spanish—anJ I'n^ja^ing 
illustrations, this book focuses on the artist's thildhood and 
early adulthood. Sadly, the book does not include any examples 
of Rivera's own work. And note that the book gives the date of 
Rivera's death as November 24, 1957, but other sources list it as 
November 25, 1957. NoUible 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies; Parents Choice Axvard, 1991. 

6.29 Wisnieu^ski, David. Sundiata: Lion King of Mali. Illustrated by 
David Wisniewski. Clarion Books, 1992. ISBN 0-395-61302-7. 
32p. 7 and up (est). Nonfiction. 

Striking cut-paper pictures illuminate this picture book biogra- 
phy of Sundiata, the thirteenth-century king of Mali in West 
Africa. Distilled from the accounts of griots, keepers of the oral 
tradition, the book recounts the legendary exploits of the chosen 
heir who was forced into exile by jealous rivals after his father's 
death. Seven years later, upon hearing that his homeland had 
been attacked, the eighteen-year-old Sundiata gathered an army, 
vanquished the invaders, and reclaimed his throne. A cut-paper 
map and an author's note provide valuable additional informa- 
tion. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

6.30 Yep, Laurence. The Lost Garden. Julian Messner, 1991. ISBN 
0-571-74159-4. 117p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

Laurence Yep, author of DragonuHn(,(s and numerous other 
books, relates his memories of growing up as a Chinese Ameri- 
can. From the time he was a child, he felt like an outsider: "the 
Chinese American raised in a black neighborhood, . . . too 
American to fit into Chinatown, ... too Chinese to fit anywhere 
else . . . the clumsy son of the athletic family . . ." Writing al- 
lowed Yep to put together the pieces of the puzzle of himself. 
This is an insightful examination of how he came to be who he 
is as a writer and as a person. 

6.31 Zheng Zhensun and Alice Low. A Young Painter: The Life and 
Paintings of Wang Yani — China's Extraordinary Young Artist 

Photographs by Zheng Zhensun. Scholastic Hardcover 
Books/Byron Preiss-New China Pictures Books, 1991. ISBN 0- 
5990-44906-0. 80p. 8 and up (est). Nonfiction. 

The life of this Chinese child prodigy evokes admiration and 
awe, from her first bold strokes at age three to the youngest ever 
one-person show at the Smithsonian Institution at the age of 



64 



Biography: Individuals Who Made a Diffemu e 



fourteen. The many examples of Wang Yani's Zon-like ink paint- 
ings of animals delight the eye. For Wang, art simply flows 
naturally: "I think painting is something very simple. You just 
paint what you think about." Her development as an artist is 
likely to captivate readers. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992, 



7 History: The Way We 
Were 

7.1 Aaseng; Nathan. Navajo Code Talkers. Walker, 1992. ISBN 0- 
8027-8183-7. 114p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

During World War II, when the marines needed a code to com- 
municate secret messages, they called on the Navajo code talk- 
ers, a special group of marines who went on to play a major role 
in the U.S. victory over Japan. Using the Navajo language, the 
code talkers created a code that could not be broken by the 
enemy. This book, illustrated with archival photographs, dra- 
matically tells the story of these little known and mostly unsung 
men. 

7.2 Arnold, Caroline. The Ancient Cliff Dwellers of Mesa Verde. 
I^hotographs by Richard Hewett. Clarion Books, 1992. ISBN 0- 
395-56241-4. 64p. 8-12. Nonfiction. 

For ten centuries, the Anasazi group of the Pueblo Indians lived 
in what is now the Four Comers area of the Southwest. When 
they abandoned their community sometime around 1300, they 
left evidence of a complex culture and civilization, the most 
striking feature of which are the cliff dwellings in Mesa Verde 
National Park in Colorado. Based on archeological data and 
illustrated with color photographs, this book describes what 
daily life might h(ive been like for the Anasazi. A glossary is 
included. See also The Villa;^e of Blue Stone by Stephen Trimble 
(7.15). 

7.3 Cox, Clinton. Undying Glory: The Story of the Massachusetts 
54th Regiment. Scholastic Hardcover Books, 1991. ISBN 0-590-^ 
44170-1. 167p. 8 and up. Nonfiction. 

The men of the all-Black 54th Massachusetts regiment were 
among the most valiant soldiers in the Civil War. Even though 
they faced racial discrimination and lower wages than whites, 
they remained undaunted. Their valor and skill in the face of 
astounding odds impressed even their detractors. Using photo- 
graphs and primary source materials, Clinton Cox recounts the 
story of these young men who helped to liberate Black people. 



Hii^tory: The V^axi \Nc Were 



41 



Movieji;oers may remember this as the Glorxf rej^imLMit. Notable 
1991 Chihirt'n'i^ Trade Bon^s in the Field of Social Studia^. 

7.4 Frocdmari; Russell. An Indian Winter. Illustrated by Karl Uod- 
men Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0^8234-0930-9, 8Hp. 10 and up 
(est). Nonfiction. 

The Mandan Indians were a proud and prosperous people when 
German Trince Alexander Philipp Maximilian and Swiss artist 
Karl Bodmer wintered with them in the Missouri River Valley in 
what is now North Dakota in 1833-34. The Mandan and their 
neighbors, the Hidatsas, generously permitted the two men to 
share their daily lives, cultural events, and routine activities. 
Russell Freedman has used the journals and artwork of these 
two travelers to create a moving portrait of a people who were 
nearly destroyed by the ravages of small pox and the white 
man's greed. ALA Notable Children s Books, 1993; Best Books for 
Young Adults, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. 

7.5 Fritz, Jean, Katherine Paterson, Patricia McKissack, Fredrick 
McKissack, Margaret Mahy, and Jamake Highwater. The World 
in 1492. Illustrated by Stefano Vitale. Henry Holt, 1992. ISBN 
0-8050-1674-0. 168p. 9 and up. Nonfiction. 

This book is an important addition to traditional American his- 
tory books. It not only highlights fifteenth-century Europe and 
Columbus's epic voyage, but it also describes other great civili- 
zations existing in 1492, including ones in Asia, Africa, Australia 
and Oceania, and the Americas. Through the narratives of these 
popular authors, plus maps, drawings, artwork, and artifacts, 
the volume offers an overview of the rich histories and customs 
of the varied people.s living at that time, and in so doing it begins 
to provide an important context for understanding the period. 
ALA Notable Children's Hooks, 1993; Notable 1992 Children s Trade 
Hooks in the Field of Social Studies. 

7.6 Hamanaka, Sheila, The Journey: Japanese Americans, Racism, 
and Renewal. Illustrated by Sheila Hamanaka. Orchard Books, 
1990. ISBN 0-531-08449-3, 40p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

During World War II, members of Sheila Hamanaka's family, 
U.S. citizens of Japanese ancestry, were imprisoned in concentra- 
tion camps in the United States. Hamanaka painted the mural 
on which this book is based to reflect that event and the history 
of Japanese Americans in general The mural depicts the racism 



67 



42 



History: The Way We Were 



endured by Japanese Americans, their struggle to end discrimi- 
nation, and their hopes for the future. Closeup photographs of 
sections of the mural are accompanied by explanatory text. The 
full five-panel mural is reproduced at the end of the text. See also 
The Uwisible Thread by Yoshiko Uchida (6.26). }aue Addams Honor 
Book, 1991; Best Hooks for Youuif Adults, 1991; Notable 1990 Chil- 
dren s Trade Books hi the fiehi of Social Studies; Recommended Boohi 
for Reluctant Youn^i Adult Readers, 1991. 

77 Haskins, Jim. The Day Martin Luther King, Jr., Was Shot: A 
Photo History of the Civil Rights Movement. Scholastic, 1992. 
ISBN 0-590-43661-9. 96p. 8-12. Nonfiction. 

Beginning and ending this book with an assessment of the last- 
ing significance of the work of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr., Jim 
Haskins traces the history of the civil rights movement from 
slavery through modern times. Haskins has divided the book 
into twenty-three short chapters that focus on specific issues and 
eras in the movement, such as "The Abolitionist Movement" and 
"On from Selma." Illustrated with archival photographs and 
drawings, this book is a useful historical piece. 

7.8 Hernandez, Xavier (translated by Kathleen Leverich). San Ra- 
fael: A Central American City through the Ages. Illustrated by 
Jordi Ballonga and Josep Escofet. Houghton Mifflin, 1992. ISBN 
0-395-60645-4. 62p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

Through the history of a fictional city, Xavier Hernandez traces 
the growth and development of what could be any Central 
American city from 1000 B.C. to the present day Illustrated with 
detailed black-and-white drawings, including alternating dou- 
ble-page spreads, this informative book shows how the city 
would have evolved through fourteen stages, from a small set- 
tlement into a late-twentieth-century metropolis. It also de- 
scribes the uncertain future that the city faces in the twenty-first 
century 

7.9 Jacobs, Francine. The Tainos: The People Who Welcomed Co- 
lumbus. Illustrated by Patrick Collins. G. P. Putnam's Sons, 
1992. ISBN 0-399-22116-6. 107p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

With a perspective rarely available to younger readers, this book 
is a thoroughly researched and sympathetic portrait of the Taino 
Indians who welcomed Columbus on his arrival in the Carib- 
bean in 1492. It provides an unrelenting saga of the cruelty, 
greed, and barbarism of the Spaniards that resulted in the almost 



68 



History: The Way We Were 



43 



complete annihilation of the Tainos within fifty years of the 
Spaniards' arrival and it presents Columbus as a vain and arro- 
gant man who lusted only for gold. See also Encounter by Jane 
Yolen (11.79) and Morning Girl by Michael Dorris (13.10). Notable 
1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies, 1992. 

7.10 Katz, William Loren. Breaking the Chains: African-American 
Slave Resistance. Atheneum. 1990, ISBN 0-689-31493-0. 208p. 11 
and up. Nonfiction. 

With chapters such as "The Battle for Family and Knowledge/' 
"Runaways and Maroons," and "The Bayonets of Freedom/' 
William Loren Katz chronicles the history of African American 
slave resistance, beginning with the slave trade in Africa and 
continuing through the Civil War and liberation. To authenticate 
his text Katz uses a variety of sources, including journals and 
books of such well-known figures as Frederick Douglass, lesser- 
known slave narratives, and works of slaveholders. The book is 
illustrated with reproductions of historical drawings and docu- 
ments. Best Books for Young Adults, 1991. 

7.11 Myers, Walter Dean. Now Is Your Time! The African-American 
Struggle for Freedom. HarperCollins, 1991. ISBN 0-06-024371-6. 
292p. 10 and up (est). Nonfiction. 

This is an impassioned presentation of African American history 
from the seventeenth century to the present. Illustrated with 
historical photographs and documents, the book is a combina- 
tion of history, biography, and autobiography. African American 
history is told through the stories of "freedom fighters" over 
three centuries, woven into accounts of important historical 
events, famous and otherwise. Walter Dean Myers also traces 
part of his own ancestry and connects it to the larger history. His 
style makes the book a good choice for reading aloud. ALA 
Notable Children's Books, 1991; Best Books for Young Adults, 1992; 
Coretta Scott King Writing Award, 1992; NCTE Orbis Pictus Honor 
Book, 1992. 

7.12 Rappaport, Doreen. Escape from Slavery: Five Journeys to 
Freedom. Illustrated by Charles Lilly HarperCollins, 1991. ISBN 
0-06-021632-8. 124p. 9-i2. Nonfiction. 

"Slave escapes occurred from the earliest times after enslaved 
Africans were first brought to America in 1619." So begins this 
book that historically documents five accounts of successful 
slave escapes on the Underground Railroad. It includes the story 



69 



44 



Histonj: The Way We Were 



of Eliza, who escaped across a river on melting ice; Dosha, who 
helped his sisters Camelia and Selena outsmart the sheriff; and 
Henry Brown, Vv^ho shipped himself out of slavery in a box. 
Focusing on individual acts of courage, the stories are drawn 
from sources such as Reminiscences of Levi Coffin and William 
Still's The Underground Rail Road, both published in the 1870s. 
Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

7.13 Sewall, Marcia. People of the Breaking Day. Illustrated by Mar- 
cia Sewall. Atheneum, 1990. ISBN 0-689-31407-8. 48p. 8 and up 
(est). Nonfiction. 

This book takes the reader back in time to the seventeenth cen- 
tury when the Wampanoag Indians thrived in what is now 
southeastern Massachusetts. With watercolor paintings and a 
poetic text, Marcia Sewall describes the seasonal activities — 
hunting, fishing, planting, harvesting — and the customs, values, 
and traditions of the people who were there when the Pilgrims 
arrived. This is a companion book to Sewall's The Pilgrims of 
Plimouth. A glossary and a list of Wampanoag words are in- 
cluded. See also Clambake: A Wampanoag Tradition by Russell M. 
Peters (3.6). Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

7.14 Siegel, Beatrice. The Year They Walked: Rosa Parks and the 
Montgomery Bus Boycott. Four Winds Press, 1992. ISBN 0-02- 
782631-7. 104p.9^12. Nonfiction. 

This is an account of the Montgomery, Alabama, bus boycott and 
the persons associated with it. It includes biographical informa- 
tion about Rosa Parks and Dr. Martin Luther King Jr. and care- 
fully details the events surrounding this landmark civil rights 
action. The book also includes photographs of incidents that 
occurred during and after the boycott. This account, divided 
into eleven chapters, can be read aloud to younger students or 
read independently by older readers interested in learning more 
about these civil rights figures. Sec also Rosa Parks: My Story by 
Rosa Parks with Jim Haskins (6.20), Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

7.15 Trimble, Stephen. The Village of Blue Stone. Illustrated by Jen- 
nifer Owings Dewey and Deborah Reade. Macmillan, 1990. 
ISBN 04)2-789501-7. 62p. 10 and up (est). Nonfiction. 

Stephen Trimble has composed a picture of daily life, in HOC a d., 
of Anasa/.i pueblo dwellers in what is now the Four Corners area 



70 




THETAINOS 

Tfw People Who Welcomed Columbus 
FRANCINE JACOBS 




Japanese Aniericaa*.. Kadsm. anil Hcncwal 




B4H)k di'Mpn b> 
Slcvc I"rv<k'ntk 



c. 



A, The Tainos: The People Who Welcomed Columbus by Francine Jacobs; Illustrated 
by Patrick Collins (see 7.9). B. The World in M52by Jean Fritz, Katherine Paterson, 
Patricia McKissack, Fredrick McKissack. Margaret Mahy, and Jamake Highwater; illus- 
trated by Stefano Vitale (see 7.5). C, The Journey: Japanese Americans, Racism, and 
Renewa/ written and illustrated by Sheila Hamanaka (seo 7.6). 

71 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Cousin^ 



A TRADITIONAL/ 
NAVA|0>TORy^A^f^ 




Trlcia Brown 



Lee Ann 

TfteStoryofa 
Yietnamese-American Girl 



Photogvcphsby Ted Thai 





A. The Orphan Boy: A Maasai Story by Tololwa Molli?.!: iiiustrated by Paul Morin (see 
9.11). B. Lee Ann: The Story of a Vietnamese-American Girl by Tricia Brown; photo- 
graphs by Ted Thai (see 8.2). C. 'a'ii and Cousin Horned Toad: A Traditional Navajo 
Sfoo' written and Illustrated by b(...ito Begay (see 9.21). D. Moon Rope: A Peruvian 
Ta/e written and illustrated by Lois Ehlert; translated by Amy Prince (see 9.4). 



72 

erIc 



History: The Way We Were 



45 



of the American Southwest. The book re-creates a year in the 
"village of blue stone/' describing a culture that has been pre- 
served to this day. The book appears to be v^ell researched, 
drawing on archeological data and the knowledge of other ex- 
perts. Included is an index, glossary, and bibliography Black- 
and-white drawings provide additional information. See also 
The Ancient Clijf Dwellers of Mesa Verde by Caroline Arnold (7.2). 
Notable 1990 Childrat's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

7.16 Walter, Mildred Pitts. Mississippi Challenge. Bradbury Press, 
1992. ISBN 0-02-792301-0. 205p. 11 and up. NonficHon. 

This is the story of the struggle for voting rights undertaken by 
African Americans living in Mississippi. The first part of the 
book relates the brutal history of race relations in Mississippi 
from the time of slavery through the first half of the twentieth 
century. Part two chronicles the extraordinary efforts of Fannie 
Lou Hamer and other courageous men and women to establish 
the Mississippi Freedom Democratic Party and to challenge both 
state and federal power structures to obtain the rights of citizen- 
ship. Corel ta Scott King Writing Honor Book, 1993. 



( 3 



46 



8 Immigrants and 
Immigration: Coming 
to America 

8.1 Anastos, Phillip, and Chris French. Illegal: Seeking the Ameri- 
can Dream. Photographs by Phillip Anastos and Chris French. 
Rizzoli International Publications, 1991. ISBN 0-8478-1367-3. 
128p. 10 and up, Nonfiction. 

Illegal is unique in several ways: its authors are not professional 
writers, but two high school students; its focus is Hispanic im- 
migrant children, not adult refugees; and its setting is Browns- 
ville, Texas, a port of entry not often mentioned in children's 
literature about the refugee experience. The result is a fresh, 
sincere look at a pressing social issue. The text by Phillip Anastos 
and Chris French is straightforward and informative; their pho- 
tographs arc simple yet illuminating. The foreword itself makes 
for worthwhile reading. Best Books for Young Adults, 1992. 

8.2 Brown, Tricia. Lee Ann: The Story of a Vietnamese- American 
Girl. Photographs by Ted Thai. G. R Putnam's Sons, 1991. ISBN 
0-399-21842-4. 48p. 6-8. Nonfiction. 

This photo essay shows the family life and school life of a mid- 
dle-class Vietnamese American child. Lee Ann Trang enjoys and 
appreciates both what she experiences in America and what she 
learns about her Vietnamese heritage from her parents and com- 
munity members. Her experiences are different from many Viet- 
namese American children, however Her school offers English 
as a second language and has a Vietnamese community liaison 
person, Text and pictures combine to show Lee Ann's life as 
similar to that of many children in middle- and upper-income 
American families, 

8.3 Grenquist, Barbara. Cubans. Franklin Watts, 1991. ISBN 0-531- 
11107-5, 64p. 10 and up. Nonfiction. 

Tracing the Cuban American community from the early history 
of Cuba to the community's place in the United States today, this 
book in the Recent American Immigrants series includes 
vignettes of heroic escapes from the island and successful accul- 



74 



ERIC 



Immigrants and Immigration: Coming to America 



47 



turation to the United States. Author Barbara Grenquist at- 
tempts to be both comprehensive and neutral, but the difficulty 
of articulating complex historical issues to young readers is evi- 
dent in the book's handling of some controversial topics. 

8.4 Kuklin, Susan. How My Family Lives in America. Illustrated by 
Susan Kuklin. Bradbury Press, 1992. ISBN 0-02-751239-8. 32p. 
4-7. Nonfiction. 

In this photo essay about three children from African American, 
Puerto Rican, and Chinese American backgrounds, author 
Susan Kuklin uses the children's words to describe their every- 
day lives and shows how their heritage is transmitted in their 
daily activities. Each of the featured children has at least one 
parent who was born outside of the United States. The book 
provides affirming portraits of the children and their communi- 
ties and concludes with a recipe from each family. 

8.5 O'Connor, Karen. Dan Thuy's New Life in America. Lerner, 
1992. ISBN 0-8225-2555-0. 40p. 9-12. Nonfiction. 

This is a photo essay about Dan Thuy, a thirteen-year-old Viet- 
namese American girl, and her family, who have been in San 
Diego for just four months. Some general historical and cultural 
background information about Vietnam is woven into the text. 
Combining black-and-white photographs, interviews, and peo- 
ple's own thoughts and opinions, author Karen O'Connor offers 
a detailed and informative chronicle of one family, part of the 
increasing population of Vietnamese immigrants in the south- 
western United States. 

8.6 Poynter, Margaret. The Uncertain Journey: Stories of Illegal 
Aliens in El Norte. Athencum, 1992. ISBN 0-689-31623-2. 163p. 
12 and up. Nonfiction. 

The stories of twelve illegal immigrants to the United States — 
from Mexico, Central America, South America, and the Carib- 
bean — are told in a detailed, moving manner Several pages of 
photographs complement these modern tales, reflecting faces 
and scenes from the lives of today's undocumented workers. 
How the author came to know the stories and their central 
characters is not revealed. Unfortunately, numerous spelling 
and grammatical errors in the book's Spanish phrases are dis- 
tracting to the reader of Spanish (e.g., el mosca (la mosca), vamanos 
(zwuanos), and mi mifios (mis minos). 



75 



9 Folktales, Myths, and 
Legends: Old and New 



Origins: How and Why Things Came to Be 

9.1 Anderson, David A./SANKOFA, reteller. The Origin of Life on 
Earth: An African Creation Myth. Illustrated by Kathleen At- 
kins Wilson. Sights ProducHons, 1991. ISBN 0-9629978-5-4. 32p. 
7 and up. 

This creation myth comes from the Yoruba people of Nigeria. 
Obatala/ an orisha, or agent, of the supreme god Olorun, de- 
scends from the sky on a gold chain and, assisted by other 
orishas, creates the earth with sand, an egg, nuts, and seeds. He 
also creates people, and Olorun breathes into them the breath of 
life. The striking feature of this book is the illustrations — silhou- 
etted figures dressed in colorful and exquisite West African 
clothing, set against backgrounds reminiscent of tie-dyed fabric. 
Caret ta Scott King Illustration Award, 1993. 

9.2 Charles, Donald. Chancay and the Secret of Fire: A Peruvian 
Tale. Illustrated by Donald Charles. G. P. Putnam's Sons/ White- 
bird Books, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22129-8. 32p. 5-8 (est). 

. When Chancay catches an enormous colorful fish, he thinks it is 
too beautiful to eat, and so he returns it to the water. The fish, 
really a Spirit of Father Earth, grants Chancay one wish in return 
for his kindness. Chancay wants fire to relieve his people from 
the cold, but first he must prove that he is strong and brave, as 
well as kind. The eye-catching illustrations for this original tale 
are inspired by ancient Peruvian arc. 

9.3 Dixon, Ann, reteller. How Raven Brought Light to People. Illus- 
trated by Jim Watts. Margaret K. McElderry Books, 1992. ISBN 
0-689-50536-1. 32p, 5-9. 

In this adaptation of an Alaskan Tlingit Indian legend. Raven the 
trickster transforms himself into the grandson of the great chief 
who selfishly hoards the sun, moon, and stars. How Raven tricks 
the chief and obtains light for the people makes an exciting story. 
On a secondary note, the story also explains the origin of the 
raven's color. James Watts's illustrations are rich with Native 



76 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



49 



American designs. See also The Story of Light by Susan L. Roth 
(9.14) and Raven's Light: A Myth from the People of the Northwest 
Coast by Susan Hand Shetterly (9.15). 

9.4 Ehlert, Lois (translated by Amy Prince). Moon Rope: A Peru- 
vian Tale/Un Lazo a La Luna: Una Leyenda Peruana. Illustrated 
by Lois Ehlert. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. ISBN 0-15- 
255343-6. 32p. 4-8. 

If you could have anything in the world, what would it be? For 
Mole it is worms, but for Fox it is a trip to the moon. In this 
adaptation of a Peruvian tale. Fox convinces Mole to join him in 
ri climb to the moon on a woven grass rope. If readers go out on 
a moonlit night, they may find out what happened to both 
animals. The text is in English and Spanish. The stylized silvery 
illustrations will hold the attention of young listeners. ALA Wo- 
tiMe Childrm's Books, 1993. 

9.5 Cicrson, Mary-Joan, rcteller. Why the Sky Is Far Away: A Nige- 
rian Folktale. Illustrated by Carla Golembe. Little, Brown/Joy 
Street Books, 1992. ISBN 0-316-30852-8. 32p. 4-8. 

According to this ancient Nigerian pourquoi tale, in the begin- 
ning the sky was the source of all food. It was so close that 
people could reach up and pluck a piece whenever they were 
hungry. Wastefulness threatened their bounty, and for a while 
everyone was careful not to take more than they could use. But 
one woman, Adese, was never satisfied, and her greed sealed the 
fate of all the people in the land. Strikingly illustrated in con- 
trasting black and bright colors, this is a timely tale relevant to 
today's environmental concerns. Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

9.6 Goble, Paul. Love Flute. Illustrations by Paul Goble. Bradbury 
Press, 1992. ISBN 0-02-736261-2. 32p. 6and up. 

This love story relates the origin of the love flute used by Plains 
Indian males in their courtship rituals. A shy young man, unable 
to express his affection for the girl whom he loves, leaves camp 
in sadness, not caring what happens to him. But unseen powers 
are watching over him, and after a four-day journey, he receives 
a gift that solves his problems. References and notes in the 
beginning of the book and drawings of various love flutes pro- 
vide valuable information. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; 
Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 



77 



50 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and Nerv 



9.7 Hong, Lily Toy, rctcller. How the Ox Star Fell from Heaven. 
Illustrated by Lily Toy Hong. Albert Whitman, 1991. ISBN 0- 
8075-3428-5. 32p. 4-8 (est). 

In this retelling of a Chinese folktale, an ox star is sent on a 
mission to earth. Mistakenly, he misreads the imperial edict from 
the heavens, and as his punishment, the ox star is banished and 
sent back to earth to become a beast of burden. Ironically, this 
celestial blunder becomes an earthly blessing in disguise. Chil- 
dren will enjoy this rcad-aloud book accompanied by the bright, 
bold illustrations. 

9.8 Knutson, Barbara, reteller How the Quinea Fowl Got Her 
Spots: A Swahili Tale of Friendship. Illustrated by Barbara 
Knutson. Carolrhoda Books, 1990. ISBN 0-87614-416-4. 32p. 5-8. 

When Nganga the Guinea Fowl and her big friend Cow go off 
to the green hills to eat grass and seeds, they both keep an eye 
out for Lion. One day when Lion is about to attack Cow, fearless 
Nganga thwarts Lion's plans and saves Cow's life. Later Cow 
finds a way to return the favor. This simply told Swahili tale of 
how Nganga gets her protective coloration makes a good read- 
aloud. The scratchboard illustrations include many African de- 
signs. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

9.9 Lewis, Richard. All of You Was Singing. Illustrated by Ed 
Youn^. Athcneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-31596- 1. 30p. 8 and up. 

The sky, earth, wind, and sun are the central forces in this lyrical 
retelling of an A/.tcc myth about the earth's creation and how 
music w.is brouf^ht to earth. The sky entreats the wind to steal 
music aWfiy from the sun so that the earth can shed its silence. 
The wind's mission is accomplished only after the sky and sun 
engage in n chish of power The striking artwork conveys the 
diverse im.i>»iM'y of lliis poetic myth. ALA Notable Children's 
Books, 1992; Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

9.10 Martin, Fnincesca. The Honey Hunters: A Traditional African 
Tale. Illustrated by Francesca Martin. Candlewick Press, 1992. 
ISBN l-564()2-()Hh-X. 28p. 4-8. 

The song of the honey guide bird — "Che, che! Cheka, che! If 
you want honey, follow me!" — is irresistable to a young boy and 
a cumulative parade of wild animals, all of whom love honey. 
This pourquoi tale from the Ngoni of East Africa explains what 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and Nexv 



51 



happened to change the animals from friends to enemies. The 
delicate, elaborately detailed illustrations are good for close ex- 
amination, and the uncomplicated narrative style makes for 
good reading aloud or telling, 

9.11 Mollel, Tololwa M, The Orphan Boy: A Maasai Story. Illus- 
trated by Paul Morin. Clarion Books, 1990. ISBN 0-89919-985-2. 
32p. All ages. 

An old man, lonely and searching for a star, is surprised to find 
instead Kileken, an orphan boy. In the days following, Kileken 
makes life prosperous for the old man in spite of a drought. In 
return, he asks only the old man's unquestioning trust. When 
curiosity causes betrayal, the boy must return home as Venus, 
called Kileken by the Maasai of East Africa. Glowing, batik-likc 
paintings, pencil sketches, and bead-like decorations, combined 
with poetically descriptive language, depict the Maasai people, 
animals, landscape, and legend. ALA Notable Children's Books, 
1993; Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies, 

9.12 Mollel, Tololwa M. A Promise to the Sun: An African Story. 
Illustrated by Beatriz Vidal. Little, Brown/Joy Street Books, 
1992. ISBN 0-316-57813-4. 32p. 6-10. 

Why do bats fly only at night? When a severe drought hits the 
land of the birds, they choose the bat to go in search of rain. The 
Moon, the Stars, the Clouds, and the Winds say they cannot 
help, but the Sun agrees to bring rain in return for a cool quiet 
place to rest at the end of each day. After a bountiful harvest, the 
birds refuse to fulfill the bat's promise of a nest for the sun, 
leaving the bat to suffer the consequences. Illustrations in water- 
color, acrylic, and crayon accompany this African talc. Notable 
1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

9.13 Oughton, Jerrie. How the Stars Fell into the Sky: A Navajo 
Legend. Illustrated by Lisa Desimini. Houghton Mifflin, 1992, 
ISBN 0-395-5H79H-(). 32p. All ages. 

On the first day. First Woman decides that the people need to 
know the laws. Al the suj^j^estion of First Man, she begins to use 
her jewels, the stars, to write the Inws in the night sky. When 
curious Coyote offt»rs to help, iMrst Woman accepts, but Coyote's 
patience gives out lonj^ helore the work is done and, in haste, he 
ruins her careful plans. Poetic language and dramatic illustra- 
tions make this Navajo creation myth suitable for a wide range 



79 



52 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



of readers. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

9.14 Roth, Susan L The Story of Light. Illustrated by Susan L. Roth. 
Morrow Junior Books, 1990. ISBN 0-688-08676-4. 32p. 6-8. 

"It was dark before the sun came. The animal people couldn't 

see " They meet to decide how to get some light from the sun. 

Possum tries but singes the hair off his tail; Buzzard burns a bald 
spot on top of his head. Then it is tiny Spider's turn. She cannot 
possibly succeed — she is too old, too small, and a woman! How 
Spider proves the other arumals wrong is the story of light. 
Susan Roth makes effective use of contrasting black, white, and 
yellow to illuminate this Cherokee myth. See also How Raven 
Brought Light to People by Ann Dixon (9.3) and Raven's Light: A 
Myth from the People of the Northwest Coast by Susan Hand Shet- 
terly (9.15). Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

9.15 Shetterly, Susan Hand, reteller. Raven's Light: A Myth from the 
People of the Northwest Coast. Illustrated by Robert Shetterly. 
Atheneum, 1991. ISBN 0-689-31629-1. 32p. 6-10. 

Where did the earth come from? Raven dropped a small stone 
onto the water, and it grew. Where did the animals and people 
come from? Raven dropped them from the sack around his neck. 
It was all beautiful, but it was all still dark. Raven could see only 
by starlight. This creation story from four Pacific Northwest 
peoples tells how Raven, the trickster, was able to steal light 
from day. See also How Raven Brought Light to People by Ann 
Dixon (9.3) and The Story of Light by Susan L. Roth (9.14). Notable 
1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies, 

9.16 Van Laan, Nancy, adapter. The Legend of El Dorado: A Latin 
American Tale. Illustrations by Beatriz Vidal. Alfred A. 
Knopf/Borzoi Books, 1991. ISBN 0-679-90136-1. 36p. 7and up. 

The legend of El Dorado (or the Gilded Man), with its much- 
sought treasures, is explained in this glowingly colorful adapta- 
tion taken from the Chibcha Indians of what is now Colombia, 
After the king's wife and daughter are lured beneath the waters 
of Lake Guatavita by the serpent who lives there, the king pays 
him homage each year with gold and jewels. Text and illustra- 
tions together portray a peaceful kingdom where the king rules 
while waiting to be reunited with his family. Notable 1991 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 



so 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and Nezo 



53 



9.17 , Williams, Sheron. And in the Beginning Illustrated by 

Robert Roth. Atheneum, 1992. ISBN 0-689-3 1650-X. 40p. 6-10. 

In th^s original creation story, Mahtmi, the Blessed One, creates 
the first man from the dark soil of Mount Kilimanjaro in East 
Africa. This original being, Kwanza ("the first one"), tires of his 
particular spot on earth and goes exploring. When he returns, he 
discovers that Mahtmi has created many other humans. Mahtmi 
then gives the jealous Kwanza a gift that marks him as special. 
Colloquial language adds an intimacy to the telling, and the 
v^atcrcolor illustrations reflect the mood. Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

Animals 

9.18 Aardema, Verna. Anansi Finds a Fool: An Ashanti Tale. Illus- 
trated by Bryna Waldman. Dial Books for Young Readers, 1992. 
ISBN 0-8037-1165-4. 32p. 4-8. 

In this Ashanti tale from Ghana, the legendary trickster Anansi 
is up to his usual antics. He is looking for a fool — a fishing 
partner to do all the hard w^ork. But Bonsu, Anansi's partner, has 
some tricks of his ov^n, and at the end of their venture, Anansi 
discovers that the fool he has found is not the one he v^as 
expecting to find. The full-color illustrations reflect the humor of 
the story, v^hich, v^ith its sound effects, makes a good read- 
aloud. A glossary of names is included. See also Anansi Goes 
Fishing by Eric A. Kimmel (9.25). Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

9.19 Aardema, Verna, reteller. Borreguita and the Coyote: A Tale 
from Ayutla, Mexico, Illustrated by Petra Mathers. Alfred A. 
Knopf/Borzoi Books, 1991. ISBN 0-679-90921-4. 32p. 5-8. 

In this retelling of a Mexican folktale, Borreguita (Spanish for 
"little lamb") tricks Coyote three times and succeeds in defeat- 
ing his plans to eat her. Outsmarted and physically bruised by 
Borreguita, Coyote learns not to bother her again. Vividly col- 
ored illustrations capture the v^iliness of the cv^e lamb and the 
gullibility of the hungry coyote. Playful v^ords convey the 
sounds of the animal characters and their actions. A brief glos- 
sary of Spanish terms is included with this trickster talc, but note 
that Esta bien means "It's all right" or "That's all right," rather 
than "that is good." Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. 



81 



54 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and Nczo 



9.20 Aardema, Verna, reteller. Traveling to Tondo: A Tale of the 
Nkundo of Zaire. Illustrated by Will Hillenbrand. Alfred A. 
Knopf/Borzoi Books, 1991. ISBN 0-679-90081-0. 36p. 5-8. 

Traveling to Tondo for his wedding takes a long, long time for 
Bowane, the civet cat who waits for his friends to accompany 
him. When they eventually arrive — after he has waited for the 
palm nuts to ripen, a snake to be digested, a tree trunk to rot — 
Bowane's bride-to-be can no longer be his bride. Will Hillen- 
brand's expressive paintings and silhouettes add to the hilarity 
of this absurd tale. The cumulative structure and the repetitious 
language make this tale from the Nkundo of Zaire a natural 
read-aloud choice. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992; Notable 
1991 Children s Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

9.21 Begay, Shonto. Ma'ii and Cousin Horned Toad: A Traditional 
Navajo Story. Illustrated by Shonto Begay. Scholastic Hardcover 
Books, 1992. ISBN 0-590-45391-2. 32p. 5^. 

When Ma'ii the lazy coyote becomes hungry, he goes to visit 
Horned Toad, his hardworking cousin. Horned Toad is too po- 
lite to refuse Ma'ii, but greedy Ma'ii's appetite is out of control. 
When Horned Toad demands that Coyote work to earn his food. 
Coyote decides to trick his cousin out of the farm. Ma'ii swal- 
lows Horned Toad, but the coyote soon discovers that Horned 
Toad has some tricks of his own. The illustrations capture the 
humor of this Navajo trickster tale. An afterword and glossary 
of Navajo words are included. 

9.22 Belpre, Pura. Perez and Martina: A Puerto Rican Folktale/Perez 
y Martina. Illustrated by Carlos Sanchez. Viking Penguin, 1991. 
ISBN 0-670-84166-8 (0-670-84167-6, Spanish ed.). 64p. 3-8. 

A traditional Puerto Rican folktale with its origins in Spain, this 
is the story of Martina, a Spanish Cockroach whose suitors woo 
her with a variety of sounds. Martina finally settles on Pore/ the 
Mouse because of the beautiful way in which he speaks to her 
But Perez meets an untimely demise when he falls int(^ a rice 
prdding that Martina is cooking for him as a Christmas sur- 
prise. 

9.23 Compton, Patricia A., reteller The Terrible EEK: A Japanese 
Tale. Illustrated by Sheila Hamanaka. Simon and Schuster Books 
for Young Readers, 1991. ISBN 0-671-73737-6. 32p. 5 and up. 

One night as the wind and rain batter their small thatched 
house, a father admits to his son that the thing he fears most is 



82 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and Nexv 



55 



a ''terrible leak." The wolf lurking outside is frightened at the 
thought of something so fierce. The thief on the roof hears "ter- 
rible eek" and is frightened, too. Through a cumulative series of 
mishaps, the thief, the wolf, a tiger, and a monkey all become 
involved in a hilarious and humorously illustrated search for the 
elusive terrible leak in this Japanese tale. 

9.24 Goble, Paul. Dream Wolf. Ilustrated by Paul Goble. Bradbury 
Press, 1990. ISBN 0-02-736585-9. 32p. All ages. 

This original folktale recalls the once-close relationship between 
Plains Indian peoples and wolves. Bored with their berry-pick- 
ing chores, young Tiblo and his little sister Tanksi wander away 
from camp. Trying to reach the top of the hills, they lose track of 
time, and night finds them far from home and lost. They are not 
alone, however. Wolf sees to their safety and, in return, is hon- 
ored by the Indians. Detailed illustrations and simple text pro- 
vide a glimpse of historical Plains Indian culture. The text has 
been rewritten in this revised edition of The Friendly Wolf (1974). 
Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

9.25 Kimmel, Eric A., reteller. Anansi Goes Fishing. Illustrated by 
Janet Stevens. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-09 18-X. 32p. 
4-9. 

This humorous retelling of an Anansi trickster tale also explains 
the origin of the spider web. Anansi the spider thinks that he can 
trick Turtle into doing all the work of catching fish. All Anansi 
will have to do is eat. But Turtle has some tricks of his own. The 
story of who gets to work and who gets to eat will keep readers 
laughing, as will the brightly animated illustrations. See also 
Anansi Finds a Fool: An Aslimiti Tale by Verna Aardema (9.18). 

9.26 Lester, Julius, reteller. Further Tales of Uncle Remus: The Mis- 
adventures of Brer Rabbit, Brer Fox, Brer Wolf, the Doodang, 
and Other Creatures. Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney Dial Books, 
1990. ISBN 0-8037-0611-1, 148p. All ages. 

In the third of his Uncle Remus books, Julius Lester retells thirt}^- 
four African American folktales. Brer Rabbit and his friends get 
into and out of all kinds of mischief, playing trirks on one 
another and on their common enemies. Lester retains a narrator, 
similar to Chandler's Uncle Remus, but his narration is full of 
references to contemporary life. Most of the tales are humorous, 
and children young and old can enjoy hearing them read aloud. 
Jerry Pinkncy's illustrations give the animals an almost human 



56 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



quality. ALA Notable Children t; Books, 1991; Notable 1990 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

9.27 McDermott, Gerald. Zomo the Rabbit: A Trickster Tale from 
West Africa. Illustrated by Gerald McDermott. Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1992. ISBN 0-15-299967-1. 32p. 5-8. 

Zomo the Rabbit is not big or strong, but he is very clever. He 
wants to be more than clever, however; he wants to be wise. He 
asks Sky God for help, but Sky Cod will not give Zomo wisdom 
until he completes three impossible tasks. How can little Zomo 
obtain the scales of Big Fish, the milk of Wild Cow, and the tooth 
of Leopard? This funny West African story with its vivid stylized 
paintings and simple text will appeal to a wide audience. 

9.28 Mollel, Tololwa M. Rhinos for Lunch and Elephants for Sup- 
per! A Maasai Tale. lllUwStrated by Barbara SpurlL Clarion Books, 

1991. ISBN 0-395-60734-5. 32p. ^ -8. 

"Who is there?" asks the hare when she returns to her cave home 
and finds it occupied. "A monster . . . ! I eat rhinos for lunch and 
elephants for supper! Come in if you dare!" answers a booming 
voice from inside the cave. What's a poor frightened hare to do? 
This one enlists the aid of her friends. Their encounters with the 
intruder, and the way in which the "monster" is revealed — and 
by whom — make a humorous story, rendered even funnier by 
the colorful bordered illustrations. The folktale comes from the 
Maasai of East Africa. 

9.29 Sierra, Judy. The Elephant's Wrestling Match. Illustrated by 
Brian Pinkney Lodestar Books, 1992. ISBN 0-525-67366-0. 32p. 
5^8. 

Who is brave enough and strong enough to wrestle with the 
mighty elephant? The monkey sends out the challenge on his 
talking drum, and the leopard, the crocodile, and the rhinoceros 
each take a turn, but the elephant is too much for each of them. 
Then a bat accepts the challenge and proves that victory does not 
always go to the mighty. The text is spare and rhythmical, mak- 
ing this story a good read-aloud. Brian Pinkney's scratchboard 
illustrations capture the action and the humor of this story from 
Cameroon. 

9.30 Stiles, Martha Bennett, retcller. James the Vine Puller: A Brazil- 
ian Folktale. Illustrated by Larry Thomas. Carolrhoda Books, 

1992. ISBN 0-897614-775-9. 28p. 5-8. 



84 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



57 



James the turtle enjoys life in his Brazilian jungle, eating coco- 
nuts and seaweed. But one day the elephant declares himself 
king of the jungle and refuses to allow James to eat his coconuts. 
Then the whale declares himself king of the ocean and forbids 
James seaweed. What can he do? Like a classic trickster, James 
uses his wits to outsmart both animals and to restore harmony 
to his domain. The Aravvak Indians of Brazil use this version of 
an African tale to explain high tides. 

Wonder Tales: Romance, Magic, and the Supernatural 

9.31 Argue ta, Manlio (translated by Stacey Ross). Magic Dogs of Ihc 
Volcanoes/Los Perros Magicos de los Volcanes. Illustrated by 
Elly Simmons. Children's Book Press, 1990. ISBN 0-89239-0r>4-6. 
32p. 5-10 (est). 

The cadejo — mythic dogs of the El Salvador volcanoes — protect 
the nearby villagers from harm and danger. When greedy land- 
lords attempt to destroy the cadejos and make the villagers work 
harder, the volcanoes conspire to erupt, saving^both the cadejos 
and the villagers from the landlords and their lead soldiers. The 
text is v^ritten in both Spanish and English. The brightly colored 
folk-art style illustrations are a fitting accompaniment to this 
original pacifist tale based on folkloric material. 

9.32 Birdseye, Tom, adapter. A Song of Stars: An Asian Legend. 
Illustrated by Ju-Hong Chen. Holiday House, 1990. ISBN 0-8324- 
0790-X. 32p. 5 and up. 

The love between Chauchau, the celestial weaver, and Newlang, 
the handsome herdsman, is so great that the Emperor of Heaven 
decrees that they should be married Unfortunately, the two are 
so devoted to each other that they neglect their other duties. As 
a punishment, they must live apart from each other and can 
meet only once a year on the seventh day of the seventh month. 
On the assigned date, Newlang has trouble crossing the Great 
Milky Way to see Chauchau. Who will come to their aid? An 
author's note explains how the myth is celebrated in both China 
and Japan. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

9.33 Blanco, Alberto (translated by Barbara Paschke). The Desert 
Mermaid/La Sirena del Desierto. Illustrated by Patricia Rcvah. 
Children's Book Press, 1992. ISBN 0-89239-106-5. 32p. 7-9 (est). 



58 



Folktales, Myths, and Le^^cnds: Old and New 



This original "folktale/' in both English and Spanish, carries a 
strong message about the need to "remember the songs of our 
ancestors." A mermaid living in an oasis in the Sonora Desert of 
Mexico learns from an Indian on a magic horse that the other 
mermaids have disappeared because they forgot their songs. 
The mermaid's quest for the ancient songs leads her eventually 
to the sea, where she finds exactly what she needs. The unusual 
illustrations were created by a tapestry artist. 

9.34 Brusca, Maria Cristina, and Tona Wilson, retellers. The Black- 
smith and the Devil/El Herrero y el Diablo. Illustrated by 
Maria Cristina Brusca. Henry Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-1954-5 
(0-8050-2411-5, Spanish ed.). 40p. 7 and up. 

Juan Pobreza, an Argentine blacksmith, is poor, but he never 
turns anyone away for lack of money. One day ho shoes the mule 
of a poor gaucho who claims to be San Pedro. In return, San 
Pedro grants him three wishes, but a disbelieving Juan impul- 
sively squanders them. Then Mr Wetcoals, who is a devil, ap- 
pears, and Juan makes a Faustian bargain with him. W!u»n it 
comes time to pay up, Juan's frivolous wishes come in handy. He 
outsmarts the devil and lives a long life, but when he finally 
dies, he discovers that he may well have outsmarted himself. 
Maria Cristina Brusca's watercolors enhance the humor of this 
South American tale. 

9.35 Dee, Ruby, reteller. Tower to Heaven. Illustrated by Jennifer 
Bent. Henry Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-1460-8. 32p. 6-10. 

Each day, while pounding her pestle, Yaa talks to the sky god 
Onyankopon. In her enthusiasm, she accidentally hits him with 
her pestle once too often, so Onyankopon moves far away into 
the heavens. Yaa misses her daily talks and has the village build 
a tower of mortar so that she can climb up to reach Onyankopon. 
But the tower is just one mortar short. If they just take one from 
the bottom. . . . Brightly colored illustrations reflect the humor of 
this West African tale. 

9.36 Demi. The Magic Boat. Illustrated by Demi. Henry Holt, 1990. 
ISBN 0-8050-1141-2. 32p. 4-8. 

in return for saving his life, an old man giv^es kind-hearted 
Chang a magic boat that grows big or small on command. Dur- 
ing a flood, Chang rescues an ant, a bee, a crane, and the trickster 
Ying. While the others become helpful friends to Chang, Ying 
steals the magic boat and runs off to the emperor to make him- 



86 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



59 



self rich. This story tells how Chang and his friends go about 
getting the boat back. Detailed illustrations featuring red and 
gold reflect the Chinese setting of this tale. 

9.37 Drummond, Allan. The Willow Pattern Story. Illustrated by 
Allan Drummond. North-South Books, 1992. ISBN 1-55858-172- 
3. 32p. 8 and up (est). 

This love story explains the blue and white landscape design 
found on willow ware. A Chinese mandarin plans to marry his 
daughter Koong Shee to an old merchant. But she falls in love 
with Chang, the servant who manages her father's business and 
cares for the garden, and the two lovers run away together.- 
Koong Shee's embittered father searches long years, and when 
he finds the couple, he exacts his punishment. Although the 
story is set in China, the china pattern was designed and first 
produced in England nearly two hundred years ago, which may 
explain some inaccuracies in ^he pictured costumes. Notable 1992 
Children's Trade Boo/cs /// the Field of Social Studies. 

9.38 French, Fiona. Anancy and Mr. Dry-Bon^. Illustrated by Fiona 
French. Little, Brown, 1991. ISBN 0-316-29298-2. 28p. 5--8 (est). 

This original tale is based on Jamaican Anancy stories and is set 
in the Caribbean. Anancy, who is a poor man, wants to marry 
Miss Louise, who is very clever and beautiful, but who has never 
laughed in her life. Mr. Dry-Bone, who is rich, also wants to 
marry her. Miss Louise will marry the one who can make her 
laugh. Which one succeeds — and how — makes an entertaininj; 
story. The black silhouettes against colorful backgrounds add 
interest to this simply lold tale. 

9.39 Goble, Paul. Iktomi and the Buffalo Skull: A Plains Indian 
Story, Illustrated by Paul Goble. Orchard Books/Richard Jack- 
son Books, 1991. ISBN 0-531-08511-2. 32p. 5-7. 

Iktomi's vanity and curiosity again get the best of him in this talc 
about the Plains Indian trickster and his misadventures. Iktomi, 
dressed to impress the girls, hears music coming from a sacred 
buffalo skull, where mice arc having a powwow. He falls asleep 
with his head in the skull, and the mice nibble off his hair. Iktomi 
is in serious trouble, and only his wife can help. The strong line 
and vivid colors of Paul Coble's illustrations complement this 
humorous story. Sec also Coble's Iktomi and the Ducks: A Plains 
Indian Story (9.40). 



87 



60 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



9A0 Goble, Paul, reteller. Iktomi and the Ducks: A Plains Indian 
Story. Illustrated by Paul Goble. Orchard Books/Richard Jack- 
son Books, 1990. ISBN 0-531-08483-3. 32p. 5-7. 

In Paul Coble's third Iktomi tale, the Plains Indian trickster 
dupes a flock of ducks and kills them for dinner Coyote, in tum, 
tricks Iktomi and steals all but one of the roasting ducks, which 
he fills with coals. Again, Iktomi's greed and conceit prove det- 
rimental to him. This retelling, as with the other Iktomi tales, has 
various typefaces and sizes to represent the story line, Iktomi's 
thoughts, and audience asides. This keeps the story moving, as 
do the bold, colorful, and distinctive illustrations. See also 
Coble's Iktomi and the Buffalo Skull: A Plains Indian Story (9.39). 

9.41 Hillman, Elizabeth. Min-Yo and the Moon Dragon. Illustrated 
by John Wallner Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. ISBN 0-15- 
254230-2. 32p. 6-10. 

The heroine of this story set in China is a little girl named 
Min-Yo. The moon is falling, and if someone cannot think of a 
solution, the earth is doomed. Because of Min-Yo's agility and 
small size, the emperor requests that she climb the cobweb stair- 
case to visit the moon dragon. Together Min-Yo and the dragon 
devise a way to save the earth and, at the same time, make the 
night sky sparkle. Watercolors illuminate this magical journey 

9.42 Hooks, William H. The Ballad of Belle Dorcas. Illustrated by 
Brian Pinkney Alfred A. Knopf/Borzoi Books, 1990. ISBN 0-394- 
94645-6. 32p. 9 and up (est). 

The daughter of a white slave owner and a house slave. Belle 
Dorcas, is ''free issue.'' But she is not free to marry the slave 
Joshua, the man whom she loves. When a new master threatens 
to sell Joshua, Belle seeks help from the conjure woman and 
agrees to "give up Joshua to keep him." The conjure woman's 
spell keeps the lovers together for all time — at a very high price. 
Brian Pinkney's evocative drawings convey the power of the 
magic and the dignity of the characters. Notable 1990 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

9.43 Ikeda, Daisaku (translated by Geraldine McCaughrean). The 
Snow Country Prince. Illustrated by Brian Wildsmith. Alfred A. 
Knopf/Borzoi Books, 1990. ISBN 0-679-91965-1. 28p, 7 and up. 

As winter arrives in Snow Country, Mariko and Kazuo begin 
looking after swans. The Snow Prince thanks them and advises, 
"whatever happtms, don't give up." When the children's father 



88 



A. B. 




C. D. 



A. Tov/er to Heaven retold by Ruby Dee; illustrated by Jennifer Bent (see 9.35). B. The 
Snow Country Prince by Daisaku Ikeda (translated by Geraldine McCaughrean); illus- 
trated by Brian Wildsmith (see 9.43). Tailypof retold by Jan Wahl; Illustrated by Wil 
Clay (see 9,58). D. Dragonfly's Tale written and illustrated by Kristina Rodanas (see 
9.52). 

88 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




VIRGINIA HAMILTON 

THE DARK WAY 

Stories from the Spirit World 




C. 



A. The Dark Way: Stories from the Spirit World retold by Virginia Hamilton; illustrated 
by Lannberl Davis (see 9.72). B, Lightning inside You. and Other Native American 
Riddles edited by John Bierhorst; illustrated by Louise Brierley (s-ee 9.69). C. The 
Seven Chinese Brothers by Margaret Mahy; illustrated by Jean and Mou-sien Tseng 
(see 9.45). 



BEST COPY AVMIABLE J3U 



Folktales, Myth^, ami Lc^^cnd^: Old and New 



61 



is injured while away, Ihcir mother must go off to care for him. 
Alone, the children continue caring for an injured swan and 
sending pictures of their daily activities to their parents. The 
advice of the Snow Priiue proves to be invaluable through the 
winter and into the spring, which brings the return of their 
parents. Brian Wildsmith's illustrations for this Japanese tale are 
vibrant. 

9.44 Lacapa, Michael, reteller. The Flute Player: An Apache Folktale. 
Illustrated by Michael Lacapa. Northland, 1990. ISBN 0-87358- 
500-3. 48p. 7 and up. 

"Listen!" It is not the wind, but the sound of a flute. Long ago a 
certain young man would play his flute in the canyon, and the 
young woman whom he loves would send a leaf down the river 
to signal her pleasure. When he goes on an extended hunting 
trip without her knowledge, she thinks that he no longer cares, 
and she becomes inconsolable. What happens when he returns 
makes a sad and romantic story, retold and illuminated by an 
Apache-Hopi artist. 

9.45 Mahy, Margaret. The Seven Chinese Brothers. Illustrated by 
Jean and Mou-sien Tseng. Scholastic Hardcover Books, 1990. 
ISBN 0-590-42055-0. 36p. 6-10 (est). 

Set in the time of the first emperor of China, Chin Shi Huang, 
this is the story of seven brothers, each possessing a unique 
power. When Third Brother repairs a great gaping hole in the 
Great Wall in one afternoon, the emperor feels threatened and 
sentences him to death. But his brothers come to his rescue, and 
the emperor finds that carrying out the sentence is not easy. 
Further, he learns that cruelty does not pay. Rich in historical 
detail, the watercolor illustrations heighten interest. ALA Notable 
Children^ Books, 1991; Notable 1990 Children'^ Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. 

9.46 Martin, Rafe. The Rough-Face Girl. Illustrated by David Shan- 
non. G. P. Putnam's Sons, 1992. ISBN 0-399-21859-9. 32p. 5 and 
up. 

This Algonquin version of a Cinderella tale is retold in the words 
of a storyteller and in boldly dramatic illustrations. Many 
women wish to marry the rich and powerful Invisible Being, but 
iiis sister decrees that "only the one who can see him can marry 
him." The Rough-Face Girl, scarred from the cook fires that her 
sisters force her to tend, easily passes the test of the Invisible 



62 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



Being's sister and proves once more that true beauty lies within. 
Note that at least one Native American critic has pointed out 
discrepancies betvc^cen the text and pictures, such as a tipi for a 
w^igwam and a crown instead of a cap, v^hich recalls the "Indian 
Princess" stereotype. 

9.47 Martinez, Alejandro Cruz (text by Rosalma Zubizarreta, Harriet 
Rohmer, and David Schccter). The Woman Who Outshone the 
Sun: The Legend of Lucia Zenteno/La Mujer que Brillaba Aun 
Mas que el Soh La Leyenda de Lucia Zenteno* Illustrated by 
Fernando Olivcra. Children's Book Press, 1991. ISBN 0-89239- 
101-4. 32p. 7 and up. 

When Lucia Zenteno arrives at the village accompanied by an 
iguana, her long unbraided hair outshines the sun. The river 
falls in love w^ith Lucia's hair, and v^hen Lucia bathes, the river 
(\ov/s through her hair until she combs it out. Fearful and intol- 
erant of Lucia's differences, the villagers drive her out, but they 
soon have reason to regret their actions. Based on a poem by 
Alejandro Cruz Martinez, the poetic text of this Zapotec Indian 
legend from Mexico is in both English and Spanish. ALA Notable 
Children's Boo/cs, 1992. 

9,43 Mayer, Marianna. Golden Swan: An East Indian Tale of Love 
from The Mahabharata. Illustrated by Robert Sauber. Bantam 
Skylark Books /Timeless Talcs, 1990. ISBN 0-553-07054-1. 64p. 8 
and up. 

A young king named Nala falls in love with the beautiful prin- 
cess Damayanti as he listens to an enchanting song about her 
sung by traveling minstrels. He sends a golden swan to her 
distant home to express his love. When it comes time for Dama- 
yanti to select a husband and she chooses Nala, this angers one 
of her suitors. Kali, the snake-eyed god of misfortune. He begins 
a course of vengeance that strips Nala of all his fortunes and 
separates the couple. Yet, true love endures. Damayanti's great 
loyalty to her husband ensures a happy ending to this classical 
story from India. Inspired by The Mahabharata, this tale is a 
masterful blend of myth and legend. 

9.49 Paterson, Katherine. The Tale of the Mandarin Ducks. Illus- 
trated by Leo and Diane Dillon. Lodestar Books, 1990. ISBN 
0-525-67283-4. 40p. 7 and up (est). 

A greedy lord in ancient Japan cages a magnificent drake, sepa- 
rating him from his mate. When the grieving drake loses its 



^2 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



63 



luster, the lord banishes the duck to a kitchen corner. Eventually 
the kitchen maid Yasuko and the servant Shozo release the duck, 
and as punishment, the lord sentences them to die. But the drake 
and his mate find a way to intervene and repay the couple for 
their kindness. The Dillons' Japanese-inspired paintings are per- 
fect complements to Katherine Paterson's original Japanese folk- 
tale. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991; Boston Globe-Horn Book 
Picture Book Axvard, 1991; Notable 1990 Children s Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. 

9.50 Pattison, Darcy. The River Dragon. Illustrated by Jean and Mou- 
sien Tseng. Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Books, 1991. ISBN 0-688- 
10427-4. 32p, 7-10 (est). 

A Chinese blacksmith is betrothed to the daughter of a w^ealthy 
goldsmith, but the father is dissatisfied w^ith the matchmaker's 
choice. At each prenuptial banquet, the father purposely serves 
the favorite foods of the dragon v^ho guards the River Dragon's 
bridge, intending that the blacksmith v^ill be devoured as he 
returns home. Fortunately, the blacksmith, aided by the "fortune 
cookie" clue.s, outsmarts the dragon and proves that he is a 
w^orthy husband-to-be. The dramatic w^atercolors capture the 
dragon's ferocity in this modern original tale that drau^s on 
some Chinese lore. 

9.51 Rappaport, Doreen, reteller. The Journey of Meng: A Chinese 
Legend. Illustrated by Yang Ming-Yi. Dial Books for Young 
Readers, 1991. ISBN 0-8037-0896-3, 32p. 10 and up. 

Meng Jiangnu's husband has been conscripted to help build the 
Great Wall of China. After he appears to her in a dream, she 
courageously sets out to find him. Magic helps her in her travels, 
but it is too late — her husband is dead. Meng Jiangnu is taken 
before the emperor, v^ho insists that she become his. She makes 
a bargain with the emperor but finds that she cannot bring 
herself to keep her promise. Somber hues and misty w^atercolors 
illustrate this tragic story of love and courage for mature read- 
ers. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

9.52 Rodanas, Kristina. Dragonfly's Tale. Illustrated by Kristina Ro- 
danas. Clarion Books, 1991. ISBN 0-395-57003-4. 32p. 5-7. 

In this Zuni Indian tale, Ashiwi villagers v^aste the bounty given 
them by the Corn Maidens. The resulting famine drives the 
villagers au^ay, but they unwittingly leave behind two children. 
To soothe his frightened sister, the boy makes a cornstalk toy. 



93 



64 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and Neio 



which comes to life and intercedes with the Com Maidens on the 
children's behalf. When the Ashiwi return, the surprise that 
awaits them teaches them an important lesson. Earth tones and 
splashes of red and blue predominate in this tale from the 
American Southwest. 

9.53 San Souci, Robert. Sukey and the Mermaid. Illustrated by Brian 
Pinkney Four Winds Press, 1992. ISBN 0-02-778141-0. 32p. 6 and 
up. 

Mermaids are rare, and the rarest kind are Black mermaids. As 
Sukey rests by the sea, her plaintive song is answered by the 
beautiful and kind Mama Jo. When Sukey shares the Black mer- 
maid's gifts with her ma and step-pa, "Mister Hard-Times," the 
greedy man wants more. Both Sukey and her step-pa get all they 
deserve from this awesome creature. Brian Pinkney's scratch- 
board illustrations add homey details and elements of wonder 
to this suspenseful African American folktale. ALA Notable Chil- 
dren's Books, 1993. 

9.54 So, Meilo, reteller. The Emperor and the Nightingale. Illus- 
trated by Meilo So. Bradbury Press, 1992. ISBN 0-02-786045-0. 
24p. 7^9 (est). 

The nightingale's song is so wonderful that the Chinese emperor 
is moA ed to tears. He places her in a golden cage and listens 
daily until someone sends him a mechanical nightingale that is 
prettier than the real one and that sings just as well. The real bird 
escapes, but the emperor is content with the mechanical bird — 
until it wears out. Years later, the emperor, old and sick, learns 
the value of true beauty and true friendship. This adaptation of 
Hans Christian Andersen's story is illustrated in vibrant colors. 

9.55 Torre, Betty L., retcUcr. The Luminous Pearl: A Chinese Folk- 
tale. Illustrated by Carol Inouye. Orchard Books, 1990. ISBN 
0-531-08490-6. 27p. 7-10 (est). 

In this Chinese folktale, the Dragon King's beautiful daughter 
seeks a husband who is honest and brave. To win her hand, two 
brothers are sent to retrieve the luminous pearl from the Eastern 
Sea. The elder brother returns with a shining pearl. The younger 
brings a magic dipper to save a flooded village, and when the 
waters recede, he discovers an oyster with a black pearl. The 
princess knows, however, that appearances are deceiving, Wa- 
tercolor paintings make the magic seem possible. 



94 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and Nezv 65 



9.56 Volkmer, Jane Anne, rctcllcr (translated by Lori Ann Schatsch- 
peider). Song of the Chirimia: A Guatemalan Folktale/La Mu- 
sica de la Chirimia; Folklore Guatemalteco. Illustrated by Jane 
Anne Volkmcr. Carolrhoda Books, 1990. ISBN 0-87614-423-7. 
40p. 8 and up. 

A Mayan princess promises to marry a suitor if he leams to sing 
like the birds. Unfortunately, after many days of trying, the 
young man finds he cannot fulfill the princess's request. Finally, 
aided by the Great Spirit, he learns to play a wooden flute-like 
instrument — the chirimia — whose melodious music has not been 
heard before by the princess. This bilingual (English-Spanish) 
edition of the Guatemalan legend of the chirimia is illustrated in 
bold colors. Notable 1990 Children'i^ Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

9.57 Wahl, Jan. Little Eight John. Illustrated by Wil Clay Lodestar 
Books, 1992. ISBN 0-525-67367-<^. 32p. 5-9. 

Little Eight John was as mean as mean could be! Whatever his 
lovingly patient mother told him would bring misfortune to the 
family was exactly what he had to do. When her warnings 
proved prophetic, he would laugh himself silly. But one day his 
misbehavior leads to an encounter with Old Raw Head Bloody 
Bones, and the close call causes Little Eight John to consider the 
error of his ways. Wil Clay's realistic paintings reveal the south- 
em rural setting of this cautionary tale drawn from African 
American folklore and used historically to warn children to be 
good. Coretta Scott Kiug Illustration Honor Book, 1993. 

9.5S Wahl, Jan, reteller. Tailypo! Illustrated by Wil Clay Henry Holt, 
1991. ISBN 0-8050-0687-7. 32p. 5-10. 

One night after supper, a creature with a great big tail creeps 
through the cracks of an African American man's cabin. The old 
man grabs his hatchet. Wump! He cuts off the creature's tail and 
eats it up. But the creature wants its tail back, and how it goes 
about getting its tail makes a deliriously scary stc^ry for young 
readers. The finely detailed illustrations capture the suspense 
and the fright. The tale is good for reading aloud. 

9,59 Wang, Rosalind C, reteller. The Fourth Question: A Chinese 
Tale- Illustrated by Ju-Hong Chen. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 
0-8234-0855-8. 32p. 6-10 (est). 

In this retelling of a Chinese folktale, a young man who has 
always worked hard wonders why he has remained so poor. On 



9a 



66 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



his journey to seek an answer from the Wise Man in the moun- 
tains, he encounters three others who each have a question to 
ask. Since the Wise Man permits only three questions, the young 
man decides to give up his own. In the end his selflessness is 
rewarded, and his question, too, is answered. 

9.60 Wisniewski, David. Rain Player. Illustrated by David Wisniew- 
ski. Clarion Books, 1991. ISBN 0-395-55112-9. 32p. 8-10. 

In this original tale based on a Mayan legend, David Wisniewski 
relates the story of Pik, a young ballplayer who challenges the 
rain god to a game of pok-a-tok, a combination of present-day 
soccer and basketball. If Pik wins, the drought will end. If he 
loses, he will be turned into a frog. With the help of a jaguar, a 
quetzal, and a sacred cenote, or deep water-filled sinkhole, Pik 
meets the challenge. The special feature of this book is Wis- 
niewski's cut-paper illustrations, which have a three-dimen- 
sional effect. An author's note provides useful background in- 
formation. 

9.61 Yacowitz, Caryn, adapter The Jade Stone: A Chinese Folktale. 
Illustrated by Ju-Hong Chen. Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234- 
0919-8. 31p. 6-10 (est). 

To follow the way of man or the way of nature? Such is the 
dilemma for Chan Lo, the village carver From a perfect piece of 
jade, the emperor expects him to carve a dragon. But it is a 
carver's traditon to follow the stone's nature, and Chan Lo dis- 
covers that this stone wants to be something else. This Chinese 
tale is illustrated in ink and watercolor paintings and is further 
enhanced by the illustrator's technique of evoking the look of 
ancient woodblock prints with Chinese characters. 

Realistic Tales 

9.62 Ada, Alma Flor (translated by Bernice Randall). The Gold Coin. 
Illustrated by Neil Waldman. Atheneurn, 1991. ISBN 0-689- 
31633-X. 32p. Zand up (est). 

"Juan had been a thief for many years." So begins this original 
tale, set in Central America, about the redemptive power of 
kindness and love. When Juan sees an old woman v/ith a gold 
coin and hears her declare herself rich, he determines to steal all 
her gold. As he trails her on errands to help the sick and needy, 
he meets only kindness. By the time he finally comes face to face 
with Dona Josepha, Juan is already on his way to being a new 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and Nero 



67 



person. Notable 1991 Children s Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

9.63 Alexander, Lloyd. The Fortune-Tellers. Illustrated by Trina 
Schart Hyman. Dutton Children's Books, 1992. ISBN 0-525- 
44849-7. 32p. 4-8. 

A carpenter, dissatisfied with his trade, visits a fortxine-teller. 
Will he be rich? famous? happy? Certainly — if he earns large 
sums cf money, becomes well known, and avoids being miser- 
able. How these and other predictions come true makes for an 
amusing original tale with a touch of slapstick added to the 
ironic plot. Trina Schart Hyman's illustrations play up the jewel- 
like colors of West African fabrics and reveal numerous details 
of daily life in a Cameroon village. ALA Notable Children's Books, 
1993; Boston Globe-Horn Book Honor Picture Book, 1993; Notable 
1992 Children s Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

9.64 Demi. The Artist and the Architect. Illustrated by Demi. Henry 
Holt, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-1685-6. 32p. 4-8 (est). 

The emperor of China employs both an architect and an artist to 
serve him. The artist becomes jealous and devises a scheme to 
eliminate the architect, who plays along with this trickery. In the 
end, the architect manages to turn the tables on the artist. Demi's 
bright colors and minute detail capture the ornate style of an- 
cient China. 

9.65 Demi. The Empty Pot. Illustrated by Demi. Henry Holt, 1990. 
ISBN 0-8050-1217-6. 30p. 4-8 (est). 

Virtue is rewarded in this tale from China. When it is time to 
choose his successor, the emperor gives each child a special seed. 
Whoever can show the emperor "their hv. i in a year's time" 
shall become emperor Ting can make anything grow, but try as 
he will, he cannot grow anything from the empen^r's seeds. He 
must appear before the emperor with an empty pot. Humiliation 
turns to triumph when the emperor reveals the secret of the 
seeds. Demi's illustrations authentically reflect Chinese land- 
scape and architecture. Notable 1991) Children s Trade Hooks in the 
Field of Social Studies, 

9.66 Rohmer, Harriet, adapter. Uncle Nacho's Hat/El Sombrero del 
Tio Nacho, Illustrated by Veg Reisborg. Children's Book Press, 
1989. ISBN 0-89239-043-0. 32p. 3-8 (est). 



97 



68 



Folktales, Myths, and Lcji^cmis: Old and Neiv 



Change is difficult lo accept at times, and Uncle Nacho demon- 
strates that to be the case. When his niece Ambrosia gives him a 
new hat. Uncle Nacho has a hard time getting rid of his old one. 
Several attempts to discard the old hat prove unsuccessful be- 
cause he still thinks in the old ways. Finally, Ambrosia, a voice 
of change, provides her uncle with the solution to his problem. 
The text of this adapted Nicaraguan folktale is in both English 
and Spanish; the artwork is evocative of Central America. 

9.67 Va, Leong (translated by James Anderson). A Letter to the King. 
Illustrated by Leong Va. HarperCollins, 1991. ISBN 0-06-020070- 
7. 32p. 4-8. 

In ancient China, parents preferred sons because sons could care 
for them in their old age. A certain physician, the unhappy father 
of five girls, is unjustly imprisoned when a relative of the king's 
dies. If he only had a son, then he would be rescued! Ti Ying, his 
youngest daughter, accompanies him to the capital, and the 
father doctor learns the value of daughters when Ti Ying writes 
a poignant letter to the king on her father's behalf. The text is in 
both Chinese and English. Unique and colorful illustrations help 
tell the tale. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

Collections 

9.68 Belting, Natalia M. Moon Was Tired of Walking on Ain Illus- 
trated by Will Hillenbrand, Houghton Mifflin, 1992. ISBN 0-395- 
53806-8. 48p. All ages. 

These fourteen creation stories from various South American 
Indian tribes answer age-old questions about ourselves and our 
universe. They explain how the earth came to be, why the rain- 
bow is bent, how rivers came into existence, and other natural 
phenomena. A handy map gives the location of the various tribal 
groups. Although the illustrations, which recall ancient times 
and artistic styles, are tastefully done and appropriate to the 
stories, some readers may be uncomfortable with the nudity or 
near-nudity shown in some scenes. Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Bonks in the Field of Social Studies, 

9*69 Bicrhorst, John, editor. Lightning inside Vou, and Other Native 
American Riddles. Illustrated by Louise Brierley. William Mor- 
row, 1992. ISBN 0-688-09582-8. lllp. All ages. 



98 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



69 



"Whfil is there inside you like lightning?" This book is a well- 
researched collection of riddles from twenty different Indian 
Iribci! groups in North and South America. An introduction pro- 
vides information about the tradition of riddling among native 
peoples, the various types of riddles, and their functions within 
the cultures. Helpful hints make it easier for readers to guess the 
answers, ind editor John Bierhorst assures readers that their 
answers may be just as acceptable as the ones printed. 

9J0 DeArmond, Dale, retcller. The Boy Who Found the Light: Es- 
kimo Folktales. Illustrated by Dale DeArmond. Sierra Club 
Books/Little, Brown, 1990. ISBN 0-316-17787-3. 61p. 7 and up. 

Woven through these three Eskimo folktales is respect for both 
humanity and nature. "The Boy Who Found the Light/' in which 
an orphan boy named Tulugac is the light bringer, makes a 
useful comparison to stories in which Raven brings light to 
people. "The Raven and the Marmot" is a trickster tale in which 
Marmot outwits Raven. In "The Doll/' Yuguk comes to life and 
brings precious gifts to his people. Black-and-white wood en- 
gravings capture the spirit of these tales from the North. Notable 
1990 Children s Trade Books hi the Field of Social Studies, 

9.71 Fairman, Tony, reteller. Bury My Bones but Keep My Words: 
African Tales for Retelling. Illustrated by Meshack Asare. 
Henry Holt, 1992. ISBN 0-8050-2333-X. 196p. 10 and up. 

In this collection, the title of which is a Luo proverb from Kenya, 
Tony Fairman presents thirteen traditional tales from various 
African peoples. Through varying typefaces, boxed asides, and 
onomatopoetic words, he attempts to represent a typical African 
oral context. Unfortunately, he tends to speak of Africa and 
"African spelling" (there is a pronunciation guide) in generic 
terms, and for story refrains he suggests some English melodies 
that may not be familiar to American readers. The specific 
source of each story is cited, and on the whole, the presentation 
is lively and inviting. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. 

9.72 Hamilton, Virginia, reteller The Dark Way: Stories from the 
Spirit World. Illustrated by Lambert Davis. Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1990. ISBN 0-15-222341-X. 154p. 9and up. 

These twenty-five stories from around the world are tales of the 
spirit world involving witches, fairies, and inhuman monsters. 
Some, such as the Medusa story, may be familiar; others will be 



99 



70 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and Nezo 



less so. All are spine-tingling. Following each tale is an author's 
note giving the tale's origin(s) and adding important context. A 
bibliography is also included. Lambert Davis's color illustra- 
tions heighten the sense of dread. These tales are suitable for any 
audience that enjoys being safely scared. 

9.73 Joseph, Lynn. A Wave in Her Pocket: Stories from Trinidad. 
Illustrated by Brian Pinkney Clarion Books, 1991. ISBN 0-395- 
54432-7. 51p.9and up. 

Amber's Tantie doesn't just tell a story: "She cause a big baccha- 
nal and scare everybody" Six tales from Trinidad comprisi^ ^his 
collection of authentic retellings of handed-down stories. 
Author Lynn Joseph smoothly blends family life v^ith cultural 
lore using the flavorful cadences of island speech patterns. The 
stories are funny, frightening, tender, tricky, and thought-pro- 
voking. Brian Pinkney's black-and-v^hite drav^ings add visual 
energy to the lively text. The book includes an aftervs^ord and 
glossary. 

9.74 Lyons, Mary E., compiler. Raw Head, Bloody Bones: African- 
American Taies of the SupernaturaL Charles Scribner's Sons, 
1991. ISBN 0-684-19333-7 88p. 10 and up. 

"Rav^ Head was a man that was more'n a man. He was big and 
strong like Big Sixteen and he was two-headed. . . Raw Head 
is just one of the scary creatures found in these fifteen stories. 
They are stories, mostly of African origin, of goblins, ghosts, 
monsters, and superhumans, collected from sources in the 
United States and the Caribbean. Told in the dialects of the 
original tellers, these stories offer scary fun and a lesson or two 
as well. Notable 1991 Children s Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

9.75 Watkins, Yoko Kawashima. Tales from the Bamboo Grove. Il- 
lustrated by Jean and Mou-sien Tseng. Bradbury Press, 1992. 
ISBN 0-02-792525-0. 49p. 9-12. 

Although author Yoko Kawashima Watkins is Japanese, as a 
child she lived in Korea, where her father was a diplomat. At 
dinnertime her father told stories, often to make a point. Guests 
and other family members also told stories. This collection of six 
tales reflects the Kawashima family's attempt to instill values 
and maintain their connections to their homeland. The author's 
introduction is informative, and the black-and-white illustra- 
tions reflect the moods of the stories. 



100 



Folktales, Myths, and Legends: Old and New 



71 



9.76 Yep, Laurence. Tongues of Jade. Illustrated by David Wiesner. 
HarperCollins, 1991. ISBN 0-06-02247M. 194p. 10 and up (est). 

Laurence Yep introduces us to seventeen folktales passed down 
by Chinese immigrants who came to America seeking their for- 
tune. These timeless tales, full of magical powers, eerie sus- 
pense, and moralistic messages, arouse the imagination. These 
stories connected the immigrants to their homeland and to their 
families, whom many would never see again. This is a compan- 
ion volume to Yep's The Rainbozv People. Notable 1991 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 



101 



10 Books for the Very 
Young 



10.1 Calhoun, Mary. While I Sleep. Illustrated by Ed Young. Morrow 
Junior Books, 199^ ISBN 0-688-08201-7. 32p. 4-7. Fiction. 

At bedtime a little girl asks, "Does everything go to sleep at 
night?" In reply, her parents affectionately describe how ani- 
mals, trains, boats, planes, and even the sun rest in the night 
world. Each double-page spread has two parts: an insert show- 
ing the creature or thing asleep, and a large pastel drawing of 
the subject's daytime activity. Although the family looks Asian, 
the book has universal appeal. 

10.2 Carlstrom, Nancy White. Baby-O. Illustrated by Su^e Steven- 
son. Little, Brown, 1992. ISBN 0-316-125851-1. 28p. 3-8. Fiction. 

"Listen to the way our baby goes / Baby Baby Baby-O." Every 
member of this extended family has a sound to accompany his 
or her task: ''tomatoma," "wusha wusha,'' ''kongada," and 
more. Readers will want to join in as they follow three genera- 
tions gathering and transporting their wares to market on a bus 
named Baby-O. At the end of the day, they reunite and ride 
Baby-O home. The colorful illustrations evoke the energy and 
vitality of the people of this unnamed Caribbean island and give 
young readers a picture of island life. 

10.3 Greenfield, Eloisc. Big Friend, Little Friend. Illustrated by Jan 
Spivey Gilchrist. Black Butterfly Children's Books, 1:»91. ISBN 
0-86316-204-5. 12p. 1-5. Fiction. 

One of a set of four board books with rhyming text by well- 
known African American writer Eloise Greenfield, this title can 
also be put to use in early literacy programs. The book focuses 
on comparative si/e, as the narrator shows that he is smaller 
than his big friend, but larger than his little friend, and that 
his role changes from learner to teacher, from smaller than to 
bigger than. Jan Spivey Gilchrist's watercolors are clear and 
uncluttered. 



10^ 



Books for the Very Young 



73 



10.4 Greenfield, Eloise. Daddy and I. . . . Illustrated by Jan Spivey 
Gilchrist. Black ButterHy Children's Books, 1991. ISBN 0-86316- 
206-1. 12p. l-~5. Fiction. 

This board book could easily find a place in a kindergarten or 
preschool. The rhyming text is about the things that an African 
American boy and his daddy do together. "We do the laundry / 
my daddy and I. / He washes the socks, / I hang them to dry." 
Some big brothers or big sisters might enjoy reading this book 
to younger siblings. 

10.5 Greenfield, Eloise. I Make Music. Illustrated by Jan Spivey Gil- 
christ. Black Butterfly Children's Books, 1991. ISBN 0-86316-205- 
3. 12p. 1-5. Fiction. 

"I make good music / on my drums, / I make good music / 
with my thumbs." A little African American girl makes music on 
everything from the piano to her thigh to a trombone. Her par- 
ents think it is all good music. This is a rhythmic, rhyming, 
read-aloud book that invites everybody to join in with a clap or 
a pat of the foot. Another of Eloise Greenfield's board books for 
the very young, this one will also work in kindergarten or first 
grade. 

10.6 Greenfield, Eloise. My Doll, Keshia. Illustrated by Jan Spivey 
Gilchrist. Black Butterfly Children's Books, 1991. ISBN 0-86316- 
203-7. 12p. 1-5. Fiction. 

"My doll Keshia wants to play. / 'Okay, darling, jump!' I say" A 
little African American girl and her brother put her doll through 
its paces, "teaching" it to walk and dance and wave and talk. 
Then it is time for a rest; Keshia has been very busy This board 
book, another of Eloise Greenfield's rhymed texts, makes a good 
read-aloud and predictable book for young listeners and new 
readers. Jan Spivey Gilchrist's watercolors make it easy to follow 
the action. 

10.7 Horton, Barbara Savadgc. What Comes in Spring? Illustrated 
by Ed Young. Alfred A. Knopf/Borzoi Books, 1992. ISBN 0-679- 
90268-6. 30p. 3-6. Fiction. 

"Mama, what comes in spring?" Imagine a child snuggling in 
her mother's lap, asking inquisitive, personal questions about 
the changing seasons. Imagine the mother's melodic responses 
that tell a story about the child's own birth with each explana- 
tion. The rhythmic dialogue, punctuated by lively illustrations, 
renders inseparable the relationship between the child's growth 



103 



74 



Books for the Very Young 



and nature's own cycle of life. Ed Young's poignant and vivid 
drav^ings help to embody the seenungly universal theme into 
the experiences of an Asian family 

10.8 Joosse, Barbara M. Mama, Do You Love Me? Illustrated by 
Barbara Lavallee. Chronicle Books, 1991. ISBN 0-87701 -759-X. 
26p. 4-6. Fiction. 

Mama's love is limitless and unconditional — even if the child 
v^rere to throw v^ater at the lamp, or put salmon in Mama's 
parka, or run av^ay, or turn into a polar bear! Young children of 
all cultures will find this story reassuring. The illustrations show 
an Inuit mother and daughter living in the arctic region of north- 
ern Alaska as the Inuit lived long ago. Included is a glossary 
explaining terms and objects referred to in the story and offering 
further insight into Inuit life and culture. 

10.9 Serfozo, Mary. Rain Talk. Illustrated by Kciko Narahashi. Mar- 
garet K. McElderry Books, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50496-9. 28p. 4-8. 
Fiction. 

Splatt! Kerplunk! Click! These arc some of the sounds that a little 
girl, who appears to be African American, hears as she frolics in 
the rain with her dog. After a whi!c it is time to come in for 
supper, hear a story by the fire, and then go to bed to listen to 
the rain and wait for tomorrow. The watercolor illustrations 
reflect the gentle mood. Thi» repetition of sounds and the use of 
onomatopoeia make this book excellent for reading aloud or 
creative drama. 

10.10 Weiss, Nicki. On a Hoi, Hot Day. Illustrated by Nicki Weiss. G. 
P. Putnam's Sons, 1992. ISBN 0-399^22119-0. 26p. 3-7. Fiction. 

What fun Mama and Angel have cooling off in the spray from a 
water hydrant, sipping cocoa, reading quietly in the afternoon, 
frolicking with each other, and singing at bedtime! The story is 
set in a multiracial community. The name Angel and a sign for 
"El Bodegero" suggest the characters may be Hispanic. The re- 
petitive rhyming text will appeal to young readers, as will the 
simple style of the illustrations. 

10.11 Williams, Vera B. "More More More/' Said the Baby: Three 
Love Stories. Illustrated by Vera B. Williams. Greenwillow 
Books, 1990. ISBN 0-688-09173-3. 33p. 4-6. Fiction. 

Meet Little Guy, Little Pumpkin, and Little Bird. One is white; 
one is African American; one is Asian. Read and see how each of 



104 





A. On a Hot, Hot Day written and Illustrated by NIcki Weiss (see 10.10). B. Mama, Do 
You Love Me? by Barbara M, Joosse; illustrated by Barbara Lavallee (see 10.8). C. 
What Comes in Spring? by Barbara Savadge Horton: illustrated by Ed Young (see 10.7). 
D. "More More More. " Said the Baby: Three Love Stories written and illustrated by Vera 

B. Williams (see 10.11). 

105 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




c. 



A. Silent Lotus written and illustrated by Jeanne M. Lee (see 11 ,47). B. Aunt Flossie's 
Hats (and Crab Cakes Later) by Elizabeth Fitzgerald Howard; illustrated by James 
Ransome (see 11.29). C. Osa's Pr/de written and illustrated by Ann Grifalconi (see 
11.21). 



106 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Hooks for the Very Young 



75 



these three babies is cared for, played with, and loved by the 
adults in their families. Vera Williams's rich watercolor illustra- 
tions and rhymthic text will leave you feeling warm and perhaps 
even slightly envious of the families in her three love stories. 
ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991; Caldecott Honor Book, 1991, 

10.12 Young, Ruth. Golden Bear. Illustrated by Rachel Isadora. Viking 
Penguin, 1992. ISBN 0-670-82577-8. 32p. 2-^. Fiction. 

A litttle African American child has a golden bear for a best 
friend. They do everything together — build a snov^man, ice 
skate, make mud pies, and dream. The simple, rhyming text 
makes for good reading aloud. The large uncluttered illustra- 
tions leave the child's gender somewhat ambiguous, although 
there may be too much hair for a contemporary boy. The musical 
score on the end pages reveals that the text is a song lyric. 



107 



11 



Picture Books: Primary 
and Beyond 



11.1 Adoff, Arnold. Hard to Be Six* Illustrated by Cheryl Hanna. 
Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Books, 1991. ISBN 0-688-09579-8. 32p. 
5-8. Fiction. 

This is a poetic look at whal it is like to be six — ^when your sister 
is ten. The six-year-old narrator cannot ride a ten-speed bike or 
pin the tail on Ihc donkey, but he can make mud pies and dream 
himself big. The family is understanding, but it is Grandma who 
helps the boy undorsland Ihe nc»ed to "take time slow, make life 
count, and pass Invo on/' I his is one of the rare books showing 
an interracial family 

11.2 Albert, Burlon. Whtrc Does the Trail Lead? Illustrated by Brian 
Pinkncy. Simon and Schuster Books for Young Readers, 1991. 
ISBN 0-671 -734(:'9-l. 32p. 3-7. Ficlion. 

An African American boy runs along the rocks at the seashore, 
stopping here and lliere lo look at periwinkles, explore deserted 
shanties, and wad? in the pounding surf as he explores a trail. 
The trail leads back to his family, who prepare a meal of freshly 
caught fish. Lyrical language might remind some children of a 
poem. Brian Pinkney has drawn on childhood experiences at 
Cape Cod to lead readers along seashore paths. 

11.3 Allen, Judy. Tiger. Illustrated by Tudor Humphries. Candlewick 
Press, 1992. ISliN 1-56402-083-5. 28p. 7-10 (est). Fiction. 

Tliere's a tiger out there! Desiring both the tiger's meat and its 
skin, the villagers plot the best way to kill it. Then a famous 
hunter arrives, and the villagers wish him luck — all except Lee, 
who wants the tiger to live. But there is more than one way to 
shoot a cat; and Lee is pleased with the outcome. Set in South 
China and illustrated with realistic watercolor paintings, this 
book aims to raise our consciousness about the endangered ti- 
ger. 

11.4 Ashley, Uernanl Clcversticks. Illustrated by Derek Brazell. 
Crown, IWl. ISBN ()-517-5HH79-X. 32p. 3-6 (est). Fiction. 



Picture Book^: Prinumf timl {ic\fivui 



77 



Ling Sung is n sensitive preschooler of Chinese descent who 
notices thnl other children are more capable than he at such tasks 
as tying their shoes and writing their names. However, one day 
when his cookie breaks, he picks up two paintbrushes and, 
without thinking, begins using them like chopsticks. His class- 
mates are impressed by his dexterity, and all want to learn how 
to use chopsticks. The artist makes each child in this British 
multiracial classroom a distinct individual. 

11.5 Axworthy, Anni. Anni's India Diary. Illustrated by Anni Ax- 
worthy. Whispering Coyote Press/Treld Bicknell Books, 1992. 
ISBN 1-879085-59-3. 32p. 7^10. Fiction. 

This is a fictional diary of a two-and-a-half-month journey 
through India. Ten-year-old Anni and her partMits begin in I3elhi 
and travel by various means to many ciHes and lo well-known 
tourist spots, such as the laj Mahal. Busy color dniwings and the 
brief text convey the sights, sounds, ano lasles that Anni and her 
parents encounter Included in the drawings are product labels, 
stamps, and other arlil.u ts that give a flavor ol India. The jour- 
ney is traced on a map in the front ot the book, 

11.6 Bogart, jo Rllen, Daniel's Dog. Illustrated by Janet Wilson. Scho- 
lastic Hardcover Books, ISBN l)^5yiM34()2-(). 32p. 5-H. 
Fiction. 

Daniel's mother is busy tiiking care of Carrie, the new baby in 
this African Canadian family, and Daniel plays alone until his 
friend Lucy, an imaginary dog, arrives. Mom understands that 
Daniel is feeling left out, and she lets him read a book to Carrie 
and hold her gently in his arms. When Daniel's real friend Nor- 
man expects to be alone for a while, Daniel knows just what to 
suggest, 

11.7 Bond, Ruskin. Cherry Tree, llhistrated by Allan Eit/en, Boyds 
Mills Press/Caroline Hous(>, 1^91. ISBN 1-878093-21-5. 32p. b-H 
(est). Fictitm. 

On the day when six-ye<ir old Kakhi comes home from the ba- 
zaar eating cherries, her grandfather suggests that she plant one 
of the seeds. Although not many trees survive the soil and cli- 
mate in her area of India, Kakhi's tree takes hold and grows over 
a t 'W years until il is taller than she and produces lovely blos- 
soms and sweet cherries. C^rand father reminds Kakhi that every 
living thing grows and changes, including herself. 



78 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



11.8 Brecklcr, Rosemary K. Hoanf Breaks the Lucky Teapot. Illus- 
trated by Adrian Frankel. Hoighton Mifflin, 1992. ISBN 0-395- 
57031-X, Hp. 5-8. Fiction. 

When he left Vietnam for America, Hoang's grandmother gave 
him a lucky teapot. Now he has broken the pot, and it can no 
longer hold the hAay Mun, the good fortune to protect the family 
from evil spirits. How can they survive the first winter with bad 
luck looming? Young readers will empathize with Hoang and 
celebrate his achievement when he finds a solution. An informa- 
tive introduction provides background and tells how to pro- 
nounce the Vietnamese words in the story. 

11.9 Bunting, Eve. The Wall. Illustrated by Ronald Himler. Clarion 
Books, 1990. ISBN 0-395-51588-2. 32p. Fiction. 

A young Hispanic American boy and his father visit the Vietnam 
Veterans Memorial in Washington, D.C., to find the name of the 
boy's grandfather — George Munoz — on the long, shiny black 
wall. As his father scans the monument, the boy observes the 
visitors and mementos there. After finding the name, the father 
makes a special record of it, and the two leave behind a token of 
love and remembrance. Overall, this is a touching picture book 
for readers of all ages. ALA Notable Children s Books, 1991; Notable 
1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.10 Cherry, Lynne. The Great Kapok Tree: A Tale of the Amazon 
Rain Forest. Illuslraled by Lynne Cherry. Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich/Gulliver Books, 1990. ISBN 0-15-200520-X. 33p. 8 
and up (est). Fiction. 

Conservation of the iv^rth's natural resources is a topic of interest 
for children and adults alike. Hence, this compelling tale about 
the shrinking tropical rain forests of the world will appeal ti) 
readers young and old. Lynne Cherry's thought provoking text 
and vivid paintinj.'s are bound to generate much classroooni 
discussion; the timely content will invite cross ciirricular intruc 
tional connections, particularly across science .mil social studies. 
Interesting and informative insights can also he found on the 
inside cover and preface. 

ll^ll Clifton, Lucille. Three Wishes. Illustrated by Michael Hays. 
Doubleday Books for Young Readers, 1992. ISBN 0-385-30497-8. 
32p. 5-8. Fiction. 

On New Year's Day, while out playing with hor best friend 
VictoriuS; an African American girl ncuned /ennbia finds a 



1 1 II 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



79 



penny with her birth year on it. This means that she can make 
three wishes and that they will come true. First, she wishes for 
warmer weather, and the sun comes out — right then. How 
should she "spend" the other two wishes? Before the day is over, 
Zenobia loses and regains a friend and learns what is really 
important. This is a newly illustrated version of Lucille Clifton's 
1976 book. 

11.12 Crews, Donald. Shortcut. Illustrated by Donald Crews. Green- 
willow Books, 1992. ISBN 0-688-06437-X. 32p. 4-7 (est). Fiction. 

In this sequel to Bigmama's (6.4), seven African American chil- 
dren take a shortcut home — along the railroad tracks sur- 
rounded by briers and water. After they pass the cutoff that 
leads back to the road, they hear the train! They realize that they 
should have taken the road. What do they do now? In his char- 
acteristic style, Donald Crews relates a terrifying experience 
from his childhood. As he states in the dedication, "All's well 
that ends well." His illustrations invite readers to join in making 
the "Klak-Klakity" and the "Whoo" sounds of the train. 

11.13 Cummings, Pat. Clean Your Room, Harvey Moon. Illustrated 
by Pat Cummings. Bradbury Press, 1991. ISBN 0-02-725511-5. 
32p. 4-7. Fiction. 

It is Saturday morning and time for cartoons, but Harvey 
Moon's mother says that it is time to clean his room. His room 
does not seem messy to Harvey — just some dirty clothes and a 
few toys. But the illustrations and the rhyming text tell a differ- 
ent story Harvey finds an amazing mess in his closet and under 
his bed. He puts everything away and announces that he has 
finished. But will it pass his mother's inspection? Young readers 
will enjoy the humorous presentation of this familiar situation. 
The illustrations reveal Ihat this particular family is African 
American. 

11.14 Cummings, Pat. Peley Moroni's Camp Runamok Diary. Illus- 
trated by Pat Cummings. Bradbury Press, 1992. ISBN 0-02- 
7255134^. 30p. 5-9. Fiction. 

Take a fourteen-day trip to Camp Uunamok with Petey Moroni, 
a six-year-old African American boy. In his diary, Petey chron- 
icles the camp mystery: the disappearance of hot dogs, gumdrop 
worms, and a host of other camp *'ct)ntraband." The children set 
a trap for the thief, but it fails. Fiach page illustrates a clue to the 
mystery thief, and on day fourteen, as the bus pulls out of sight. 



111 



80 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



the full-color illuslralion reveals the culprit lying in full view 
under a tree. 

11.15 Curtis, Gavin. Grandma's Baseball. Illustrated by Gavin Curtis. 
Crown, 1990. ISBN 0-517-57390-3. 32p. 5-7 (est). Fiction. 

Grandpa, who used to play baseball with a team in the old 
Negro leagues called the Monarchs, died last year. Now 
Grandma has come to live with the narrator's family. She is 
pretty grumpy, and when she catches the narrator playing with 
Grandpa's special baseball, he expects her to be angry. But her 
reaction surprises him. The baseball becomes the means for 
them to express their love and grief and come to a deeper under- 
stand ing of each other. Here is a sympathetic look at a not 
uncommcai family situation. 

11.16 Dorros, Arthur. Abuela. Illustrated by Elisa Kleven. Dutton 
Children's Books, 1991. ISBN 0-525-44750-4. 40p. 8-10. Fiction. 

Rosalba spends the day in the city with her grandmother, 
Abuela. A flock of birds stimulates Rosalba's imagination, and 
she and her grandmother take a fanciful flight over New York 
City They visit Central Park, the New York harbor, the Statue of 
Liberty, JFK Airport, even their relatives' store. Spanish words 
are woven smoothly into the text, and a glossary is provided. 
The special feature of this book is the collage artwork, which 
makes New York sparkle. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992; 
Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.17 Dragonwagon, Crescent. Home Place. Illustrated by Jerry Pink- 
ney Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02-733190-3. 32p. 5-8. Fiction. 

A white family on a Sunday hike come across an old homestead 
where daffodils come up each year to announce the coming of 
spring. A marble, a nail, a horseshoe, a piece of a plate, a yellow 
bottle, and a china doll's arm all conjure up a long-ago extended 
family of African Americans who might have lived and loved in 
this place. The poetic text and the luminous watercolors of this 
quiet book capture a sense of both change and continuity over 
time. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Stud- 
ies. 

11.18 Elsenberg, Phyllis Rose. You're My Nikki. Illustrated by Jill 
Kastner. Dial Books for Young Readers, 1992. ISBN 0-8037-1129- 
8. 32p. 4-8. Fiction. 



er|c 



112 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



81 



"But what if you forget me at your new job tomorrow?" Nikki 
needs to hear Mama say over and over again that she will not 
forget her daughter under any circumstances. Nikki dons sev- 
eral disguises and devises memory tests, but her mother always 
has the right answers. At the end of Mama's tiring first day at 
work, both Nikki and Mama need their reassuring bedtime con- 
versation. The realistic illustrations show a middle-class African 
American family composed of a working mother and three chil- 
dren. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

11.19 Gajadin, Chitra, reteller (adapted by Rabindranath Tagore). 
Amal and the Letter from the King. Illustrated by Helen Ong. 
Boyds Mills Press/Caroline House, 1992. ISBN 1-56397-120-8. 
36p. 8 and up (est). Fiction. 

Amal, who is too ill to go outdoors, sits by his window, dream- 
ing and wishing that he could "go everywhere and see every- 
thing." One night a friend who is a fakir, or Hindu ascetic, tells 
Amal that the king will come and take him on a journey. Amal 
happily falls asleep, feeling no more pain. The allegorical story, 
adapted from the play The Post Office by Nobel Prize-winner 
Rabindranath Tagore, is illustrated with paintings that evoke 
India and capture the unyielding spirit of the bov Amal. 

11.20 Greenfield, Eloise. First Pink Light. Illustrated by Jan Spivey 
Gilchrist. Black Butterfly Children's Books, 1991. ISBN 0-86316- 
207-X. 16p. 4-7. Fiction. 

Dtiddy has been away for a month. Now he is coming home, and 
Tyrtv w.inls to sit up all night and wait. Mama lets him put on 
his pajnmas and sit in the big chair. She tells him that when he 
si»os thf first pink light, it will be time to get ready to surprise 
Dculdy Tywc misses the first pink light, but he feels Daddy's 
love next morning when his father carries him off in his strong 
brown arms. Jnn Spivey Gilchrist's watercolors capture the 
Wiirmth of this lovinj; African American home and family and 
give a new look to a story first published in 1976. 

11.21 Grifalconi, Ann. Osa's Pride. Illustrated by Ann Grifalconi. Lit- 
tle, Brown, 1 WO. ISBN 0-316-32865-0. 32p. 5-8 (est). Fiction, 

Osa is stubborn and full of pride. She brags about her father, 
who never returned from the war, but she refuses to listen to her 
friends' stories about their parents. When Osa's excessive pride 
interferes with her social life, Gran'ma Tika uses a story cloth to 



113 



82 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



help Osa put things in perspective. The theme will connect with 
readers across cultures, as will the rich, warm illustrations. The 
story is set in the Cameroon, but only the village (Tos) is named, 
leaving readers to search for the specific African location. Notable 
1990 Children Trink Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.22 Hamilton, Virginia. DrylrMgso. Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney. 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. ISBN 0-15-224241-4. 50p. Sand 
up. Fiction. 

When a big dust storrr. hits Lindy's mid western farm, a young 
boy comes running before the wind-driven dust. His name is 
Drylongso. His own family is elsewhere, but he remembers what 
his mother said: "Where he goes, life will grow better." Dry- 
longso helps Lindy's family for a while, but in time he must 
move on, leaving them witn renewed hope. Virginia Hamilton 
has created a mythical African American character and a cau- 
tionary tale about the need to preserve the land. 

11.23 Haskins, Francine. Things I Like about Grandma. Illustrated by 
Francine Haskins. Children's Book Press, 1992. ISBN 0-89239- 
107-3. 32p. 4-8 (est). Fiction. 

What a lot of things there are to do with Grandma! She tells 
stories, makes quilts, bakes, goes to church, and visits the sen- 
iors' home. Best of all, her granddaughter gets to participate in 
all these activities — and more. Francine Haskins's simple text 
and somewhat stylized illustrations describe a warm and loving 
relationship between a young African American girl and her 
very active grandmother. 

11.24 Havill, Juanita. Treasure Nap. Illustrated by Elivia Savadier. 
Houghton Mifflin, 1992. ISBN 0-395-57817-5. 32p. 4S. Fiction. 

It is too hot for a nap, so Alicia's mother tells a family story. The 
girl in the story takes a long trip to visit her grandfather, who 
teaches her to ride a burro, make wooden bird cages, and play 
the pito (flute). When it is time to leave, he gives her three gifts. 
That little girl was Alicia's great-great-grandmother. After her 
nap, Alicia takes Grcat-Great-Grandmother's treasures from the 
trunk and imagines herself in the mountains of Mexico, where 
her ancestors lived before coming to the United States. 

11.25 Hayashi, Akiko. Aki and the Fox. Illustrated by Akiko Hayashi. 
Doubleday, 1991. ISBN 0-385-41947-3. 4()p. 4-7. Fiction. 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



83 



Kon is the stuffed fox that Grandma sent to look after Aki from 
the time she was born. Kon and Aki become inseparable, but 
after a few years Kon gmws old. Together Aki and Kon set out 
for Grandma's so that she can mend Kon's seams. Their journey 
turns into an adventure, and the friends must take care of each 
other. But getting to Grandma's is worth the trip. This translated 
book retains its Japanese flavor in both text cind illustrations. 

11.26 Hill, Elizabeth Starr. Evan's Comen Illustrated by Sandra 
Speidel. Viking Penguin, 1990. ISBN 0-670-82830-0. 32p. 3-8. 
Fiction. 

There is little space for eight people in a two-room apartment, 
but Evan wants a place of his own. When Mama suggests that 
hp choose one of the eight corners, Evan is delighted and sets 
about selecting and fixing up his corner Somehow, though, just 
when his space should be right, something is missing. Evan 
discovers that his corner has room for one more. New illustra- 
tions help to update this classic tale of an African American 
family caring and sharing. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. 

11.27 Hoffman, Mary. Amazing Grace. Illustrated by Caroline Binch. 
Dial Books for Young Readers, 1991. ISBN 0-8037-1040-2. 28p. 

4- 8. Fiction. 

Grace loves to act out stories, so when the teacher of her British 
school announces that the class will perform the play Peter Pan, 
Grace naturally wants to be Peter. But her classmates say that 
she cannot be Peter — Peter is not a girl, and Peter is not Black. 
At home Grace sadly tells Ma and Nana what happened. Mama 
is angry, but it is Nana who convinces Grace that she can do 
anything she puts her mind to. The picture of Grace as Anansi is 
worth the price of the book. ALA Notable Children s Books, 1992; 
Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.28 Hort, Lenny. How Many Stars in the Sky? Illustrated by James 
E. Ransome. Tambourine Books, 1991. ISBN 0-688-10104-6. 32p. 

5- 8. Fiction. 

A young African American boy, unable to sleep, decides to count 
the stars in the sky from his bedroom window, his backyard, and 
his tree house, but he still cannot see all of them. The boy and 
his daddy, who also cannot sleep, discover a great place for 
stargazing, but the stars are so close together they cannot be 
counted. After sleeping outside underneath the night sky, the 



115 



84 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



boy and his father wake up to a special star that can be both seen 
and counted. 

11.29 Howard, Elizabeth Fitzgerald. Aunt Flossie's Hats (and Crab 
Cakes Later), Illustrated by James Ransome, Clarion Books, 
1991, ISBN 0-395-54682-6. 32p. 6-9. Fiction. 

Playing dress-up in Aunt Flossie's hats makes Sarah and Susan's 
Sunday afternoons especially memorable because each hat 
evokes precious memories and exciting stories. Reminiscing be- 
comes a sensory experience as Aunt Flossie passes down stories 
about the sights, sounds, and smells of early Baltimore. Later, 
the girls, their great-aunt, and their parents go out for delicious 
crab cakes. Full-color oil paintings depict an antique-filled house 
and energetic young girls, and convey the love and warmth 
found in this African American family Notable 1991 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.30 Hudson, Wade. Jamal's Busy Day. Illustrated by George Ford. 
Just Us Books, 1991. ISBN 0-940975-21-1. 24p. 5-7 (est). Fiction. 

Jamal's father, an architect, works hard. His mother, who is an 
accountant, works hard as well. Jamal goes to school, but he 
works hard, too. He is active all day — working with numbers, 
doing research, trying experiments, assisting his "supervisor" 
(teacher). He even brings work home. At dinnertime when his 
parents talk about their busy day at work, Jamal chimes in that 
he knows exactly what they mean. Grownups are not the only 
ones who have busy days. George Ford's realistic paintings 
bring out the humor of the story of this African American family 
Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.31 Hughes, Shirley. Wheels: A Tale of Trotter Street. Illustrated by 
Shirley Hughes. Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Books. ISBN 0-688- 
09881-9. 28p. 5-8. Fiction. 

Trotter street "blossoms" each spring with tricycles, roller skates, 
baby buggies, and a variety of wheels. Carlos and Billy, on their 
"old slow bikes," enjoy racing each other through familiar Lon- 
don neighborhoods and parks. When Billy gets a new racing 
bike and starts to win every race, Carlos is jealous and asks his 
mum for a new bike, too. On his birthday, he receives a number 
of parcels, but no bicycle. Carlos's surprise birthday wheels will 
make the final race of the holiday unforgettable. 



lib 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



85 



11.32 Ichikawa, Satomi. Nora's Duck. Illustrated by Satomi Ichikawa. 
Philomel Books, 1991. ISBN 0-399-21805-X. 32p. 5-8 (est). Fic- 
tion. 

Nora finds an injured duckling and takes it to Doctor John for 
l:jlp, even though he is no'; an animal doctor. At his farm the 
Japanese girl discovers a menagerie of animals that he is caring 
for, and she learns, among other things, why sheep do not graze 
on the pretty flov^ers, v^hy abandoned hens need help, why 
turtles need a house, and what parrots eat. When the duck starts 
quacking at her, she must discover what it needs. Watercolor 
illustrations accompany her journey of discovery. An afterword 
provides information about the real Dr. John and his animal 
sanctuary in Kent, England. 

11.33 Igus, Toyomi. When I Was Little. Illustrated by Higgins Bond. 
Just Us Books, 1992. ISBN 0-940975-32-7. 32p. 5-9 (est). Fiction. 

Noel, a young African American boy, loves to go fishing every 
summer with Grandpa Will, who lives in the country As they 
fish. Grandpa Will tells stories about what life was like for him 
as a young boy — no refrigerators, no jets, no indoor toilets, no 
TV. How did they ever get along? "Things are different now," 
says Grandpa Will, "but . . . the important things are just the 
same." Scenes from Grandpa's time are rendered in black and 
white, while the present time is shown in full colon 

11.34 Ikeda, Daisaku (translated by Gearaldine McCaughrean). The 
Cherry Tree. Illustrated by Brian Wildsmith. Alfred A. 
Knopf /Borzoi Books, 1991. ISBN 0-679-92669-0. 28p. 5-8 (est). 
Fiction. 

Left homeless and fatherless by the war, Taichi and Yumiko live 
in an abandoned farmhouse with their heartbroken mother. One 
day a stray cat leads the children to an old cherry tree that has 
not bloomed in many years. An old man is trying to protect the 
tree from winter in the hope that it will blossom again. The 
children help, and when spring comes, hope is reborn for them 
and for their entire village. Brian Wildsmith's characteristically 
colorful illustrations capture the spirit of hope. Notable 1992 
Children'iy Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies, 

11.35 Isadora, Rachel. At the Crossroads. Illustrated by Rachel Isa- 
dora. Grccnwillow Books, 1991. ISBN 0-688-05271-1. 32p. 5-8. 
Fiction. 



117 



86 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



This simple story from South Africa offers a poignant look at life 
in the Black townships. The children are excited because their 
fathers are returning after ten long months away working in the 
mines. After school, the children go to the crossroads, where 
they are joined by friends and others in the community. They 
sing and dance in anticipation of the fathers' impending arrival, 
but it is dawn before the last six waiting children hear the rum- 
ble of the truck that brings their fathers home. ALA Notable 
Children's Books, 1992; Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies, 

11.36 Isadora, Rachel. Over the Green Hills. Illustrated by RacncI 
Isadora. Greenwillow Books, 1992. ISBN 0-688-10510-6. 32p. 5-8 
(est). Fiction. 

Zolani and his mother travel on foot from the seashore, over the 
green hills, to visit Urandma Zindzi. Zolani's mother carries the 
baby on her back, a box of dried fish on her head, and a basket 
of com on her arm. Zolani leads a goat carrying freshly gathered 
mussels. But Grandma Zindzi is not at home. As evening falls 
and they prepare to leave, Grandma finally appears, and the 
long journey seems worth every step. The present-tense text and 
vivid watcrcolor illustrations give a sense of everyday life in the 
Transkei, an independent Black state on the east coast of South 
Africa. 

11.37 Johnson, Angela. Do like Kyla, illustrated by James E. Kansome. 
Orchard Books/Richard Jackson Books, 1990. ISBN 0-531-08452- 
3. 32p. 3-7. Fiction. 

A little sister adores her big sister Kyla. From morning to night 
she imitates her sister's every action, from pouring honey on 
oatmeal to crunching home from the store following their own 
footprints in the snow. Whatever Kyla does, the little sister says, 
"1 do like Kyla." But at bedtime, when the day is ending just as 
it began — with birds gathering at the window — the little sister 
gets a chance to take the lead. A simple, somewhat repetitive text 
and strong watercolor paintings make this gentle story of an 
African American family a good read-aloud. 

11.38 Johnson, Angela. The Leaving Morning. Illustrated by David 
Soman. Orchard Books/Richard Jackson Books, 1992. ISBN 0- 
531-08592-9. 32p. 4-7. Fiction. 

Moving is difficult at any age, but especially for this young 
African American boy who leaves behind relatives, friencls, and 



lib 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



87 



neighbors. The family has completed all of its packing, and the 
only thing remaining is saying good-bye to all the special people 
whom they are leaving behind. The young boy leaves his "lips" 
and kisses on the windows of his old home as a fond remem- 
brance. David Soman's watercolors enhance the gentle tone of 
the text. 

1139 Johnson, Angela, One of Three. Illustrated by David Soman. 
Orchard Books, 1991, ISBN 0-531-08555-4. 32p. 4-7 (est). Fiction. 

"Since I can remember I've been one of three — Eva, Nikki, and 
me." The three sisters do many things together: walk to school, 
play dress-up, ride the subway, shop. But every once in a while, 
Eva and Nikki will not allow their little sister to tag along. Then 
Mama and Daddy and Sister make their own special times to- 
gether — ^a different set of three. Many "youngest-in-the- family" 
children will recognize themselves in this warm story about an 
African American family. 

11.40 Johnson, Angela, When I Am Old with You. Illustrated by 
David Soman, Orchard Books/ Richard Jackson Books, 1990, 
ISBN 0-531-08484-1, 32p, 4-7. Fiction, 

A young African American boy spends time with his Gran- 
daddy, They sit on the porch, go fishing, play cards, ride a 
tractor, peruse old family clothing and pictures stored in the 
attic, and enjoy a corn roast with family and friends. Through- 
out, the boy tells the Grandaddy that "when I am old with you," 
the two of them will do all their favorite things together — ex- 
actly what they are doing now. The dreadlocked little boy is a 
happy surprise in this universal story of love between a grand- 
father and his grandson. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991; 
Coretta Scott Kin;f Writinij; Honor Boot 1991; Notable 1990 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies, 

11.41 Johnson, Dolores. The Best Bug to Be. Illustrated by Dolores 
Johnson. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-7478424, 32p, 4-4}, Fiction, 

Kelly is disappointed when she is cast as a "good-for-nuthin' 
bumblebee" in the school play, Megan will be the cutest lady- 
bug; Robert the only t«>ad in the froggy pond; and Sharon the 
Queen of the butterflies. But all bees do is buzz! When Kelly's 
parents let her know that they expect her to do her best in the 
role, Kelly works hard at being a good bumblebee. On the night 
of the play, the hard W(M'k of this African American girl pays off. 



119 



88 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



The watercolor illustrations portray a delightful multiracial cast 
of expressive characters. 

11.42 Johnson, Dolores. What Kind of Baby-sitter Is This? Illustrated 
by Dolores Johnson. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-747846-7. 32p. 
5-8. Fiction. 

Kevin's mother takes classes in the evenings, but he does not 
want to have a sitter. Baby-sitters just talk on the phone, eat all 
the snacks, and v^atch soap operas. Not this sitter — boy, is she 
different! She v^ears a baseball cap v^ith the logo of Kevin's 
favorite team; she v^aves a pennant while she watches the game; 
and she actually knows the rules of the game. And there are 
more surprises to come in this appealing and amusing story of 
an intergenerational friendship between an African American 
boy and a baseball-loving baby-sitter. 

11.43 Johnson, Dolores. What Will Mommy Do When I'm at School? 
Illustrated by Dolores Johnson. Macmillan, 1990. ISBN 0-02- 
747845-9. 32p. 4-6. Fiction. 

A little African American girl is starting school tomorrow. How 
will her mother ever manage without her? When she goes to 
school, there will not be time to make muffins together, or watch 
cartoons, or comb Mom's hair. And who will help with the 
groceries? Dad tries to be reassuring, but not until Mom an- 
nounces that she is about to begin her own new adventure does 
the little girl know that she will not need to worry about her 
mother. This story will connect with any young child who has 
had to face a new challenge. 

11.44 Johnson, Kyorson. Kenji and the Magic Geese. Illustrated by 
Jean and Mou-sien Tseng. Simon and Schuster Books for Young 
Readers, 1992. ISBN 0-671-75974-4. 32p. 7 and up. Fiction. 

Kenji loves the family's valuable painting of five geese in flight 
When a flood destn^ys the family's rice crop, his father must sell 
the painting. Kenji gives his beloved geese a going-away gift of 
a ride on his kite, but when it returns, there are only four geese 
in the painting! The magic continues in this story set in Japan. 
Eventually Kenji's father finds a way to keep the picture and 
share the art with others. The color illustrations capture the 
emotions of the people and the spirit of the theme. 

11.45 Johnston, Tony Lorenzo, the Naughty Parrot. Illustrated by Leo 
Politi. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. ISBN 0-15-249350-6. 
32p. 5-8. Fiction. 



i2\) 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



89 



Lorenzo the parrot thinks that he is the family protector. He lives 
in the garden and squawks a warning at everyone who enters. 
He gets into all sorts of mischief as he "participates" in all the 
family activities, including Ana's birthday party and San Ni- 
colas's Christmas Eve visit. But more than anything, Lorenzo 
loves cookies. How this love of cookies helps find Papa's miss- 
ing wedding ring makes an amusing family story. The illustra- 
tions show a contemporary family living in Mexico. 

11.46 Keller, Holly. Island Baby. Illustrated by Holly Keller. Greenwil- 
low Books, 1992. ISBN 0-688-10580-7. 32p. 4-7. FicHon. 

Set on an unnamed Caribbean island, this is the story of friend- 
ship between a young boy and an elderly man who keeps a bird 
hospital. Simon comes by every morning to help Pops with his 
birds. One day Simon finds an injured flamingo whom he names 
Baby. Simon nurses Baby back to health, and the two become 
attached. Then the time comes for Simon to set the bird free. He 
must handle that difficult task and take a step toward his own 
growth as well. 

11.47 Lee, Jeanne M. Silent Lotus. Illustrated by Jeanne M. Lee. Farrar, 
Straus and Giroux, 1991. ISBN 0-8050-0169-7. 30p. 7-10 (est). 
Fiction. 

Lotus is deaf and cannot speak, but she loves to imitate the 
graceful walk of the cranes and herons that she observes around 
her in Kampuchea. Seeking a way to help their unhappy child, 
her parents take her from her village to the king's palace in the 
city. There she sees the court dancers and "hears" the vibrations 
of their music. She has, her parents think, found her calling. 
How Lotus triumphs over silence and enchants the royal court 
makes an inspiring story. Jeanne Lee's vibrant illustrations bring 
this Cambodian tale to life. 

11.48 Martin, Ann. Rachel Parker, Kindergarten Show-off. Illustrated 
by Nancy Poydar Holiday House, 1992. ISBN 0-8234-0935-X. 
40p. 5-8. Fiction. 

Five-year-old Olivia, an only child, is quite satisfied with her 
accomplishments. She is the only one in her kindergarten class 
who can read or write. Then Rachel Elizabeth Parker moves in 
next door. Not only can she read and write, but she has a grand- 
daddy and a baby sister and two first names! She can do every- 
thing Olivia can do. Who could be friends with this kindergarten 
show-i)tf? How the girls resolve their differences and develop an 



90 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



interracial friendship makes a satisfying story for young readers. 
Notable 1992 Children s Trade BooArs in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.49 McKissack, Patricia C. X Million Fish . . . More or Less. Illus- 
trated by Dena Schutzer. Alfred A. Knopf/Bor/oi Books, 1992. 
ISBN 0-679-90692-4. 32p. All ages. Fiction. 

Hugh Thomas encounters Pappa-Daddy and Elder Abbajon 
while fishing early one morning on the Bayou Clapateaux. He 
listens as they trade tall tales of strange happenings around the 
bayou. Later, Hugh becomes involved in his own strange hap- 
penings while he catches a million fish . . . more or loss. Patricia 
McKissack's skillfully woven tale of an African American boy is 
strongly supported by Dena Schutzer's bright acrylic illustra- 
tions. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

11.50 Medearis, Angela Shelf. Dancing with the Indians. Illustrated 
by Samuel Byrd. Holiday House, 1991. ISBN 0-8234-0893-0. 32p. 
5-8. Fiction. 

In a rhyming text, Angela Shelf Medearis celebrates the connec- 
tion between people of two cultures. Her great-grandfather, 
"Papa John/' escaped from slavery and was rescued by Semi- 
nole Indians. For generations, his family has kept up the tradi- 
tion of taking part in the semi-annual Seminole powwow in 
Oklahoma. This story is told from the perspectve of a young girl 
of the 1930s who joins her family in respectfully watching the 
Indian dances iind then being invited to join in. Notable 7991 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.51 Merrill, jean, adapter. The Girl Who Loved Caterpillars: A 
Twelfth-Century Tale from Japan. Illustrated by Floyd Cooper. 
Philomel Hooks, 1992. ISBN 0-399-21871-8. 32p. 5-S. Fiction. 

In this story, taken from a ts\'elfth-century Japanese scroll, the 
unconventional l/umi has no interest in the ladylike fashion of 
the Japanese court. She prefers studying and playing with cater- 
pillars to plucking her eyebrows and blackening her teeth, as is 
the fashion for women. Izumi's reputation captures the attention 
of the captain of the stables. Although the story ends abruptly, it 
leaves readers to ponder what happens after Izumi and the 
captain correspond. Floyd Cooper's luminous oil-wash paint- 
ings are striking and capture the drama of the story. 



1 




c. 



A. Iiiu) of Cnuws written and illustrated by Allen Say (see 11 .66). B. My Doll. Keshia 
liy I IniiiH (Irentilmld, Illustrated by Jan Spivey Gilchrist (see 10.6). C. The Wallb^ Eve 
hunting, illustrated by Ronald Himler (see 11.9). 

1?3 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




A. When i A, f I Old with Vot/by Angela Johnson; illustrated by David Soman (see 11.40). 

B. Jonathan and His Mommy by Irene Smalls-Hector; illustrated by Michael Hays (see 
1171). C. When Africa WasHomeby Karen Lynn Williams; Illustrated by Floyd Cooper 
(see 11.76) D. The Girl Who Loved Caterpillars: A Twelfth-Century Tale from Japan 
adapted by Jean Merrill; ili'<strated by Floyd Cooper (see 11.51) 



1:^4 BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Picture Books: Primary and Bcyoud 



11.52 Mills, Claudia. A Visit to Amy-Clalre. illustrated by Shuila 
Hamanaka. Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-766991-2. 32p. 5-H (est). 
Fiction. 

Fivo-year-old Rachel looks forward to visiting her cousin Amy- 
Claire and doing all the things that they did together on the last 
visit — making report cards, taking bubble baths, swinging on 
the tire. But all Amy-Claire wants to do is play with Rachel's 
two-year-old sister, Jessie. Rachel eventually finds a way to solve 
her problem. Sheila Hamanaka's vibrant paintings give life to 
this tale of sibling rivalry. The families appear to be biracial and 
Asian, but no more specific information is given. 

11.53 Mora, Pat. A Birthday Basket for Tia. Illustrated by Cecily Lang. 
Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-767400-2. 29p. 4-8 (est). Fiction. 

Young Cecilia wants to do something special for her great-aunt's 
ninetieth birthday. With the aid of her new cat, Chica, she pre- 
pares a birthday basket that reminds Tfa of their special times 
together. Tia is both surprised and pleased. The cumulative 
story will appeal to young readers, as will the vibrant illustra- 
tions of this Mexican American family. Appropriately placed 
Spanish words add just the right touch. 

11.54 Nodar, Carmen Santiago. Abuelita's Paradise/El Parafso de 
Abuelita. Illustrated by Uiane Paterson. Albert Whitman, 1992. 
ISBN 0-8075-U129-H (0-8073-6346-3, Spanish ed.). 32p. 5-8. 
Fiction. 

WhtMi Marlta's grandmother dies, Marita inherits her old rock- 
ing chair As Marita rocks and leans on Abuelita's old faded 
blanket with the word ("paradise") on it, she recalls the 

wonderful stories that her grandmother used to tell of her youth 
in Puerto Uico. Tlii» evocative illustrations add to the poignancy 
of the story 

11.55 t )rr, Kalheriiiiv My (irandpa and the Sea. Illustrated by Kather- 
ine Orr C'arolrhoda Books, 1990. ISBN (1-87614-409-1. 32p. 5-9. 
I h tion 

I lla's gramllatlier is a (islu»riiian who loves the sea. He and 
( iraniniy live on the ( aribhean island of St. Lucia, and when Lila 
speiuls tiini» with tluMii, (irandpa passes on his wisdom about 
naturi* and life Whi»n livhnologically advanced fishing methods 
di'plett^ the supply ol lish, c;randpa must find a new way to 
Illlike a living, lie tries several occupations, but ultimately he is 



92 



l^irlufv lk)oks: Phmary and Beyond 



hiippy to rcMiirn to sivv I lu» color illustrations give a sense of 
tlu» In'iUity of the island and the sea. 

11.56 I'inknoy; ( iloria JcMn Back liome. Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney 
Dial Books for Young Readers, 1992. ISBN 0-8037-1169-7. 40p. 
5-9 (est). Fiction. 

Ernestine spends part of the summer with her North Carolina 
kinfolk: Uncle June, Aunt Beula, and Cousin Jack. Life on the 
farm is not at all like life in the city, but Ernestine feels right at 
home — when Jack is not teasing her about her "citified" clothes 
and her "citified" ways. Can they ever be friends? The Pinkneys 
capture in words and illustrations an experience familiar to gen- 
erations of northern urban African Americans — maintaining 
their roots "back home" in the South. ALA Notable Children's 
Books, 1993; Notnble 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

11.57 Polacco, Patricia. Chicken Sunday. Illustrated by Patricia Po- 
lacco. Philomel BcKiks, 1992. ISBN 0-399-22133-6. 32p. S-9. FicHon. 

Winston, Stewart, and their white "sister friend" love Miss Eula 
and her voico that sounds "like slow thunder and sweet rain." 
They also love her soul food dinners after church on "chicken 
Sundays." They want to buy her a special gift for Easter, but just 
when they go to ask Mr Kodinski to give them work, he falsely 
accuses them of throwing eggs at him. How they convince him 
of the truth and earn the gift makes an appealing story of inter- 
racial, intercultiual friendship and creativity. ALA Notable Chil- 
dren's Books, nm; Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. 

11.58 Polacco, Patricia. Mrs. Katz and Tush. Illustrated by Patricia 
Polacco. Bantam Little Rooster Books, 1992. ISBN 0-553-08122-5. 
32p. 5-8. Fiction. 

Larnel convinces his neighbor, Mrs. Katz, to adopt a scrawny, 
tailless kitten — ugly and unwanted. As the kitten grows, so does 
the relationship between the lonely Jewish widow and the Afri- 
can American boy The friends discover that they have much in 
common when Mrs. Katz invites Larnel to celebrate a passover 
seder with her. Lively illustrations flesh out the story with de- 
tails of interiors, neijjhborhood surroundings, and real people. 
Notable 1992 Children s Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 



Picture Hooks: Primary and Beyond 



11.59 Rcddix, Valerie. Dragon Kite of the Autumn Moon. Illustrated 
by Jean and Mou-sien Tsenj;. Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Books, 
1991. ISDN 0-688-11031-2. 32p. 5-10. Fiction. 

There is an old Chinese belief that if you set your kite free, it will 
take whatever misfortune you have with it. Young Tad Tin's 
grandfather becomes gravely ill. He had been a kite maker and 
had made a beautiful big dragon kite for Tad Tin when he was 
born. Seeing his grandfather so sick. Tad Tin knows that he must 
fly his dragon kite and set it free in order to make his grandfa- 
ther well again In this story set in Taiwan. 

11.60 Ringgold, Faith. Aunt Harriet's Underground Railroad in the 
Sky. Illustrated by Faith Ringgold. Crown, 1992. ISBN 0-517- 
5H76H-H. 32p. 7 and up (est). Fiction. 

In this sequel to Tar liciu h (11.61), Cassie Louise Lightfoot and 
her bnither Ue Ue fly up to the sky, where they encounter the 
Underground Railroad train and its conductor. Aunt Harriet 
Tubman. While He Be rides on the train. Aunt Harriet guides 
Cassie on a journey from the hardships of slavery to the jubila- 
tion of freedom and a reunion with her brother. The color illus- 
trations are In much the same style as those in Tar Beach. A 
biographical sketch of Harriet Tubman, accompanied by a map 
and a brief bibliography, is included. 

11.61 Ringgold, Faith. Tar Beach. Illustrated by Faith Ringgold. 
Crown Tublishers, 1991. 1S13N 0-517-58031-4. 32p. 7and up (est). 
Fiction. 

Cassie Louise Lighllt)ot, eight years old, enjoys family outings 
on tar beach, the rooftop of her Harlem apartment building. 
From there, while her parents play cards with Mr. and Mrs. 
Honey, Cassie imagines that she can fly over the city, claiming 
all that she surveys and righting wrongs along the way. Based 
on a story quilt that hangs in the Guggenheim Museum, the 
illustrations, bordered by reproductions from the original quilt, 
are the exciting feature of this book by an established African 
American artist. See also Aunt Harriet's Underi^round Railroad in 
the Sky by Faith Ringgold (11.60). ALA Notabie Children's Books, 
J992;Caldccott Honor Book, 1992; Corctta Scott King Illustration 
Award, 1992. 

11.62 Koe, Fileen. Con Mi Hermano/With My Brother. Illustrated by 
Robert Casilla. Uradbury Press, ISBN 0-02-777373-^1. 32p. 
4-7. Fiction. 



94 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



In both English and Spanish, this story is told in the words of a 
young boy who wants to be just like his older brother. He ad- 
mires the way his brother can ride a bus to school, deliver 
newspapers, and play ball on Saturdays. The older brother affec- 
tionately makes time for the little one, making their ties espe- 
cially close. The evocative illustrations of the boys playing base- 
ball, wrestling, and reading together capture the warm and 
loving relationship of two Hispanic American brothers. 

11.63 Sage, James. The Uttle Band. Illustrated by Keiko Narahashi. 
Margaret K. McElderry Books, 1991. ISBN 0-689-50516-7. 28p. 
4^. Fiction. 

A little band weaves its way through a town, delighting all the 
people who hear its music. Long after it has gone, the townspeo- 
ple remember its music, "and nothing was ever the same again." 
The lyrical text and the gentle illustrations combine for a sooth- 
ing effect. The band is racially integrated, as are the townspeo- 
ple. The book offers a vision of a harmonious multicultural 
world. 

11.64 Sakai, Kiniiko. Sachiko Means Happiness. Illustrated by Tomie 
Arai. Children's Hook Fress, 1990. ISBN 0-89239-065-4. 30p. 6-10 
(est). Fiction. 

In this story about a Japanese American family, Sachiko's grand- 
mother sometimes does not recognize her own family or know 
where she is, Sachiko is upset with this change in the loving 
grandmother who gave her her name. When Grandmother starts 
to weep while trying to find "home," Sachiko looks into her eyes 
and recognizes that in her mind she is a frightened five-year-old 
child. Her new understanding gives her the patience to treat her 
grandmother with kindness and love. Full-color illustrations 
have a Japanese flavor. 

11.65 Samton, Sheila White, Jenny's Journey. Illustrated by Sheila 
White Samton, Viking Penguin, 1991. ISBN 0-670-83490-4. 32p, 
3-8, Fiction. 

When Maria moves away and writes of her loneliness to Jenny, 
her best friend, Jenny finds a creative way to make her friend 
feel belter. Jenny's exciting sea journey owes a great deal to 
imagination. I he book, with its lively illustrations full of details 
thai extend the text, is a celebration of a friendship that happens 
to ht» inliMTai iai. 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



95 



11.66 Say, Allen. Tree of Cranes. Illustrated by Allen Say Houghton 
Mifflin, 1991. ISBN 0-395-52024-X. 32p. 4-8. Fiction. 

Having taken a chill playing at a forbidden pond, a young 
Japanese boy understands why he must take a hot bath, eat a hot 
meal, and go to bed. But he is puzzled by his mother's behav- 
ior — folding paper cranes and digging up his birth tree. It is the 
seventh day before the New Year, and his mother, who was born 
in California, introduces him to the spirit and customs of Christ- 
mas. Allen Say's autobiographical depiction of his first Christ- 
mas is illustrated in luminous watercolors. ALA Notable Chil- 
dren's Books, 1991; Notable 1991 Childrat's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. 

11.67 Schoberle, Cecile. Esmeralda and the Pet Parade, Illustrated by 
Cecile Schoberle. Simon and Schuster Books for Young Readers, 
1990. ISBN 0-671-67958-9. 32p. 5-«. Fiction. 

Esmeralda, Juan's goat, is always in trouble. She was a gift from 
Grandfather, who calls her an explorer and insists that one day 
she will be famous. The Garcia Street children only hope that 
Essie will not spoil their chances at the Santa Fe pet parade. 
Esmeralda is irrepressible, and in the end the Garcia Street 
youngsters have a pleasant surprise. The linoleum-block print 
illustrations are in the colors of tne Southwest in this story about 
a Mexican American family 

11.68 Scott, Ann Herbert. On Mother's Lap. Illustrated by Glo Coal- 
son. Clarion liooks, 1992. ISBN 0-395-58920-7. 32p. 5-7. Fiction. 

Michael was rocking on Mtilher's lap. Soon Dolly, boat, and 
puppy are all cuddled under the reindeer blanket and rocking 
on Mother's lap, too. Then liaby starts to cry, and Mother thinks 
she wants to rock, tot). 'Tiiere isn't room," says Michael. "Let's 
see," says Mother, and soon Michael sees how big Mother's 
lap — and Mother's love — can be. The drawings in this full-color 
new edition reveal that this universal story takes place in the 
home of an Eskimo family living in an Alaskan village. 

11.69 Shelby, Anne. We Keep a Store. Illustrated by John Ward. Or- 
chard Uooks, 1990. ISBN 0-531 -08456-6. 32p. 5^. Fiction. 

A small girl relates the good things about keeping a country 
store: her family working together, not paying yourself for items 
from the shelves, sneaking a piece of candy, and neighbors gath- 
ering around the stove, on the porch, and in the yard. This brief 
portrait of an African Anierican family at work conveys the 



96 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



small pleasures and warmth of sharing with those who care. 
Realistic paintli.gs by John Ward bring the people and details to 
life. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.70 Smalls-Hector, Irene. Irene and the Big, Fine Nickel. Illustrated 
by Tyrone Getcr. Little, Brown, 1991. ISBN 0-316-7987M. 32p. 
5-^. Fiction. 

In this autobiographical story set in the 1950s, free-spirited 
seven-year-old Irene begins the day exploring her Harlem 
neighborhood. She enjoys a biscuit at Miss Sally's house, has a 
disagreement with Charlene on the sidewalk, and plays adven- 
turous games with Lulabellc and Lulamae. A nickel found in the 
gutter buys a raisin bun plus some crumbs put in the bag by 
Miss Susie. While the friends sit on the curb and relish the good 
taste, Irene silently anticipates Miss Sally's banana pudding to 
end this special day for her. 

11.71 Smalls-Hector, Irene. Jonathan and His Mommy. Illustrated by 
Michael Hays. Little, Brown, 1992. ISBN 0-136-79870-3. 32p. 4-7. 
Fiction. 

Five-year-old Jonathan and his mother do more than walk 
through their urban neighborhood. They race, take giant steps 
and little steps, do ballet steps, and stop to dance to reggae 
music. The rhythmic text and vibrant illustrations portray an 
African American mother and son having fun together and en- 
joying each other's company. 

11.72 Tan, Amy. The Moon Lady. Illustrated by Gretchen Schields. 
Macmillan, 1992. ISBN 0-02-78883U-4. 32p. 9-12. Fiction. 

One rainy afternoon, Maggie, Lily, and June are bored. Grand- 
mother (Nai-nai) tells them a story from her childhood in China. 
On one Chinese Moon Festival, her family had gone on a boat to 
Tai Lake for a great feast and celebration. On the trip, Nai-nai 
learned what secret wishes mean and how they can be fulfilled. 
A description of a traditional holiday celebration is craftily 
woven into this story, adapted from Amy Tan's The Joy Luck Club. 
Notable 1992 Children s Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.73 Walker, Alice. Finding the Green Stone. Illustrated by Catherine 
Deeter Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1991. ISBN 0-15-227538-X. 
38p. 7-10. Fiction. 

In this moralistic tale by Alice Walker, one of America's best- 
known writers, Johnny learns of the destrui Live powers of nega- 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



97 



tive emotions and the hcnling power of love. Everyone in his 
multiracial community has a shining green stone. When Johnny 
is unkind to friends and family he loses his stone, and everyone 
tries to help him find it. But johnny must find his green stone 
himself. The long text rails for reading aloud to younger stu- 
dents, but middle readers can read the book lhem^;elves. 

11.74 Walter, Mildred Pitls. Two and Too Much. Illustrated by Pat 
Cummings. Bradbury Press, mi). ISBN 0-02-792290-1. 32p. 4-7. 
Fiction. 

Two-year-old dina is always into something. When seven-year- 
old Brandon volunt(H»rs to help Mama get ready for company. 
Mama asks him to baby-sii Gina. He tries his best, but Gina is 
always one step ahead of him. Just when he is about to play his 
records for her, Gina disappears. The youngster turns up, but 
Brandon thinks Gina is "two and too much!" Children with 
younger siblings will recogni/e themselves in this realistically 
drawn African American family. 

11.75 Williams, Karen Lynn. Galtmoto. Illustrated by Catherine Stock. 
Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Books/Mulberry Books, 1990. ISBN 
0-688-10991-8. 27p. 5-8. Fiction. 

Kondi wants to make a galimoto, a Chichewa word for a toy 
vehicle made from old wires, but he does not have enough wire. 
His determination and ingenuity spur him in a village-wide 
search for what he needs. By nightfall the village children can all 
play with the fruit of his labors. As Kondi scours his Malawi 
village, the reader also encounters the sights, sounds, smells, 
and busy life of the people. The full-color paintings accompany- 
ing this inspiring story add reality and immediacy. Notable 1990 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.76 Williams, Karen Lynn. When Africa Was Home. Illustrated by 
Floyd Cooper. Orchard Books/Richard Jackson Books, 1991. 
ISBN 0-531-08525-2. 32p. 4-8. Fiction. 

Barefoot, hatless Peter and his parents live in an African village. 
Peter, a blond, white American, and Yekha, a Black village child, 
are inseparable. Together they slide down anthills, eat fish 
sauce — eyes and all — and relish sugar cane treats. When it is 
time to return "home" to America, not even popsicles seem 
inviting to Peter. After months in America, the family happily 
returns to Africa. This sensitively told story is flawed by its 
failure to specify its setting, thereby feeding the myth of a gi»- 



i;31 



98 



Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



neric "Africa." Chichewa words are used in the text, indicating 
that the setting is Malawi. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. 

11.77 Williams, Sherley Anne. Working Cotton. Illustrated by Carole 
Byard. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. ISBN 045-299624-9. 
32p. 5-9. Fiction. 

Shelan's family and other workers arrive at the cotton fields of 
central California before it is light, pick cotton all day, and leave 
when it is dark again. Shelan piles cotton in the middle of the 
row for Mamma. She is proud of Daddy's speed and skill, and 
imagines how much she can pick when she is older. The poetic 
text and dramatic illustrations give a sense of how these African 
American migrant farm hands maintain their dignity while per- 
forming backbreaking work for minimal compensation. ALA 
Notable Children's Books, 1993; Caldecolt Honor Book, 1993; Coretta 
Scott King Illustration Honor Book, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies, 

11.78 Wilson, Beth R Jenny. Illustrated by Dolores Johnson. Macmil- 
Ian, 1990. ISBN 0-02-7931 20-X. 30p. 6-8. Fiction. 

This is a collection of vignettes in the voice of Jenny, a pensive 
seven-year-old girl. She talks, among other things, about her 
teacher, her grandma and grandpa, chocolate cookies, and what 
seems spooky. Readers will notice her expression of disgust 
when she says, "When I go visiting with Grandma she likes to 
show people my baby pictures. ..." The illustrations offer a 
realistic picture of an African American girl, her family, and the 
multiracial group of people who are a part of her world. Notable 
1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

11.79 Yolen, Jane. Encounter. Illustrated by David Shannon. Harcourt 
Brace Jovanovich, 1992. ISBN 0-15-225962-7. 32p. H and up. Fic- 
tion. 

In an interesting reversal, the landing of Columbus on the Baha- 
mian island of San Salvador in 1492 Is recounted through the 
eyes of a Taino Indian boy who has dreams and premonitions 
about the disasters that will befall his people because of the 
Spaniards' greed for gold. Nobody heeds his warning, and the 
story concludes with the boy as an old man, robbed of his 
dreams and his land. See also The Tainos: The People Who Wel- 
comed Columbus by Francine Jacobs (7.9) and Morning Gir/ by 
Michael Dorris (13.10). 




Picture Books: Primary and Beyond 



99 



11.80 Zimelman, Nathan. The Greal Adventure of Wo Ti. Illustrated 
by Julie Downing. Macniillan, 1992. ISliN 0-02-793731-3. 32p. 
5-8. Fiction. 

Wo Ti the carp lives a safe and comfortable life in the pond at the 
emperor's Summer Palaci^ in Heijinj;, but he feels that something 
is missing. Then Kitti Ho the alley cat leaps over the palace 
walls, and the birds and fish are no longer safe. Wo Ti devises a 
clever plan to rid them of the m(?nace, and through this under- 
taking nis life becomes fulfilled. The carp's adventure is brought 
to life by artist Julie Downing's evocative watercolors. 



133 



12 Fiction for Middle 
Readers 

12.1 Bunting, Eve. Summer Wheels. Illustrated by Thomas B. Allen. 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. ISBN 0-15-207000-1. 48p. 6-10. 
Fiction. 

The bicycle man repairs bikes and lends them to the neighbor- 
hood children. Two rules prevail — ^bikes must be returned by 
4:00 PM ; and if a bike breaks while you are riding it, you repair 
it. One day a now boy Leon, shows up and borrows the favorite 
bike of Lawrence. Then Leon fails to return the bike on time. 
Lawrence and his friend Brady go after him to see that justice is 
done. What happens to the rule breaker in this interracial story 
makes a strong statement about the power of kindness and trust. 
Notable 1992 Children s TVade Books in the Field of Social Stndiei^. 

12.2 Gogol, Sara. Vatsana's Lucky New Year. Lerner, 1992. ISDN 0- 
8225-0734-X. 156p. 9-12. Fiction. 

Born in America to Laotian parents, Vatsana considers herself an 
American. Why does she need to know Laotian customs? Vat- 
sana must learn to cope with a racist bully and to help her newly 
arrived cousin adjust to America. In doing so, she comes lo 
accept being part of two cultures and to appreciate her own dual 
heritage. Although the theme is a bit too obvious, the book can 
help readers sympathize with the plight of recent immigrants 
from Southeast Asia and other regions of the world. 

12.3 Gordon, Sheila. The Middle of Somewhere: A Story of South 
Africa. Orchard Books/Richard jackson Books, 1990. ISBN 0- 
531-08508-2. 154p. 8-12. Fiction. 

Nine-year-old Rebecca's family and the rest of the Black villag- 
ers have been told that they must move because the area is to be 
used for a new white suburb. The bulldozers may come any day. 
This is South Africa, where apartheid rules. But this time the 
community decides to protest. Resistance will bring attention to 
their plight, but it also brings risk. Ultimately, the focus is on 
both the strength of the family and community and the hope that 
sustains a people, fane Addams Honor Rook, 1991. 



ERIC 



134 



Fiction for Mithllc /^tvn/crs 



12.4 Greenfield, Eloise. Koya DeLaney and the Good Girl Blues. 

Scholastic Hardcover Books, 1992. ISBN 0-590-43300-8. 128p. 
8-10. Fiction. 

Koya is a sixth-gmdc African American girl who uses humor to 
approach and often avoid difficult situations. She refuses to get 
angry because she fears it will permanently mar her character. It 
is only after her sister Loritha is treated unfairly and the singing 
of her rock-star cousin Delbert is interrupted by rude fans that 
Koya comes to terms with the appropriateness of angry feelings. 
This book is good for promoting classroom discussions on emo- 
tions and family activities. 

12.5 Hamilton, Virginia. The All Jahdu Storybook. Illustrated by 
Barry Moser. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1991. ISBN 0-15- 
239498-2. 108p. 7-10. Fiction. 

Virginia Hamilton remodeled the original tales about the magi- 
cal trickster Jahdu and added four lively new adventures for this 
complete collection. Mama Luka, the baby-sitter, is missing from 
the stories, but her absence brings the reader closer to the en- 
dearing African American hero. Paintings by Barry Moser add 
to the flavor of mystery and magic. This is an excellent read- 
aloud choice. 

12.6 Hamilton, Virginia. Cousins. Illustrated by Jerry Pinkney. Phi- 
lomel Books, 1990. ISBN 0-399-22164-6. 125p. 9-12. Fiction. 

Cammy misses her beloved Gran and sneaks into the nursing 
home to visit Gran, but she cannot resolve her other problem, 
goody-goody cousin Patricia Ann. If only Patty would vaporize! 
All the anger, hurt, and rivalry between these two cousins come 
together one fateful afternoon. The tragedy of Patty's death is 
nearly doubled when Cammy tries to give in to despair, but 
strong family lies pull her through. This novel explores complex 
relationships within a believable African American family of 
stning ancf unique individuals. ALA Notable Children's Books, 
1991; Best nooks for Youua Ailultn, J99h 

12.7 Hurwit/, Johanna. Class President. Illustrations by Sheila 
Hamanaka. Scholastic/Apple Paperbacks, 1991. ISBN 0-590- 
44064-0. 85p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

Julio Sanchez realizes that the new school year may be different 
from what he expected once he discovers that the new fifth- 
grade teacher is a man, Ernesto Flores. Julio's first lesson is to take 
pride in his Puerto Rican name and the heritage it symbolizes. 



102 



Fiction for Middle Readers 



He also learns how to be a true leader, how to help a friend, and 
how to make brownies — lessons different from the subjects that 
he was prepared to study. Readers will enjoy the familiarity of 
the joys and trials of school life. 

12.8 Kidd, Diana. Onion Tears. Illustrated by Lucy Montgomery 
Orchard Books, 1991. ISBN 0-531-08470-1. 62p. 7-10. Fiction. 

Nam Huong is a Vietnamese girl living in Australia. She has lost 
her entire family and is having difficulty adjusting to life in this 
new place. Nam Huong cries onion tears while helping in Aun- 
tie's restaurant, although she wishes she could cry real tears. But 
she can trust no one — until she gets to know Miss Lily, an eccen- 
tric teacher living nearby. This wistful journey of self-discovery 
is guided by Nam Huong's personal view. Notable 1991 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies, 

12.9 Kraus, Joanna Halpert. Tall Boy's Journey. Illustrated by Karen 
Ritz. Carolrhoda Books, 1992. ISBN 0-87614-746-5. 48p. 6-9. 
Fiction. 

When his grandmother dies, eight-year-old Kim Moo Yong is 
adopted by an American couple. Tom away from Korea and 
everything that he knows, he finds America confusing and 
frightening. He has promised his uncle to be a "tall boy," but the 
situation is overwhelming. Then he meets Mr. Cho, a Korean 
friend of his new father's. Mr. Cho becomes a source of informa- 
tion and comfort to Kim Moo Yong and helps him learn to 
adjust. One illustration does not match the text, but overall this 
is a sympathetic view of an increasingly common event. 

12.10 Myers, Walter Dean. Mop, Moondance, and the Nagasaki 
Knights. Delacorte Press, 1992. ISB^: 0-385-30687-3. 150p. 8-12. 
Fiction. 

In this sequel to Me, Mop and the Moondance Kid, T.J., his younger 
brother Moondance, their friend Mop, and their Elks teammates 
try to eam a trip to Japan by winning a special international 
baseball tournament. But the Eagles and their coach are big 
obstacles. Then there are the teams from Mexico, France, and 
Japan — the Elks don't speak their languages. The kids neverthe- 
less find a way to make friends — and temporary enemies. In the 
end, the kids' concern for one another, coupled with their ath- 
letic skills, saves the U:y. 



136 



Fiction for Midtilc Readers 



103 



12.11 Namioka, Ix^nsey. Yang the Youngest and His Terrible Ear. Il- 
lustrated by Kces de Kieftc. Little, Brown /Joy Street Uooks, 
1992. ISBN 0-316-59701-5. 134p. 9-11 (est). Fiction. 

The Yangs have recently moved to Seattle from China. Vingtao, 
the youngest, has the misfortune of having been born into a 
musically talented family. Despite his inability to play in lune, 
his parents expect his musical talent to emerge. Vingtao's talents 
are in baseball, bul he has a difficult time convincing his parents 
that he should quit the violin. Yingtao and his friend Matthev^ 
devise a scheme to prove that he is different from his musical 
siblings. Humorously told in the first person, this is an excellent 
read-aloud book. 

12.12 Pinkwater, Jill. Tails of the Bronx: A Tale of the Bronx. Macmil- 
Ian, 1991. ISBN 0-02-774652-6. 208p. 8-12. Fiction. 

All the cats on Burnbridge Avenue are missing. Ten-year-old 
Loretta Berstein and her multicultural group of friends in a 
largely working-class community in the Bronx decide to search 
for them. They soon solve the mystery of the missing cats, but In 
the process the friends learn firsthand about the far more diffi- 
cult problem of homelessness. Although the plot sometimes bor- 
ders on the improbable, the story is one of the fevs^ children's 
bonks to broach this societal issue. 

12.13 Ke^an, Dian Curtis. The Curse of the Trouble Polls. Illuslraled 
by Michael Chesworlh. Henry Holt /Red Fealher Books, 1992. 
ISBN O m)5l)-1944-H. 5Kp. 7-10. Action. 

In a hilarious depiction of a fourlh-grade classroom, Chinese 
American Angle Wu becomes popular when she shares her six 
h'onble dolls from Ciualemala with her friends. The dolls arc 
supposed to dispel trouble, but when Angie lends the dolls one 
by one lo her classmates, Ihe blessing of the trouble dolls turns 
out to be a curse. Some customs and beliefs of the Mayas are 
superficially inlerlaced into the plot. 

12.14 Knop, Peter, and Connie Uoop. Ahyoka and the Talking Leaves. 
Illustrated by Yoshi Miyake. Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Books, 
1992. ISBN 0-688-10697-8. 64p. 6 and up. Fiction. 

Si»quoyah and his daughter, Ahyoka, are the only Individuals 
known to have created a written language. This flctlonall/ed 
account of the Cherokee visionary places his daughter at the 
center of the story. It describes their hardships, from being ac- 
cused of doing evil magic to having their cabin burned. It also 



13 V 



104 



Fiction for Middle Readers 



makes clear Set] iioyah's commitment to the project and the enor- 
mity of their achievements. One wishes for more information 
about the accuracy of the illustrations, but the story is worth 
reading. Notable 1992 Children s Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. 

12.15 Stolz, Mary. Go Fish. Illustrated by Pat Cummings. HarperCol- 
lins, 1991. ISBN 0-06-025822-5. 73p. 7-11. Fiction. 

Grandfather agrees to take Thomas fishing, one of their favorite 

Kastimes. At the end of the day, Thomas is once again eager to 
ear Grandfather's stories, which have been passed down 
through the centuries from West Africa, In this sequel to Storm 
in the Night, characterization is strong, there is obvious affection 
between Thomas and his grandfather, and their love of reading 
and storytelling are skillfully woven into the story. See also 
Stealing Homehy Mary Stolz (12.16). Notable 1991 Children's Trade 
Hooks in the Field of Social Studies. 

12.16 Stolz, Mary Stealing Home. HarperCollins, 1992. ISBN 0-06- 
021157-1. 154p. H-11. Fiction. 

Just when Thomas thinks that life is at its coziest. Aunt Linzy 
arrives for an extended visit. She does not like baseball and 
disapproves of f ishing. She does like to clean up. Adjusting to the 
changes that she brings to their lives is not easy for Thomas or 
his grandfather This sequel to Storm in the Night and Go Fish 
(12.15) Includes 5he humor and strong characterization that 
ri'iulers havi> come to expect from Mary Stolz's stories about an 
orplianed AlriciUi American boy being raised in Florida by his 
wise iind loving grandfather 

12.17 Tale, IHeannni \i Thank You, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.! Frank- 
lin Watts, I wo. ISBN 0-531-10904-6. 237p. 8-10. Fiction. 

Mary Elouise is dark-skinned and unhappy about it. She hates 
the Black dolls thiK Big Mama gives her for Christmas. She is 
willing to give up her good friend if she can be friends with 
Brandy, a light-skinned girl whose family is well-off. But when 
a storyteller who calls herself Imani Afrika comes into her class 
room and into her life, Mary Elouise begins her journey toward 
self-acceptance, supported by her true friends and by her loving 
and wise grandmother Notable 1990 Children's Trade Hooks in the 
Field of Social Studies. 



138 



h id ton for Muhilc Headers 



105 



12.18 Taylor, Mildnul D. Mississippi Bridge. Illustrated by Max 
Ginsburg. Uidl Hooks for Young Readers, 1990. ISBN 0-8037> 
0427-5. 62p. H and up. Fiction. 

Jeremy Simms, a white boy, relates the events that unfold as the 
weekly bus arrives at his family's store one rainy day in the 
1930s, a time of blatant racism in rural Mississippi. Before cross- 
ing the raging creek, the bus driver makes the Black passengers, 
including the Logan children's grandmother, get off the bus to 
make room for some whites, which proves to be a fateful deci- 
sion. This hard -hitting tale expands the story of the Logans from 
Roll of Thunder, Hear My Cry. Nolable 1990 Chihiren'a Trade Books 
in the Field of Social Studiei^. 

12.19 Yee, Paul. Roses Sing on New Snow: A Delicious Tale. Illus 
trated by Harvey Chan. Macmillan, 1991. ISBN 0-02-793622-H. 
32p. (y-U (est). Fiction. 

hi this humorous and moral tale by Canadian author Paul Yee, 
a father falsely boasts that his two sons, rather than his daughter, 
are the best cooks in town. An inevitable predicament arises 
when the visiting governor of China requests the recipe for the 
daughter's exquisite dish called "Roses Sing on New Snow." 
The artist accurately depicts the New World setting of the early 
Chinese immigrants and particularly captures the emotions of 
the rotund protagonists. This is a good accompaniment to Paul 
Yee's Tales from Gold Mountain. 



13 Novels for Older 
Readers 



13.1 Alexander, Lloyd. The Remarkable Journey of Prince Jen. Dut- 
ton Children's Books, 1991. ISBN 0-52544826-8. 274p. 11 and up 
(est). Fiction. 

Young Prince Jen, with the aid of his loyal manservant Mafoo, 
seeks the legendary kingdom of Tien Kuo in order to learn from 
its wise ruler. Yuan Ming. An old sage chooses six simple gifts 
for Prince Jen to bear in homage, and unbeknown to him, the 
gifts have magical powers. The numerous obstacles overcome 
serve as rites of passage into manhood. Author Lloyd Alexander 
weaves an intricate tale not unlike Chinese legends of old. 

13.2 Armstrong, Jennifer Steal Away. Orchard Books/Richard Jack- 
son Books, 1992. ISBN 0-531 -08583-X. 210p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

It is 1855. Orphaned Susannah has come from Vermont to live 
with her slaveholding Virginia relatives. Bethlehem is a "gift" to 
Susannah from the family. Both girls are desperate to escape, 
and together this unlikely interracial pair of thirteen year olds 
runs away. On the girls' journey north, their courage, their 
friendship, and their values are all tested. Forty years later, they 
tell the story of their adventure to their thirteen-year-old grand- 
daughters. Readers will find much food for thought in this story 
of two strong and honest women. ALA Notable Children's Books, 
1993; Best Books for Young Adults, 1993. 

13.3 Berry, James. Ajeemah and His Son. HarperCollins/Willa 
Perlman Books, 1992. ISBN 0-06-021044-3, H3p. 11 and up. Fiction. 

In an unnamed African nation in the early 1800s, Ajeemah and 
his eighteen-year-old son, Atu, are walking to a neighboring 
village with a dowry for Atu's chosen bride when they are 
kidnapped and sold into slavery. They survive the six-week 
voyage and land in Jamaica, where they are sold to separate 
sugar plantations, never to meet again. James Berry tells their 
parallel stories in this hard-hitting exploration of the effects of 
slavery on the lives of the enslaved and their descendants. This 
book is foi mature readers. ALA Notable Childre)i's Books, 1993; 
Best Books for Youug Adults, 1993; Boston Globe-Horn Book Fiction 



Mo 



Novels for Older Readers 



107 



Auumi, nm; Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies. 

13.4 Blair, Dnvid Nelson. Fear the Condor. Lodestar Books, 1992. 
ISBN 0-525-^7381-4. 137p. U) and up (est). Fiction. 

Bartolina Ch'oke and her Aymara Indian family work for the 
patr6n of a large farm in Bolivia in the 1930s. Bartolina learns the 
cruelties of the subservient life that she and her family arc forced 
to live when she is given added housekeeping duties and when 
her father is conscripted intc) the Bolivian army to fight in a war 
in which he has no investment. Bartolina is determined to learn 
how to read, and her literacy provides the catalyst for trying to 
bring about change in her people's way of life. 

13.5 Booth, Coleen E. Going Live. Charles Scribner's Sons, 1992. 
ISBN 0-684-19392-2. 181p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

Assuming the responsibility of being one of the three hosts on a 
TV talk show is a great challenge for an eleven-year-old African 
American girl named Delaney Crawford. She soon learns that 
cooperation, making choices, and decision making are central 
to fulfilling this challenge. Delaney misses her friends, has no 
time for fun, and cannot keep up with her homework. Adding 
to her anguish is the decision of her widowed mother to date a 
fellow dentist. This first novel will connect with many modem 
teenagers. 

13.6 Buss, Fran Leeper (with Daisy Cubias). Journey of the Spar- 
rows. Lodestar Books, 1991. ISBN 0-525-67362-8. 155p. 12 and 
up. Fiction. 

Fifteen-year-old Maria, two siblings, and another teenager are 
smuggled into the United States fn)m Mexico in a crate in order 
to escape murder in their home country of V.\ Salvador. In Chi- 
cago, they suffer starvation and cruel working conditions. 
Maria's sense of hope and her determination to reunite with her 
mother and baby sister, still in Mexico, make the story ultimately 
affirming. The author's frankness dbout the terror that illegal 
aliens face makes for mature reading. This is a topic not well 
represented in young adult literature, fane Addants Award, 1992; 
Notable 1991 Children's Trade Hooks in the l ieid ofSovial Studies. 

13.7 Case, Dianne. Love, David, lllustrrited by Dan Andreasen. Lode- 
star Books, 1991. ISBN 0-525-67350-4. 12Hp. 10-12. Fiction. 



Ml 



108 



Novels for Older Headers 



Allhoiif^h shi? loves her parents and the baby sisler for whom she 
I .ni»s diiily, fur Anna jantjies, a ''colored" South Afriean, 
I rnlers on hiT helm ed half-brother, David. David loves her, loo, 
hul Uc wants to escape their unyieldinf» poverty and his abusive 
sleplathei In this first-person narrative, Anna relates her own 
hopes and tears, and wnat happens when, inevitably, her father 
abuses tlie do(> that Diivid had rescued from drownlni^ and had 
f^rovvn tt) loviv I he !U)vel ^^ives human faces to South Africa's 
racial oppn^ssion. 

13.N C lioi,Sook Nyul. Year of Impossible Goodbyes. I lou^hton Mif- 
flin, l^i^il. ISliN 0 3M5-57419«h. I7lp. 10 and up. Miction. 

Ten-year-old Sooknn lives in Japanese-occupied North Korea. 
Her brothers and father are off fighting in the resistance. When 
her grandfather dies, his spirit broken by the cruelty of the 
Japanese soldiers, Sookan, her mother, and her brother plan their 
escape to American-occupied South Korea. The harsh realities of 
war as seen through this young girl's year of impossible good- 
byes provide a heart-wrenching perspective on an aspect of 
World War II that is probably not familiar to U.S. readers. ALA 
Notable Children's Hooks, 1992; Best Books for Young Adults, 1992. 

13.9 Davis, Ossie. Just like Martin. Simon and Schuster Books for 
Young Readers, 1992. ISBN 0-671-73202-1. 215p. 10 and up (est). 
Fiction. 

It is 1963 in Alabama. Through his pastor. Stone has met Dr. 
Martin Luther King Jr. and wants to be a preacher, "just like 
Martin." But Stone's father, embittered by his Korean War expe- 
rience, sees nonviolence as cowardly and refuses to embrace it. 
Stone finds himself pulled between his love for his father, who 
l arries a gun in his truck, and his own ideals. This is a vivid, 
albeit sometimes humorous, re-creation of an eventful period in 
the African American struggle for freedom. Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade Hooks in the Field of Social Studies. 

13.10 Dorris, Michael. Morning Girl. Hyperion Books for Children, 
1992. ISBN 1-5(1282-285-3. 74p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

(;n)wing up on one of the Bahama Islands in the late fifteenth 
» entury, twelve-year-old Morning Girl likes being out to greet 
the morning, but her younger brother Star Boy wants to be an 
(»xpert on the night. Alternating chapters from the perspectives 
of tht»si» two very ilifferent children re-create the everyday lives 
and cidture of a laino family and community. Their lives seem 





A. Class President by Johanna Hurwilz; illustrated by Sheila Hamanaka (see 12.7). B. 
The Middle of Somewhere: A Story of South Africa by Sheila Gordon (see 12.3). C. 
Ahyoka and the Talking Leaves by Peter and Connie Roop; illustrated by Yoshi Miyake 
(see 12.14). D. The Dark Thirty: Southern Tales of the Supernatural by Patricia C. 
McKissack: illustrated by Brian Pinkney (see 14.6). 



l\3 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



MORNING 6IRL 



MICHTIEL D0RR.1S 




A or HO:ikh haiti i 



TMKOr 
inPOSSIPLE 
QOObPTCS 

500K NTULCnOI 




D. 



A. Morning Girl by Michael Dorris (see 13.10). B, Year of Impossible Goodbyes by 
Sook Nyul Choi (see 13.8). C. Taste of Salt: A Story of Modern Haitib^ Frances Temple 
(see 13.30). D. Goodbye, Vietnam by Gloria Whelan (see 13.32). 



144 



Novels for Older Rtuhkrs 



109 



ordinary and comfortable. Then one day in 1492 Morning Girl, 
out for a swim, meets a group of strangers in a fat canoe. See also 
The Tainos: The People Who Welcomed Columbushy Francine Jacobs 
(7.^) and Eucounter by Jane Yolen (11.79). Scoff OVell Award for 
Historical Fiction, 199.3. 

Iwl.ll Ciirion, Barbara. Indian Summer. Scholastic Hardcover Books, 
1990. ISBN 0-590-42636-2. 183p. 10-12. Fiction. 

Joni McCord and Sarah Birdsong are forced to share Sarah's 
bedroom when Joni's father becomes the summer resident phy- 
sician on the Iroquois reservation. Joni, resentful that she had to 
come, and Sarah, distrustful of this interloper in her home and 
community, struggle to lay aside their misconceptions and hurts 
so that they may become friends. Ghostly faces in a tree, missing 
possessions, and barbed words lie between them and threaten to 
ruin the summer until one impulsive act during the annual 
powwow. 

13.12 Haugaard, Erik Christian. The Boy and the Samurai. Houghton 
Mifflin, 1991. ISBN 0-395-56398-4. 221p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

Saru is orphaned when his mother dies in childbirth and his 
father dies fighting in the civil war in sixteenth-century Japan. 
Eventually Saru finds himself alone on the streets. Comparing 
himself to the "monkey who docs not speak," he survives by 
carefully observing the world around him. When he agrees to 
help rescue a samurai's imprisoned wife, Saru's survival skills 
come into play. This is an absorbing tale that accurately reflects 
this period in Japanese history. 

13.13 Higginsen, Vy (with Tonya Bolden). Mama^ I Want to Sing, 
Scholastic Hardcover Books, 1992. ISBN 0-590-44201-5, 183p. 11 
and up. Fiction. 

This novel is based on the off-Broadway musical of the same 
title. It tells the story of Doris Winter, an African American girl 
who grows up singing in the choir of her father's church in the 
VHOs. But Doris is also attracted to the popular music that her 
mother calls "wordly." Working at the Apollo Theatre without 
her mother's knowledge helps to keep her dream alive. Doris 
must find a way to convince her mother to let her follow her 
dream. 

13.14 Hill, Kirkpatrick. Toughboy and Sister. Margaret K. McFlderry 
Books, 1990. ISBN 0-689-50506-X. 121 p. 8-12, Fiction, 



115 



110 



Novels for Older Readers 



"Mama died in Orlobcr, just before the Yukon froze up for tho 
winter." Now eloviMvyear-old John (Toughboy) and his younger 
sister Laurie art* left with their father. When summer comes, 
Paddy takes them as usual to the fishing camp in the Yukon. 
Then, after a drinking binge, the father dies, leaving the children 
stranded in the camp. There they must learn to feed themselves 
and ward off danger. This is a compelling survival story about 
two Athabascan children in whom children everywhere can see 
something of themselves. 

13.15 Houston, James. Drifting Snow: An Arctic Search. Illustrated 
by James Houston. Margaret K. McElderry Books, 1992. ISBN 
0-689-50563-9. 150p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

Because of the threat of tuberculosis, Apoutee, now named 
Elizabeth Queen, was separated from her parents along with 
other young Inuit children on Nisek Island. Her life was spared, 
but all records and identification of her family were lost. Now, 
at age fourteen, Elizabeth returns to the Arctic to search for her 
parents and to learn the language and lifestyle of her family. One 
Inuit family takes her in, and soon Elizabeth is faced with star- 
vation and the struggle to survive in her new nomadic life. 
When she finds her family, Elizabeth must make a difficult 
decision. Notn- le 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies, 

13.16 Lyons, Mary E. Letters from a Slave Girl: The Story of Harriet 
Jacobs. Charles Scribner's Sons, 1992, ISBN 0-684-19446-5. 146p. 
12 and up. Fiction. 

Harriet Jacobs is attractive and intelligent, a dangerous combi- 
nation for a female slave in the niid-1800s. Her "owner" tries to 
subjugate her sexually; but Harriet avoids his advances and 
chooses another, seemingly kinder white man, hoping to be 
freed. They have two children, who are eventually freed. Har- 
riet, however, is pursued by her "owner" and spends seven 
years hiding in the attic of her grandmollier's house before she 
can escape to the North. This account of Marriel's lile, (old 
through fictional letters that Harriet writes to various family 
members, reveals the ways in which enslaved wonu'U wen» 
exploited. Readers may want to read the actual aulohiogniphy 
of Harriet Jacobs (1813-97). ALA Notnhle Chthhms Hook^. 
BesI Honks for Young Adidls, 199,r 

13.17 Mazzio, ]nan. The One Who Came Hack. Houghton Midlih, 
1992. ISBN 0-395-39506-1. 178p. 11 and up. I'iciion. 



I4ij 



Novels for Oilier Readers 



111 



Alex and Eddio are good friends who share their dreams and 
adventures in the mountains of New Mexico. When Eddie dis- 
appears after spending the day with Alex, no one believes Alex's 
version of what may have happened to the Mexican American 
boy. This story of two teenage boys deals with interracial friend- 
ship and familial relationships. An underlying theme of preju- 
dice and fear ties the story together, linking adults' suspicions of 
children and blatant prejudice directed toward Mexican Ameri- 
cans. The story is a gripping adventure and coming-of-age story. 
Rcamufiended Books for Reluctant Young Adult Readers, 1993, 

13.18 Moore, Yvette. Freedom Songs, Orchard Books, 1991. ISBN 0- 
531-08412-4. 168p. 12 and up. Fiction. 

It is 1963. Fourteen-year-old Sheryl, who has always lived in 
Brooklyn, goes with her family to visit relatives in North Caro- 
lina. Sheryl is surprised at the overt racism that she encounters 
in the South. She admires her young Uncle Pete, who is a Free- 
dom Rider involved in voter registration. Back in Brooklyn, 
Sheryl realizes that northerners are part of the struggle, too. 
Inspired by her uncle's courage and undaunted by family trag- 
edy, Sheryl and her friends find a way to participate. Notable 
1991 Children s Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

13.19 Myers, Walter Dean. The Mouse Rap, Harper and Row, 1990. 
ISBN 0-06-024344-9. lH6p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

"Ka-phoomp! Ka-phoomp! Da Doom Da Dooom!" Each chapter 
in this humorous novel opens with an introductory rap by 
Mouse, the fourteen-year-old narrator of a tale of summer ad- 
venture in Harlem. Girls, a father trying to drop back into his 
family, and rumors of large sums of money left in an abandoned 
building all complicate Mouse's life and make for a memorable 
summer. Walter Dean Myers's playful handling of the vernacu- 
lar of urban Black adolescents adds to the book's appeal to 
preteen and teen readers. Best Books for Young Adults, 1991, 

13.20 Myers, Walter Dean. The Righteous Revenge of Artemis Bon- 
ner, HarperCollins, 1W2. ISBN 0-06-020846-5. 140p. 10 and up. 
Fiction. 

In this funny Western spoof set in 1882, Artemis Bonner, an 
African American teenager, travels from New York to Arizona to 
avenge the murder of his Uncle Ugly. Out West, Arlemis teams 
up with a Cherokee boy named Frolic, and the Iwo of them 
pursue villain Catfish Grimes and his oman, Lucy Featherdip, 



.1 i 7 



112 



Novels for Older Readers 



from Tombstone to Alaska and back. Can Truth and Honest 
Det(?rmination win out over evildoers? Will Artemis find Uncle 
Ugly's hidden treasure? The outcome does not matter; readers 
should go along for the fun and adventure! Best Books for Young 
Adults, 1993. 

13.21 Myers, Walter Dean. Somewhere in the Darkness. Scholastic 
Hardcover Books, 1992. ISBN 0-590-42411-4. 168p. 12 and up. 
Fiction. 

Tenth-grader Jimmy leaves Harlem and his loving foster mother, 
Mama Jean, to make an odyssey across the country with Crab, 
the father whom he barely remembers. Crab, who has recently 
escaped from prison, has something he needs to do, and Jimmy 
has questions that need to be answered. As they journey back to 
Crab's old haunts, both father and son learn painful lessons 
about family and trust, and the requirements of fatherhood. 
Here is a poignant story that will strike a familiar chord with 
many readers. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Best Books for 
Young Adults, 1993; Boston Globe-Horn Book Fiction Honor Book, 
1992; Coretta Scott King Writing Honor Book, 1993; Nezobery Honor 
Book, 1993; Recommended Books for Reluctant Young Adult Readers, 
1993. 

13.22 Naidoo, Beverley. Chain of Fire. Illustrated by Eric Velasquez., 
HarperCollins, 1990. ISBN 0-397-32427-8. 242p. 11 and up. 
Fiction. 

In South Africa, Black and white people live separately by law. 
When fifteen -year-old Naledi, her friend Taolo, and their neigh- 
bors discover large numerals painted on their homes, they are 
upset. The numbers mean that they must leave their homes and 
move to a barren "homeland." When Naledi and her friends 
form an "anti-removal" committee, they discover how cruel 
apartheid can be. This sequel to Journey to fo'burg will help 
students understand one of the most important human rights 
issues of the day. Best Books fin Young Adults, 1991; Notable 1990 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

13.23 Namioka, Lenscy. The Coming of the Bear. HarperCollins, 1992. 
ISBN 0-06-020289-0. 230p. 11 and up. Fiction. 

Zenta and Matsuzo, two disgraced samurai from feudal Japan, 
are shipwrecked on a strange island after escaping from sure 
death in Japan. They are rescued by aboriginal tribal people, the 
Ainus, who live on Yezo (now Hokkaido), and are taught some 



lis 



ERIC 



Novels for Older Readers 



113 



of the Ainu customs. Horrified by the brutal Bear Festival, the 
two young warriors resolve to escape to a nearby Japanese set- 
tlement. However, the Japanese settlement is not what they ex- 
pect, and they find themselves in the middle of a war between 
their people and their Ainu rescuers. 

13.24 Prather, Ray Fish and Bones. HarperCollins, 1992. ISBN 0-06- 
0251224), 255p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

It is August 1971. The Sun City, Florida, bank has been robbed, 
and Ibirteen-year-old Hones wants to collect the reward for solv- 
ing the crime. Many of the town's best-known citizens. Black 
and white, become suspects as portions of the stolen money turn 
up in unexpected places, As Bones makes his rounds in town 
and on the river, what he uncovers is some of the town's disturb- 
ing history. In spite of the many touches of humor, the book is 
for mature readers. 

13.25 Robinson, Margaret A. A Woman of Her Tribe. Charles Scrib- 
ner's Sons, 1990. ISBN 0-6H4- 19223-3. 131p. 12 and up. Fiction. 

Fifteen-year-old Annette has won a scholarship to St. John's 
Academy in Victoria, British Columbia. Acceptance means leav- 
ing the Nootka village where she grew up with her father's 
people. Her mother, who is not a Nootka Indian, thinks Annette 
needs to expand her horizons. At school Annette faces racism, 
but with the help of two special teachers and a friend, she begins 
to adjust. Then at holiday time, she returns to the Nootka village 
and wrestles with the choices inherent in dealing with her dual 
cultural inheritance. This book has mature content. 

13.26 Salisbury, Graham. Blue Skin of the Sea: A Novel in Stories, 

Delacorte Press, 1992. ISBN 0-3H5-30596-6. 215p. 10 and up. 
Fiction. 

Since his mother's death, seven-year-old Sonny Mendoza has 
lived with his aunt. Then he goes to live on the Big Island of 
Hawaii with his father. Though he comes from a family of fish- 
ermen. Sonny is secretly afraid of the sea. In eleven stories, 
covering the thirteen years from 1953 to 1966, Graham Salisbury 
shows how Sonny faces his fears and comes to know and love 
his father This is an engaging story about a family whose lives 
are intertwined with the sea. Best Books for Youn}f Adulls, 1992; 
NotMc 1992 Children's Tnuic Books in the Field of Social Studies. 

13.27 Soto, Gary. Pacific Crossing. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1992. 
ISBN 0^15-259187-7. 134p. 10 and up (est). Fiction, 



Ms 



114 



Novels for Older Rcmlen^ 



Lincoln Mendoza and his barrio brother Tony lake pari in n 
six-week sludenl exchange program with hosl families in Japan. 
Lincoln, who is Mexican American, becomes a "son" to Mr. and 
Mrs. Ono and a brolher lo Milsuo — working on Iheir farm, 
sludying kempo (a type of Japanese martial arts), and learning 
somelhing about Japanese cullure. Lincoln and his new family 
musl learn lo undersland Iheir differences and discover the simi- 
larities betwcrn their lives. The book includes a glossary of 
Spanish and Japanese phrases. 

13.28 Solo, Gary. Taking Sides. Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1991. 
ISBN 0-15-284076-1. 138p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

When eighth-grader Lincoln Mendoza and his mother move 
from an urban barrio to a white suburb, Lincoln must contend 
with being a minority in school and on the basketball team. 
Decisions about old and new friends and his mother's new 
boyfriend occur in a realistic fashion. Conversations include 
several Spanish words, which appear in the glossary. Gary Soto 
dramatically weaves the pressures of growing up with Lincoln's 
need and desire to maintain his Mexican American cultural 
identity. 

13.29 Spinelli, Jerry Maniac Magee. Little, Brown, 1990. ISBN 0-316- 
80722-2. 184p. 9 and up. Fiction. 

When Jeffrey Lionel "Maniac" Magee's parents die in a tragic 
railroad accident, the three-year-old boy is placed in the custody 
of his dour, feuding, and distant aunt and uncle. By age eleven, 
he can no longer tolerate the tension and anger, so he runs away 
to another town, where he meets Amanda, an African American 
girl who forges a friendship with him. Jeffrey amazes adults and 
children with his athletic prowess and ability to face all chal- 
lenges, but he increasingly comes to feel like an outsider. Jeffrey 
begins a journey to find a place where he is loved, accepted, and 
made a part of a family. BoMon Glohc-Horn Book Fiction Award, 
1990;Neivber\j Mediii 1991. 

13.30 Temple, Frances. Taste of Salt: A Story of Modern Haiti. Or- 
chard Books/Richard Jackson Books, 1992. ISBN 0-531 -08f)()9-7. 
179p. 11 and up. Fiction. 

Authentic voices lull the story of two Haitian teens who are 
working with social reformer Jean-UcM-lrand Arislide before and 
after his presidential election. After l)jo is healiMi by \Uv lotilnn 
Macoute (the private army of repres.sive president l-rani^cus 



Novels for Older Readers 



115 



Duvalier), Aristide asks Jeremic to record Djo's life story. As she 
listens, Jeremie is drawn to Djo and feels compelled to share her 
own very different story. The engrossing first-person narration 
reveals parallels between the coming of age of the two teenagers 
and Haiti's changing sociopolitical situation. This is an impres- 
sive first novel that mature readers will find accessible. 

13.31 Thomas, Joyce Carol. When the Nightingale Sings. HarperCol- 
lins, 1992. ISBN 0-06-020295-5. 148p. 12 and up. FicHon. 

This is a gospel version of the Cinderella story. Fourteen-year- 
old Marigold, an African American orphan of mysterious ori- 
gins, has been raised by mean Ruby and her no-singing twin 
daughters, who treat Marigold like a servant. When the young 
Minister of Music hears Marigold's nightingale voice, he is so 
enchanted that he sets up a Great Gospel Convention to find a 
new lead gospel singer, with predictable results. Full of lyricism 
and sly church humor, this modern fairy tale speaks of love, of 
family, and of self-respect. 

13.32 Whelan, Gloria. Goodbye, Vietnam. Alfred A. Knopf/Porzoi 
Books, 1992. ISBN 0^679-92263-6. 136p. 12 and up. Fiction. 

Thirteen-year-old Mai and her family escape from Vietnam 
through a dangeroas sea voyage, only to find themselves in a 
refugee camp in Hong Kong. Their courage bolstered by the 
threat of imprisonment for the father and grandmother should 
they return to Vietnam, Mai and her family quietly endure many 
hardships as they wait to see if they will be able to find a home 
outside Vietnam. Acknowledging the people and the refugee 
agency who helped her work, author Gloria Whelan presents a 
timely story. 

13.33 Woodson, Jacqueline. The Dear One. Delacorte Press, 1991. 
ISBN 0-385-30416-1. 145p. 12 and up. Fiction. 

When her mother agrees to care for a friend's pregnant daughter, 
Feni is furious. A teenager from Harlem will surely disrupt their 
upper-middle-class home. Rebecca, the mother-to-be, is none 
too happy with the arrangement either, but eveiyone tries to 
make the best of it. Mama, Feni, and their friends encircle Re- 
becca in their warmth as they help both her and themselves. The 
novel deals with such contemporary issues as alcoholism and 
homosexuality, but without sensationalism or moralizing. 

13.34 Woodson, Jacqueline. Last Summer with Maizon. Delacorte 
Press, 1990. ISBN 0-385-30045-X. 105p. 10 and up. Fiction. 



Novels for Older Readers 



The summer brings major changes to Margaret's life. Her father 
dies, and to add to her sense of loss, her best friend Maizon is 
offered a scholarship to a New England boarding school. The 
girls have different temperaments; the out-going Maizon tends 
to overshadow Margaret's quieter gifts. In the fall, while Maizon 
tries to meet the challenges of being Black and lacking in mate- 
rial wealth in a predominantly white private school, Margaret 
remains in Brooklyn and discovers her own talents. For a time, 
it looks as if the friendship may not survive, but the ties between 
the girls are binding. 

13.35 Woodson, Jacqueline. Maizon at Blue Hill. Delacorte Press, 
1992. ISBN 0-385-30796-9. 131p. 10 and up. Fiction. 

In this sequel to Last Summer with Maizon (13.34), Maizon leaves 
Brooklyn to go to Blue Hill, a private boarding school in Con- 
necticut. Although Blue Hill offers many advantages and Mai- 
zon does well academically, she misses her grandmother and her 
best friend Margaret. Being one of five or six Black girls in this 
elite setting forces Maizon to wrestle with issues of race and 
class, and to wonder not only whether she belongs at Blue Hill 
but whether she can ever belong anywhere. Best Books for Young 
Adults, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies. 

13.36 Wunderli, Stephen. The Blue between the Clouds. Henry Holt, 
1992. ISBN 0-8050-1772-0. 114p. 10-12. Fiction. 

Two Moons is named for the two halves of the world, white and 
Indian, in which he lives. Matt is given the name Blue between 
the Clouds after the hope that clouds will bring rain to the crops, 
but pass before it floods. Together these two boys, one white, one 
Navajo, share adventures and dreams of flying. Set in Thistle, 
Utah, in the early 1940s, this book is rich in descriptions of 
Navajo life and culture, although the story is told from Matt's 
perspective. 



14 Anthologies: 

Gatherings of Poems 
and Stories 



14.1 Cnrlson, Lori M., and Cynthia L. Ventura, editors. Where Angels 
Glide at Dawn: New Stories from Latin America. Illustrated by 
Jose Ortega. J. U. Lippincott, 1990. ISBN 0-397-32425-1. 114p. 10 
and up. Fiction. 

Introduced by Isabel Allende, these ten stories evoke the geog- 
raphy of Latin America and the spirit of its people yet demon- 
strate the diversity of cultures, politics, and living conditions. 
Some stories are realistic, others are fanciful. We learn, for in- 
stance, of the bear in the pipes of a house, the rebellion of the 
magical rabbits, and a Holy Week celebration in the town of 
Tarma, Peru. Each story is followed by a brief note about its 
source. A glossary of unfamiliar words and phrases and addi- 
tional information about the authors and editors is provided. 

14.2 Carlstrom, Nancy White. Light: Stories of a Small Kindness. 
Illustrated by Lisa Desimini. Little, Brown, 1990. ISBN 0-316- 
12857-0. 42p. 9-12. Fiction. 

These seven original short stories are set in the diverse settings 
of Mexico, Guatemala, Haiti, and New York City. Each story 
involves a "small kindness," an event that is or seems miracu- 
lous. A young boy braves a dark cave. Another has his achieve- 
ment celebrated by his classmates. Students on a school trip 
narrowly escape danger. Every story speaks of the triumph of 
the human spirit. An author's note reveals the way in which the 
stories relate to her own experiences. 

14.3 Durell, Ann, and Marilyn Sachs, editors. The Big Book for 
Peace. Dutton Children's Books, 1990. ISBN 0-525-44605-2. 120p. 
6-12 (est). Fiction. 

Seventeen stories and poems and accompanying illustrations by 
more than thirty well-known writers and artists make up this 
anthology designed to promote peace and harmony among the 
people of the earth. A letter from a Japanese American World 
War II internment camp, an adaptation of the Iroquois Book of 



n^3 

o 

ERIC 



118 



Anthologies 



the Great Law, and a story about the Mississippi Democratic 
Freedom Party are a few of the features — some humorous, some 
sad — of this book that celebrates the idea of peace. Jnue A(U1(un}< 
Award, 1991; ALA Notable Children:^ Books, 1991; Notable 1990 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies, 

14.4 Hirschfelder, Arlcne B., and Beverly R. Singer, compilers. KiNitift 
Voices: Writings of Young Native Americans. Charles S^rih 
ner's Sons, 1992. ISBN 0-684-19207-1. 115p. 12 and up. Nonficlion. 

"A voice made of many voices of proud men and women with a 
hope and a question. . . . Will we make it? Listen!" !n this collec- 
tion of poems and testimonies, contemporary young Native 
Americans speak of their identity, families, homelands, rituals 
and ceremonies, education, and the harsh realities of their lives. 
This work provides insight into the feelings of the young writ- 
ers, who are forced to live in two worlds and who are trying to 
be in harmony with both. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies, 

14.5 Larrick, Nancy, and Wendy Lamb, editors. To Ride a Butterfly: 
Original Stories, Poems, and Songs for Children by Fifty-two 
Distinguished Authors and Illustrators. Bantam Doubleday 
Dell, 1991. ISBN 0-440-50402-3. 96p. 5-10. Fiction. 

Fifty-two well-known authors and illustrators, from Verna 
Aardema to Charlotte Zolotow, have contributed to this anthol- 
ogy of illustrations, stories, folktales, fables, poems, songs, and 
nonfiction writings. Produced for the twenty-fifth anniversary 
of Reading Is Fundamental (RIF), it contains pieces created or 
adapted for this volume. Contributors include Lucille Clifton, 
John Steptoe, Brian Pinkney, and Patricia McKissack. The pieces 
are appealing. Sadly, however. Native peoples. Latinos, and 
Asians (except for one Yashima painting) are not to be found. It's 
a collection in Black and white. 

14.6 McKissack, Patricia C. The Dark Thirty: Southern Tales of the 
Supernatural. Illustrated by Brian Pinkney. Alfred A. 
Knopf/Borzoi Books, 1992. ISBN 0-679-91863-9. 122p. 7 and up. 
Fiction. 

These ten original stories will give you goose bumps. They are 
ghost stories and horror stories of the kind told in the author's 
childhood home in the dark thirty, the half hour just before 
nightfall. Incorporating African American history and culture, 
the tales include stories from the days of slavery and from the 



154 



Anthologies 



119 



twentieth-century civil ri^^hts movement. The final story is based 
on one of Patricia McKisstick's childhood experiences. Brian 
Pinkney's scratchbciud illustrations add just the right touch to 
these scary stories. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Coretta 
Scott King Writiug Awimi, 1 993; Newbery Honor Book, 1993; Notable 
1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies, 

14.7 Rosen, Michael editor. Home: A Collection of Thirty Distin- 
guished Authors and Illustrators of Children's Books to Aid 
the Homeless. HarperCollins/Charlotte Zolotour Books, 1992. 
ISBN 0-06-021789-8, 32p. All ages. Fiction. 

Thirteen urell-knov^n authors and seventeen prominent illustra- 
tors have contributed stories, poems, and illustrations for this 
multicultural anthology. The theme is "home," and the proceeds 
support Share Our Strength (SOS) in its fight against homeless- 
ness. Even though it appears in the context of a poetic allusion 
to "Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves," some readers may find it 
offensive that the single representation of Arabs shoves them as 
grinning thieves. Notable 1992 Children's Books in the Field of Social 
Studies, 

14.8 Soto, Gary Baseball in April, and Other Stories. Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, 1990. ISBN 0-15-205720-X. lllp. 10 and up (est). 
Fiction. 

Like Gary Soto's poems, these eleven stories are filled v^ith the 
details of daily life in a Mexican American community in Fresno, 
California, A big brother comes through at the right time; a boy 
tries to impress a girl with his knowledge of French; a mishap at 
a school talent show turns into a comic performance. Readers 
from all kinds of families and all kinds of neighborhoods will 
recognize something of themselves in the people depicted in 
these stories. A glossary of Spanish words is included. Best Books 
for Young Adults, 1991. 

14.9 Tate, Eleanora E. Front Porch Stories at the One-Room School. 
Illustrated by Eric Velasquez. Bantam Skylark Books, 1992. ISBN 
0-533-08384-8. 112p. 8 and up. Fiction, 

Margie, who is a twelve-year-old African American girl, her 
father, and her seven-year-old cousin Ethel sit on the steps of the 
old one-room school and swap stories. Daddy does most of the 
telling, recalling growing up in Nutbush, Missouri, when Aunt 
Daisy was the teacher in the school. There are ghost stories, 
family stories, school stories, and town stories in this collection 



120 



Anthologies 



of ten talcs. Mkldio graders will enjoy these yams that beg to be 
read aloud. 

14.10 Thomas, Joyce C arol, editor. A Gathering of Flowers: Stories 
about Being Young in America. Harper and Row, 1990. ISBN 
0-06-0261 236p. 11 and up. Fiction. 

Covering such diverse settings as urban San Francisco, a Chip- 
pewa reservation, and a Latino barrio in Chicago, these eleven 
stories by authors from diverse backgrounds recount what it is 
like to grow up in the United States. Written by such well-known 
children's book authors as Lois Lowry, Gary Soto, and Jeanne 
Wakatsuki Houston, the stories are compassionate and moving 
accounts of life as experienced by young people from different 
backgrounds. 



1 5 A Potpourri of 
Resources 



This list of resources is not intended to be comprehensive. It incUides 
materials that came to the attention of the committee members as we 
reviewed books for inclusion in this booklist. Although most of the 
books suggested for teachers have been published in the 1990s, many of 
the other listed resources provide information about useful materials 
published prior to that time. Wherever possible, addresses and phone 
numbers are listed for the resources; addresses and phone numbers for 
the publishers can be found in the Directory of Publishers. We hope that 
this list of resources will be a helpful starting point for readers just 
beginning to explore multicultural literature, and a reminder for others 
who are farther along on the journey. 

Books for Teachers 

Harris, Violet ]., cd. Teaching Multicultural Literature in Grades K-8. Norwood, 
Mass.: Christopher-Gordon, 1992 (paper, 1993). 

Lindgren, Merri V., ed. The Multicolored Mirror: Cultural Substance in Literature 
for Children and Youn*^ Adults. Fort Atkinson, Wis.: Highsmith Press, 
1991. 

Manna, Anthony L., and Carolyn S. lirodie, eds. Many Faces, Many Voices: 
Multicultural Literary Experiences for Youth. Fort Atkinson, Wis.: 
Highsmitli Press, 1992. 

NietO/ Sonia. Affirming Diversity: The Sociopolitical Context of Multicultural Edu- 
cation. New York: Longman, 1^)92. 

Bibliographies and Guides 

Khorana, Meena, comp. The Indian Subcontinent in Literature for Children and 
Young Adults: An Annotated Bihlioj^raphy of English-Language Books. Bib- 
liographies and Indexes in World Literature series, no. 32. Westport, 
Conn.: Greenwood Press, 199 L 

Kruse, Ginny Moore, and Kathleen T. Horninj^, eds. Multicultural Literature 
for Children and Young Adults, 3d ed. Madison, Wis.: Cooperative Chil- 
dren's Book Center, 1991. 



157 



122 



A Potpouni ofRcsounvs 



Miller-Lachman, Lyn. Our Families, Our Friends, Our World: An Aimat(^ted 

Guide to Significant Multicultural Books for Children and Tevnasfcrs. New 
Providence, NJ.: R. R. Bowker, 1992. 

Schon, Isabel. A Hispanic Heritage: A Guide to Juvenile Books about Hispanic Peo- 
ple and Cultures, series 1-4. Metuchen, NJ.: Scarecrow Press, 1980-91. 

Slapin, Beverly, and Doris Seale. Through Indian Eyes: The Native Experience in 
Books for Children, 3d ed. Philadelphia: New Society Publishers, 1992. 

Periodicals 

Booklinks, 434 W. Downer, Aurora, IL 60506. 

A bimonthly magazine published by the American Library Association. 
Although not specifically concerned with multicultural literature, the 
magazine does include many relevant articles, activities, and reviews, 
and it often features works, authors, and artists of interest to multicul- 
tural literature proponents. The magazine offers themed annotated bib- 
liographies, pieces focusing on book illustrations, and teaching ideas. 

Faces (Cobblestone Publishing) 

For students in grades four to nine. This children's magazine with an 
anthropological perspective introduces readers to various cultures of 
diverse peoples around the world. It contains photographs, articles, 
stories, and suggested activities. The publisher also offers Cobblestone, a 
history magazine for young people that sometimes contains articles that 
are relevant to multicultural studies. 

llarambee (Just Us Books) 

A newspaper for young readers published six times a year. The focus is 
on the African American experience. The newspaper contains informa- 
tion articles, photographs, learning activities, booklists, interviews, 
word lists, and the Captain Africa comic strip adventure. 

Multicultural Revicio (Greenwood Publishing Group) 

Offers reviews of books and materials related to multiculturalism. Al- 
though not all material relates to elementary and middle schools, a 
substantial portion does, including reviews of children's books and 
curricular materials. Many of the ads are from small presses. 

School Voices, 79 Lx:onard Street (Basement), New York, NY 10013. 

A New York City newspaper for parents, educators, and students that is 
published by a pRvcquality, multiracial network of educators and parents. 

Teaching Tolerance, Southern Poverty Law Center, 400 Washington Avenue, 
Montgomery A L 361 04. 

Biannual, free to rducntors. The publication, first issued in spring 1992, 
focuses on diversity and tolerance and includes articles, reviews, news. 




A Potpourri of Resources 



123 



interviews, essays, and tiDti-s nii resources. It is useful to teachers with 
an interest in multiculluriil education. 

Tribal Collvgv: Journal of Anwricati Indian Uii^lier flJucation, Paul Boyer, Editor, 
Tribal Collefie, 2509 Montgomery Way, Sacramento, CA 95818; 916-456- 
5234. 

Sponsored by a consortium of 26 Indian-controlled community colleges. 
The journal reaches an audience of experienced American Indian in- 
structors, administrators, and policymakers. 

Classroom Resources 

Children's Museum, 200 Congress Street, Boston, MA 02210; 617-426-6500. 

Offers a variety of multicultural programs for K-8 teachers and their 
classes. The museum houses many multicultural resources, including 
exhibits, and has multimedia curricula kits available for a small fee. A 
multicultural summer institute is also offered. 

Ethnic Arts & Facts, P.O. Box 20550, Oakland, CA 94620. 

Offers "culture kits" from Africa, Mexico, Peru, and Guatemala. The kits 
include cultural/historical overviews written by university scholars 
"who have lived within the culture" and contain authentic traditional 
artifacts, such as masks, baskets, cloth, and musical instruments. Maps, 
bibliographies, references, and suggested activities also are part of the 
kits. Additional artifacts and children's litarature are also available. 
Unfortunately, the catalog fails to specify which African cultures are 
represented, although such information is given for other kits (e.g., 
Huichol Indians of Mexico). 

Facing History and Ourselves, National Foundation, 25 Kennard Road, Brook- 
line, MA 02146; 617-734-1111. 

Works with teachers throughout the country who want to examine ways 
of bringing imp ortant but controversial material into the classroom. The 
organization focuses on the Holocaust as a vehicle for understanding 
the complexity of human behavior. It has also published a curriculum 
guide, which is available for purchase. 

JACP, 414 East Third Avenue, San Mateo, CA 94401; 800-874-2242. 

A nonprofit organization, currently in its nineteenth year, that special- 
izes in Asian American materials, including books, games, audiovisual 
materials, and dolls. In addition, it reviews recent Asian American pub- 
lications. 

Massachusetts Global Education Program (MGEP)/ Winchester Public Schools, 
Winchester, MA 01890; 617-721-1257. 

Nonprofit organization that helps elementary and secondary schools 
improve their students' ability to deal with the changing world and 



15n 



124 



A Polpourri of Resources 



increase their skills iind knowledge in such subjects as foreign lan- 
guages, world history, world cultures, geography, and global issues. It 
offers programs, activities, and technical assistance. In addition, it has a 
summer institute and provides mini-grants to teacher developers. 

Menkart, Deborah, and Catherine A. Sunshine, eds. Caribbean Connections: 
Puerto Rico. Classroom Resources for Secondary Schools series. Wash- 
ington, D,C,: Network of Educators' Committees on Central America, 
1990. 

One of a series of resource packets on the Caribbean. This packet is 
designed to encourage teachers to incorporate material on Puerto Rico 
and Puerto Ricans into existing curricula. It uses interviews, oral histo- 
ries, and other first-person accounts to show Caribbean history, as well 
as essays, musical lyrics, maps, and short stories by well-known Puerto 
Rican authors. Other titles in the series: Overview of Regional History; 
Jamaica; Haiti; Trinidad and Tobago; and Caribbean Life in North America. 

Organization for Equal Education of the Sexes, P.O. Box 438, Dept. WA, Blue 
Hill, ME 04614; 207-374-2489. 

Specializes in posters of women of all different backgrounds who have 
made a difference. 

Perez-Selles, Maria, and Nancy Carmen Barra-Zuman. Building Bridges of 
Learning and Understanding: A Collection of Classroom Activities on Puerto 
Rican Culture. Andover, Mass.: Regional Laboratory for Educational Im- 
provement of the Northeast and Islands, and New England Center for 
Equity Assistance (300 Brickstone Square, Suite 900, Andover, MA 
01810), 1990. 

A compilation of activities that integrate elements of Puerto Rican his- 
tory and culture into the curriculum, K-8, in three major sections (Loca- 
tion and Migration; A Blend of Cultures; An Island Rich in Tradition). 
There are activities for all subject areas. The focus is on the Tainos, the 
original ir\habitants, and on the Spanish, but the activities omit Puerto 
Rico's African heritage. 

World Music Press, 11 Myrtle Avenue, PO, Box 2565, Danbury, CT 06813; 
203-748-1131. 

Specializes in multicultural music publications and recordings for edu- 
cators and in community outreach programs. 



Small Publishers and Distributors 

Most of the books we received came from the major "mainstream" 
publishers of children's books. Important contributions to multicultural 
literature, however, are also coming from small independent presses. 
The following list is not comprehensive, but includes those small 
presses that came to our attention during the committee's tenure. The 



IGO 



A Potpourri of Resources 



125 



directory by Kathleen Horiiinj]; wil! prove invaluable for those seeking 
children's books from the small presses. See the Directory of Publishers 
for addresses and phone numbers of the publishers listed below. 

Arte Publico Press 

Hills itself as the "oldest and largest publisher of U.S. Hispanic litera- 
ture." The prt»ss offers books for adults, children, and young adults and 
includes some work of Nicholasa Mohr It also offers Kikiriki and TUn-ta- 
ca-tim, highly recommended collections of stories and poems in English 
and Spanish. 

Black Butterfly Children's Books (produced by Writers and Readers Publish- 
ing) 

luKUses on "Black children's books" and books about children of color 
for all children. It has published books by Tom Feelings and by Eloise 
Greenfield and ]an Spivey Gilchrist, including Nathaniel Talking. 

California Tomorrow 

An organization that publishes materials focusing on the tremendous 
diversity in California's schools. Books include California Perspectives 
and Embracing Diversity. 

Children's Book Press 

A nonprofit organization that publishes multicultural literature and 
audiocassettes. A number of its books are bilingual (e.g., English/Span- 
ish, English/Khmer, English/Korean). The press focuses on folktales 
and contemporary stories from "minority and new immigrant" cul- 
tures, including Eastern European cultures. 

Good Books for Young Readers 

Offers books focusing on the Amish. Its fiction works provide insight 
into the daily lives and culture of this religious minority. 

Hispanic Books Children's Catalog (Hispanic Books Distributors and Publish- 
ers) 

I,ists Spanish-language versions of well-known books and other titles 
available in Spanish from various publishers. 

Horning, Kathleen. Alternative Press Publishers of Children's Bonks: A Directory, 
4th ed. Madison, Wis.: Friends of the Cooperative Children's Book Cen- 
ter, 1992. 

A good reference source for finding less well known publishers of qual- 
ity books for children. 

Just Us Books 

Specialize^ >n books for young readers that focus on the African and 
African A^ieiican experience. It publishes Afro-Bets Books, which fea- 



126 



A Potpourri of Resources 



ture concepts and information related to Africa and African Americans, 
including Afro-Bcis Book of Black Heroes and Afro-Bets ABC Book. It also 
publishes Harambee (see Periodicals). 

Lee and Low Books 

A new small publisher of multicultural literature for young readers, 
launched in spring 1993. To date, it has published five realistic picture 
books featuring Latino (Mexican American, Guatemalan), Japanese 
American, and African American characters. 

Multicultural Publishers Exchange (Highsmith Press) 

An association of African, Hispanic, Asian-Pacific Islander, Native 
American, and white American small press publishers of multicultural 
books. It publishes an annual catalog listing books for children and 
young adults, adult resources and references, and curriculum materials. 

New Society Publishers 

A nonprofit, worker-controlled publishing house. It publishes a variety 
of books focusing on issues of peace, feminism, the environment, and 
civil rights, including children's books on peace and the nuclear arms 
race. 

Oyate, 2702 Mathews Street, Berkeley, CA 94702; 510-848-6700. 

An organization of Native Americans. It evaluates texts, resource books, 
and fiction; conducts workshops for educators; and distributes chil- 
dren's books written and illustrated by Native Americans. Write for a 
list of materials. 

Savanna lk)oks 

Specializes in books about children of color. 

Tundra Books 

Publishes children's books reflecting Canada's multicultural popula- 
tion, including Native peoples and immigrants. It offers some books in 
French and some in Spanish. 

Helaine Victoria Press 

A nonprofit educational organization specializing in posters, postcards, 
and other educational materials that focus on women and social protest. 

Clearinghouses 

Clearinghouse for Immigrant F-ducation (CHIMF), National Coalition of Ad- 
vocates for Students, 100 Boylston Street, Suite 737, Boston, MA 02116. 

An interactive resource center and networking service that facilitates 
access to educational materials, organizations, and people concerned 
with effective education of immigrant students. 




A Potpourri of Resources 



127 



Educational Materials and Services Center (EMSC), 144 Railroad Avenue, Suite 
107, Edmonds, WA 98020; 206-775-3582. 

A multicultural education clearinghouse featuring children's books, 
filmstrips and other audiovisual materials, and professional materials. 
It also publishes a nev^sletter. Multicultural Leader, featuring articles and 
review^s focusing on multicultural issues. 

National Clearinghouse for Bilingual Education (NCBE), Center for Applied 
Linguistics, 1118 22nd Street, N.W., Washington, DC 20037; 800-321- 



I'rovides information on any aspect of bilingual education. It also pub- 
lishes a free bi-nionthly newsletter. Forum. 

Agencies, Centers, and Other Organizations 

Congreso Ikiricua, Puerto Rican Congress of New Jersey, 515 South Broad 
Street, Trenton, NJ; 609-989-8888. 

A statewride agency serving the community development needs of New 
Jersey's Puerto !<ican and Latino populations. The congress has devel- 
oped bilingual curriculum resources and also provides a multitude of 
other services to the educational community. 

Council on Interracial Books for Children, 1841 Broadway, New York, NY 
10023; 212-757-5339. 

Publishes a newsletter, the Bulletm, from time to time. This nonprofit 
organization was founded by writers, librarians, teachers, and parents 
in 1966. It promotes anti-racist and anti-sexist children's books and 
other materials which affirm diversity. It publishes lesson plans, re- 
source materials, and curriculum guides, and it has developed a series 
of filmstrips on child care, racism and sexism in children's books, and 
stereotypes. 

I'diicators for Social Responsibility, 23 Garden Street, Cambridge, MA 02138; 
617-492-1764. 

A national teachers' organization that offers curricula and professional 
development addressing the socially significant controversies of the 
nuclear age. It publishes many curricula and sponsors workshops and 
conferences. Its membership includes teachers at all school levels. 

Pqulty Institute, 6400 Hollis Street, Suite 15, Emoryville, CA 94608; 415-658- 
4^77. 

A nonprofit national agency that specializes in multicultural organiza- 
tifuul development. It works with universitites, schools, community 
groups, and corporations on issues of racism, sexism, anti-Semitisrn, 
and discrimination based on sexual orientation, social class, age, or 
disabilities. 



NCBE. 




128 



A Potpourri of Resources 



Everyone's Books, 71 Elliot Street, Brattlcboro, VT 05301; 802-254-8160. 

A bookstore focusing on multicultural books for cliildren. It also pub- 
lishes a quarterly newsletter of book reviews ar^d sell* parenting and 
educational books as well. 

Learning Alliance, 494 Broadway New York, NY 10012; 2l2-22f)-7l7l. 

A nonprofit independent organization that crciUos innovative educa- 
tional programs and organizing activities. The alliance works with so- 
cial change groups to provide information and resources on a variety of 
issues, such as ecology, diversity, health, and women's issues. 

Multicultural Project for Communication and Education, 71 Cherry Street, 
Cambridge, MA 02139; 617-492-10b3. 

Publishes a periodic newsletter with information of interest to educa- 
, tors. It provides training and has published Caring for Children in a Social 
Context: Eliminating Kacism, Sexism, and Other Patterns of Discrimination, 
as well as other fine multicultural materials. 

National Association for Bilingual Education (NABE), Union Center Plaza, 
Third Floor, 810 First Street, N.E., Washington, DC 20001-4205; 202-898- 
4205. 

A professional association founded in 1975 to address the educational 
needs of language minority students. 

National Association for Multicultural Education (NAME), c/o Dr. Rose 
Duhon, Office of the Dean, Southern University P.O. Box 9983, Baton 
Rouge, LA 70813; 504-771-2290. 

A professional organization founded in 1990 to promote multicultural 
education in the United States. 

National Association of Black School Educators (NABSE), 2816 Georgia Ave- 
nue, N.W., Washington, DC 20001; 202-483-1549. 

A professional association that works to enhance and facilitate the edu- 
cation of Black children. It holds a national conference, publishes a 
newsletter, Neiosbriefs, and sponsors the Educational Development Pro- 
gram, which consists of a demonstration school, a research and devel- 
opment institute, and the NABSE Foundation. 

National Institute against Prejudice and Violence, 31 South Greene Street, 
Baltimore, MD 21201; 410-328-5170; FAX 410-328-7551. 

A national center dedicated to research and action against prejudice and 
intergroup conflict. 

National Women's History Project, 7738 Bell Road, Windsor, CA 95492-8518; 
707-838-6000. 

Publishes and sells educational materials focusing on women's history 
including posters, display kits, videos, and curriculum materials. 



A Potpourri of Resources 



129 



Nen\'ork of Educators on Central America (NECA), 1118 22nd Street, N.W., 
Washington, DC 20037; 202-429-0137; FAX: 202-429-9766. 

Formed in 1986 by teachers' committees from a dozen cities. It provides 
information for teachers and students on Central America and the Car- 
ibbean and has developed a number of resources on the quincentenary 
in both English and Spanish. It publishes many curricula and sponsors 
workshops. 

New England Center for Equity Assistance (NECEA), 300 Brickstone Square, 
Suite 900, Andover, MA 01810. 

An assistance center that offers a catalogue of nonprofit resources. Media 
Matters, which is available on loan at no charge. 

Tr.iprock Peace Center, Woolman Hill, Keets Road, Deerfield, MA 01342; 413- 
773-7427. 

Woi ks with educators and other community people to help bring peace 
issues into the curriculum. This resource center publishes The Traprock 
Report and Teacfiable Moments, both available for a small fee. It also 
sponsors a yearly conference and has a great many curricula for loan. 

U.S. Committee for UNICEF, Information Center on Children's Cultures, 331 
E. 39th Street, New York, NY 10016. 

Publishes a wealth of information on books and other educational ma- 
terials with an international perspective, including the celebration of 
holidays. It also has sample lesson plans. 



1«5 



Award-Winning Books 

The following award-winning books are annotated in Kaleidoscope and 
can be located in the text according to the annotation number that 
follows each listing. 



For All Ages 

Adci, Alnin V\or. Tlw Gold Coi}i. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the 
Tield i)\ Si>cial Sludifs. (^Kb2) 

Anderson, David A./SANKDI'A, reti'Ik'r. The Origin of Life on Earth: A)i Afri- 
avi CnvUou Mi/th. C'cMvtta Scott Kin^ Illustration Award, 1993. (9.1) 

Melting, Natalia M. Moon ^V^^s Tim/ of Walking on Air. Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Hooks in the l-ii'ld nf Social Studies. (9.68) 

Hirdseyr, Tom, aiiapU»r A iio))g of Stnryi: An Asian Legend. Notable 1990 Chil- 
dren's Trade liooks in the l-ieid of Social Studies. (9.32) 

Bryan, Ashley. All Night, All Day: A Child's First Book of African-American Spiri- 
tuals. Coretta Scott King 'illustration Honor Book, 1992. (2.2) 

Bryan, Ashley. Si}ig to the Sioi. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (1.5) 

Burgie, Irving. Caribbean Carnival: Songs of the West Indies. Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade l3ooks in the Field of Social Studies. (2.3) 

Cassedy, Sylvia, and Kunihiro Suetake, trans. Red Dragonflif on My Shoulder. 
ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993. (1.7) 

Cox, Clinton. Undying Glory: The Story of the Massachusetts 54th Regiment. No- 
table 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (7.3) 

Cummings, Pat, comp. and ed. Talking with Artists: Conversations with Victoria 
Chess, Pat Cummings, Leo and Diane Dillon, Richard Flgielski, Lois Ehlert, 
Lisa Campbell Ernst, Tom Feelings, Steven Kellogg, Jerry Pinkney, Amy 
Schwartz, Ljine Smith, Chris Van Allsburg and David Wiesner ALA Nota- 
ble Children's Books, 1993; Boston Globe-Horn Book Nonfiction 
Award, 1992; NCTE Orbis Pictus Honor Book, 1993. (2.4) 

Durrell, Ann, and Marilyn Sachs, eds. The Big Book for Peace. Jane Addams 

Award, ^^91; ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991; Notable 1990 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (14.3) 

Fkooniiak, Norinee. Arctic Memories. NCTF Orbis Pictus Honor Book, 1991; 
Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the F-ield of Social Studies. (4.4) 

I'.oble, Paul. Ihram Wolf Notable Wi) Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies. (9.24) 



.1 B B 

o 

ERIC 



Award-Winning Books 



Goble, Paul. Love Flute. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Notable 1992 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.6) 

Greenfield, Eloise. Night on Neighborhood Street. ALA Notable Children's 
Books, 1992; Coretta Scott King Writing Honor Book, 1992; Notable 
1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (1.11) 

Joseph, Lynn. Coconut Kind of Day: Island Poems. Notable 1990 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (1.14) 

Lester, Julius, reteller. Further Tales of Uncle Remus: The Misadventures of Brer 
Rabbit, Brer Fox, Brer Wolf, the Doodang, and Other Creatures. ALA Nota- 
ble Children's Books, 1991; Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. (9.26) 

Lewis, Richard. All of You Was Singing. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992; 
Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.9) 

Lomas Garza, Carmen (as told to Harriet Rohmer). Family Pictures/Cuadros de 
Familia. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991. (4.17) 

Martinez, Alejandro Cruz. The Woman Who Outshone the Sun: The Legend of Lu- 
cia 7.enteno/La Mujer que Brillaba Aun Mas que el Sol: La Leyenda de Lucia 
Zniteno. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992. (9.47) 

McKissack, Patricia C. The Dark Thirty: Southern Tales of the Supernatural. ALA 
Notable Children's Books, 1993; Coretta Scott King Writing Award, 
1993; Newbery Honor Book, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Bunks in the Field of Social Studies. (14.6) 

McKissack, Patricia C. A Million Fish . . . More or Less. Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (11.49) 

Mollel, Tololwa M. The Orphan Boy: A Maasai Story. ALA Notable Children's 
Books, 1992; Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of So- 
cial Studies. (9.11) 

Oughton, Jerrie. Hozv the Stars Fell into the Sky: A Navajo Legend. Notable 1992 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.13) 

Roop, Peter, and Connie Roop. Ahyoka and the Talking Leaves. Notable 1992 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (12.14) 

Rosen, Michael J., ed. Home: A Collection of Thirty Distinguished Authors and Il- 
lustrators of Children's Books to Aid the Homeless. Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (14.7) 

San Souci, Robert. Sukey and the Mermaid. ALA Notable Children's Books, 
1993. (9.53) 

Soto, Gary Neighborhood Odes. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Bonks in the 
Field of Social Studies. (1.22) 



Award-Winning Books 



133 



Younger Readers 

Aardema, Vema. Amnsi Finds a Fool: An Ashanti Tale. Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.18) 

Aardema, Vema, reteller. Borreguita and the Coyote: A Tale from Ayutla, Mexico. 
Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.19) 

Aardema, Vema, reteller. Traveling to Tondo: A Tale of the Nkundo of Zaire. ALA 
Notable Children's Books, 1992; Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books 
in the Field of Social Studies. (9.20) 

Alexander, Lloyd. The Fortune-Tellers. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; 
Boston Globe-Hom Book Honor Picture Book, 1993; Notable 1992 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.63) 

Bnichac, Joseph, and Jonathan London. Thirteen Moons on Turtle's Back: A Na- 
tive American Year of Moons. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. (1.4) 

Brusca, Maria Cristina. On the Pampas. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books 
in the Field of Scx:ial Studies. (4.3) 

Bunting, Eve. The mil. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991; Notable 1990 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (11.9) 

Crews, Donald. Bigmamas. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992. (6.4) 

Demi. The Empty Pot. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of So- 
cial Studies. (9.65) 

Dorros, Arthur. Abuela. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992; Notable 1991 
Children's Trade Books in the I^eld of S<Kial Studies. (11.16) 

Dorros, Arthur. Tonight Is Cornavnl. Notable l^^^^l Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. (3.3) 

Dragonwagon, Crescent. Home Place. Notable Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. (11.17) 

Ehlert, Lois. Moon Rope: A Peruvian Tale/Lhi hizo n In Luna: Una Leyenda Pe- 
ruana. ALA Notable Children's Hooks, mX (^^.4) 

Fisenberg, Phyllis Rose. You're My Nikki. Notable W2 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studios. (11.18) 

Gerson, Mary-Joan, reteller. Why the Sky /.s* I'ar Away: A Nigerian Folktale. 
Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.5) 

Grifalconi, Ann. Osa's Pride. Notable 19W Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (11.21) 

Hill, Elizabeth Starr. Evans Comer. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. ( 1 1 .26) 

Hoffman, Mary. Amazing Grace. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992; Nota- 
ble 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (11.27) 



134 



Aioard-Winning Books 



Howard, Elizabeth Fitzgerald. Aunt Flossie's Hats (and Crab Cakes Later). Notable 
1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (11.29) 

Hudson, Wade. Jamal's Busy Day. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (11.30) 

Ikeda, Daisaku. The Cherni Tree. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (11.34) 

Isadora, Rachel. At the Crossroads. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992; Nota- 
ble 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (11.35) 

Johnson, Angela. When I Am Old with You. ALA Notable Children's Books, 

1991; Coretta Scott King Writing Honor Book, 1991; Notable 1990 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (11.40) 

Joseph, Lynn. An Island Christmas. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. (3.5) 

Kendall, Russ. Eskimo Boy: Life in an Inupiaq Eskimo Village. Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (4.14) 

Knutson, Barbara, reteller. How the Guinea Fowl Got Her Spots: A Swahili Tale of 
Friendship. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. (9.8) 

Mahy, Margaret. The Seven Chinese Brothers. ALA Notable Children's Books, 
1991; Notable 1991) Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. (9.45) 

Martin, Ann. Rachel PiukeK Kindergarten Show-off. Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Hooks in the I'iold of Social Studies. (11.48) 

McMillan, Bruce. Ijitifig I nHlions. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993. (5.10) 

Medearis, Angela Shelf. Ihtuing with the Indians. Notable 1991 Children's 
Trade Books in the l-iold'of Social Studies. (11.50) 

Mermen, Ingrid, and Niki Daly. Somezvhere in Africa. Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Books in the l-ield of Social Studies. (4.19) 

Pinkney, Gloria Jean. Buck Home. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Nota- 
ble 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (11.56) 

Polacco, Patricia. Chicken Sunda\/. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Nota- 
ble 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (11.57) 

Polacco, Patricia. Mrs. Kalz and Tush. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. (11.58) 

Ringgold, Faith. Tar Beach. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1992; Caldecott 

Honor book, 1992; Coretta Scott King Illustration Award, 1992. (11.61) 

Roth, Susan 1 The Ston/ of I ight. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies! (9.14) 

Say, Allen. Tree of Cranes. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991; Notable 1991 
Children's Trade Books in the I'ield of Social Studies. (11.66) 



1 ( ; fj 



Azvard-Wimiing Books 



135 



Shelby, Anne. Wc Keep a Store. Notable 1 WO Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (11.6^)) 

Va, Leong. A Letter to the Kiu}^. Notable W)] Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (^).h7) 

Wahl, Jan. Little E/^/// folin, Coretla Scott King Illustration Honor Book, 
1992. (9.57) 

Waters, Kate, and Madeline Sltu'enz-I .ow. Lio}i Dancer: Ernie Wan's Chinese 
Neio Year. Notable IWO Children's Trade liooks in the Field of Social 
Studies. (3.9) 

Williams, Karen lynn. Calimoto. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. ( 1 1 .75) 

Williams, Karen lynn. When Africt} IVrfs Home. N(^table 1991 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Sociai Studies. (11. 76) 

Williams, Sherley Anne. Working: Cotton. AI.A Notable Children's Books, 
1993; Caldecott Honor Hook, 1993;Coretta Scott King Illustration 
Honor liook, 1993; Notable 1W2 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. (11.77) 

Williams, Vera H. "More More More," Said the Huby: Three Love Stories. ALA 
Notable Children's Hooks, 1991; Caldecott Honor Book, 1991. (10.11) 

Wilson, Beth P. fenm/. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies. (1178) 

Winter, Jeanette. Diej^o. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies; Parents Choice Award, 1991. (6.28) 



Middle-Grade Readers 

Berck, Judith. No Place to Be: Voices of Homeless Children. ALA Notable Chil- 
dren's Books, 1992. (4.2) 

Bunting, Eve. Summer Wheels. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (12.1) 

DeArmond, Dale, reteller. The Boi/ Who Found the Light: Eskimo Folktales. 

Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books Ln the Field of Social Studies. (9.70) 

Drummond, Allan. The Willow Pattern Story. Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.37) 

Everett, Gwen. Li'l Sis and Uncle Willie: A Story Based on the Life and Paintings 
of William H. Johnson. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Notable' 
1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (6.7) 

Golenbock, Peter. Teammates. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the 
Held of Social Studies. (6.9) 

Hooks, William H. The Ballad of Belle Dorcas. Notable 1990 Children's Trade 
Books in the I'ield of Social Studies. (9.42) 



1 7 0 



Award-Winning Books 



Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. Arctic Hunter. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books 
in the Field of Social Studies. (4.10) 

Hoyt-Goldsmith Diane. Pueblo Storyteller. Notable 1991 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. (4.11) 

Hoyt-Goldsmith, Diane. Totem Pole. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. (3.4) 

Jenness, Aylette. Families: A Celebration of Diversity, Commitment, and Love. No- 
table 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (5.6) 

Keegan, Marcia. Pueblo Boy: Growing Up in Two Worlds. Notable 1991 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (4>13) 

Kidd, Diana. Onion Tears. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. (12.8) 

Lankford, Mary D. Hopscotch around the World. Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. (5.7) 

Mollel, Tololwa M. A Promise to the Sun: An African Story. Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.12) 

Paterson, Katherine. The Tale of the Mandarin Ducks. ALA Notable Children's 
Books, 1991; Boston Globe-Horn Book Picture Book Award, 1991; 
Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.49) 

Peters, Russell M. Clambake: A Wampanoag Tradition. Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (3.6) 

Price, Leontyne. Aida. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991; Coretta Scott 
King Illustration Award, 1991. (2.9) 

Rappaport, Doreen. Escape from Slavery: Five Journeys to Freedom. Notable 

1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (7.12) 

Regguinti, Gordon. The Sacred Harvest: Ojibway Wild Rice Gathering. Notable 

1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (4.20) 

Reynolds, Jan. Himalaya: Vanishing Cultures. Notable 1991 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. (4.21) 

Reynolds, Jan. Sahara: Vanishing Cultures. Notable 1991 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. (4.22) 

Rosen, Michael J. Elijahs Angel: A Story for Chanukah and Christmas. Notable 
1992 Children's Trade Books iiVthe Field of Social Studies. (3.8) 

Say, Allen. El Chino. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of So- 
cial Studies. (6.23) 

Sewall, Marcia, People of the Breaking Day. Notable 1990 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. (7.13) 

Shetterly, Susan Hand, reteller. Raven's Light: A Myth from the People of the 
Northioest Coast. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies. (9.15) 



171 



Azmrd-Winning Books 



137 



Stanley, Fay. The last Princesti: The Story of Princess Ka'iulani of Haivai'i. Nota- 
ble 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (6.25) 

Stolz, Mary. Go Fish. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of So- 
cial Studies. (12.15) 

Tate, Eleanor E. TImnk You, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.! Notable 1990 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (12.17) 

Taylor, Mildred D. Mississippi Bridge. Notable 1990 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. (12.18) 

Van Laan, Nancy, adapter. The Legend of El Dorado: A Latin American Tale. No- 
table 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.16) 

Volkmer, Jane Anne, reteller. Song of the Chirimia: A Guatemalan Folktale/La Mu- 
sica de la Chirimia: Folktale Guatemalteco. Notable 1990 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.56) 

Wells, Ruth. A to Zen: A Book of lapanese Culture. Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (4.26) 

Williams, Sheron. And in the Beginning Notable 1992 Children's Trade 

Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.17) 

Wisniewski, David. Sundiata: Lion King of Mali. ALA Notable Children's 

Books, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. (6.29) 

Wood, Ted (with Wanbli Numpa Afraid of Hawk). A Boy Becomes a Man at 
Wounded Knee. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies. (3.10) 

Zhensun, Zheng, and Alice Low. A Young Painter: The Life and Paintings of 
Wang Yani — China's Extraordinary Young Artist. ALA Notable Chil- 
dren's Books, 1992. (6.31) 



Older Readers 

Anastos, Phillip, and Chris French. Illegal: Seeking the American Dream. Best 
Books for Young Adults, 1992. (8.1) 

Armstrong, Jennifer. Steal Aivaif. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Best 
Books for Young Adults, 1993. (13.2) 

Berry, James. Ajcemah and His Son. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Best 
Books for Young Adults, 1993; Boston Globe-Horn Book Fiction 
Award, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies. (13.3) 

Buss, I'ran Leeper (with Daisy Cubias). Journey of the Sparrows. Jane Addams 
Award, 1992; Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of 
Social Studies. (L3.6) 

Choi, Sook Nyiil. The Year of the Impossible Goodbyes. ALA Notable Children's 
Books, 1^92; Best Books for Young Adults, 1992. (13.8) 



112 



138 



Azvard'Wmrtmg Books 



Collier, James Lincoln. Duke Ellington. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books 
in the Held of Social Studies. (6.3) 

Davis, Ossie. /i/s/ like Martin. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (13.9) 

Dorris, Michael. Mornin\^ Girl. Scott O'Uell Award for Historical Fiction, 
1993,(13,10) 

Fairman, Tony, Biirif My HofWs hut Keep M\f Word^: African Tales for Retelling. 
Notable 1992 Children's Trade ikxiks in the Field of Social Studies. (9.71 ) 

Fradin, Dennis Brindell. Uiiuratlm: Me^^i^enger of Peace. Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade Hooks in the F'ield of Social Studies. (6,8) 

Freedman, Russell. Indian Winter. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; 
Best Books for Young Adults, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. (7,4) 

Fritz, Jean, Katherine Paterson, Patricia McKissack, Fredrick McKissack, 
Margaret Mahy, and Jamake Highwater. The World in 1492. ALA Nota- 
ble Children's Books, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in 
the Field of Social Studies. (7.5) 

Glenn, Mel. My Friend's Got This Problem, Mr. Candler: High School Poems. 
Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 
(1.10) 

Gordon, Sheila. The Middle of Someivhere: A Story of South Africa. Jane Addams 
Honor Book, 1991. (12.3) 

Hamanaka, Sheila. The jounun/: Japanese Americans, Racism, and Reneival. Jane 
Addams Honor Book, 1991; Bes[ Books for Young Adults, 1991; Notable 
1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies; Recom- 
mended Books for Reluctant Young Adult Readers, 1991. (7.6) 

Hamilton, Virginia. Cou>ifi>. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991; Best Books 
for Young Adults 19^M. (12.6) 

Hart, Philip S. I Ii/uik: I'nv: America'^ I'lrst Black Aviators. Notable 1992 Chil- 
dren's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (6.10) 

Haskins, James. Hlack Ihmcc in Atncrica- A llislori/ through Its People. Best 
Books for Young Adults, Coretta Scott King Writing Honor 
Book, 1991. (2.h) 

Haskins, James. TInirgood Marshall: A I ife for justice. Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Bociks in the Meld of Stx ial Studies. (6.11) 

Haskins, Jim. Against All Opjtosition: lUack Fxplorcrs in America. Notable 1992 
Children's Trade Books in the I'ield of Social Studies. (6,12) 

Haskins, Jim. One More River to Cross. The Stories of Twelve Black Americans. 
Best Books for Young Adults, 1993; Notable 1992 Children's Trade 
Books in the F'ield of Social Studies. (6.13) 



1 7 3 



Award-Winning Books 



139 



Haskins, Jim. Outward Dreams: Black Inventors and Their Inventions, Notable 

1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (6.14) 

Hirschfelder, Arlene B., and Beverly R. Singer, comps. Rising Voices: Writings 
of Young Native Americans. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (14.4) 

Houston, James. Drifting Snow: Aii Arctic Search. Notable 1992 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (13.15) 

Jacobs, Francine. The Tainos: The People Who Welcomed Columbus. Notable 1992 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (7.9) 

Katz, William Loren. Breaking the Chains: African-American Slave Resistance. 
Best Books for Young Adults, 1991. (7.10) 

Lyons, Mary E. Utters from a Slave Girl: The Story of Harriet Jacobs. ALA Nota- 
ble Children's Books, 1992; Best Books for Young Adults, 1993. (13.16) 

Lyons, Mary E. Sorrozv's Kitchen: The Life and Folklore of Zora Neale Hurston. 

Recommended Books for Reluctant Young Adult Readers, 1991. (6.16) 

Lyons, Mary E., comp. Razv Head, Bloody Bones: African-American Tales of the 
Supernatural. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. (9.74) 

McKissack, Patricia C, and Fredrick McKissack. Sojourner Truth: Ain't I a 
Woman? ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993; Best Books for Young 
Adults, 1993; Boston Globe-Horn Book Nonfiction Award, 1993; 
Coretta Scott King Writing Honor Book, 1993. (6.17) 

Mazzio, Joan. The One Who Came Back. Recommended Books for Reluctant 
Young Adult Readers, 1993. (13.17) 

Moore, Yvette. Freedom Songs. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (13.18) 

Morey, Janet Nomura, and Wendy Dunn. Famous Asian Americans. Notable 

1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (6.19) 

Myers, Walter Dean. The Mouse Rap. Best Books for Young Adults, 1991. (13.19) 

Myers, Walter Dean. Now Is Your Time! The African-American Strug}(lefor 
Freedom. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1991; Best Books for Young 
Adults, 1992; Coretta Scott King Writing Award, 1992; NCTF Orbis 
rictus Honor Book, 1992. (7.11) 

Myers, Walter Dean. The Righteous Revenge of Artemis Bonner. Best Books for 
Young Adults, 1993. (13.20) 

Myers, Walter Dean. Somezohere in the Darkness. ALA Notable Children's 

Books, 1993; Best Books for Young Adults, 1993; Boston Globe-Horn 
Book Fiction Honor Book, 1992; Newbery Honor Book, 1993; Recom- 
mended Books for Reluctant Young Adult Readers, 1993. (13.21) 

Naidoo, Beverley Chain of Fire. Ikst 15ooks for Young Adults, 1991; Notable 
1990 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (13.22) 



140 



Award-Winning Books 



Nye, Naomi Shihab, comp. This Same Ski/: A Collection of Poems from around 
the World. ALA Notable Children's Books, 1993. (1.19) 

Parks, Rosa (with Jim Haskins). Rosa Parks: My Story. ALA Notable Chil- 
dren's Books, 1993; Best Books for Young Adults, 1993; Recommended 
Books for Reluctant Young Adult Readers, 1993. (6.20) 

Porter, A. P. Jump at de Sun: The Story ofZora Neale Hurston. Notable 1992 
Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies; Recommended 
Books for Reluctant Young Adult Readers, 1993. (6.21) 

Rappaport, Doreen, reteller. The Journey ofMeng: A Chinese legend. Notable 
1991 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (9.51) 

Salisbury, Graham. Blue Skin of the Sea: A Novel in Stories. Best Books for 

Young Adults, 1992; Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. (13.26) 

Siegel, Beatrice. The Year They Walked: Rosa Parks and the Montgomery Bus 

Boycott. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social 
Studies. (7.14) 

Soto, Gary. Baseball in April, and Other Stories. Best Books for Young Adults, 
1991. (14.8) 

Soto, Gary. A Fire in My Hands: A Book of Poems. Notable 1991 Children's 
Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. (1.21) 

Spinelli, Jerry. Maniac Magce. Boston Globe-Hom Book Fiction Award, 1990; 
Newbery Medal, 1991. (13.29) 

Sullivan, Charles, ed. Children of Promise: African-American Literature and Art 
for Young People. Best Books for Young Adults, 1992. (2.10) 

Tan, Amy. The Moon Lady. Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field 
of Social Studies. (11.72) 

Trimble, Stephen. The Village of Blue Stone. Notable 1990 Children's Trade 
Books in the Field of Social Studies. (7.15) 

Walter, Mildred Pitts. Mississippi Clmllenge. Coretta Scott King Writing Honor 
Book, 1993. (7.16) 

Woodson, Jacqueline. Maizon at Blue Hill. Best Books for Young Adults, 1993; 
Notable 1992 Children's Trade Books in the Field of Social Studies. 
(L3.35) 

Yep, Laurence. Toiigucs of Jade. Notable 1991 Children's Trade Books in the 
Field of Social Studies. (9.76) 



It** 



Directory of Publishers 



Hany N. Abrams. Subsidiary of Times Mirror. Orders to: 120 Woodbine 
Street, Bergenfield, NJ 07621. 800-345-1359. 

Arte Publico Press. University of Houston, 4800 Calhoun, Houston, TX 
77204-2090. 800-633-ARTE; FAX 713-743-2847. 

Atheneum. Imprint of Macmillan. Orders to: 100 Front Street, Box 500, River- 
side, NJ 08075. 800-257-5755. 

Bantam Doubleday Dell. Orders to: 414 E. Gulf Road, Des Plaines, IL 60016. 
800-223-6834. 

Bantam Little Rooster Books. See Bantam Doubleday Dell. 

Bantam Skylark Books. See Bantam Doubleday Dell. 

Barron's Educational Series. P.O. Box 8040, 250 Wireless Boulevard, Haup- 
pauge, NY 11788. 800-645-3476. 

Black Butterfly Children's Books. Produced by Writers and Readers Publish- 
ing. Distributed by Publishers Group West, 4065 HoUis Street, Emery- 
ville, CA 94608. 800-788-3123. 

R. R. Bowker. 121 Chanlon Road, Nev^ Providence, NJ 07974. 800-521-8110. 
Orders to: PO. Box 1001, Summit, NJ 07902-1001. 

Boyds Mills Press. Division of Highlights Company. Distributed by St. Mar- 
tin's Press, 175 Fifth Avenue, Room 1715, New York, NY 10010. 800- 
221-7945. 

Boyds Mills Press/Caroline House. See Boyds Mills Press. 
Boyds Mills PressAVordsong. See Boyds Mills Press. 

Bradbury Press. Imprint of Macmillan. Orders to: 100 Front Street, Box 500, 
Riverside, NJ 08075. 800-257-5755. 

Candlewick Press. Distributed by Penguin USA. Orders to: 120 Woodbine 
Street, Bergenfield, NJ 07621. 800-526-0275. 

Caroline House. Imprint of Green Hill. Distributed by National Book Net- 
work, 4720A Boston Way, Lanham, MD 20706-4310, 800-462-6420. 

Carolrhoda Books. 241 First Avenue, N., Minneapolis, MN 55401. 800-328- 
4929. 

Checkerboard Press. 30 Vesey Street, New York, NY 10007. 212-571-6300. 

Children's Book Press. 6400 Hollis Strcet, Emeryville, CA 94608. 510-655- 
3395; FAX 510-655-1978. Distributed by Bookpeople, 7900 Edgewater 
Drive, Oakland, CA 94621. 800-999-4650. 



176 



142 



Directory of Publishers 



Christopher-Gordon. 480 Washington Street, Norwood, MA 02062. 617-762- 
5577. 

Chronicle Books. Division of Chronicle Publishing, 275 Fifth Street, San 
Francisco, CA 94103. 800-722-6657 (orders only). 

Clarion Books. Imprint of Houghton Mifflin. Orders to: Wayside Road, 
Buriington, MA 01803. 800-225-3362. 

Cobblehill Books. Imprint of Dutlon Children's Books, a division of Pen- 
guin USA. Orders to: 120 Woodbine Street, Bergcnficld, NJ 07621. 800- 
526-0275. 

Cobblestone Publishing. 7 School Street, Peterborough, NH 03458. 603-924- 
7209. 

Cooperative Children's Book Center. Orders to: Publication Sales, Wiscon- 
sin Department of Public Instruction, P.O. Box 7841, Madison, WI 
53707-7841. 800-243-8782. 

Thomas Crowell. Imprint of HarperCollins Children's Books. Orders to: 
1000 Keystone Industrial Park, Scranton, PA 18512. 800-242-7737. 

Crown Publishing Group. Affiliate of Random House. Orders to: 400 Hahn 
Road, Westminster, MD 21157. 800-733-3000 (orders); 800-726-0600 (in- 
quiries). 

Delacorte Press. Division of Bantam Doubleday Dell. Orders to: 414 E. Gulf 
Road, Des Plaines, IL 60016. 800-223-6834. 

Dial Books. Division of Penguin USA. Orders to: 120 Woodbine Street, Ber- 
genfield, N] 07621. 800-526-0275. 

Dial Books for Young Readers. See Dial Books. 

Dillon Press. Imprint of Macmillan. Orders to: 100 Front Street, Riverside, 
NJ 08705. 800-257-5755. 

Doubleday. Division of Bantam Doubleday Dell. Orders to: Doubleday Con- 
sumer Ser\dces, P.O. Box 5071, Des Plaines, IL 60017-5071. 800-223- 
6834. 

Doubleday Books for Young Readers. See Doubleday. 

Dutton Children's Books. Division of Penguin USA. Orders to: 120 Wood- 
bine Street, Bergenfield, N] 07621. 800-526-0275. 

Farrar, Straus and Giroux. 19 Union Square, W., New York 10003. 800-631- 
8571. 

Four Winds Press. Imprint of Macmillan Children's Book Group. Orders to: 
100 iTont Street, Riverside, N] 08705. 800-257-5755. 

Friends of the Cooperative Children's Book Center. P.O. Box 5288, Madi- 
son, Wl 53705-0288. 608-222-1867. 

Ciood Books for Young Readers. P.O. Box 419, Main Street, Intercourse, PA 
17534. 800-762-7171; PAX 717-768-3433. 



177 



Directory of Publishers 



143 



Green Tiger Press. Imprint of Simon and Schuster, 1230 Avenue of the 
Americas, New York, NY 10020. 212-698-7000. 

Greenwillow Books. Division of William Morrow. Orders to: 39 Plymouth 
Street, P.O. Box 1219, Fairfield, NJ 07007. 800-843-9389. 

Greenwood Press. Division of Greenwood Publishing Group, 88 Post Road, 
W., RO. Box 5007, Westport, CT 06881-5007. 800-225-5800 (orders only). 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. Orders to: 6277 Sea Harbor Drive, Orlando, FL 
32887. 800-225-5425. 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich/Gulliver Books. See Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich/Odyssey Books. See Harcourt Brace Jovanovich. 

Harper and Row. Division of HarperCollins. Orders to: 1000 Keystone Indus- 
trial Park, Scranton, PA 18512-4621. 800-242-7737 (800-982-4377 in 
Pennsylvania). 

HarperCollins. Orders to: 1000 Keystone Industrial Park, Scranton, PA 18512- 
4621. 800-242-7737 (800-982-4377 in Pennsylvania). 

HarperCollinsAVilla Perlman Books. See HarperCollins. 

HarperCollins/Charlotte Zolotow Books. See HarperCollins. 

Highsmith Press. W5527, PO. Box 800, Fort Atkinson, Wl 53538-0800. 800- 
558-2110 for information; FAX 800-835-2329. 

Hispanic Books Distributors and Publishers. 1665 West Grant Rd., Tucson, 
AZ 85745. 602-882-9484. 

Henry Holt. Orders to: 4375 W. 1980, S., Salt Lake City, UT 84104. 800-488- 
5233. 

Henry Holt/Red Feather Books. See Henry Holt. 

Holiday House. 425 Madison Avenue, New York, NY 10017. 212-688-0085. 

Houghton Mifflin. Orders to: Wayside Road, Burlington, MA 01803. 800-225- 
3362. 

Hyperion Books for Children. Division of Disney Book Publishing. Distrib- 
uted by Little, Brown. Orders to: 200 West Street, Waltham, MA 02254. 
800-343-9204. 

Just Us Books. 301 Main Street, Suite 22-24, Orange, NJ 07050. 201-676-4345. 

Alfred A. Knopf. Subsidiary of Random House. Orders to: 400 Hahn Road, 
Westminster, MD 21157. 800-733-3000. 

Alfred A. Knopf/Borzoi Books. See Alfred A. Knopf. 

Lee and Low Books. 228 East 45th Street, 14th Ploor, New York, NY 10017. 
212-867-6155; FAX 212-338-9059. Distributed by Publishers Group 
West, 4065 Hollis Street, Lmeryville, CA 94608. 800-788-3123. 

Lemer Publications. 241 First Avenue, N., Minneapolis, MN 55401. 800-328- 
4929. 



ERLC 



178 



144 



Directory of Publishers 



Lippincott Children's Books. Imprint of HarperCollins Children's Books. Or- 
ders to: 1000 Keystone Industrial Park, Scranton, PA 18512^621. 800- 
638-3030. 

Little, Brown. Division of Time Warner. Orders to: 200 West Street, Waltham, 
MA 02254. 800-759-0190. 

Little, Brown/Joy Street Books. See Little, Brown. 

Lodestar Books. Imprint of Dutton Children's Books, a division of Penguin 
Books. Orders to: Penguin USA, 120 Woodbine Street, Bergenfield, NJ 
07621.800-526-0275. 

Longman. Division of Addison- Wesley. Orders to: 95 Church Street, White 
Plains, NY 10601. 914-993r5000. 

Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Books. Division of William Morrow. Orders to: 39 
Plymouth Street, P.O. Box 1219, Fairfield, NJ 07007. 800-237-0657. 

Lothrop, Lee and Shepard Books/Mulberry Books. See Lothrop, Lee and 
Shepard Books. 

Margaret K, McElderry Books. Imprint of Macmillan Children's Books 

Group. Orders to: 100 Front Street, Riverside, NJ 08075. 800-257-5755. 

Macmillan. Orders to: 100 Front Street, Riverside, NJ 08075. 800-257-5755. 

Julian Messner. Imprint of Simon and Schuster, 1230 Avenue of the Ameri- 
cas, New York, NY 10020. 232-698-7000. 

William Morrow. Orders to: Wilmor Warehouse, P.O. Box 1219, 39 Plymouth 
Street, Fairfield, Nj 07007. 800-237-0657. 

Morrow Junior Books. See William Morrow. 

Network of Educators' Committees on Central America. P.O. Box 43509, 
Washington, IX 20010-9509. 202-429-0137. 

New Society Publishers. 4527 Springfield Avenue, Philadelphia, PA 19143. 
215-382-6543. 

North-South Books. Orders to: 1133 Broadway Suite 1016, New York, NY 
10010.800-282-8257. 

Northland Publishing. P.O. Box 1389, Flagstaff, AZ 86002. 800-346-3257. 

Orchard Books. Division of Franklin Watts, 387 Park Avenue, S., New York, 
NY 10016. 800-672-6672. 

Orchard Books/Richard Jackson Books. See Orchard Books. 

Oyate. 2702 Mathews Street, Berkeley CA 94702. 510-848-6700. 

Philomel Books. Imprint of the Putnam Publishing Group. Orders to: 390 
Murray Hill Parkway Iiast Rutherford, NJ 07073. 800-631-8571. 

Picture Book Studio. Orders to: Simon and Schuster Children's Books, 15 
Columbus Circle, New York, NY 10023. 800-223-2348; 800-223-2336 
(orders only). 



17R 

BEST COPY AVAIIAB U 

ERIC 



Directory of Publishers 



145 



G. P. Putnam's Sons. Imprint of the Putnam Publishing Group. Orders to: 
390 Murray HiU Parkway, East Rutherford, NJ 07073. 800-631-8571. 

G. R Putnam's SonsAVhitebird Books. See G. P. Putnam's Sons. 

Rizzoli International Publications. 300 Park Avenue, S., New York, NY 
10010. 800-462-2387. 

Rizzoli International Publications/National Museum of American Art, 
Smithsonian Scholastic. See Rizzoli International Publications. 

Savanna Books. 858 Massachusetts Avenue, Central Square, Cambridge, 
MA. 617-868-3423. 

Scarecrow Press. Division of Grolier. Orders to: 52 Liberty Street, Box 4167, 
Metuchen, NJ 08840. 800-537-7107. 

Scholastic. Orders to: PO. Box 120, Bergenfield, NJ 07621. 800-325-6149 (or- 
ders only). 

Scholastic/Apple Paperbacks. See Scholastic. 

Scholastic/Cartwheel Books. See Scholastic. 

Scholastic Hardcover Books. See Scholastic. 

Scholastic Hardcover Books/Lucas Evans Books. See Scholastic. 

Scholastic Hardcover Books/Byron Preiss-New China Pictures Books. See 
Scholastic. 

Charles Scribner's Sons. Division of Macmillan. Orders to: 100 Front Street, 
Riverside, NJ 08075. 800-237-5755. 

Sierra Club Books/Little, Brown. Distributed by Little, Brown. Orders to: 
200 West Street, Walthain, MA 02254. 800-759-0190. 

Sights Productions. RO. Box 101, Mt. Airy, MD 21771. 410-795-4582. 

Silver Burdett Press. Division of Paramount Publishing. Orders to: P.O. Box 
2649, Columbus, OH 43216. 800-848-9500. 

Simon and Schuster. 1230 Avenue of the Americas, New York, NY 10020. 
212-698-7000. 

Simon and Schuster Books for Young Readers. See Simon and Schuster. 

Tambourine Books. Imprint of William Morrow. Orders to: Wilmor Ware- 
house, PO. Box 1219, 39 Plymouth Street, Fairfield, NJ 07007. 800-237- 
0657 (customer ser\ice). 

Tilbury House. Distributed by Consortium Book Sales and Distribution, 
1045 Westgale Drive, St. Paul, MN 55114-1065. 800-283-3572. 

Troll Associates. Subsidiary of Educational Reading Services, 100 Corporate 
Drive, Mahwah, NJ 07430. 800-526-5289. 

Tundra Books. In Canada: Universit\' of Toronto Press, 5201 Duffcrin St., 
Downsview, Ontario M3H 5T8; 416-667-7791; FAX 416-667-7832. In 



130 



146 



Directory of Publishers 



the U.S.: University of Toronto Press, 340 Nagel Dr, Buffalo, NY 
14225; 716-683-4547. 

Helaine Victoria Press. 911 N. College Avenue, No. 3, Bloomington, IN 
47404. 812-331-0444. 

Viking Penguin. Division of Penguin USA. Orders to: 120 Woodbine Street, 
Bergenfield, NJ 07621. 800-526-0275. 

Walker and Company. Division of Walker Publishing, 720 l-ifth Avenue, 
New York, NY 10019. 800-289-2553 (orders only). 

Franklin Watts. Subsidiary of Grolier. Orders to: 5450 N. Cumberland Ave- 
nue, Chicago, IL 60656. 800-672-6672. 

Whispering Coyote Press. 480 Newbury Street, Suite 104, Danvers, MA 
01923. 508-281-4995. 

Whispering Coyote Press/Treld Bicknell Books. See Whispering Coyote Press. 

Albert Whitman. 6340 Oakton Street, Morton Grove, IL 60053. 800-155-7675. 

Writers and Readers Publishing. 625 Broadway 10th Floor, New York, NY 
10012. 212-982-3158. Distributed by Publishers Group West, 4065 Mol- 
lis Street, Emery\'ille, CA 94608. 800-788-3123. 



Author ndex 



Aardema, Vema, 9.18^9.20 
Aaseng, Nathan, 7.1 
Ada, Alma Flor, 9.62 
Adier, David A., 6.1,6.2 
Adoff, Arnold, 1.1, 11.1 
Albert, Burton, 11.2 
Alexander, Lloyd, 9.63, 13.1 
Allen, Judv, 11.3 
Allison, Diane Worfolk, 1.2 
Anastos, Phillip, 8.1 
Ancona, George, 5.11 
Anderson, David A., 9.1 
Argueta, Manlio, 9.31 
Armstrong, Jennifer, 13.2 
Arnold, Caroline, 7.2 
Ashley, Bernard, 11.4 
Axworthy, Anni, 11.5 



Barboza, Steven, 2.1 

Begay, Shonto, 9.21 

Beime, Barbara, 4.1 

Belprd, Pura, 9.22 

Belting, Natalia M., 9.68 

Berck, Judith, 4.2 

Berry, James, 1.3, 13.3 

Bierhorst, John, 9.69 

Birdseye,Tom, 9.32 

Blair, David Nelson, 13.4 

Bianco, Alberto, 9.33 

Bogart, Jo Ellen, 11.6 

Bolden, Tonya, 13.13 

Bond, Ruskin, 11.7 

Booth, Coleen E., 13.5 

Breckler, Rosemary K., 11.8 

Brown, Tricia, 8.2 

Bruchac, Joseph, 1 .4 

Brusca, Marfa Cristina, 4.3, 9.34 

Bryan, Ashlev, 1.5,2.2 

Bunting, Eve] 11.9, 12.1 

Burgle, Irving, 2.3 

Buss, Fran deeper, 13.6 



Calhoun, Mary, 10.1 

Carlson, Lori M, 14.1 

Carlstrom, Nancy White, 1.6, 10.2, 14.2 



Case, Dianne, 13.7 

Cassedy, Sylvia, 1.7 

Charles, Donald, 9.2 

Cherry, Lynne, 11.10 

Chocolate, Deborah M. Newton, 3.1 

Choi, Sook Nyul, 13.8 

Clifton, Lucille, 3.2, 11.11 

Collier, James Lincoln, 6.3 

Compton, Patricia A., 9.23 

Cox, Clinton, 7.3 

Crews, Donald, 6.4, 11.12 

Cubias, Daisy, 13.6 

Cummings, Pat, 2.4, 11.13, 11.14 

Curtis, Gavin, 11.15 



Dabovich, Lydia, 1.8 

Daly, Niki, 4.19 

Davis, Ossie, 13.9 

DeArmond, Dale, 9.70 

Dee, Ruby, 9.35 

Delacre, Lulu, 2.5 

Demi, 1.9, 6.5, 9.36, 9.64, 9.65 

Denenberg, Barry, 6.6 

Dixon, Ann, 9.3 

Dorris, Michael, 13.10 

Dorros, Arthur, 3.3, 11.16 

Dragon wagon. Crescent, 11.17 

Drummond, Allan, 9.37 

Dunn, Wendy, 6.19 

Durell, Ann, 14.3 



Ehlert, Lois, 9.4 
Eisenberg, Phyllis Rose, 11.18 
Ekoomiak, Normee, 4.4 
Emberley, Rebecca, 5.1 
Everett, Gwen, 6.7 



Fairman, Tony, 9.71 
Falwell, Cathryn, 5.2 
Fradin, Dennis BrindcU, 6.8 
Frcedman, Russell, 7.4 
French, Chris, 8.1 
French, Fiona, ^.38 
Fritz, Jean, 7.5 



182 



148 



Author Index 



Gajadm, Chitra, 11.19 
Game^ S. T., 5.3 
Gerson, Mary-Joan, 9.5 
Girion, Barbara, 13.11 
Glenn, Mel, 1.10 
Goble, Paul, 9.6, 9.24, 9.39, 9.40 
Gogol, Sara, 12.2 
Golenbock, Peter, 6.9 
Gordon, Sheila, 12.3 
Greenfield, Eloise, 1.11, 10.3-10.6, 11.20, 
12.4 

Greenspan, Adele Aron, 5.4 
Grenquist, Barbara, 8.3 
Grifalconi, Ann, 11.21 



Ha^c, Sarah Josepha, 1.12 

Hamanaka, Sheila, 7.6 

Hamilton, Virginia, 9.72, 11.22, 12.5, 12.6 

Hart, Philip S., 6.10 

Haskins, Francine, 4.5, 11.23 

Haskins, James, 2.6, 6.11 

Haskins, Jim, 4.6, 6.12-6.14, 6.20, 7.7 

Haugaard, Erik Christian, 13.12 

Hauptly, Denis J.,4.'7 

Hausherr, Rosmarie, 5.5 

Havilljuanita, 11.24 

Hayashi, Akiko, 11.25 

Hernandez, Xavier, 7.8 

Hewett, Joan, 4.8 

Higginsen, V^, 13.13 

Highwater, Jamake, 7.5 

Hill, Elizabeth Starr, 11. 26 

Hill, Kirkpatrick, 13.14 

Hillman, Elizabeth, 9.41 

Hirschfeldcr, Arlene B., 14.4 

Hoffman, Mary, 11.27 

Hoig, Stan, 4,9 

Hong, Lily Toy, 9.7 

Hooks, William H., 9.42 

Hort, Lenny, 11.28 

Horton, Barbara Savadge, 10.7 

Houston, James, 13.15 

Howard, Elizabeth Fitzgerald, 11.29 

Hovt-<3oldsmith, Diane, 3.4, 4.10, 4.11 

Hudson, Wade, 11.30 

Hughes, Libby, 6.15 

Hughes, Shirley, 11.31 

Hunter, Latoya', 4.12 

Hurwitz, Johanna, 12.7 



khikawa, Stitomi, 11..^2 
Igus, Toyomi, 11.33 



Ikeda, Daisaku, 9.43, 11.34 
Isadora, Rachel, 11.35, 11.36 



Jacobs, Francine, 7.9 
Jenness, Aylette, 5.6 
Johnson, Angela, 11.37-11.40 
Johnson, Dc'ores, 11.41-11.43 
Johnson, Ryerson, 11.44 
Johnston, Tony, 11.45 
Joosse, Barbara M., 10.8 
Joseph, Lynn, 1.14, 3.5, 9.73 



Katz, William Loren, 7.10 
Keegan, Marcia, 4.13 
Keller, Holly, 11.46 
Kendall, Russ,4.14 
Kidd, Diana, 12.8 
Kimmel, Eric A, 9.25 
Knight, r largy Bums, 4.15 
Knutson, Barbara, 9.8 
Kraus, Joanna Halpert, 12.9 
Kuklin, Susan, 8.4 



Lacapa, Michael, 9.44 
Lamb, Wendy, 14.5 
Langstaff, John, 2.7 
Lankford, Mary D, 5.7 
Larrick, Nancy, 14.5 
Lauture, Deniz^, 1.15 
Lee, Jeanne M., 11.47 
Lester, Julius, 9.26 
Levvington, Anna, 4.16 
Lewis, Richard, 9.9 
Linden, Ann Marie, 5.8 
Livingston, MyraCohn, 1.16 
Lorn as Garza, Carmen, 4.17 
London, Jonathan, 1.4 
Low, Alice, 6.31 

Lyons, Mary E., 6.16, 9.74, 13.16 



MacKinnon, Debbie, 3.9 
Mado, Michio, 1.17 
Mahy, Margaret, 7.5, 9.45 
Mart'm, Ann, 11.48 
Mdrtin, I'ranccsca, 9.10 
Martin, Rafe, 9.46 
MdrliJH*/, Alejandro Cruz, 9.47 
Mathis, Sharon Bell, 1.18 
Mayor, Marian n a, 9.48 
Mazzio, Joan, 13.17 



1 



Author Index 



149 



McDermott, Gerald, 9.27 
McKissack, Fredrick, 6.17, 7.5 
McKissack, Patricia C, 6.17, 7.5, 11.49, 
14.6 

McMahon, Patricia, 4.18 
McMillan, Bruce, 5.10 
Medearis, Angela Shelf, 2.8, 11.50 
Mermen, Ingrid, 4.19 
Merrill, Jean, 11.51 
Miller, Mar>' Beth, 5.11 
Miller, Robert H., 6.18 
Mills, Claudia, 11.52 
Mollel, Tololvva M., 9.11, 9.12, 9.28 
Moore, Yvette, 13.18 
Mora, Pat, 11.53 
Morey, Janet Nomura, 6.19 
Morris, Ann, 5.12, 
Myers, Walter Dean, 7.11, 12.10, 
13.19-13.21 



Naidoo, Beverley, 13.22 
Namioka, Lensey, 12.11, 13.23 
Nodar, Carmen Santiago, 11.54 
Nye, Naomi Shihab, 1.19 



O'Connor, Karen, 8.5 
Orr, Katherine, 11.55 
Oughton, Jerrie, 9.13 



Parks, Rosa, 6.20 
Paterson, Katherine, 7.5, 9.49 
Pattison, Darcy, 9.50 
Peters, Russell M., 3.6 
Pinkney, Gloria Jean, 11.56 
Pinkwator,Jill, 12.12 
Polacco, Patricia, 11.57, 11.58 
Porter, A. R, 3.7, 6.21 
Poynter, Margaret, 8.6 
Prather, Ray, 13.24 
Price, Leontyne, 2.9 



Rappaport, Doreen, 7.12, 9.51 
Reddix, Valerie, 11.59 
Regan, Dian Curtis, 12.13 
Regguinti, Gordon, 4.20 
Reynolds, Jan, 4.21,4.22 
Ringgold, Faith, 11.60, 11.61 
Robinson, Margaret A., 13.25 
Rodanas, Kristina, 9.52 
Roe, Eileen, 11.62 



Rohmer, Harriet, 9.66 
Roop, Connie, 12,14 
Roop, Peter, 12.14 
Rosen, Michael J., 3.8, 14.7 
Rosenberg, Maxine B., 5.13 
Roth, Susan L.,9.14 



Sabin, Louis, 6.22 
Sachs, Marilyn, 14.3 
Sage, James, 11.63 
Sakai, Kimiko, 11.64 
Salisbury, Graham, 13.26 
Samton, Sheila White, 11.65 
San Souci, Robert, 9.53 
Say, Allen, 6.23, 11.66 
Schmidt, Diane, 4.23 
Schoberle, Cecile, 11.67 
Scott, Ann Herbert, 11.68 
Senna, Carl, 6.24 
Serfozo, Mary, 10.9 
Sewall, Marcia, 7.13 
Shelby, Anne, 11.69 
Shetterly, Susan Hand, 9.15 
Siegel, Beatrice, 7.14 
Sierra, Judy, 9.29 
Singer, Beverly R., 14.4 
Slier, Deborah, 1.20 
Slovenz-Lovv, Madeline, 3.9 
Smalls-Hector, Irene, 11.70, 11.71 
So, Meilo, 9.54 

Soto, Gary, 1.21, 1.22, 13.27, 13.28, 
14.8 

Spinelli, Jerry, 13.29 
Stanley, Fay, 6.25 
Stiles, Martha Bennett, 9 30 
Stolz, Mary, 12.15, 12.16 
Suetake, Kunihiro, 1.7 
Sullivan, Charles, 2.10 
Swentzell, Rina, 4.24 



Tagore, Rabindranath, 1.23 

Tan, Amy, 11.72 

Tate, Eleanora E., 12.17, 14.9 

Taylor, Mildred D., 12.18 

Temple, Frances, 13.30 

Thomas, Joyce Carol, 13.31, 14.10 

Thompson, Peggy, 4.25 

Torre, Betty L., 9.55 

Trimble, Stephen, 7.15 



Uchida, Yoshiko, 6.26 



IS4 



Author Index 



Vi, Leong, 9.67 
Van Laan, Nancy, 9.16 
Ventura, Cynthia L., 14.1 
Volkmer, Jane Anne, 9.56 



VVahl, Jan, 9.57, 9.58 

Walker, Alice, 11.73 

Walker, Paul Robert, 6.27 

Walter, Mildred Pitts, 7.16, 11.74 

Wanbli Numpa Afraid of Hawk, 3.10 

Wang, Rosalind C, 9.59 

Waters, Kate, 3.9 

Watkins, Yoko Kawashima, 9.75 

Weiss, Nicki, 10.10 

Wells, Ruth, 4.26 

Whelan, Gloria, 13.32 

Williams, Karen Lynn, 11.73, 11.76 

Williams, Sherlev Anne, 11.77 

Williams, Sheron,9.17 



Williams, Vera B„ 10.11 
Wilson, Beth P, 11.78 
Wilson, Tona, 9.34 
Winter, Jeanette, 6.28 
Wisniewski, David, 6.29, 9.60 
Wood, Ted, 3.10 

Woodson, Jacqueline, 13.33-13.35 
Wunderli, Stephen, 13.36 



Yacowitz. Caryn, 9.61 
Yee, Paul, 12.19 
Yep, Laurence, 6.30, 9.76 
Yolen, Jane, 1.24, 11.79 
Young, Ruth, 10.12 
Yu, Ling, 4.27 



Zheng Zhensun, 6.31 
Zimelman, Nathan, 11.80 



Illustrator Index 



Allen, Thomas B., 12.1 
Allison, Diane Worfolk, 1.2 
Anastos, Phillip, 8.1 
Ancona, George, 5.11, 5.13 
Andreasen, Dan, 13.7 
Anno, Mitsumasa, 1.17 
Arai, Tomie, 11.64 
Asare, Meshack, 9.71 
Axworthy, Anni, 11.5 



Bacon, Paul, 6.9 

Ballonga, Jordi, 7.8 

Bang, Molly, 1.7 

Barbour, Karen, 1.3 

Begay, Shonto, 9.21 

Beime, Barbara, 4.1 

Bent, Jennifer, 9.35 

Bernstein, Michael J., 1.10 

Binch, Caroline, 11.27 

Bochak, Grayce, 1.23 

Bodmer, Karl, 7.4 

Bond, Higgins, 11.33 

Brazell, Derek, 11.4 

Brierley, Louise, 9.69 

Brusca, Maria Cristina, 2.8, 4.3, 9.34 

Bryan, Ashley, 1.5,2.2, 2.7 

Byard, Carole, 11.77 

Byrd, Samuel, 1.16, 11.50 



Casilla, Robert, 6.1, 6.2, 11.62 

Chan, Harvey, 12.19 

Charles, Donald, 9.2 

Chen Ming-jeng, 4.27 

Chen, Ju-Hong, 9.32, 9.59, 9.61 

Cherry, Lynne, 11.10 

Chesworth, Michael, 12.13 

Clay, Wil, 9.57, 9.58 

Club de Madras Virgin del Carmen of 

Lima, Peru, 3.3 
Cordon, Glo, 11.68 
Collins, Patrick, 7.9 
Conklin, Paul S., 4.25 
Cooper, Ployd, 11.51, 11.76 
Cooper, Martha, 3.^ 
Crews, Donald, 6.4, 11.12 



Cummings, Pat, 11.13, 11.14, 11.74, 12.15 
Curtis, Gavin, 11.15 



Dabovich, Lydia, 1.8 
d'Amboise, Carolyn George, 2.1 
Davis, Lambert, 9.72 
deKiefte, Kees, 12.11 
DeArrnond, Dale, 9.70 
Deeter, Catherine, 11.73 
Dejohn, Marie, 6.22 
Delacre, Lulu, 2.5 
Demi, 1.9, 6.5,9.36, 9.64,9.65 
Desimini, Lisa, 9.13, 14.2 
Dewey, Jennifer Owings, 7.15 
Diaz, David, 1.22 
Dillon, Diane, 1.6,2.9,9.49 
Dillon, Leo, 1.6, 2.9, 9.49 
Dodson, Liz Brenner, 4.6 
Downing, Julie, 11.80 
Drummond, Allan, 9.37 



Ehlert, Lois, 9.4 
Eitzen, Allan, 11.7 
Ekoomiak, Normee, 4.4 
Emberley, Rebecca, 5.1 
Escofet, Josep, 7.8 
Etre, Lisa, 5.3 



Falwell, Cathryn, 5.2 
Ford, George, 11.30 
Frankel, Adrian, 11.8 
French, Chris, 8.1 
French, Fiona, 9.38 



Geter, Tyrone, 11.70 

Gilchrist, Jan Spivey, 1.11, 1.18, 3.2, 

10.3-10.6, 11.20 
Gii-Lsburg, Max, 12.18 
Goble, Paul, 9.6, 9.24, 9.39, 9.40 
Golembe, Carla, 9.5 
Green, Jonathan, 1.15 
Greenspun, Adelo Arori, 5.4 
Grifalconi, Ann, 11.21 



152 



Illustrator Index 



Hamanaka, Sheila, 7.6, 9.23, 11.52, 12.7 

Hanna, Cheryl, 11.1 

Haskins, Francine, 4.3, 11.23 

Hayashi, Akiko, 11.25 

Hays, Michael, 11.11, 11.71 

Hewett, Richard, 4.8, 7.2 

Hey man. Ken, 5.12 

Hillenbrand, Will, 9.20, 9.68 

Himler, Ronald, 11.9 

Hong, Lily Toy, 9.7 

Houston, James, 13.15 

Hu,rmg-Hwa, 1.20 

Hughes, Shirley, 11.31 

Humphries, Tudor, 11.3 

Hyman, Trina Schart, 9.63 



J.chikawa, Satomi, 11.32 

Inouye, Carol, 9.55 

Isadora, Rachel, 10.12, 11.35, 11.36 



Jenness, Aylette, 5.6 

Johnson, Dolores, 11.41-11.43, 11.78 

Johnson, William H., 6.7 



Kakkak, Dale, 4.20 
Kastner, Jill, 11.18 
Keegan, Marcia, 4.13 
Keller, Holly, 11.46 
Kendall, Russ, 4.14 
Kleven, Elisa, 11.16 
Knutson, Barbara, 9.8 
Kuklin, Susan, 8.4 



Lacapa, Michael, 9.44 
Lang, Cecily, 11.53 
Lavallee, Barbara, 10.8 
Lee, Jeanne M., 11.47 
Leonard, Richard, 6.18 
Lessac, Frane, 2.3 
Lilly, Charles, 7.12 
Locker, Thomas, 1.4 
Lomas Garza, Carmen, 4.17 



Madama, John, 3.6 
Maritz, Nicolaas, 4.19 
Martin, Francesca, 9.10 
Massey, Cal, 3.1 
Mathers, Petra, 9.19 
McDermott, Gerald, 9.27 



McMillan, Bruce, 1.12, 5.10 
Migdale, Lawrence, 3.4, 4.10, 4.11 
Milone, Karen, 5.7 
Miyake, Yoshi, 12.14 
Montgomery, Lucy, 12.8 
Morin, Paul, 9.11 
Moser, Barry, 12.5 



Narahashi, Keiko, 10.9, 11.63 



O'Brien, Anne Sibley, 4.15 
O'Brien, Michael F., 4.18 
Olivera, Fernando, 9.47 
Ong, Helen, 11.19 
Orr, Katherine, 11.55 
Ortega, Jos^, 14.1 



Parker, Edward, 4.16 
Paterson, Diane, 11.54 
Pinkney, Brian 9.29, 9.42, 9.53, 9.73, 11.2, 
14.6 

Pinkney, Jerry, 1.1, 9.26, 11.17, 11.22, 

11.56,12.6 
Polacco, Patricia, 11.57, 11.58 
Politi, Leo, 11.45 
Porter, Janice Lee, 3.7 
Poydar, Nancy, 11.48 



Ransome, James E., 11.28, 11.29, 11.37 

Reade, Deborah, 7.15 

Reisberg, Veg, 9.66 

Revah, Patricia, 9.33 

Reynolds, Jan, 4.21, 4.22 

Ringgold, Faith, 11.60, 11.61 

Ritz, Karen, 12.9 

Robinson, Aminah Brenda Lynn, 3.8 
Rodanas, Kristina, 9.52 
Roth, Robert, 9.17 
Roth, Susan L., 9.14 
Russell, Lynne, 5.8 



Sdnchez, Carlos, 9.22 
Sam ton. Sheila White, 11.65 
Sauber, Robert, 9.48 
Savadier, Elivia, 11.24 
Say, Allen, 6.23, 11.66 
Schields, Gretchen, 11.72 
Schmidt, Diane, 4.23 
Schoberle, Cecile, 11.67 



187 



Illustrator Index 



153 



Schutzer, Dena, 11.49 
Sewall, Marcia, 7.13 
Shannoa David, 9.46, 11.79 
Shetterly, Robert, 9.15 
Sieveking, Anthea, 5.9 
Simmons, Elly, 9.31 
So, Melio, 9.54 
Soman, David, 11.38-11.40 
Speidel, Sandra, 1.14, 11.26 
Spurll, Barbara, 9.28 
Stanley, Diane, 6.25 
Steen, Bill, 4.24 
Stevens, Janet, 9.25 
Stevenson, Sugie, 10.2 
Stock, Catherine, 3.5, 11.75 
Stow, Jenny, 1.13 



Thai, Ted, 8.2 
Thomas, Larry, 9.30 
Tseng, Jean, 9.45, 9.50, 9.75, 11.44, 11.59 
Tseng, Mou-sien, 9.45, 9.50, 9.75, 11 .44, 
11.59 



Vd, Leong, 9.67 

Van Wright, Cornelius, 1.20 



Velasquez, Eric, 13.22, 14.9 
Vidal, Beatriz, 9.12, 9.16 
Vitale, Stefano, 7.5 
Volkmer, Jane Anne, 9.56 



V/aldman, Bryna, 9.18 
Waldman, Neil, 9.62 
Wallner, John, 9.41 
Ward, John, 11.69 
Watts, Jim, 9.3 
Weiss, Nicki, 10.10 
Wiesner, David, 9.76 
Wildsmith, Brian, 9,43, 11.34 
Williams, Vera B., 10.11 
Wilson, Janet, 11.6 
Wilson, Kathleen Atkins, 9.1 
Winter, Jeanette, 6.28 
Wisniewski, David, 6.29, 9.60 



Yang Ming-Yi, 9.51 
Yoshi, 4.26 

Young, Ed, 9.9, 10.1,10.7 



Zheng Zhensun, 6.31 



4 



Subject Index 



Abenaki Indians, 1.4 
Abolition, 6.17, 7.10, 13.2 
Abuse, 13.7 
Adoption, 12.9 

Adventure, 11.12, 13.1, 13.12, 13.17, 

13.20, 13.23 

Africa, 2.9, 3.1, 3.7, 4.19, 4.22, 6.6, 6.15, 
6.29, 9.1, 9.5, 9.8, 9.10-9.12, 9.17, 9.18, 
9.20, 9.25, 9.27-9.29, 9.35, 9.63, 9.71, 

11.21, 11.35, 11.36, 11.75, 11.76, 12.3, 
13.7, 13.22 

African Americans, 1.1, 1.2, 1.11, 1.12, 

I. 15, 1.16, 1.18, 1.20, 2.2, 2.6-2.8, 2.10, 
3.1, 3.2, 3.7, 3.8, 4.5, 4.12, 4.23, 5.2, 
5.10, 5.13, 6.1, 6.3, 6.4, 6.7, 6.9-6.14, 
6.16-^.18, 6.20, 6.21, 6.24, 7.3, 7.7, 
7.10-7.12, 7.14, 7.16, 8.4, 9.?.6, 9.42, 
9.53, 9.57, 9.58, 9.74, 10.3-;0.6, 10.9, 
10.12, 11.2, 11.11-11.15, 11 17, 11.18, 

II. 20, 11.22, 11.23, 11.26, 11.28-11.30, 
11.33, 11.37-11.43, 11.49, 11.50, 
11.56-11.58, 11.60, 11.61, 11.65, 
11.69-11.71, 11.74, 11.77, 11.78, 
12.4-12.6, 12.15-12.18, 13.2, 13.5, 
13.9, 13.13, 13.16, 13.18-13.21, 13.24, 
13.31, 13.33-13.35, 14.6, 14.9 

African Canadians, 11.6 

Aging, 11.40, 11.64 • 

Ainus, 13.23 

Alabama, 6.20, 7.14, 13.9 

Alaska, 1.6, 4.10,4.14, 9.3, 10.8, 11.68 

Alcoholism, 13.33 

Algonquin Indians, 9.46 

Alphabet books, 4.26, 5.9 

Anasazi Indians, 7.2, 7.15 

Animals, 1.7, 1.9, 1.12, 1.17, 4.8, 9.4,9.8, 
9.10, 9.12-9.15, 9.18-9.31, 9.40, 9.41, 
9.43, 9.49, 9.50, 9.54, 9.61, 9.70, 10.12, 
11.3, 11.6, 11.14, 11.25, 11.32, 11.41, 
11.43, 11.46, 11.67, 11.80 

Anthologies, 1.9, 1.19, 1.20, 1.24, 
9.68-9.76, 12.5, 14.1-14.10 

Apache Indians, 9.44 

Apartheid, 6.6, 6.15, 12.3, 13.22 

Apartments, 11.26 

Aravvak Indians, 9.30 

Architects, 9.64 

Arctic, 4.4, 4.10, 10.8, 13.15 



Argentina, 4.3, 9.34 

Art/artists, 2.4, 2.10, 3.4, 4.11, 4.24, 6.7, 
6.28, 6.31, 7.6, 9.61, 9.64, 11.44 

Arts, performing, 2.1-2.3, 2.5-2.9, 4.1, 
5.5, 13.5 

Arts, visual, 2.4, 2.10, 6.7, 6.28, 6.31 
Ashanti, 9.18 

Asia, 1.7, 1.9, 1.17, 1.23, 4.6, 4.15, 4.18, 
4.21, 4.25-4.27, 6.5, 6.31, 7.5, 8.5, 9.7, 
9.23, 9.32, 9.36, 9.37, 9.41, 9.43, 9.45, 
9.48-9.51, 9.54, 9.55, 9.59, 9.61, 9.64, 
9.65, 9.67, 9.75, 10.7, 11.3, 11.5, 11.7, 
11.8, 11.19, 11.25, 11.34, 11.44, 11.47, 
1131, 11.59, 11.66, 11.72, 11.80, 13.1, 
13.8, 13.12, 13.23, 13.27, 13.32 

Asian Americans, 3.9, 4.1, 6.19, 6.23, 
6.26, 6.30, 7.6, 8.2, 8.4, 8.5, 9.76, 10.1, 
11.8, 11.52, 11.64, 11.72, 12.2, 12.9, 
12.11, 12.13 

Athabascan Indians, 13.14 

Aunts/uncles, 9.66, 9.73, 11.29, 11.53, 
12.16, 13.18, 13.20 

Australia, 12.8 

Aviation, 6.10 

Aymara Indians, 13.4 

Aztecs, 9.9 



Babies, 10.11 

Baby-sitting, 11.42, 11.74 

Bahamas, 11.79, 13.10 

Baseball, 6.9, 6.22, 6.27, 11.15, 11.42, 

12.10,12.16 
Bats, 9.12,9.29 
Bears, 10.12 

Beauty/appearance, 9.46, 9.49, 9.54, 9.55 
Bedtime, 1.6, 10.1, 11.28, 11.37 
Bees, 11.41 
Bicycles, 11.31, 12.1 

Bilingual/multilingual books. 1.8, 1.17, 
2.5, 4.4, 4.17, 4.26, 5.1, 6.28, 9.4, 9.31, 
9.33, 9.47, 9.56, 9.66, 9.67, 11.62 

Biography, 1.16, 2.4, 4.1, 4.5, 61-6.31, 
7.11, 7.14, 11.12, 11.70, 13.16 

Biracial families, 5.13, 11.1, 11.52, 12.9 

Birds, 9.8, 9.54, 11.45, 11.46 

Birth, 10.7 

Birthdays,! 1.31, 11.53 



189 



Subject Index 



155 



Black Britor^s, 1.3, 11.27 
Board books, 10.3-10.6 
Boats/boaHng, 1.23, 9.36, 11.65, 11.72 
Bolivia, 13.4 

Books/ reading, 4.19, 13.4 

Brazil, 4.16, 9.30,11.10 

British Columbia, 13.25 

Buildings /structures, 4.15,9.45, 11.9, 11.17 

Bullfighting, 6.23 



California, 1.21, 4.8, 8.5, 11.77, 14.8 
Cambodia, 11.47 
Cameroon, 9.29, 9.63, 11.21 
Camouflage, 9.8 
Camp, 11.14 

Canada, 4.4, 13.14, 13.25 

Caribbean, 1.3, 1.5, 1.13, 1.14, 2.3, 2.5, 3.5, 
4.7, 4.12, 5.8, 6.22, 6.27, 7.9, 8.3, 8.6, 
9.22, 9.38, 9.73, 9.74, 10.2, 11.46, 
11.54, 11.55, 11.79, 13.3, 13.10, 13.30, 
14.2 

Camaval, 3.3 

Cats, 11.53, 11.58, 11.80, 12.12 

Central America, 7.8, 8.6, 9.31, 9.56, 9.60, 

9.62,9.66, 12.13, 13.6, 14.2 
Ceremonies, 3.4, 3.6, 3.10 
Chanukah, 3.8 

Cherokee Indians, 9.14, 12.14, 13.20 

Cheyenne Indians, 4.9 

Chibcha Indians, 9.16 

Chichewa text/ terms, 11.76 

China, 4.25, 6.5, 6.31, 9.7, 9.32, 9.36, 9.37, 
9.41, 9.45, 9.50, 9.51, 9.54, <).55, 9.59, 
9.61, 9.64, 9.65,9.67, 11.3, 11.72, 11.80, 
13.1 

Chinese Americans, 3.9, 6.23, 6.30, 8.4, 

9.76, 11.72, 12.11, 12.13 
Chinese Britons, 11.4 
Chinese Canadians, 12.19 
Chinese New Year, 3.9 
Chinese text/terms, 9.67 
Christmas, 2.5, 3.2, 3.5, 3.8, 11.66 
City life, 1.3, 1.11, 4.2, 4.19, 4.23, 4.25, 

5.1,7.8, 11.71, 12.12, 13.19 
Civet cats, 9.20 

Civil rights movement, 1.16, 6.6, 6.11, 6.15, 

6.20, 7.7, 7.14, 7.16, 13.9, 13.18, 14.6 
Civil War (U.S.), 7.3 
Cleanliness, 11.13 
Cochiti Indians, 4.11 
Cockroaches, 9.22 
Codes, 7.1 
Colombia, 9.16 



Colorado, 7.2 

Coming of age, 13.1, 13.17, 13.25, 13.30, 
'14.10 

Community, 1.11, 1.22, 5.1, 12.3, 13.22 
Concept books, 5.1-5.13, 10.3 
Connecticut, 13.35 

Conservation /ecology, 4.16, 9.5, 11.3, 

11.10, 11.22, 11.55 
Cookies, 11.45 
Cotton, 11.77 

Counting books, 4.6, 5.3, 5.8 

Country life, 6.4, 11.69 

Cousins, 11.52, 11.56, 12.2 

Cowboys, 2.8, 4.3, 6.18 

Coyotes, 9.13, 9.19, 9.21, 9.40 

Creation stories, 9.1, 9.9, 9.13, 9.15, 9.17, 

9.68 
Cuba, 8.3 

Cuban Americans, 8.3 



Dance, 2.1, 2.6, 11.47, 11.50 
Desert life, 4.22, 9.33 
Devils, 9.34 

Diaries/journals/letters, 4.12, 4.18, 7.4, 

9.67, 11.5, 11.14, 11.51, 13.16 
Dishes, 9.37 
Dogs, 9.31, 11.6 
::)ragons, 9.41, 9.50, 9.61 
Drought, 9.60, 11.22 
Ducks, 9.49, 11.32 



East (U.S.), 3.6, 4.1, 4.2, 7.3, 7.13, 11.16, 
11.61, 11.70, 13.18, 13.19, 13.34, 14.2 
East Africa, 9.10, 9.11, 9.17, 9.28 
Easter, 11.57 
Egypt, 2.9 

El Salvador, 9.31, 13.6 
Elephants, 9.29, 9.30 
Emotions, 11.73, 12.4 
Employment/careers, 4.1, 11.18, 11.30, 
11.35 

Endangered species, 11.3 
England, 1.3, 11.4, 11.27, 11.31, 11.32 
Eskimos — See Inuits 
Explorers, 6.12, 6.18 



Fairies, 9.72 

Family life, 1.1, 1.11, 1.15, 3.6, 4.2, 4.5, 
4.1 2, 4.17, 4.18, 4.27, 5.4, 5.6, 5.13, 6.4, 
8.2, 8.5, 9.67, 9.73, 10.4, 10.6-10.8, 
10.10, 10.11, 11.1, 11.2, 11.6, 11.8, 



100 



156 



Subject Index 



11.13, 11.15, 11.17, 11.18, 11.20, 11.23, 
11.24, 11.26, 11.28-11.30, 11.33, 
11.35-11.40, 11.43-11.45, 11.52-11.56, 
11.61, 11.62, 11.64, 11.66, 11.68, 
11.69, 11.71-11.74, 12.4, 12.6, 12.11, 
12.14--12.16, 13.7, 13.8, 13.10, 
13.14, 13.15, 13.17, 13 21, 
13.27^13.29, 13.31-13.33, 14.4, 14.8, 
14.9 
Fantasy, 13.1 

Farm life, 11.22, 11.56, 11.77 
Fathers/daughters, 5.4, 9.67, 11.35, 11.39, 

12.14, 12.19 
Fathers/sons, 1.15, 5.4, 10.4, 11.20, 11.28, 

11.35, 12.19, 13.3, 13.9, 13.19, 13.21, 

13.26 
Fire, 9.2 

Fish/fishing, 11.33, 11.49, 11.55, 11.80, 

12.15, 13.26 
Flight, 11.16, 11.61 
Floods, 11.44 
Florida, 6.4, 12.16, 13.24 
Flutes, 9.6, 9.44, 9.56, 11.24 
Folktales, 9.1-9.97, 13.31, 14.5 
Food/eating, 4.20, 5.10, 8.4, 11.4, 11.29, 

11.44, 11.45,12.19 
Football, 1.18 
Fortune-telling, 9.63 
roster families, 13.21 
Foxes, 9.4,9.26, 11.25 
French text/terms, 1.8 
Friendship, 1.11, 3.8, 5.10, 9.54, 10.3, 

10.12, 11.11, 11.31, 11.48, 11.65, 11.70, 

11.73, 11.76, 12.1, 12.10, 12.17,13.5, 

13.28, 13.33, 13.34, 13.36 



Games, 1.24,5.7, 9.60 
Geese, 11.44 
Ghana, 9.18 
Ghosts, 9.74, 14.6, 14.9 
Gifts/ wishes, 9.2, 9.6, 9.17, 9.34, 9.53, 
9.70, 11.11, 11.53, 11.57, 11.72, 13.1 
Goats, 11.67 

Gods/goddesses, 9.1, 9.2, 9.35, 9.48, 9.60 
Grandparents, 6.4, 11.1, 11.7, 11.15, 11.16, 

11.21, 11.23-11.25, 11.27, 11.33, 11.36, 

11.40, 11.54, 11.55, 11.39, 11.64, 11.72, 

12.6,12.15-12.17,13.2 
Growth/change, 9.66, 10.3, 10.7, 11.1, 

11.4, 11.7, 11.46 
Guatemala, 9.56, 12.13, 14.2 
Gulf War, 6.24 
Gymnastics, 4.23 



Haiku, 1.7 

Haiti, 13.30, 14.2 

Hats, 9.66 

Hawaii, 6.25, 13.26 

Hawaiian text/terms, 6.25 

Hearing disabilities, 5.11, 11.47 

Himalayas, 4.21 

Hindi text/terms, 4.6 

Hispanic Americans /Latinos, 1.21, 1.22, 

2.8, 4.8, 4.17, 8.3, 8.4, 10.10, 11.9, 

11.16, 11.24, 11.53, 11.54, 11.62, 11.67, 

12.7, 13.17, 13.27, 13.28, 14.8 
Historical fiction, 11.70, 12.14, 12.19, 

13.2-13.4, 13.8-13.10, 13.12, 13.16, 

13.18, 13.20, 13.23, 13.36 
History, North American, 2.6, 2.10, 3.10, 

4.7, 4.9, 6.8, 6.12-6.14, 6.18, 6.25, 

7.1-7.16, 8.3, 11.60, 11.79 
History, South American, 6.2, 7.5 
History, world, 4.15, 6.2, 6.5, 7.5, 8.5 
Holidays/celebrations, 2.5, 3.1-3.10, 

11.50, 11.57, 11.58, 11.66, 11.72, 14.4 
Homelessness, 4.2, 11.34, 12.12, 13.12, 

13.29, 14.7 
Homosexuality, 13.33 
Honesty, 9.65 
Honey, 9.10 
Hong Kong, 13.32 
Horror stories, 14.6 
Horses/riding, 4.8 
Human rights, 13.30 



Identity, 6.30, 11.27, 12.2, 12.8, 12.11, 

12.17, 13.15, 13.25, 13.28, 13.29, 13M, 

13.35, 14.4 
Illegal aliens, 8.1,8.6, 13.6 
Illness/death, 7.4, 7.9, 11.15, 11.19, 11.34, 

11.54, 11.59, 11.64, 12.6, 12.8, 13.14, 

13.34 

Imagination, 1.2, 1.8, 11.6, 11.16, 11.61, 
11.65 

Immigrants/immigration, 4 12,8.1-8.6, 
9.76, 11.8,12.2,12.8,12.9, 12.11, 
12.19, 13.6,13.32 
Imprisonment, 6.26, 7.6, 13.12, 13.21 
India, 1.23, 4.6, 9.48, 11.5, 11.7, 11.19 
Indians — See Native Americans and also 

individual tribal entries 
Insects, 11.51 

Intergpnerational stories, 3.8, 6.4, 9.11, 
10.2, 11.1, 11.7, 11.15, 11.16, 11.21, 
11.23-11.25, 11.27, 11.29, 11.33, 11.34, 
11.36, 11.40, 11.42, 11.46, 11.53-11.55, 



19i 



Subject Index 



157 



11.57-11.59, 11.64, 11.72, 12.6, 
12.15-12.17, 13.2 
Interracial friendships, 11.48, 11.57, 11.58, 
11.65, 11.73, 11.76, 11.78, 12.1, 12.10, 
13.2, 13.11, 13.17, 13.27, 13.29, 13.35, 
13.36 

Inuits, 4.4, 4.10, 4.14, 9.70, 10.8, 11.68, 13.15 
Inuktitut text/terms, 4.4 
Inupiaq text/terms, 4.10, 4.14 
Inupiaqs, 4.10, 4.14 
Inventors, 6.14 
Iroquois Indians, 6.8, 13.11 
Island life, 1.5, 1.13, 1.14, 3.5, 5.3, 5.8, 
10.2, 11.55, 13.26 



Jamaica, 4.12, 9.38, 13.3 

Japan, 1.7, 1.9, 1.17, 4.26, 9.23, 9.32, 9.43, 

9.49, 9.75, 11.25, 11.34, 11.44, 11.51, 

11.66, 13.12,13.23,13.27 
Japanese Americans, 6.26, 7.6, 11.64 
Japanese Britons, 11.32 
Japanese text/terms, 1.17, 4.26, 13.27 
Jealousy, 11.31 
Jews, 3.8, 11.58 
Judges, 6.11 



Kampuchea — See Cambodia 

Kindness, 9.62, 14.2 

Kites, 11.59 

Korea, 4.18, 13.8 

Korean Americans, 4.1, 12.9 

Kwanzaa, 3.1, 3.7 



Lakota Indians, 3.10 

Language, 12.14 

Laotian Americans, 12 2 

Utin America, 1.3, 1.5, 1.13, 2.3, 2.5, 3.3, 
4.3, 4.7, 4.12, 4.16, 5.3, 5.8, 6.2, 6.22, 6.27, 
7.8, 7.9, 8.3, 8.6, 9.2, 9.4, 9.16, 9.22, 9.30, 
9.31, 9.34, 9.38, 9.56, 9.60, 9.62, 9.66, 
9.68, 9.69, 9.74, 10.2, 11.10, 11.46, 11.54, 
12.13, 13.3, 13.4, 13.6, 13.30, 14.1, 14.2 

Latinos — See Hispanic Americans/ Latinos 

Light, 9.3,9.14,9.15, 9.70 

Lost children, 9.24, 9.52 



Maasai, 9.11,9.28 

Magic, 9.31, 9.33, 9.35, 9.36, 9.39-9.43, 
9.45, 9.48, <^A9, 9.51-9.55, 9.59, 9.76, 
11.44,12.5,12.13 



Malawi, 11.75, 11.76 
Mali, 6.29 

Mandan Indians, 7.4 

Manual labor, 11.77 

Maryland, 11.29 

Massachusetts, 3.6, 7.3, 7.13 

Mathematics, 5.10 

Mayas, 9.56, 9.60, 12.13 

Mermaids, 9.33, 9.53 

Mexican Americans, 1.21, 1.22, 4.17, 

11.24, 11.53, 11.67, 13.17, 13.27, 13.28, 

14.8 

Mexico, 6.28, 8.6, 9.9, 9.19, 9.33, 9.47, 

11.45, 13.6, 14.2 
Mice, 9.22 

Midwest (U.S.), 3.10, 4.20, 11.22, 14.9 

Migrant workers, 11.77 

Military figures, 6.24 

Minnesota, 4.20 

Mississippi, 7.16, 12.18 

Missouri, 14.9 

Moles, 9.4 

Money, 11.70 

Mongols, 6.5 

Monsters, 9.28, 9.58, 9.72, 9.74 
Mothers/daughters, 10.7, 10.8, 11.18, 

11.39, 11.43,13.5, 13.13 
Mothers /sons, 3.2, 9.57, 10.10, 11.6, 

11.36, 11.66, 11.68, 11.71,13.28 
Mountain life, 4.21 
Moving, 11.38, 11.65 

Multicultural theme, 1.10, 1.19, 1.24, 2.1, 

2.4, 3.8, 4.2, 4.15, 5.4-5.7, 5.9-5.13, 

7.5, 8.4, 9.72, 10.10, 10.11, 11.4, 11.31, 
11.41, 11.57, 11.58, 11.63, 11.73, 11.76, 
12.12, 13.27, 14.2, 14.3, 14.5, 14.7, 14.10 

Music/songs, 2.2, 2.3, 2.5, 2.7-2.9, 4.1, 
5.5, 6.3, 9.9 '*.33, 9.44, 9.56, 10.5, 
10.12, 11.63, 12.11, 13.13, 13.31, 14.5 
Mystery /detective stories, 13.17, 13.24 
Myths/legends, 1.4, 9.1-9.3, 9.6. 9.9, 
' 9.13-9.17, 921, 9.32, 9.39, 9.40, 9.44, 
9.46-9.48, 9.52, 9.56, 9.60, 9.68, 9.70 



National leaders, 1.16,6.2, 6.5, 6.6,6.15, 
6.25, 6.29, 7.7 

Native Americans (North /South 

America), 1.4, 1.6, 3.4, 3.6, 3.10, 4.4, 
4.9-4.11, 4.13, 4.14, 4.20, 4.24, 6.8, 7.1, 
7.2, 7.4, 7.9, 7.13, 7.15, 9.3, 9.6, 9.9, 
9.13-9.16, 9.21, 9.24, 9.30, 9.39, 9.40, 
9.44, 9.46, 9.47, 9.52, 9.56, 9.60, 
9.68-9.70, 10.8, 11.50, 11.68, 11.79, 



158 



Subject Index 



12.13, 12.14, 13.4, 13.10, 13.11, 13.14, 
13.15, 13.20, 13.25, 13.35, 13.36, 14.4 

Nature, 1.4, 1.6, 1.9, 1.17, 9.47,9.68, 9.70 

Navajo Indiaas, 7.1, 9.13, 9.21, 13.36 

Navajo text/terms, 9.21 

New Mexico, 4.11, 4.13, 4.24, 13.17 

New York, 4.1, 4.2, 11.16, 11.61, 11.70, 
13.18, 13.19, 13.34, 14.2 

Ngoni, 9.10 

Nicaragua, 9.66 

Nigeria, 9.1,9.5 

Night, 1.6, 10.1 

Nkundo, 9.20 

Nootka Indians, 13.25 

North Carolina, 11.56, 13.18 



Ojibway Indians, 4.20 
Ojibway text/terms, 4.20 
Oklahoma, 4.9 
Olympic Games, 6.1 
Opera, 2.9 

Orphans, 9.11, 12.16, 13.12, 13.29, 13.31 
Oxen, 9.7 



Pacific Northwest Indians, 9.15 
Parades, 11.67 
Peace/pacifism, 9.31, 14.3 
Pearls, 9.55 
Peru, 3.3, 9.2, 9.4 
Pianos, 4.1 

Plains Indians, 9.6, 9.24, 9.39, 9.40 
Plants/gardening, 9.65, 11.7 
Poetry, 1.1-1.24, 14.3-14.5, 14.7 
Politics, 13.30 

Pourquoi tales, 9.2, 9.4, 9.5, 9.7-9.12, 

9.14, 9.30, ').68 
Poverty, 9.59, 13.6, 13.7, 13.15 
Pride, 11.21 

Pueblo Indians, 4.11, 4.13, 4.24, 7.2, 7.15 

Puerto Ricans, 8.4, 12.7 

Puerto Rico, 2.5, 4.7, 6.22, 6.27, 9.22, 11.54 



Quebec, 4.4 



Rabbits, 9.26-9.28 

Race relations, 1.16, 6.6, 6.9, 6.10, 6.15, 
6.20, 6.27, 7.6, 7.7, 7.10-7.12, 7.14, 
7.16, 11.60, 12.2, 12.3, 12.17, 12.18, 
13.7, 13.9, 13.11, 1317, 13.18, 13.22, 
13.24, 13.28 



Rain, 10.9, 12.18 

Rain forests, 4.16, 11.10 

Ranch life, 4.3 

Ravens, 9.15, 9.70 

Realistic tales, 9.62-9.67 

Refugees, 13.6, 13.8, 13.32 

Rhyming text, 3.2, 5.8, 10.2-10.6, 10.10, 

10.12, 11.13, 11.50 
Rice, 4.20, 11.44 
Riddles, 9.69 

Romance/love, 9.6, 9.20, 9.22, 9.32, 9.37, 
9.38, 9.42, 9.44, 9.46-9.51, 9.55, 9.56, 
13.19 

Royalty /nobility, 9.16, 9.41, 9.43, 9.48, 
9.49, 9.51, 9.54-9.56, 9.61, 9.64, 9.65, 
11.19, 11.47, 11.80, 13.1 



Sahara 4.22 

School'iife, 1.10, 1.18, 4.12, 4.18, 8.2, 11.4, 
11.27, 11.30, 11.41, 11.43, 11.48, 12.2, 
12.7, 12.13, 13.25, 13.35, 14.9 

Sea/seashore, 9.33, 9.55, 11.2, 11.55, 
13.26, 13.32 

Seasons, 1.1, 1.4, 1.9, 10.7 

Seminole Indians, 11.50 

Sexual harassment, 13.16 

Shapes, 5.2 

Sheep, 1.12,9.19 

Sherpas, 4.21 

Short stories, 14.1-14.3, 14.5, 14.7, 14.8, 
14.10 

Siblings, 5.13, 9.43, 9.45, 9.46, 9.52, 10.6, 
11.1, 11.6, 11.37, 11.39, 11.52, 11.62, 
11.68, 11.74, 13.7, 13.14 

Sign language, 5.11 

Sioux Indians, 3.10 

Size, 10.3 

Slavery, 6.17, 7.10, 7.12, 7.16, 9.42, 11.60, 

13.2, 13.3, 13.16, 14.6 
Social life/customs, 3.1, 3.4, 3.6, 3.7, 3.9, 

4.1-4.27, 7.2, 7.4, 7.5, 7.13, 7.15, 8.4, 

8.5, 10.8, 11.36, 11.51, 11.66, 11.75, 

13.10, 13.15, 13.23, 13.36, 14.6 
South (U.S.), 1.15, 6.4, 6.7, 6.20, 7.14, 

7.16, 9.57, 11.29, 11.56, 12.16, 12.18, 

13.2, 13.9, 13.18, 13.24 
South Africa, 4.19, 6.6, 6.15, 11.35, 11.36, 

12.3, 13.7, 13.22 
South Amaic.1, 3.3, 4.3, 4.16, 6.2, 8 6, 9.2. 

9.4, 9.16, 9.30, 9.34, 9.(>8, 9.69, 11.10, 

13.4 

South Carolina, 1.15, h.7 
South Uakota, 3.10 



193 



Subject Index 



159 



Southwest (U.S.), 4.9, 4.11, 4.13, 4.17, 

4.24, 7.2, 7.15, 8.1,9.52,13.17 
Space/privacy, 11.26 
Spain, 6.23 

Spanish text/terms, 1.8, 2.5, 3.3, 4.3, 
4.17, 5.1, 6.28, 9.4, 9.19, 9.31, 9.33, 
9.47,9.56,9.66, 11.16, 11.53, 11.62, 
13.27, 13.28, 14.8 

Spiders, 9.25 

Spirituals, 2.2, 2.7 

Sports, 1.18, 4.8, 4.23, 6.1 , 6.9, 6.22, 6.23, 
6.27, 9.60, 11.15, 11.42, 12.10, 12.11, 
13.29 

Spring, 10.7 

St. Lucia, 11.55 

Stars/sky, 9.1, 9.3-9.5, 9.7, 9.9, 9.11-9.15, 

9.27, 9.32,9,35,9.41, 11.28 
Stores/markets, 10.2, 11.69 
Storms, 12.18 

Storytelling, 9.71, 11.29, 11.49, 12.15, 14.9 
Supernatural, 9.34, 9.57, 9.58, 9.72, 9.74, 
14.6 

Survival, 13.14, 13.16 
Suspense, 9.76 
Swahili, 9.8 

Swahili text/terms, 3.1, 3.7 
Swans, 9.43 



Tails, 9.58 

Taino Indians, 7.9, 11.79, 13.10 

Taiwan, 4.27, 11.59 

Tall tales, 11.49 

Teen pregnancy, 13,33 

Television, 13.5 

Tewa Indians, 4.24 

Tewa text/terms, 4.24 

Texas, 4.17, 8.1 

Theater, 11.27, 11.41 

Thieves, 9.23, 9.62,11.14 

libet, 4.21 

Tigers, 11.3 

Tlingit Indians, 9.3 

Toads, 9.21 

Tobago, 3.5 

Tools, 5.12 

Toys, 9.52, 10.6, 10.12, 11.25, 11.75, 12.13 
Track/field, 6.1 

Traditional rhymes, 1.2, 1.8, 1.12, 1.13, 

1.24 
Trains, 11.12 
Transkei, 11.36 
Travel, 11.5, 11.36,11.65 



Treasure, 13.19, 13.20 

Trees, 4.16, 11.7, 11.10, 11.34, 11.66 

Trickster tales, 9.3, 9.8, 9.15, 9.18, 9.19, 

9.21, 9.25, 9.27, 9.30, 9.36, 9.38-9.40, 

9.70, 12.5 
Trinidad, 1.14, 3.5,9.73 
Tsimshian Indians, 3.4 
Tuaregs, 4.22 
Turtles, 9.25, 9.30 



Underground Railroad, 7.12, 11.60 
Utah, 13.36 



Vehicles, 10.2,11.75, 12.18 
Venezuela, 6.2 
Vietnam, 13.32 
Vietnam War, 11.9 

Vietnamese Americans, 8.2, 8.3, 11 K 
Vietnamese Australians, 12.8 
Vietnamese text /terms, 11.8 
Virginia, 13.2 
Volcanoes, 9.31 



Walls, 4.15, 9.45, 11.9 

Wampanoag Indians, 3.6, 7.13 

Wampanoag text/terms, 3.6, 7.13 

War, 11.34, 13.4, 13.23 

Washington (state), 3.4, 12.11 

Washington, D.C., 4.5 

West (U.S.), 1.21, 2.8, 3.4, 4.8, 6.18, 7.2, 

8.5,9.15, 11.77, 12.11, 13.20, 13.36, 14.8 
West Africa, 9.27, 9.35 
West Indies — Sff* Caribbean 
Whales, 9.30 

Wildlife rescue, 11.32, 11.46 
Witches, 9.72 
Wolves, 9.23, 9.24, 9.26 
Women's rights, 6.17 
World War II, 6.26, 7.1, 7.6, 13.8 
Writers/ writing, 1.19, 1.21, 2.10, 6.16, 
6.21,6.26, 6.30,9.67, 12.14 



Yoruba, 9.1 
Yukon, 13.14 



Zaire, 9.20 

Zapotec Indians, 9.47 
Zuni Indians, 9.52 



194 



Title Index 



A to Zen: A Book of Japanese Culture, 

4.26 
Abuela, 11.16 

Abuelita's Paradise/El Paraiso de 

Abuelita, 11.54 
Against All Opposition: Black Explorers 

in America, 6.12 
Ahyoka and the Talking Leaves, 12.14 
Ai'da, 2.9 

Ajeemah and His Son, 13.3 

Akiand the Fox, 11.25 

All Jahdu Storybook, The, 12.5 

All Night, All Day: A Child's First Book 

of African- American Spirituals, 2.2 
All of You Was Singing, 9.9 
Amal and the Letter from the King, 11.19 
Amazing Grace, 11.27 
Anancy and Mr. Dry-Bone, 9.38 
Anansi Finds a Fool: An Ashanti Tale, 

9.18 

Anansi Gees Fishing, 9.25 

Ancient Cliff Dwellers of Mesa Verde, 

The, 7.2 
And in the Beginning . . . , 9.17 
Animals, The: Selected Poems, 1.17 
Anni's India Diary, 11.5 
Antonio's Rain Forest, 4.16 
Arctic Hunter, 4.10 
Arctic Memories, 4.4 
Artist and the Architect, The, 9.64 
At the Crossroads, 11.35 
Aunt Flossie's Hats (and Crab Cakes 

Later), 11.29 
Aunt Harriet's Underground Railroad in 

the Sky, 11.60 



BabyO, 10.2 

Back Home, 11.56 

Ballad of Belle Dorcas, The, 9.42 

Baseball in April, and Other Stories, 14.8 

Best Bug to Be, The, 11.41 

Big Book for Peace, The, 14.3 

Big Friend, Little Friend, 10.3 

Bigmama's, 6.4 

Birthday Basket for T(a, A, 11.53 
Black Dance in America: A History 
through Its People, 2.6 



Blacksmith and the Devil, The/El 

Herrero y el Diablo, 9.34 
Blue between the Clouds, The, 13.36 
Blue Skin of the Sea: A Novel in Stories, 

13.26 

Borreguita and the Coyote: A Tale from 

Ayutla, Mexico, 9.19 
Boy and the Samurai, The, 13.12 
Boy Becomes a Man at V\bunded Knee, 

A, 3.10 

Boy Who Found the Light, The: Eskimo 

Folktales, 9.70 
Breaking the Chains: African-American 

Slave Resistance, 7.10 
Brothers and Sisters, 5.13 
Bury My Bones but Keep My Words: 

African Tales for Retelling, 9.71 



Caribbean Carnival: Songs of the West 

Indies, 2.3 
Chain of Fire, 13.22 
Chancay and the Secret of Fire: A 

Peruvian Tale, 9.2 
Cherry Tree, 117 
Cherry Tree, The, 11.34 
Chi-hoon: A Korean Girl, 4.18 
Chicken Sunday, 11.57 
Children of Clay: A Family of Pueblo 

Potters, 4.24 
Children of Promise: African-American 

Literature and Art for Young People, 

2.10 

Chingis Khan, 6.5 

City Kids in China, 4.25 

Clambake: A Wampanoag Tradition, 3.6 

Class President, 12.7 

Clean Your Room, Harvey Moon, 11.13 

Cleversticks, 11.4 

Climbing Jacob's Ladder: Heroes of the 
Bible in African- American Spirituals, 
2.7 

Coconut Kind of Day: Island Poems, 1.14 
Colin Powell: A Man of War and Peace, 
6,24 

Coming of the Bear, The, 13.23 

Con Mi Hermano/With My Brother, 11.62 

Count Your Way through India, 4.6 



Title Index 



161 



Cousins, 12.6 
Cubans, 8.3 

Cuise of the Trouble Dolls, The, 12.13 



Daddies, 5.4 

Daddy and I . . . , 10.4 

Dan Thuy's New Life in America, 8.5 

Dancing with the Indians, 11.50 

Daniel's Dog, 11.6 

Dark Thirty, The: Southern Tales of the 

Supernatural, 14.6 
Dark Way, The: Stories from the Spirit 

World, 9.72 
Day Martin Luther King, Jr., Was Shot, 

The: A Photo History of the Civil 

Rights Movement, 7,7 
Dear One, The, 13.33 
Desert Mermaid, The/La Sirena del 

Desierto, 9.33 
Diary of Latoya Hunter, The: My First 

Year in Junior High, 4.12 
Diego, 6.28 
Do like Kyla, 11.37 

Dragon Kite of the Autumn Moon, 11 .59 
Dragonfly's Tale, 9.52 
Dream Wolf, 9.24 

Drifting Snow: An Arctic Search, 13.15 
Drylongso, 11.22 
Duke Ellington, 6.3 



Eating Fractions, 5.10 
El Chino, 6.23 

Elephant's Wrestling Match, The, 9.29 
Elijah's Angel: A Story for Chanukah 

and Christmas, 3.8 
Emperor and the Nightingale, The, 9.54 
Empty Pot, The, 9.65 
Encounter, 11.79 

Escape from Slavery: Five Journeys to 

Freedom, 7.12 
Eskimo Boy: Life ia an Inupiaq Eskimo 

Village, 4.14 
Esmeralda and the Pet Parade, 11.67 
Evan's Corner, 11.26 

Everett Anderson's Christmas Coming, 3.2 



Families: A Celebration of Diversity, 

Commitment, and Love, 5.6 
Family in Taiwan, A, 4.27 
Family Pktures/Cuadros de familia, 4.17 
Famous Asian Americans, 6.19 



Father and Son, L15 
Fear the Condor, 13.4 
Finding tlie Green Stone, 11.73 
Fire in My Hands, A: A Book of Poems, 
1.21 

First Pink Light, 11.20 
Fish and Bones, 1324 
Flute Player, The: An Apache Folktale, 
9.44 

Flying Free: America's First Black 

Aviators, 6.10 
Fortune-Tellers, The, 9.63 
Fourth Question, The: A Chinese Tale, 9.59 
Freedom Songs, 13 ? ? 
Front Porch Stories at the One-Room 

School, 14.9 
Further Tales of Uncle Remus: The 

Misadventures of Brer Rabbit, Brer 

Fox, Brer Wolf, the Doodang, and 

Other Creatures, 9.26 



Galimoto, 11.75 

Gathering of Flowers, A: Stories about 

Being Young in America, 14.10 
Girl Who Loved Caterpillars, The: A 

Twelfth-Century Tale from Japan, 

11.51 
Go Fish, 12.15 
Going Live, 13.5 
Gold Coin, The, 9.62 
Golden Bear, 10.12 
Golden Swan: An East Indian Tale of 

Love from The Mahabharata, 9.48 
Goodbye, Vietnam, 13.32 
Grandma's Baseball, 11.15 
Great Adventure of Wo Ti, The, 11.80 
Great Kapok Tree, The; A Tale of the 

Anjazon Rain Forest, 11.10 



Handtalk School, 5.11 

Hard to Be Six, 11.1 

Hiawatha: Messenger of Peace, 6.8 

Himalaya: Vanishing Cultures, 4.21 

Hoang Breaks the Lucky Teapot, 11.8 

Home: A Collection of Thirty 

Distinguished Authors and 

Illustrators of Children's Books to 

Aid the Homeless, 14.7 
Home Place, 11.17 
Honey Hunters, The. A Traditional 

African Tale, 9.10 
Hopscotch around the World, 5.7 



196 



162 



Title Index 



House That Jack Built, The, 1.13 
How Many Stars in the Sky?, 11.28 
How My Family Lives in America, 8.4 
How Raven Brought Light to People, 93 
How the Guinea Fowl Got Her Spots: A 

Swahiii Tale of Friendship, 9.8 
How the Ox Star Fell from Heaven, 9.7 
How the Stars Fell into the Sky: A 

Navajo Legend, 9.13 



I Am a Jesse White Tumbler, 4.23 

I Feel like Dancing: A Year with Jacques 

d'Amboise and the National Dance 

Institute, 2.1 
1 Make Music, 10.5 
1 Remember "121," 4.5 
Iktomi and the Buffalo Skull: A Plains 

Indian Story, 9.39 
Iktomi and the Ducks: A Plains Indian 

Story, 9.40 
lllej^dl: Sei»king the American Dream, 8.1 
In for Winter, Out for Spring, 1 .1 
In the Fyes of the Cat: Japanese Poetry 

for AH Si'asons, 1.9 
Indian Summer, 13.11 
Indian Winter, Aii, 7.4 
Invisible Thread, The, 6.26 
Irene and the Big, Fine Nickel, 11.70 
Island Baby, 11.46 
Islai\d Christmas, An, 3.5 



Jade Stone, The: A Chinese Folktale, 9.61 

Jamal's Busy Day, 11.30 

James the Vine Puller: A Brazilian 

f'olktale, 9.30 
Jenny, 11.78 
Jenny's Journey, 11.65 
Jonathan and His Mommy, 11.71 
Journey, The: Japanese Americans, 

Racism, and Renewal, 7.6 
Journey of Meng, The: A Chinese 

U'gend, 9.51 
Journey of the Sparrows, 13.6 
Jump at de Sun: The Story of Zora Neale 

Hurston, 6.21 
Just like Martin, 13.9 



Kenji and the Magic Geese, 11.44 
Keys to My Kingdom, The: A Poem in 
Three Languages, 1.8 



Koya DeLaney and the Good Girl Blues, 

12.4 
Kwanzaa, 3.7 



Las Navidades: Popular Christmas 

Songs from Latin America, 2.5 
Last Princess, The: The Story of Princess 

Ka'iulani of Hawai'i, 6.25 
Last Sununer with Maizon, 13.34 
Laura Loves Horses, 4.8 
Leaving Morning, The, 1138 
Lee Ann: The Story of a 

Vietnamese-American Girl, 8.2 
Legend of El Dorado, The: A Latin 

American Tale, 9.16 
Let Freedom Ring: A Ballad of Martin 

Luther King, Jr., 1.16 
Letter to the King, A, 9.67 
Letters from a Slave Girl: The Story of . 

Harriet Jacobs, 13.16 
Li'l Sis and Uncle Willie: A Story Based 

on the Life and Paintings of William 

H. Johnson, 6.7 
Light: Stories of a Small Kindness, 14.2 
Lightning inside You, and Other Native 

American Riddles, 9.69 
Lion Dancer: Ernie Wan's Chinese New 

Year, 3.9 
Little Band, The, 11.63 
Little Eight John, 9.57 
Lorenzo, the Naughty Parrot, 11.45 
Lost Garden, The, 6.30 
Love, David, 13.7 
Love Flute, 9.6 

Luminous Pearl, The: A Chinese 
Folktale, 9.55 



Magic Boat, The, 9.36 

Magic Dogs of the Volcanoes /Los Perros 

Migicos de los Volcanes, 9.31 
Ma'ii and Cousin Horned Toad: A 

Traditional Navajo Story, 9.21 
Maizon at Blue Hill, 13.35 
Make a Joyful Sound: Pwms for Children 

by African- Americnn Poets, 1.20 
Mama, Do You Love Me?, 10.8 
Mama, I Want to Shig, 13.13 
Maniac Magee, 1 3.29 
Mary Had a Little Lamb, 1.12 
Middle of Somewhere, The: A Story of 

South Africa, 12.3 



19? 



Title Index 



163 



Million Fish . . . Morc or Ia*ss, A, 11 49 

Min-Yo and the Moon Dragon, 9.41 

Mississippi Bridge, 12.18 

Mississippi Challenge, 7.16 

Moon Lady, The, 1172 

Moon Rope: A Peruvian Tale/Un l.azo a 

La Luna: Una Leyenda Peruana, 9.4 
Moon Was Tired of Walking on Air, 

9.68 

Mop, Moondance. and the Nagasaki 

Knights, 12/0 
"More More More," Said the Baby: 

Tlaree Love Stories, 10.11 
Morning Girl, 13.10 
Mouse Rap, The, 13.19 
Mrs. Katz and Tush, 11.58 
My Doll, Keshia, 10.6 
My First ABC, 5.9 
My First Kwanzaa Book, 3.1 
My Friend's Got This Problem, Mr. 

Candler: High School Poems, 1.10 
My Grandpa and the Sea, 11-55 



Navajo Code Talkers, 7.1 

Neighborhood Odes, 1.22 

Nelson Mandela: "No Easy Walk to 
Freedom," 6.6 

Nelson Mandela: Voice of Freedom, 6.15 

Night on Neighborhood Street, 1.11 

No Place to Be: Voices of Homeless 
Children, 4.2 

Nora's Duck, 11.32 

Northern Lullaby, 1.6 

Now Is Your Time! The African- 
American Struggle for Freedom, 7.11 



On a Hot, Hot Day, 10.10 
On Mother's Lap, 11.68 
On the Pampas, 4.3 

One More River to Cross: The Stories of 
Twelve Black Americans, 6.13 

One of Three, 11.39 

One Smilin^, Grandma: A Caribbean 
Counting Book, 5.8 

One White Sail, 5.3 

One Who Came Back, The, 13.17 

Onion Tears, 12.8 

Origin of Life on Earth, The: An African 

Creation Myth, 9.1 
Orphan Boy, The: A Maasai Story, V.l 1 
Osa's Pride, 11.21 



Outward Dreams: Black Inventors and 

Their Inventions, 6.14 
Over the Green Hills, 11.36 



Pacific Crossing, 13.27 

Paper Boats, 1.23 

People of the Breaking Day, 7. 13 

People of the Sacmd Arrows: The 

Southern Cheyenne Today, 4.9 
Perez and Martina: A Puerto Rican 

Folktale/Perez y Martina, 9.22 
Petey Moroni's Camp Runamok Diary, 

11.14 

Pianist's Debut, A: Preparing for the 

Concert Stage, 4.1 
Picture Book of Jesse Owens, A, 6.1 
Picture Book of Sim6n Bolivar, A, 6.2 
Pride of Puerto Rico: The Life of Roberto 

Clemente, 6.27 
Promise to the Sun, A: An African Story 

9.12 

Pueblo Boy: Growing Up in Two Worlds, 
4.13 

Pueblo Storyteller, 4.11 

Puerto Rico: An Unfinished Story, 4.7 



Rachel Parker, Kindergarten Show-off, 

11.48 
Rain Player, 9.60 
Rain Talk, 10.9 

Raven's Light: A Myth from the People 

of the Northwest Coast, 9.15 
Raw Head, Bloody Bones: 

African-American Tales of the 

Supernatural, 9.74 
Red Dog, Blue Ply: Football Poems, 1.18 
Red Dragonfly on My Shoulder, 1 .7 
Reflections of a Black Cowboy: Book 

Four, Mountain Men, 6.18 
Remarkable Journey of Prince Jen, The, 

13.1 

Rhinos for Lunch and Elephants for 
Supper! A Maasai Tale, 9,28 

Righteous Revenge of Artemis Bonner, 
The, 13.20 

Rising Voices: Writings of Young Native 

Americans, 14.4 
River Dragon, The, 9.50 
Roberto Clemente: Young Baseball Hero, 

6.22 

Rosa Parks: My Story, 6.20 



198 



164 



Title Index 



Koses Sing on New Snow: A Delicious 

Tale, 12.19 
Rough-Face Girl, The, 9.46 



Sachiko Means Happiness, 11.64 
Sacred Harvest, The: Ojibway Wild Rice 

Gathering, 4.20 
Sahara: Vanishing Cultures, 4.22 
San Rafael: A Central American City 

through the Ages, 7.8 
Seven Chinese Brothers, The, 9.45 
Shape Space, 5.2 
Shortcut, 11.12 
Silent Lotus, 11.47 
Sing to the Sun, 1.5 
Snow Country Prince, The, 9.43 
Sojourner Truth: Ain't I a Woman?, 6.17 
Somewhere in Africa, 4.19 
Somewhere in the Darkness, 13.21 
Song of Stars, A: An Asian Legend, 9.32 
Song of the Chirimia: A Guatemalan 

Folktale /La Musica de la Chirimia: 

Folklore Guatemalteco, 9.56 
Sorrow's Kitchen: The Life and Folklore 

of 2^ra Neale Hurston, 6.16 
Steal Away, 13.2 
Stealing Home, 12.16 
Story of Light, The, 9.14 
Street Rhymes around the World, 1.24 
Sukey and the Mermaid, 9.53 
Summer Wheels, 12.1 
Sundiata: Lion King of Mali, 6.29 



Tails of the Bronx: A Tale of the Bronx, 

12.12 
Tailypo!, 9.58 

Tainos, The: The People Who Welcomed 

Columbus, 7.9 
Taking a Walk: A Book in Two 

Languagcs/Caminando: Un Libroen 

Dos Ijenguas, 5.1 
Taking Sides, 13.28 
Tale of tlie Mandarin Ducks, The, 9.49 
Tales from the Bamboo Grove, 9.75 
Talking Walls, 4.15 

Talking with Artists: Conversations with 
Victoria Chess, Pat Cummings, Leo 
and Diane Dillon, Richard Egielski, 
Lois Ehlert, Lisa Campbell Ernst, 
Tom Feelings, Steven Kellogg, Jerry 
Pinkney, Amy Schwartz, Lane Smith, 



Chris Van Allsburg and David 

Wiesner, 2.4 
Tall Boy's Journey, 12.9 
Tar Beach, 11.61 

Taste of Salt: A Story of Modem Haiti, 

13.30 
Tean) dilates, 6.9 

Terrible EEK, The: A Japanese Tale, 9,23 
Thank You, Dr. Martin Luther King, Jnl, 
12.17 

Things I Like about Grandma, 1L23 
Thirteen Moons on Turtle's Baclc A 

Native American Year of Moons, 1.4 
This Is the Key to the Kingdom, 1.2 
This Same Sky: A Collection of Poems 

, from around the World, 1.19 
Three Wishes, 11.11 
Thurgood Marshall: A Life for Justice, 

6.11 
Tiger, 11.3 

To Ride a Butterfly: Original Stories, 
Poems, and Songs for Children by 
Fifty-two Distinguished Authors and 
Illustrators, 14.5 

Tongues of Jade, 9.76 

Tonight !s Carnaval, 3.3 

Tcx>ls,5.12 

Totem Pole, 3.4 

Toughboy and Sister, 13.14 

Tower to Heaven, 9.35 

Traveling to Tondo: A Tale of the 
Nkundo of Zairv, 9.20 

Treasure Nap, 11.24 

Trtv of Cranes, 11 .66 

Two and Too Much, 11 .74 



Uncertain Journey, The: Stories of Illegal 

Aliens in El Norte, 8.6 
Uncle Nacho's Hat/El Sombrero del Tio 

Nacho,9.66 
Undying Glory: The Story of the 

Massachusetts 54th Regiment, 7.3 



Vatsana's Lucky New Year, 12.2 
Village of Blue Stone, Tlie, 7.15 
Visit to Amy-Claire, A, 11.52 



Wall, The, 11.9 

Wave in Her Pocket, A: Stories from 
Trinidad, 9.73 



199 



Title Index 



165 



We Keep a Store, 11.69 

What Comes in Spring?, 10.7 

What Instrument Is Ihis?, 5.5 

What Kind of Baby-sitter Is This?, 11.42 

What WUl Mommy Do When I'm at 

School?, 11.43 
Wheels: A Tale of Trotter Street, 11.31 
When Africa Was Home, 11.76 
When I Am Old witli You, 11 .40 
When I Dance, 1 .3 
When I Was Little, 11.33 
When the Nightingale Sings, 13.31 
Where Angels Glide at Dawn: New 

Stories from Latin America, 14.1 
Where Does the Trail Lead?, 11.2 
While I Sleep, 10.1 

Why the Sky Is Far A.way: A Nigerian 

Folktale, 9.5 
Willow Pattern Story, The, 9.37 
Woman of Her Tribe, A, 13.25 
Woman Who Outshone the Sun, The: 

The Legend of Lucia Zenteno/La 



Mujer que Brillaba Aiin que el 
Sol: La Leyenda de Lucia Zenteno, 
9.47 

Working Cotton, 11.77 
World in 1492, The, 7.5 



Yang the Youngest and His Terrible Ear, 
12.11 

Year of Impossible Goodbyes, 13.8 

Year They Walked, The: Rosa Parks and 
the Montgomery Bus Boycott, 7.14 

You're My Nikki, 11.18 

Young Painter, A: The Life and Paintings 
of Wang Yani— China's 
Extraordinary Young Artist, 6.31 



Zebra-Riding Cowboy The: A Folk Song 

from the Old West, 2.8 
Zomo the Rabbit: A Trickster Tale from 

West Africa, 9.27 



Photo Credits 



We wish to thank the following publishers for their gracious permission to 
reprint the photographs of book covers that appear on our photo pages. 

Black Butterfly Childien's Books 

My Doll, Keshia by Eloise Greenfield; illustrated by Jan Spivey Gilchrist. 
Borzoi Books 

The Snow Country Prince by Daisaku Ikeda (translated by Geraldine McCaughrean); 
cover illustration by Brian Wildsmith used with permission of Alfred A. Knopf/ Borzoi 
Books. 

Boyds Mills Press 

Chi'Hoon by Patricia McMahon; photographs by Michael F. O'Brien. 
Paper Boats by Rabindranath lagore; illustrated by Gra>-ce Bochak. 

Carolrhoda Books 

Count Your Way through India by Jim Haskins; illustrated by Liz Brenner Dodson. All 
rights reserved. 

Chronicle Books 

Mama, Do You Love Me? by Barbara M. Joosse; cover illustration by Barbara Lavaliee 
copyright 1991. 

Clarion Books, an imprint of Houghton Mifflin Company 

Shape Space by Cathryn Falwell; cover illustration copyright © 1992 by Cathryn Falwell. 
Orphan Boy by Tololwa M. MoUel; cover illustration by Paul Morin copyright © 1991. 
Dragonfly's Tale by Kristina Rodanas; cover illustration by Kristina Rodanas copyright 
©1992. 

Aunt Flossie's Hats (and Crab Cakes Later) by Elizabeth Fitzgerald Howard; cover illustra- 
tion by James Ransome copyright © 1991. 

Tl\e Wall by Eve Bunting; ojver illustration by Ronald Himler © 1990. 
Farrar, Straus and Giroux 

Silent Lotus by leanne M. Lee; cover illustration © 1991 by Jeanne M. Lee. 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovich 

Aida retold by Leontyne Price; cover illustration by Diane Dillon used with permission. 
The Dark Way: Stories from the Spirit World retold by Virginia Hamilton; cover illustration 
by Lambert Davis used with permission. 

Himalaya: Vanishing Cultures by Jan Reynolds; cover illustration used with permission. 
In for Winier, Out for Spring by r^old Adoff; cover illustration by Jerry I'inkjiey us4'd 
with permission. 

Moon Rope: A Peruvian Tale/ Un Law a La Luna: Una Lyntda Peruana by Ix)is I-hlert 
(translated by Amy Prince); cover illustration by Lois Ehiert used wi\h pi^rmission. 

Henry Holt and Company 

Arctic Memories by Normee Ekoomiak; illustrations copyright © 1988 by Normw Fk^xv 
miak. 

lailypof retold by Jan Wahl; illustrations copyright © 1991 by Wil Clay 




Photo Credits 



167 



Tower to HeaiH*n retold by Ruby Dee; illustratioi\s copyright © 1992 by Jennifer Bent. 
The World in 1492 by Jean Fritz, Katherine Paterson, Patricia McKissack, Fredrick 
McKissack, Margaret Mahy, and Jamake Highwater; illustrations copyright © 1992 by 
Stefajio Vitale. 

Houghton Mifflin Company 

El Chino by Allen Say; illustrations © 1990 by Allen Say 
V'ee of Cranes by Allen Say; illustrations © 1991 by Allen Say 

Year of Impossible Goodbyes by Sook Nyul Choi; illustrations © 1991 by Sook Nyul Choi. 
Hyperion Books for Children 

Morning Girl by Michael Dorris; cover illustration © 1994 by Ellen Thompson. 
Alfred A. Knopf 

The Dark Thirty: Southern Tales of the Supernatural by Patricia McKissack; cover illustra- 
tion copyright 1992 by Brian Pinkney 

Diego by Jonah V^inter, translated by Amy Price; cover illustration © 1991 by Jeanette 
Winter. 

Goodbye, Vietnam by Gloria Whelan; cover illustration © 1992 by David Levinson. 
Wttat Comes in Spring? by Barbara Savadge Horton; cover illustration © 1992 by Ed 
Young. 

Lemer Publications Company 

A Family in Taiiimn by Ling Vu; cover photograph by Chen Ming-jeng. All rights re- 
served. 

Little/ Brown and Company 

Jonathan and His Mommy by Irene Smalls; illustration copyright 1992 by Michael Hays. 
Osa's Pride by Ann Grifalconi; illustration copyright 1990 by Ann Grifalconi. 

William Morrow and Company 

ALyoka and the Talking Leaves by Peter and Connie Roop; cover illustration by Yoshi 
Miyake used with permission. 

Hopscotch Around the World by Mary D. Lankford; cover illustration by Karen Miione 
used with permission. 

Lightning inside You, and Other Native American Riddles compiled by John Bicrhorst; cover 
illustration by Louise Brierley used with permission. 

''More More More/' Said the Baby: Three Love Stories by Vera B. Williams; cover illustration 
by Vera B. Williams used with permission. 

Orchard Books 

The jourmy: Japanese Americans, Racism, and Renewal by Sheila Hamanaka; cover illustra- 
tion ©1990. 

The Middle of Somewhere: A Story of South Africa by Sheila Ciordon; cover illustration V 
1990. 

A Taste of Salt: A Stonf of Modern Haiti by I'ranres Temple; cover illustration V 1V92. 
When Africa Was Home by Karen Lynji Williams; cover illustration by Moyd CiH)p(M <v 
1991. 

When I Am Old with You by Ajigeia juhjison; t over illustration by David Soman Wi). 
Philomel Books 

Father and Son by tX^ni/.([^ Lauture; cover illustration by Jonathan ditrn ust^d with 
permission. 

The Girl Who Ijowd Caterjnllurs: A Twelfth Century Tale from lupun rtdapled by jvan Merrill- 
cover illustration by Floyd Ccwper used with permission. 



168 



Photo Credits 



Norifwrn Luilaby by Nancy White Carlstrom; cover illustration by Leo and Diane Dilion 
used with [.permission. 

G. P. Putnam's Sons 

Ue Am: The Sior\/ of a Vivttunitcsc Amvncati CirJ by Tricia Brown; cover photograph by 
Ted Thai used witli piTmissl<^n 

On a Hot, Hot Day by Nicki Weiss; covtT illustration used with permission. 
The TuifWi^ by f-rancinc Jartihs; vovvr illustration by Patrick Collins used with permis- 
sion. 

Rizzoli International PuMicalions 

/ r/ Sis by William M Joiinstin, trom Sis and Uncle WiHieby Gwen Everett, used with 
permission. 

Scliulaiitic 

Chiu^ VrcsuU'ut hy lohar.na Hurwit/; cover illustration by Sheila Hamanaka copyright © 
S( holiislir liu 

/ ////ny Im (lofih h\ \Uinv McMillan; cover illustration by Bruce McMillan copyright © 
Siholastii ln< 

hh Navukili'^ rompilrd by I ulu Ut^iacre; cover illustration by Lulu Delacre copyright © 
S( h()lasti( Im 

l.uui Ihtu rt hy Kato Madeline Siovenz-Low; cover illustration by Martha Cooper copy- 
right O Srholastii Inc. 

Ma n iUhi Cous/ri Homed Tinui by Shonto Begay; cover illustration by Shonto Begay 
copyright O Scholastic Lie. 

All/ / trf^t Kumz(w Book by Deborah M. Newton Chocolate; cover illustration by Cal 
Massey copyright © Scholastic Inc. 

The Sevi'n Ch\uei>e iirothcra by Margaret Mahy; cover illustration by Jean and Mou-sien 
Tseng copyright © Scholastic Inc. 

Tilbury House Publishers 

Talktufi Wa//s by Margy Burns Knight; illustration © 1992 by Anne Sibley O'Brien. 




Editor 



Rudme Sims Bishop is professor of education at 
Hie Ohii) Stale University, where she teaches 
coursi^s in childri^n's literature. A graduate of 
West Chester University of Pejinsylvania, Bishop 
als<i holds an M. J ,d. from the University of Penn- 
sylvania and an Md.SJ. from Wayne State Univer- 
sity in Detroit, where she was a participant in the 
Reading Miscue Research Project. She taught ele- 
menti-ry school iji Pennsylvania for a number of 
years, and for several years was on the faculty of 
the University of Massachusetts, where she di- 
rected a graduate-level teacher education pro- 
gram in reading, writing, and literature. Bishop 
has held a number of leadership positions in the 
National Council of Teachers of English, and is 
also an active member of the International Read- 
ing Association and the National Conference on Research in English. As a 
member of the American Library Association, she served on the 1992 Newbery 
Award Committee. Bishop has been a speaker at numerous conferences nation- 
ally and internaiionaliy, and is the author of many articles and chapters in 
professional journals and books. She is the author of Sltadow and Subtiiauce: 
AfrO'Anwrican Experience in Contemporary Children's Fiction and Presenting Wal- 
ter llvan Myers, and is at w^ork on a book on the evolution of African American 
children's literature. 






Kaleidoscope: 
A Multicultural Booklist for 
Grades K-^ 

A new addition to the NCTE BibUography Series, i^^^^ope 
celebrates cultural diversity with annototions of nearly 400 books 
published between 1990 and 1991 The booklist, featuring photographs 
of the covers of many of the annotated books, focuses on people of color, 
especially African Americans, Asian Americans, Hispanic Amerl- 
cans/Utinos, and Native Americans. Some books set in counbies outside 
the United States are also included. Whenever possible, annotations identity 
the particular country, nationality, or ethnic group of the characters or settmg. 
To hiRhlight both commonaliries and differences between cultmes, chapters 

OTxwks by genre or theme rather than by cultural group. Nonhchon is 
jd into Arts," "Ceremonies and Celebrations/' ''People to Know 
and Places to Go," Concepts and Other Useful Information, 'History: The 
Way We Were," and "Immigrants and Immigratton: Conung to America. 
Fiction entries are divided primarily by age level, with broks for the very 
voune, picture books, fiction for middle readers, and novels mr older rcadere. 
Tortry and Verse," "Biography: Individuals Who Made a Difference, and 
Tolktoles, Myths, and Legaids--OId and New" round out the categon^. 
A detaUed subject index, listing bookspertainine to various M«oCTiltural 
groups, will prove invaluable to teachers and librarians in developmg 
teaching units or in locating specific books. Also included are a 
list of resources pertaining to multicultural literature, a listing 
of award-winning books featured in Kaleidoscope, a directory 
of publishers, and indexes of authors, illustrators, and titles. 



KAl«ldlotcop« 



ERIC 



