DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 385 412 RC 020 165 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
SPONS AGENCY 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
CONTRACT 
NOTE 
PLB TYPE 



Panton, Karen L. M. *, And Others 

Evaluation of the Indian Education Technical 

Assistance Centers. 

Policy Studies Associates, Inc., Washington, DC. 

Department of Education, Washington, DC. Office of 

the Under Secretary. 

ED/OUS-95-8 

95 

LC89089001 
lAOp. 

Reports - Evaluative/Feasibility (142) 



EDRS PRICE MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS Agency Cooperation; ^Agency Role; Alaska Natives; 

^American Indian Education; *Coordinat ion; 

Educational Policy; Elementary Secondary Education; 

Federal Indian Relationship; ^Federal Programs; Needs 

Assessment; ''Program Effectiveness; Program 

Evaluation; Technical Assistance 
IDENTIFIERS '''Office of Indian Education; ^Technical Assistance 

Centers 



ABSTRACT 

Six Indian Education Technical Assistance Centers 
(IETACs) provide technical assistance to American Indian and Alaska 
Native education programs funded by Title V grants from the Office of 
Indian Education (CIE) . This study examines the services provided by 
the IETACs and identifies factors that influence their effectiveness. 
Data were collected through: a review of reports, training materials, 
and other IETAC-related documents; a literature review; telephone 
interview; site visits; interviews with OIE personnel; and a mail 
survey of more than 700 IETAC service recipients and potential 
service recipients around the country. Most service recipients of the 
IETACs find them accessible, responsive, and capable of meeting 
stated needs and requests. However, while the IETACs are meeting the 
expectations associated with their role, their role is rather limited 
in scope. Findings of this, evaluation indicate that (1) there is 
little or no opportunity for sustained, long term assistance; (2) the 
help that is requested, and therefore provided, is often geared 
toward addressing managerial and administrative concerns such as 
completing the grant application rather than the substance of 
educational programs; (3) the IETACs often assist individuals and 
projects in isolation from regular school programs; and (4) the 
current relationship between OIE and the IETACs does not include the 
mutual exchange of ideas and information that could lead to 
improvements in American Indian education. Sixteen approaches for 
improving U.S. Department of Education (ED) sponsored technical 
assistance are offered in the categories of roles and 
responsibilities, internal operations, relationships of IETACs with 
ED and OIE, and reorganization of technical assistance. Many of the 
suggestions are also relevant to ED~sponsored technical assistance 
providers for programs that serve other groups of students, including 
limited-English proficient and migrant students. (TD) 



/ 




Policy Studies Associates, Inc. 

I7IS CONNECTICUT AVENUE, N. W. . SUITE 400 • WASHINGTON, D. C. JOOQ9 • (202)939-9780 



EVALUATION OF THE 
INDIAN EDUCATION TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE CENTERS 



Karen L. M. Panton 
Kelly W, Colopy 
Beveily A. Pringle 



1995 



This report was prepared pursuant to Contract Number LC 89089001, Task Order 
EA930620. U.S. Department of Education (Nancy Loy. Project Officer) 

The views expressed in this report, developed under coniract to the U.S. Department 
of Education, do not necessariK refleci the position or policy of the Department, and 
no official endorsement by the Department should be inferred 



ERIC 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



We would like to express our sincere appreciation to all of the survey respondents who agreed 
to participate in this study at a very busy time during the school year. Without their cooperation, this 
report could not have been written. 

We would like to thank the following directors of the Indian Education Technical Assistance 
Centers (IETACs) for allowing us to interview their staff, and for providing us with valuable 
information and materials that enabled us to conduct this study: 

Gwen Shunatona IETAC I 

Phil Baird IETAC II 

Livia Millard IETAC III 

Shirley Hendricks IETAC IV 

Mary Ann Brittain IETAC V 

Ramona Suetopka-Duerre IETAC VI 

We also wish to thank staff at the U.S. Lepartment of Education-particularly Nancy Loy. 
Valena Plisko, Liz Whitehorn, John Wade, and Lisa Gorove for contributing to the study design and 
activities, and for their time and attention to reviewing and commenting on our preliminary findings 
and final report. 

And finally, we would like to thank our colleagues at Policy Studies Associates. As members 
of the study team. Janie Funkhouser, Robert Hallock, and Katrina Laguarda conducted site visits to 
the centers and conducted telephone interviews with representatives of SEAs and Indian education 
organizations. Brenda Turnbull served as advisor and primary reviewer for the final product. Leila 
Fiester. Justin Fugle, Angela Williams, and Peter Youngs helped us to increase our survey response 
rate by contacting numerous respondents and completing the surveys over the telephone. Christine 
McRae assisted with the survey data analysis and developed many of the tables in this report. Nancy 
Thornes and Benjamin Lagueruela contributed a substantial amount of time to the production of tliis 
document. 



° 4 
ERIC 1 



CONTENTS 



Page 



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY i 

I. INTRODUCTION 1 

Background and Purpose of the IETACs 2 

Evaluation Goals and Design 4 

Sample Selection and Survey Administration 5 

II. CONTEXT AND OPERATIONS OF IETAC ASSISTANCE 9 

Characteristics of Service Recipients and Potential Service Recipients 9 

Local and Regional Needs 14 

Services and Operations 21 

Outreach and Awareness Raising 22 

Needs Assessment 24 

Services Provided 25 

Methods for Providing Services 33 

IETAC Staff 38 

Staff Strengths 39 

IETACs and OIE 40 

Roles and Responsibilities 40 

Nature and Frequency of Communication 41 

Coordination 42 

The Use of NonlETAC Services by Title V Grantees and Potential Grantees . . 43 

Impetus to Coordinate with Others 45 

Coordination Activities 48 

Impediments to Coordination 51 

III. EFFECTS OF IETAC SERVICES 54 

Service Quality 54 

Responsiveness 56 

Usefulness 56 

Reported Outcomes 58 

Survey Respondents' Assessments of IETAC Effectiveness 58 

Perceptions of IETAC Effectiveness among Other Organizations 59 

IETAC Perceptions of Their Own Effectiveness 60 

Strengths and Limitations of the IETAC Role 62 

What Influences IETAC Effectiveness 62 

Factors and Conditions that Facilitate Effectiveness 63 

Factors and Conditions that Impede Effectiveness 64 



ERIC 

EJM.HflMsiHIJilU 



CONTENTS (Continued) 



Page 

IV. APPROACHES FOR IMPROVING ED-SPONSORED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 66 

Roles and Responsibilities 66 

Internal Operations 72 

Relationships with ED and OIE 74 

Reorganization of Technical Assistance 77 

REFERENCES 79 

TECHNICAL APPENDIX A 1 

EXHIBIT I: Organizations to Which Title V Grantees Would Most Likely Turn for 

Assistance in Key Issue Areas A-4 

APPENDIX A: Indian Education Technical Assistance Center (IETAC) Regions A-6 

APPENDIX B: Selected Characteristics of IETAC Regions, FY 1993 A-7 

APPENDIX C: Number of Assistance Providers Within Each IETAC Region by Federal 

Technical Assistance Program \-8 

APPENDIX D: Cover letter to survey respondents 

APPENDIX E: Survey of Indian Education Technical Assistance Center (IETAC) 
Service Recipients and Potential Service Respondents 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 



I) 

9 

ERIC 



LIST OF TABLES 



Table 1 
Table 2 
Table 3 
Table 4 

Table 5 
Table 6 
Table 7 

Table 8 

Table 9 
Table 10 
Table 1 1 
Table 12 
Table 13 
Table 14 

Table 15 



Page 

Demographic Characteristics of Survey Respondents 10 

Programmatic Characteristics of the Grant Recipients 12 

Additional Responsibilities of Title V Directors 13 

Assistance Provided to IETAC Service Recipients through Materials. Regional 

Workshops, or On-site Visits, by Selected Topics 16 

Topics on Which Other Providers Have Provided Technical Assistance .... 17 

Manner ir. Which Survey Respondents First Learned about the IETACs .... 23 

Manner in Which Survey Respondents First Learned 

about Specific IETAC Services -4 

IETAC Service Recipients' Requests for and Receipt of Materials/Information 

from IETAC Office 27 

IETAC Service Recipients' Participation in Regional Workshops 28 

IETAC Service Recipients' Participation in On-Site Visits 29 

Technology Available to Survey Respondents 36 

How Technology Is Used to Reach Service Recipients 37 

IETAC Attributes Valued by Service Recipients 55 

IETAC Technical Assistance Compared with Assistance 

from Other Providers 58 

Programmatic Chances Resultine from IETAC Assistance 59 



a 

ERIC 



EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 



Under the provisions of the Indian Education Act of 1988. six Indian Education Technical 
Assistance Centers (IETACs) provide technical assistance to school districts. Bureau of Indian Affairs 
schools. Indian tribes, Indian organizations, Indian parent committees, and all local projects and 
initiatives that receive Title V grants from the Office of Indian Education (OIE"» to promote 
educational achievement among American Indian and Alaska Native youth and adults 1 . 

This study examines and assesses the services provided by the IETACs and identifies factors 
that influence their effectiveness. Data were collected through: (Da review of reports, training 
materials, and other IETAC-related documents; (2) a review of current literature on the condition of 
Indian education and on technical assistance in education; (3) telephone interviews with 
representatives from national and state Indian education organizations and state education agencies 
i.SEAs); (4) site visits to each of the IETACs. which included observations of IETAC-sponsored 
workshops and on-site visits with Title V grantees; (5) interviews with Office of Indian Education 
personnel; and (6) a mail survey of more than 700 IETAC service recipients and potential service 
recipients around the country. 

This evaluation was conducted between May 1993 and July 1994. During this period, the 
IETACs" three-year contracts expired; their operations continued, with some modifications, under 
interim funding arrangements; and the reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
Act iESEA) moved into its final stages, bringing the prospect of significant changes in the structure of 
federal technical assistance. 

When the IETACs' contracts expired in November 1993. they were extended, first for six 
months, and then for three additional months (until May 1994) in anticipation of the changes 
expected with the reauthorization of ESP. A. When it became apparent that reauthorization would not 
occur before the extended contracts expired, a Request for Proposals (RFP) was issued and 
organizations were invited to compete for a new nine-month interim contract (September 1. 
1 ^94-May 3 1 . 1995). As a result of the timing of these events, some of the observations that are 
made in this report do not reflect the contractual changes that have already modified some roles and 
responsibilities of the IETACs. For example, under the new interim contract: < 1 1 four additional 
days are provided for IETAC staff development; (2) the centers are required to integrate Goals 2000 



; In this report, the term "American I; dians will generally refer to both American Indians and 
Alaska Natives 



into workshop themes; (3) application-related assistance is de-emphasized; and (4) the importance of 
staff development for LEAs is underscored. 



Although new developments have changed and will change the structure and operation of the 
IETACs from that which was studied during the past year, the findings of this evaluation suggest 
ways of improving federal technical assistance, rega-dless of its configuration or focus. For example, 
most IETAC service recipients find the IETACs accessible, responsive, and capable of meeting stated 
needs and requests. However, while the IETACs are typically good at what they do. their role is 
rather limited in scope. We found that: (1) there is little or no opportunity for sustained, long-term 
assistance; (2) the help that is requested--and therefore provided-is often geared toward addressing 
manag rial and administrative concerns (e.g., completing the grant application) rather than the 
substance of educational programs; and (3) the IETACs often assist individuals and projects in 
isolation from regular school programs. For these and other reasons expanded on in this report, the 
IETACs have had limited effects on the overall quality of Title V projects and little opportunity to 
influence the kinds of changes that are likely to have a lasting, positive effect on American Indian 
students' educational services and academic achievement. 

Oui- description and analysis of the strengths and weaknesses associated with the design and 
operation of the IETACs under their 1991-93 contract have enabled us to identify several important 
features of effective technical assistance for educators serving American Indian students. The policy 
options presented here can be broadly applied to any newly authorized configuration of technical 
assistance sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education (ED) 



IETAC Operations 

The IETACs are well known among those involved in Indian education. They serve schools 
and institutions that h ive received, or are eligible to receive. Title V Indian Education Act formula 
grants or discretionary grants. Title V projects provide services to American Indian students at all 
education levels-preschool, elementary, secondary, postsecondary. and adult education. Typically, 
noncomperitive formula grants are awarded to public schools, while competitive discretionary grants 
are awarded to Indian-controlled schools, institutions of higher education. Indian tribes, and other 
Indian organizations. The IETACs endeavor to meet the many federal program requirements and 
education-related needs that exist among grantees and potential grantees within the American Indian 
education communities. 



ERIC 



3 



Topics of Assistance 



Title V grantees and potential grantees frequently need help in understanding and completing 
the federal grant application forms that they must submit. The existence of every Title V project is 
dependent on a grantee's ability to master the application form and satisfy all federal paperwork 
requirements related to the management and implementation of the project. It is therefore not 
surprising that most of the lETACs' resources are directed towards helping formula grantees satisfy 
needs that are related to completing grant applications and managing programs. For example, in 
order to complete a grant application, applicants must be able to describe their strategies for 
conducting program evaluations and needs assessments-two topics that the IETACs are regularly 
called upon to address. In addition, grantees and potential grantees often have questions and concerns 
about Title V program management and implementation. (Discretionary grantees are not eligible for 
assistance in developing their grant applications, but they can and do seek other types of assistance.) 

The IETACs also help grantees to develop strategies for increasing parent involvement and 
training parents to make decisions that will affect the nature and quality of the educational services 
their children receive in schools. This is particularly important to formula grantees, who must 
demonstrate that Indian parents are actively involved in project activities. 

Service recipients also need training, materials, and information that will help them to 
enhance their educational services to American Indian students. These include; 1 1) staff training in 
new instructional techniques; (2) information and materials on strategies to address problems that 
affect large numbers of American Indian children and adolescents (e.g.. high dropout rates, low self- 
esteem, and substance abuse); (3) details on education resources, services, and programs of particular 
interest to American Indians (e.g.. postsecondary scholarships and grants for American Indian 
students, dates and location of special conferences and workshops); and (4) culturally relevant 
information and curricular materials (e.g.. tribe-specific teaching materials that address language and 
culture, research articles that promote ->n understanding of the dynamics and impact of culture in 
education). Although the IETACs offer assistance in each of these areas, many center staff indicated 
that they would like to increase the quantity of time and resources directed at improving the content 
and substanee--versus the management and administration--ot' Title V projects. 



Service Delivery 

F-"or the most part, the IETACs deliver their services via workshops, on-site visits, telephone, 
fax. and the mail. Workshop locations are carefully selected so that grantees and potential grantees in 

lii 



ERIC 



urban as well as more remote, rural locations can attend with as little difficulty as possible. 
Workshops often cover more than one topic (e.g., conducting a needs assessment and tutoring 
strategies), and an opportunity for attendees to ask project-specific questions is usually provided 
during the one- to two-day event. Individualized on-site visits are scheduled when a request is made 
for mi re intense and specific assistance (e.g., a request from a school district that has never before 
received a formula grant to operate a Title V project and has many detailed questions and concerns). 
Requests that do not require a workshop or an on-site visit are handled over the telephone, by mail, 
or by fax (e.g.. requests for copies of a document such as parent committee by-laws and curriculum 
guides or inquiries concerning a single question in the grant application). 

Although the majority of grantees and potential grantees have access to technologies such as 
televisions with video players, telephones with conference rail capabilities, and computers with 
modems, relatively few report that the IETACs have communicated with them via these technologies. 



Staffing 

Each IETAC has between three and seven full-time equivalent staff members. In addition, 
each center maintains a pool of consultants who conduct workshops when there is a need for their 
expertise in a particular subject area. Most IETAC staff have completed undergraduate or graduate 
work in education or related fields such as counseling and psychology. In addition. IETAC staff and 
consultants are skilled at facilitating communication between school districts and the federal 
government, between schools and American. Indian communities, and between American Indian 
organizations and Title V grantees. They are particularly adept at demystifying federal government 
and Title V program requirements, as well as parent committee rights and responsibilities. 

IETAC staff members-nearly all of whom are American Indian-report that their personal 
knowledge of American Indian cultures and languages is important to their success in working with 
Indian tribes and schools, and parent committees. Their knowledge of and appreciation for American 
Indian history, art. traditions, and spiritual life are particularly appealing to educators and parents in 
very traditional American Indian communities. IETAC staff believe that these shared understandings 
enhance their ability to communicate with those whom they serve. 



IV 



li 



a 

ERIC 



Limitations of the IETAC Role 



IETAC staff and representatives of the Indian organizations and SEAs whom we interviewed 
all expressed various levels of dissatisfaction with the current roles and responsibilities of the 
IETACs. Specifically, they are concerned that time and resources spent in satisfying needs for 
assistance in understanding and complying with federal program requirements reduce the time and 
resources available for the IETACs to address other needs that they believe have a more direct 
bearing on the experiences and ultimate achievement of American Indian students. Among those 
identified were needs for: (1) more assistance with the content and substance (e.g.. curriculum and 
instruction) of Indian education programs: (2) increased integration into the mainstream operations of 
schools and districts of teaching practices and materials that are effective with Indian students; (3) 
more research on issues of relevance to the broader American Indian education community: and (4) 
collaborations and partnerships among those inside and outside of schools for the purpose of 
providing more comprehensive services to address the multifaceted but interrelated social, emotional, 
physical, and academic needs of American Indian students. 

Many IETAC staff members also expressed dissatisfaction with certain contractual regulations 
that they b lieve restrict the centers' initiative and ability to improve Title V projects in certain 
districts. L nder the current legislation (Indian Education Act of 1988. section 5321 [e] [B]). IETAC 
services are provided "on request" only. IETAC staff point out that when conflict exists among 
individuals involved in a Title V project (e.g., parents, teachers. Title V director, school 
administrators), they frequently choose not to invite the IETAC in to provide assistance, even though 
help is desperately needed and some individuals (e.g.. a parent group) do want the center's help. In 
addition. IETAC staff note that because the Indian Education Act requires that they provide services 
only on request, they are unable to take the initiative to go beyond the specific request that has been 
made to address other noticeable problems in a project, or to coax reluctant project administrators to 
strive for excellence and even greater improvements in their project (rather than just the minimum 
standard of acceptability that will ensure that they receive funds). Thus, some IETAC staff believe 
they are hindered in their ability to bring about real improvements in some areas. 



IETAC Relationships with Other Technical Assistance Providers and OIE 

The number of other federally funded technical assistance centers with which each IETAC 
could conceivably coordinate is large, ranging from 12 in IETAC region VI to 46 in ITT AC region I 
Add SEAs. Indian organizations, and colleges and unr.rsities. and the potential for coordination is 
great. The IETACs coordinate because they themselves need information, because others invite them 



to coordinate, and because they encounter problems whose solutions are attainable through pooled 
resources. The centers exchange newsletters, brochures, selected materials, and referrals for service 
or information with American Indian organizations, SEAs, and some federally funded technical 
assistance providers. Some lETACs have also mad« presentations and conducted workshops at 
gatherings of these organizations, invited other technical assistance providers to assist them with 
IETAC staff development, and cosponsored summer institutes for teachers with SEAs, universities, 
and technical assistance providers. 

The centers' coordination efforts focus on issues that are of clear concern to American Indians 
and Alaska Natives, and, as a result, most of their coordination efforts with federally funded technical 
assistance providers have been with the regional educational laboratories. Title VII Multifunctional 
Resource Centers, and the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Regional Centers. For example, the 
regional educational laboratories have sought the expertise of IETAC staff members as they developed 
plans and materials for their American Indian education initiative. The other two technical assistance 
programs regularly address issues (e.g., bilingual education, substance abuse prevention) that are of 
interest in the American Indian education community. 

Although there is overlap among the students who are eligible for Title V and Chapter 1 
services in some schools, there is little coordination between these two programs. There is a 
perception among some local educators with whom we spoke that because the two programs have 
distinct legislative histories, funding streams, and program requirements, they are and should remain 
disassociated. Others contend that: (1) coordination between the two programs might result in the 
culturally related needs of the typically smaller Indian population being overlooked: and (2) 
coordination might result in Indian education being equated with the compensatory or remedial 
education often provided under Chapter 1 . 

The IETACs are administered by OIE's Division of Program Support and the Title V grants 
are administered by OIE's Division of Program Operations. The IETAC directors and their 
Contracting Officer's Technical Representative (COTR) communicate with each other by telephone on 
a weekly basis, usually concerning IETAC reports, clarification of federal policy, and other day-to- 
day details .if IETAC contract work. The IETACs are required to tell OIE in monthly, annual, and 
•jnd-.if-contract-period reports what they are doing and what they have accomplished. These 
extreme!} detailed reports, which are submitted to the COTR, list all center work by task and account 
tor all workshops, on-site visits, telephone calls, and dissemination activities. In addition, the centers 
are required to submit topics of the evaluations that all workshop participants must compleie at the 
end of each session, and they are expected to use this information in self-evaluations of workshop 
effectiveness. Several IETAC directors indicated, however, that although they are proud of the 

vi 



ERIC 



x o 



excellent ratings they typically receive, comments and suggestions for improvement are rarely 
offered, so they have little to guide them in making changes and improvements. The IETACs are not 
required to track the effects of their services in terms of project-related changes made by grantees, or 
the quality and characteristics of the educational services that their service recipients provide to 
students. 

The current relationship between OIE and the IETACs does not include the mutual exchange 
of ideas and information that could lead to the development of programmatic changes and 
improvements-within the IETACs, OIE, or Title V projects--and that might ultimately improve 
educational services to American Indian siulents. Although the IETACs' primary role is assist 
Title / projects, there is little communication between OIE program staff and the IETACs--or 
between the Division of Grants Management and the Division of Program Operations staff-on issues 
related to the improvement of Title V projects or the IETACs. OIE's program operations staff tend 
to view the importance of the IETACs in a fairly limited way: the centers are valuable in that they 
help to improve the quality of the grant applications submitted. 

In spite of this narrow perspective on the IETACs' role. OIE program staff rarely 
communicate their expectations for completion of Title V paperwork to IETAC staff. In fact. IETAC 
staff report that occasionally they learn of new developments in the Title V program from the grantees 
rather than OIE. They added that this not only embarrasses them but also undermines their credibility 
with clients. Center staff also provided examples of questions and requests for materials (e.g., 
examples of good multiyear grant applications) and information (e.g.. on the legality of a particular 
use of Title V funds in one district) that had gone unanswered by OIE for long periods of time. 

Although they address similar needs, produce materials that address similar topics, and face 
similar problems within each of their regions. inter-IETAC coordination is somewhat limited due to 
time and budget constraints. Inter-IETAC communication occurs primarily via telephone and is 
restricted to center directors who typically discuss day-to-day details of IETAC contract work. 
During previous contract periods. OIE required and sponsored inter-IETAC teams to meet twite a 
year to address special issues; IETAC staff described these meetings as effective vehicles for cross- 
center fertilization of ideas. However, during the most recent contract period. OIE reduced the 
number of these events because of budget limitations. 



vii 



ERIC 



Quality and Effects of IETAC Services 



According to the majority of IETAC service recipients who responded to our survey, the 
lETACs are accessible, responsive, and skilled at locating and developing useful materials and other 
resources. This finding supports the claim of IETAC staff that all requests for services are answered 
--whether through an on-site visit, a telephone consultation, a written explanation, or some other 
means. Of those who reported that an IETAC helped them to change some aspect of their program. 
54 percent changed their needs assessment procedures. 52 percent changed their program design, and 
46 percent changed their evaluation design. Representatives of several national Indian education 
organizations and SEAs-all of whom are familiar with IETAC services-also report a positive view of 
IETAC staff and their work. They specified that IETAC staff are well informed and generally well 
regarded, accessible, and pleasant to work with. 

Most service recipients who completed the survey and most of the representatives of state 
education departments and Indian education organizations with whom we spoke agree that the lETACs 
do what they do well. A key to improving the effectiveness of this high-quality technical assistance 
for Indian education, according to most of our interviewees, is to broaden the nature and scope of the 
lETACs' mandate to assist. Some specific recommendations for improving the lETACs' effectiveness 
include (1) permit and encourage the lETACs to address systemic changes in locai schools and 
districts, not just Indian education in isolation; (2) reverse the rules and regulations that currently 
prohibit the lETACs from addressing some of the most pressing needs that face American Indian 
communities (e.g., awareness of alcohol abuse, community wellness issues); (3) allow for higher- 
intensity assistance than is currently provided; and (4) require wider dissemination of information 
about successful Indian education programs. Although the lETACs appear to be well positioned to 
serve as a catalyst for broad-based educational change and improvement, they have not yet taken on 
this role, in part because they and others have viewed this more complex and integrative function as 
falling outside the lETACs' contract mandate. 

These perceptions of IETAC effectiveness square with the lETACs' own reports about their 
woik. Their primary sources of feedback-personal interactions and workshop evaluation forms- 
suggest that their services are valued. Some IETAC staff pointed to the progress that some parent 
committees in their region have made and to improvements in the quality of the instructional materials 
now available in some districts. However. IETAC staff pointed out that they are not in a position to 
isolate and identify the effects of their work on grantees or on the students whom they serve. They 
explain that; ( 1 ) they have very limited contact with grantees u. a single workshop or on-site 
visit, with little or no follow-up); (2) Title V programs are supplementary by design and are often not 
connected to the regular school program in most districts; and (3) there are many other intervening 



viii 



programmatic variables that influence American Indian students. Although OIE program staff and 
IETAC staff members have a general sense that the IETACs have contributed to an improvement in 
the quality of Title V grant applications in recent years, many concur with the IETAC director who 
noted that "good applications do not necessarily mean good programs. " 

Approaches for Improving ED-Sponsored Technical Assistance 

This study suggests that, in general, the IETACs are meeting the expectations associated with 
their assigned role; however this role is limited in scope. Policymakers may want to consider 
modifying thL role in order to increase technical assistance providers' ability to contribute to more 
meaningful educational changes that w.ll positively affect American Indian students. Several 
approaches for ED to consider that are likely to :.ccomplish this goal are outlined below and expanded 
on in Chapter 4. In many cases, the new directions suggested are also relevant and potentially useful 
to Eb-sponsored technical assistance providers who offer assistance to programs that target other 
groups of students (e.g.. limited English proficient, migrant). 

Roles and Responsibilities 

1 Reassign grant application-related responsibilities. This would allow technical assistance 

providers to concentrate their resources on helping service recipients to meet the instructional, 
curricular. and developmental needs of their students. ED could accomplish this in one of 
two ways: ( 1) assign one or more centers to specialize in grant application assistance and 
respond to all requests for this type of assistance, thereby allowing other ce; :crs to devote 
their time and resources to responding to the other needs of grantees located in more than one 
region; or (2) pass this responsibility on to OIE and increase its staff size so that it can 
adequately respond to this need. 

1. Direct technical assistance providers to offer more intensive assistance in improving the 
content of Title V programs (e.g., curriculum and informational materials, instructional 
approaches, and counseling practices). The problems of poor student achievement, alienated 
parents, inadequately prepared school staff, and resource-starved school districts can only he 
effectively addressed through sustained, long-term assistance. The IETACs' limited resources 
are thinly stretched, and the current pattern of brief, one-time-only assistance events that most 
IETAC service recipients receive is unlikely to he effective in improving education programs 
tor American Indian students. 



ix 



Direct technical assistance providers to help promote in the mainstream operations of 
schools and districts, the integration and institutionalization of teaching practices and 
materials that are effective with American Indian students. Several IETAC staff members 
reported that American Indian students often spend time in classrooms that lack culturally 
appropriate curriculum, and that they often interact with teachers and fellow students who are 
hostile or insensitive and who display a genera! lack of cross-cultural understanding. 
Technical assistance providers could help to address these problems by promoting a more 
integrated approach to Indian education. They could help Title V grantee.; to integrate their 
projects with general school programs 2nd the wider school environment, and they could 
contribute to schoolwide and districtwide improvement initiatives by helping teachers and 
administrators develop new programs and structures iha 1 , address the needs of their American 
Indian students. 



Authorize technical assistance providers to be more proactive in their relationships with Title 
V grantees, and require that grantees seek IETAC assistance when particular needs or areas 
of weakness in their project have been identified by ED or the IETACs Because of their 
close contact with grantees, the IETACs are often the first to become aware of which local 
projects are particularly weak, which are blatantly out of compliance, and which have internal 
conflicts that have prevented them from requesting assistance. By authorizing < 1) the IETACs 
to initiate contact with school districts and Title V project personnel, or (2) requiring tlnu 
grantees seek IETAC service;., when needed (e.g.. by making it a condition for future funding) 
policymakers could enable the IETACs to positively affect the weakest projects in their 
region. The second option, while taking a stronger stand on the provision of assistance, has 
the possible disadvantage of placing the IETACs in a new and perhaps unwelcome role-that 
of a mandated intervention rather than an invited helper. 

Organize technical assistance to develop the capacit}' of communities to addmss some of 
their own local needs. Technical assistance providers could assist Indian educators within 
SEAs. LEAs. tribal colleges, anu other local institutions to addiess local parent committee 
training needs. The IETACs could also provide training m conflict mediation and team 
building whem necessary. Not only would this allow the IETACs to devote more of their 
time to other areas of need, but these local personnel would be in a better position to offer the 
kind of long-term follow-up that is necessary for real change and improvements to occur. 

Organize technical assistance to encourage and facilitate the building of partnerships and 
networks among Title V projects and organizations in local communities (e.g., tribes, 
businesses, health care and social service providers) for the purpose of sharing information, 
and locating and directing additional resources to meeting the multiple needs of American 
Indian students. Based on information provided by IETAC staff members and representatives 
of Indian education organizations and SEAs. and on comments written in the surveys by 
several Title V directors, it is apparent that many Indian education projects need additional 
resources to more effectively meet the needs of their students. Through the establishment of 
partnerships and linkages between grantees and local organizations, some of these needs can 
be addressed. Technical assistance providers should work to increase awareness of locally 



available resources and offer guidance on how these resources can be effectively integrated 
into service recipients' programs in order to increase their impact. 

7 Fund each technical assistance provider to develop and carry out research projects that 
address questions that are important in their own regions, and that are aho relevant to the 
broader American Indian education community. The lETACs have close, ongoing 
relationships with Indian students, patents, and educators in every region of the country. 
With additional resources and an appropriately trained staff, they could take advantage of their 
proximity and access to American Indian students and institutions (e.g.. tribal colleges) to 
contribute to a national American Indian education research agenda by conducting studies on a 
range of topics that are of interest to educators (e.g., a broad-based study of American Indian 
children's learning styles and ti.eir effects on student assessment). In addition, the six 
regionally based centers could disseminate research findings nationwide. 

8 Permit some specialization of functions across centers, coupled with more active 
coordination among the centers. The existing duplication of effort across the lETACs could 
be lessened by encouraging the centers to pool their resources in such functions as materials 
development. Taking this coordination a step further, particular centers could develop special 
expertise in one or more issues (e.g.. adult education, curriculum development) and then act 
as resources to the other centers. Such specialization could go hand-in-hand with the 
development of closer collaboration across the network of centers that serve the same p.ogram 
and would help to expand the notion of collaboration beyond information sharing to include 
the exchange of products and training materials. This concept of specialization coupled with 
increased coordination and collaboration may be extended to include all federal technical 
assistance programs. For example, a technical assistance provider who is knowledgeable and 
familiar with an issue cutting across several different programs could provide help in these 
areas to service recipients in various programs. 

Internal Operations 

9 Expand the use of technology in order to more effectively meet the needs of Title V grantees 
and potential grantees. The creation of a computer-accessible database of documents related 
to Indian education for use by educators, parents, and students would facilitate the 
dissemination of needed materials and information to local communities. Another possible 
use of technology involves the development of training videos that address some of the more 
frequent and standardized requests of grantees (e.g.. steps to follow in conducting a needs 
assessment, or a guide for developing program objectives). A team of OIE staff, technical 
assistance center directors, and experienced Title V administrators could preview each video 
to ensure that all relevant questions and issues are adequately addressed, a document 
providing information on subsequent modifications could be published annually and 
disseminated to each grantee in order to keep video information from the centers current. 
The telephone conferencing capabilities of IETAC service recipients could also be used more 
effectively. Assistance providers could schedule and organize telephone conference calls 



among groups of grantees who might benefit from the opportunity to network with others or 
to discuss issues of mutual concern. 

10. Require the provision of professional development in all areas relevant to the technical 
assistance providers' work (e.g., curriculum development, issues in adult education, 
conducting a needs assessment) in order to build the capacity of center staff. There is an 
ongoing need for state-of-the-art knowledge in all aspects of education among IETAC staff, 
particularly as it relates to the unique cultural and academic needs of American Indian 
students. However, the average amount of time devoted to formal professional development 
in 1992 was one day per staff member, the minimum amount required under the IETAC 
contract at that time. (Under the terms of the new. interim contract, the number of days for 
staff development has been increased to five.) Although the nature of IETAC work makes 
protecting time for study, reflection, and planned change difficult, it is essential that sufficient 
time be made available, given the rapid pace of knowledge development in education and 
related fields. 



1 1 Require technical assistance providers to demonstrate staff skills appropriate to any addition 
to their mission. The skills needed for helping local educators understand Title V regulations 
and complete a grant application are different from those needed to conduct research, or to 
work through the complex issues associated with overhauling . school system to improve 
education for American Indian children and adults. Any changes in the role of a technical 
assistance provider would require staff who possess a combination of breadth and depth in 
knowledge and skill in many areas-a team that includes both generalists and specialists. 
Perhaps more important, it would also require a staff who demonstrate acumen in sustaining 
relationships with the power brokers and gatekeepers in schools, districts, and communities. 



Relationships With ED and OlE 

12. Change the accountability measures that govern technical assistance operations and 

reporting procedures to emphasize the provision of more intensive services that are geared 
towards achieving real program improvements. ED could significantly influence and shape 
the work of all technical assistance providers by modifying current accountability 
requirements. The current measures emphasize racking up numbers of contacts with service 
recipients-through mailings, telephone calls, and face-to-face visits. However, this emphasi'' 
on broad coverage runs counter to the intensive and sustained attention that is needed to help 
service recipients make fundamental and lasting improvements in education for the students 
whom they serve A federal focus on long-term improvement might prompt technical 
assistance providers to target services to fewer service recipients and to build in opportunities 
for continuity and follow-up in their relationships with clients. Under these conditions, a 
different ;et of accountability measures would be required: measures that would reflect this 
move to a more high-intensity-low-coverage approach to technical assistance. 



\ii 



13 Modify the reports that assistance providers produce so the connections among goals, 

activities, and outcomes are evident. Although many technical assistance programs require 
individual assistance cente r s to conduct an evaluation of their services, the reports that are 
currently produced shed little light on the impact of assistance activities on service recipients 
(Haslam et.al., 1994). They tend tu focus on compliance issues rather than the quality of the 
services that have been provided and the contributions to the institutions and organizations 
assisted. While the monitoring of contract compliance cannot be ignored, new reporting 
requirements that provide clearer evidence of the link among goals, activities, and outcomes 
are essential. Indicators that could be aggregated across the entire program would mirror the 
elements of accountability suggested above. Important features of such indicators would be 
the inclusion of measures of continuity and interaction in service relationships and of the 
effects on the education of American Indian students. 



14 Create formal opportunities for the exchange of more meaningful information between 
technical assistance providers and OIE. Currently, the relationship beiween OIE and the 
IETACs focuses overwhelmingly on minutiae. Although the centers frequently include 
suggestions for improving services in their ieports. they indicate that they receive no feedback 
from OIE. Strategies for achieving the shared, overarching goal of enhancing Indian 
education programs and the services received by American Indian children are rarely, if ever, 
discussed. Ongoing communication that serves to clarify each organization goals, roles, and 
responsibility vis a vis (1) each other, (2) Title V grantees, and (3) che students served by 
these projects n ay help to uncover new ways in which each organization can further facilitate 
and enhance the efforts and accomplishments of the other, as they seek to achieve their shared 
goals. In addition, the success of efforts to change accountability and reporting requirements 
will depend on frequent and substantive communication between technical assistance providers 
and their program officers. For this to occur, the avenues for communication among staff 
from OIE's grants management and program operation offices and technical assistance 
providers must be formalized by the creation of occasions that facilitate the exchange of 
information (e.g.. regularly scheduled telephone conferences, periodic meetings). 



Reorganization of Technical Assistance 

15 American Indian staff who have a personal knowledge of American Indian cultures and 
languages should be adequately represented within organizations that provide technical 
assistance services to organizations, schools, and LEAs that serve American Indian students. 

IETAC staff members believe that their personal connections with Indian culture are a key to 
their success in working with Indian tribes and schools and Title V parent advisory 
committees. Many traditional American Indian educators and community members say that 
knowledge and respect for American Indian history, art. traditions, and spiritual life are 
essential traits in the individuals who help them improve the educational and job opportunities 
for their children. Several IETAC staff reported that, without this shared identity and cultural 
understanding, their ability to deliver technical assistance services would have been greatly 
diminished. 



xiii 



Ensure that the interests of American Indian students, who represent a very small 
proportion of the total number of students who are served by programs that receive technical 
assistance services, are protected and promoted under any new configuration of technical 
assistance. Large numbers of non-Indian students are served by programs that receive 
assistance from the Chapter 1 Technical Assistance Centers, Drug-Free Schools and 
Communities Regional Centers, and other technical assistance providers. IETAC staff and 
other American Indian educators are concerned that the unique cultural needs of American 
Indian students might be overlooked under any other system for delivering technical 
assistance. To ensure that this does not occur, efforts must be made to involve American 
Indian educators at all levels of planning, organization, and implementation of any new- 
arrangement for the delivery of technical assistance. 



xiv 



I. INTRODUCTION 



This report presents findings from an evaluation of the Indian Education Technical Assistance 
Centers iIETACs). which are supported by the U.S. Department of Education (ED). The IETACs 
assist grantees under the Indian Education Act as well as other education agencies, tribes, and 
communities engaged in efforts on behalf of the education of American Indians and Alaska Natives 1 . 

This evaluation was conducted between May 1993 and July 1994. During this period, the 
IETACs' three-year contracts expired; their operations continued, with some modifications, under 
interim funding arrangements; and the reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education 
Act (ESEA) moved into its final stages, bringing the prospect of significant changes in the structure of 
federal technical assistance. 

When the IETACs' contracts expired m November 1993. they were extended, first for six 
months, and then for three additional months (until August 1994). in anticipation of the charges 
expected with the reauthorization of ESEA. When it became apparent that reauthorization would not 
occur before the extended contracts expired. ,t Request for Proposals (RFPi was issued and 
organizations were invited to compete for a new nine-month interim contract (September 1. 1994 - 
May 31. 1995). As a result of the timing of these events, some of the observations that are made in 
this report do not reflect the contractual changes that have already modified some roles and 
responsibilities of the IETACs. For example, under the new interim contract: (1) four additional 
days are provided for IETAC staff development; (2) the centers are required to integrate Goals 2000 
into workshop themes; (3) application-related assistance is de-emphasized; and (4) the importance of 
staff development for LEAs is underscored. 

Although new developments have changed and will change the structure and operation of the 
IETACs from that which was studied during the past year, the findings of this evaluation suggest 
ways of improving federal technical assistance, regardless of its configuration or focus. For example, 
most IETAC service recipients find the IETACs accessible, responsive, and capable of meeting stated 
needs and requests. However, while the IETACs are typically good at what they do. their role is 
rather limited in -.cope. We found that: 1 1) there is little or no opportunity for sustained, long-term 
assistance; i2i the help thai is requested- -,md therefore provided-is often geared toward addressing 
managerial and administrative concerns ie g.. completing the grant application) rather than the 



; In this report, the term "Amencan Indians ' will generally re'er to both American Indians and 
Alaska Natives 



substance of educational programs; and (3) the IETACs often assist individuals and projects in 
isolation from regular school programs. For these and other reasons expanded on in this report, the 
IETACs have had limited effects on the overall quality of Title V projects and little opportunity to 
influence the kinds of changes that are likely to have a lasting, positive effect on American Indian 
students' educational services and academic achievement. 

Our description and analysis of the strengths and weaknesses associated with the design and 
operation of the IETACs under their 1991-93 contract have enabled us to identify several important 
features of effective technical assistance for educators serving American Indian students. The policy 
options presented here can be broadly applied to any newly authorized configuration of technical 
assistance sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education (ED). 

Background and Purpose of the IETACs 

The Indian Education Act (IEA) was originally enacted in 1972 iP.L. 92-318). It sought to 
improve educational opportunities for American Indians, and to promote self-determination for 
American Indian communities by creating a decisionmaking role for parent committees in their 
children's education systems. In recognition of the special educational needs of American Indians, the 
act authorized funding for educational programs designed to address these distinctive needs (U.S. 
Office of Education. 1979) The act also authorized the Office of Education to contract with 
agencies, institutions, and udian tribes to disseminate information concerning education programs, 
services, and resources available to American Indian students (ED. 1991\ p. 1 1). 

During the early implementation of the act. the Office of Education discovered that many of 
these newly funded projects were encountering recurring problems in several areas. For example: 
(1) manv evaluations were conducted in a cursory or haphazard way and therefore did not produce 
substantive data that could be used to improve the projects; (2) grantees often lacked the experience 
and knowledge necessary to manage the projects well; (3) parent committees were ill equipped to 
participate fully in project planning and administration; i4) project quality varied widely, with some 
prefects not addressing either the goals of the act or local educational needs; and (5) project staff 
experienced difficulties in locating information on educational practices and approaches that were 
effective with American Indian students (Office of Education. 1979) 

To address these emerging problems. Congress amended the Indian F.ducation Act iF L. 100- 
42", Section 1150[c][l]) to authorize five regional centers to assist the grantees in developing and 
implementing projects Under the current act. as reauthorized in 19S8 (Part C. Section 5321c). ED is 



authorized to establish regional technical assistance centers by entering into grants or contracts with 
public and private agencies and organizations; state education agencies (SEAs) in states with more 
than 3.000 American Indian students enrolled in public elementary and secondary schools; and 
American Indian tribes, institutions, and organizations. Currently the centers are all funded under 
contracts with ED. 

The purpose of these centers is to assist locai educational agencies (LEAs). Bureau of Indian 
Affairs (BIA)-operated schools and BIA contract schools. Indian tribes. Indian organizations, and 
parent committees in improving their Indian education programs by: < 1) providing information on 
strategies and techniques in program evaluation; (2) providing technical assistance in program 
planning, development, management, implementation, and evaluation; and (3) coordinating, 
developing, and uisseminating information concerning all federal education programs affecting 
American Indian children and adults, including information on successful practices, models, and 
projects designed to meet the educational needs of American Indian children and adults (ED. 199 l a . 

p. in. 

Projects funded under the Indian Education Act of 1988 provide services to students at all 
educational levels-preschool, elementary, secondary, postsecondary . and adult education. Project 
activities include the preservation of American Indian languages, bilingual education, tutoring in bas 
skills, teacher training, literacy development, drug and alcohol use prevention education, gifted and 
talented education, computer instruction, and career development (ED. 199 1\ p. 12). The IETACs 
assist grantees and potential grantees in each of the following main categories: 

• Subpart 1: Grants to LEAs-which include both formula grants to public schools and 
competitive discretionary grants to Indian-controlled schools; 

• Subpart 2-Discretionary Special programs for improvement of opportunities for 
Indian children-which include programs that improve educational opportunities for 
Indian children, special teacher training programs, and fellowship programs that allow 
Indian students to pursue graduate and professional degrees; and 

• Subpart 3-Discretionary: Special programs for adult education for American 
Indians. 

Currently there are six IETACs serving the following geographic areas of the country 
i Appendix A): the eastern region (Center 1); the northern plains region (Center II); the northwestern 
region (Center III); the southwestern region (Center IV); the southern plains region (Center V); and 
Alaska (Center VI). Cente, VI. the newest center, was established 'n 1991 to increase the 
accessibility of technical assistance services to the widely dispersed ^.rantees and potential grantees m 



that state. Before this. Alaska had been included in Center Ill's service region. Each renter 
endeavors to achieve the goal of "improving the quality of Indian education applications and 
implementation of successful applications'' (ED, 1 99 i*. p. 18) through on-site visits, elephone 
consultations: center-sponsored workshops: seminars; and the dissemination of materials and 
information on education resources, services, and programs. The IETACs also provide assistance on 
special topics, including culture-based curriculum development, strategies for enhancing student 
discipline and self-esteem, and adult literacy. 

Evaluation Goals and Design 

The goals of this study were to examine and assess the services provided by the IETACs. 
identify factors that influence their effectiveness, and develop appropriate policy options that wou d 
help to achieve improvements where they are needed. To meet these goals, we organized our data 
collection around several key questions: (1) whom do the IETACs serve and what needs do service 
recipients experience 1 (2) what types of services do the IETACs offer' 1 (3) how are the IETACs 
staffed' 1 (4) what accountability measures govern IETAC operations and reporting procedures 1 (5) 
what types of relationships do the IETACs have with other technical assistance providers. Indian 
organizations. LEAs. SEAs. Office of Indian Education (OIE). and each other 1 and (6) what have 
been the effects of IETAC services 1 

This final report presents information gathered through the following activities that were 
conducted between May 1993 and July 1994: 

• A review of reports, training materials, studies, and other IETAC-related documents 
produced by ED and the centers. 

• A review of current literature on the condition of Indian education and on technical 
assistance in education. 

• Telephone interviews with i oresentatives from selected national and state Indian 
education organizations and Si \s. 

• Site visits to the six centers, including interviews with all directors and most staff 
members: on-site visits and observation of workshops: and collection of relevant 
documents. 

• Interviews and other discussions with Office of Indian Education t' 'IE) personnel wh 
are familiar with the Title V projects and the IETACs. and 

4 

< i — 



• A mail survey of more than 700 IETAC service recipients and potential service 
recipients around the country. 



The telephone interviews were conducted with representatives from nine Indian organizations 
and SEAs who are deeply involved in Indian education and are knowledgeable about the issues facing 
Title V grantees and potential grantees locally and nationally. They provided information on the 
relationship between their organizations and the IETACs. the demand for IETAC services in the 
Indian education community, and their perceptions of the effectiveness of IETAC services. 

Visits to the IETACs took place from August through October 1993. Two members of the 
evaluation team spent four or five days in each region. At each site we interviewed IETAC staff and 
consultants and examined a wide range of documents produced by the center (e.g.. newsletters, 
monthly and annual reports, training and curriculum materials). We obs -rved at least one on-site 
training or workshop session in each region and met informally with several Title V grantees at each 
of these events. 

Discussions and interviews were also conducted with several 01 E staff members at key 
junctures in the study: ( 1) at the very beginning of the study when we met with ED staff to review 
our study plan; (2) following the preliminary analysis of our findings-after the document review, 
telephone interviews, and site visits had all been completed; and (.M at the end of the study, following 
the administration of the survey-after all the study data had been collected. These discussions were 
useful in helping us to refine our interview and survey questions, interpret our findings, and gain a 
more complete understanding of the context in which the IETACs and Title V grantees operate. 

Sample Selection and Survey Administration 

Various categories of survey respondents were included in our sample. Throughout this 
report these categories are defined as follows: 

Potential grantees. Any school. LEA. institution of higher education. Indian tribe, or 
organization that is eligible to apply for a Title V grant but does not currently have or. 



ERIC Lu 



BIA schools. 1 BIA schools are grouped into two categories: (1) BIA-operated schools and 
(2) BIA-funded schools (i.e., BIA-contract. BIA-grant, and BlA-cooperative schools which receive 
funds from the BIA but are not operated by the BIA). 

Formula grantees. These include: (1) public school districts with Title V formula grants; (2) 
BIA schools with Title V formula grants: and (3) BIA schools that are eligible to apply for Title V 
formula grants but do not currently have them. All formula grantees and potential formula grantees 
arc eligible to receive IETAC assistance, although not all have done so. 

Discretionary grantees. This category includes: (1) all public school districts, institutions of 
higher education. Indian tribes, Indian organizations, and BlA-funded schools that currently have 
discretionary grans; and (2) Indian tribes and organizations that are eligible to apply for discretionary 
grants, but do not currently have them. All are eligible to receive IETAC assistance, although not all 
have done so. State education agencies (SEAs) are included in this category also. Although they are 
not potential grantees, they do work on statewide Indian education issues ar" -1 receive assistance from 
the IETACs periodically. 

Our survey of IETAC service recipients and potential service recipients—those who are 
eligible to receive assistance but have not yet done so-was conducted in May and June 1994. Our 
sample, which was drawn from mailing lists provided by each IETAC. included Title V grantees who 
had received awards in 1992-93 and 1993-94 as well as potential grantees. During our site visits in 
the fall of 1993 we asked IETAC staff to identify the following groups on their mailing lists: ( 1 ) 
formula grantees; (2) discretionary grantees; (3) BIA schools; and (4) potential grantees. We were 
unable to verify the accuracy or completeness of these mailing Hsts because a mai ,: ng list of current 
Title V grantees was unavailable from OIE. 

Surveys were mailed to the 59 discretionary grantees and 90 BIA schools identified on the 
mailing lists provided by the centers. In keeping with the study design, a random sample of 500 
formula grantees was drawn from the remaining 1,118 school districts on the mailing lists. In 
addition, a samplf of 65 SEAs and Indian tribe- and organizations was drawn from the list of 130 
Sli, Vs. Indian tribes and Indian education organizations that were included on the IETAC mailing list. 

As the completed •urveys were returned to us and analyzed, it became apparent that our 
mailing lists of discretionary grantees and BIA schools were incomplete (e.g.. we later learned '.hat 



; BIA schools became eligible to participate in OIE programs when the Indian Education Act was 
reauthorized in ! c >88. 



several BIA schools that ware potential grantees were not included on the IETAC lists) and some 
discretionary grantees and BIA schools had not been accurately identified as such on the lists. Several 
survey respondents who had been included in our sample of non-BIA formula grantees indicated on 
their completed surveys that they were discretionary grantees or BIA schools. 

A total of 48 surveys were returned to us from individuals who indicated that they had 
discretionary grants; 37 of these had been identified as discretionary grantees on the mailing lists but 
the others had not. Because we do not have an accurate figure for the total number of discretionary 
grantees, we are unable to provide information on either the percentage of all discretionary grantees 
who were included in our sample or the percentage of all discretionary grantees who responded to our 
survey. According to OIE, there were 89 discretionary grants in 1993-94. Although this provides 
some indication of the approximate number of discretionary grantees, the actual number of individual 
grantees would be fewer than 89 because a single organization, school, or tribe may receive two or 
more of these grants. 

Similarly, a total of 99 surveys were returned to us from individuals who identified their 
schools as BIA schools: 67 of these had been among the 90 schools so identified on our mailing lists. 
A subsequent telephone call to the BIA revealed that for the 1993-94 school year there were actually 
a total of 184 BIA schools around the country. The proportion that have Title V grants is unclear. 

Although the number of survey respondents is higher that we originally expected for BIA 
schools and discretionary grantees, we cannot claim that these respondents are statistically 
representative of all BIA schools or all discretionary grantees because our original sample was neither 
the entire population of these two groups (as we had originally intended) nor a randor.i sample drawn 
from the pool of BIA schools and discretionary grantees. However, because the demographic 
characteristics of the BIA schools varied little, we determined that our sample of BIA schools could 
be considered representative of the BIA school population. 

All of our survey data were organized and analyzed according to the self-identification 
provided by the survey respondents. From among the school districts with formula grants, we 
received 355 of the 500 surveys that were mailed out-a response rate of 71 percent. Based on 
recommendations from OIE. we placed the BIA-operated and BlA-funded schools in either the 
formula or discretionary grantee populations, depending on the type of grant they indicated they have 
received All BIA schools in our sample that do not have a Title V grant were placed in the formula 
grantee sample because they are potential formula grantees. With the addition of BIA-operated and 
BlA-funded schools into the formula grantee sample, the total number of formula grantees in our 
sample increased to 442. The public school districts and BIA schools in the formula grantee sample 

7 



o 

ERIC 



were then weighted to reflect their actual proportions in the total population. (See technical 
appendix.) As a result, all references to sample size in our tables reflect these weights. 

As noted before, the BIA-funded schools that have discretionary grants were included in the 
d ; scretionary grantee population. With the addition of these schools and the SEAs, the number of 
those included in our sample of discretionary grantees and potential discretionary grantees increased 
to 73,' The discretionary grantees were not weighted because we were unable to determine the total 
number of potential discretionary grantees. 4 

Of the 727 surveys mailed out. 516 were completed, giving us an overall response rate of 71 
percent. Although the majority of completed surveys were mailed to us by respondents, we were able 
to increase our response rate from 40 percent to 71 percent over a two-week period by calling 
potential respondents and completing their surveys over the telephone. The telephone conversations 
with some survey respondents revealed that many were overwhelmed by a large number of surveys 
"from Washington and everywhere eise" during the period in which our survey was administerec. In 
fact, one respondent indicated that she had received a -otal of 30 different surveys in recent months. 
In addition, the end of the academic year is traditionally a very busy time for school personnel. 
Several potential respondents told us that getting their jobs done took priority over completing the 
survey. Finally, several Title V directors had already left i'or their summer vacations when the 
survey was administered, and could not be contacted. 



' One respondent did not answer the appropriate sunr. questiui to allow us to place it m either 
category 



1 The number of potential discretionary grantees is quite Iarv.e because it includes Indian tribes 
Indian organization'*, tribal colleges, and universities, in all regions of the country 



II. CONTEXT AND OPERATIONS OF IETAC ASSISTANCE 



In this chapter, we identify whom the IETACs serve, the needs they address, the services they 
offer, the characteristics and qualifications of their staff, and their relationships with other 
organization and institutions. 



Characteristics of Service Recipients and Potential Service Recipients 

Figures provided by OIE indicate that there were 1.182 formula grants and 89 discretionary- 
grants during the 1993-94 school year (including grants to BIA and BIA contract schools). Not 
surprisingly, the majority of IETAC service recipients are LEAs that receive formula grants, and 
discretionary grantees represent a much smaller proportion of service recipients. Unlike formula 
grantees, discretionary grantees are not eligible for assistance in developing their applications; 
however, some discretionary grantees do seek IETAC assistance with program management, needs 
assessment, and evaluation. BlA-operated schools are eligible for formula grants or cultural 
enrichment discretionary grants. However, no BIA-operated school in our sample indicated that it 
had a discretionary grant. BlA-funded schools are eligible for formula and discretionary grants. Of 
the BIA-funded schools in our sample, nearly two-thirds (62 percent) of those with Title V grants 
have formula grants and 38 percent have discretionary grants. 

All formula grantees and potential formula grantees are public school districts or BIA schools 
(table 1). Among the discretionary grantees and potential discretionary grantees that responded. 35 
percent are Indian organizations, and smaller percentages are Indian tribes. BIA-funded schools, 
public school districts, and institutions of higher education, 

OIE grant recipients are typically located in rural areas (table 1). Three-quarters of the 
survey respondents are in a rural area--45 percent off reservations and 30 percent on reservations. 
Discretionary grantees are more likely to be on the reservation while formula grantees are more likely 
to be located off the reservation. 



9 



ERIC 



J 



Table 1 

Demographic Characteristics of Survey Respondents 



Demographic Characteristics 


Total 


Formula 
Grantees 


Discretionary 
Grantees 


Type of Institution 




(n = 442) 3 


in = 71) 


Public school district 


761 


87% 


11% 


t3ir\ acnooi 


6 


7 


0 


BIA contract school 


7 


6 


15 


Institution of higher education 


i 


0 


1 1 


Indian organization 


4 


0 


29 


Indian tribe 


2 


0 


15 


State education agency 


3 


0 


19" 


Urbaniaty 


in = 497) 


«n = 431) 


iil = hh) 


Urban 


25% 


24% 


_ / .'V 


Onr'il nntirccf rvitinn 
iVUIdl — ! UilltaCl 'dUVUl 


45 


48 


lb 


ivurai — rcscrv juuii 


30 


28 


47 


Percentage of Students Eligible for Free or Reduced- 
Price Lunch 


irt--.H7f 


n = V 1 




25 percent or less 


11% 


11% 




26 to 50 percent 


27 


27 


Not Applicable""" 


51 to 75 percent 


27 


27 




76 to 99 percent 




26 




100 percent 


10 


8 





Table reads: Seventy percent of all survey respondents are public school districts. 

" SEAs are not eligible to receive discretionary grants; however, they are included in our sample because 
they sometimes seek IETAC assistance as they attend to statewide Indian education issues 
" Includes only those grantees serving student populations. 

■" Many of the institutions that have discretionary grants (e.g., colleges, tribal organizations*) 
sr:ve an adult population that is ineligible to receive free or reduced-price lunch. 

Note Percentages may not total 100 due to rounding 



s Includes actual and potential grantees in each category. 



On average, the Title V projects in our survey have been funded for 12 years. One-fifth (20 
percent; have been funded for fewer than five years, and 40 percent have been funded for more than 
15 years (table 2). The remaining 40 percent are fairly evenly distributed across years 5 through 15. 
On average, formula grantees have been funded for the longest period-- 13 years-versus 7.5 years for 
discretionary grantees. 

The average Title V grant award is 566,491 However. 40 percent of grant recipients receive 
less than S25.000 (table 2). Only 19 percent reported that they receive more than S 100.000. The 
average grant award among the discretionary grantees ($155,000) is nearly three times larger than the 
average award made to the formula grantees (approximately $57,000). 

On average, Title V program directors in our survey have worked in this capacity for six 
years. They usually wear at least two hats-only 10 percent said they had no responsibilities beyond 
the Title V grant (table 3). Forty-three percent are federal program coordinators, 18 percent are 
principals. 15 percent are counselors. 10 percent are teachers, and 8 percent are superintendents. 
Those who administer Title V funds also work with a number of other federal program. In fact, 
more than half (51 percent) of the individuals who indicated that they are federal program 
coordinators also work with the Chapter 1 basic program, and approximately one-third work with 
Johnson-O'Malley (42 percent), special education (22 percent), and Impact Aid (32 percent). 

During our site visits, some 1ETAC staff members suggested that these multiple job 
responsibilities might contribute to the relatively high turnover rate among those in this position. 
Our survey data indicated that 58 percent of the 363 Title V directors who answered this question 
have been Title V directors for less than five years (table 2). Title V directors of formula grant 
projects-287 of whom responded to this question-tend to have more experience than their 
counterparts in BIA-funded schools or those who direct discretionary grant programs. Title V 
directors of formula grants have spent, on average. 6 5 years as Title V director, with 22 percent 
spending more than 10 years in that capacity. Title V directors in BIA-funded schools-55 of whom 
responded to this question-have spent the least amount of time in their role-an average of 3 vears- 
and only 4 percent have worked in that capacity for more than 10 years. A sizeable majority (86 
percent) have spent less than 5 years as Title V director. Directors of discretionarv grants fall in the 
middle: the 20 grantees who provided this information have spent, on average. 4.5 vears in their 
role, and 10 percent have worked in this capacity for more than 10 years (table 2). 



Table 2 

Programmatic Characteristics of the Grant Recipients 



r 


Programmatic Characteristics 


-T. ..... 1 

Total 


Formula 
Grantees 


DiciTPtinnarv ClfAnt PP^ 

C HUlla I Y VJ 1 ulllvv. j 




Years oj litie v urani runamg 


.n = 3Xhi 




n = 47i 




Less than 5 years 


20% 


16% 


49% 




5 to 10 years 


19 


18 


21 




11 to 15 years 


21 


it 


15 




16 to 20 years 


30 


32 


1 1 




More than 20 years 


10 


11 


4 




Amount of title V Grant, 1993-1994 

Less than S 10.000 


15% 


in - 365 1 

16% 


5% 




S 10,000 to 524,999 


25 


27 


8 




$25,000 to $49,999 


24 


25 


15 




$50,000 to $100,000 


17 




10 




More than $100,000 


19 


15 


62 


1 


Title V Director-Years of Service 
1 year or less 


18% 


in = *4;i 
17% 


,n = r> 

.'US 




2 to 4 years 


37 


37 


1 1 
44 




5 to 10 years 


25 


25 


19 




More than 10 years 


20 


21 


7 




Percentage of Indian Students Sewed 


:n = 3«Ki 


il » iKtli 






50 percent or less 


14% 


15% 






5 1 to 75 percent 
76 to 99 percent 


11 
15 


1 1 
Id 


Not Applicable* 




100 percent 


59 


58 






Primary Focus of the Indian Education 
Project 


m=434) 


n = 3H5i 






Supplemental academic tutoring for 

Cultural enrichment/Indian 
language classes 
Counseling/career awareness 


57% 

29 

10 


60% 

30 
1 1 


29% 

20 
6 




Staff development for teachers 


1 


1 


0 




Teacher preparation for preset-vice, 

teachers 

Adult education 


1 
1 

4 


0 
0 


h 




Other (eg., dropout prevention, 
family support services, chemical abuse 
prevention) 


14 


14 


12 




T.thle reads. Twenty percent ot Title V gram recipients 
less than five years. 


have received these grams tor 


• An Indian inht' or organisation may 
memriership The percent of Indian 


consider its clientele to be an 
students served by the priced 


entite tribe or its entire 
ciuild be vety small 



9 

ERIC 



Table 3 

Additional Responsibilities of Title V Directors 



Additional Responsibilities 


Total 


Formula 
Grantees 


Grantees 


Other responsibilities in addition to Title V director 










(n = 505 1 


(ll = 434S 


01 = "\ ) 


Federal program coordinator 


43 'T- 


46% 


24% 


Principal 


IS 


21 


3 


Counsel h or student advisor 


15 


16 


10 


Teacher 


10 


11 


4 


Superintendent 


8 


11 


0 


Paraprofessional/rutor 


9 


10 


3 


No other responsibilities 


10 


9 


18 


Those who are also federal program coordinators 
also work with the following: 


111= "'hi i 


H1.-3I4I 


in -4-i 


Chapter 1 basic program 


51% 


56% 


21 % 


Johnson-O'Malley 


42 


44 


28 


Special education 


33 


36 


r 


Impact Aid 


J_ 


-5H 


1 1 


Gifted and talented programs 


25 


~» 
_ / 


15 


Title VII, bilingual education 


18 


18 


15 


Chapter 1 migrant education program 


12 


13 


6 


Other (e.g.. JTPA. MeKinney. 
Perkins Act, Drug Free, Chapter 2) 


30 


29 


34 



Table reads: Forty-three percent of all Title V directors are also federal program coordinators. 



More than one-half (57 percent) of those who have a Title V grant say that the primary focus 
of their Indian Education project is to provide supplemental academic tutoring for Indian students 
(table 2). About one-third (29 percent) identified their primary focus as providing cultural enrichment 
or Indian language classes r o students, and 10 percent are focused on providing student counseling or 
career awareness. Formula grantees are more likely than discretionary grantees to offer the 
supplemental tutoring, while discretionary grantees are more likely to focus their efforts on adult 
education. Very few projects have focused their efforts at the teacher level--! percent of projects 

13 



ERIC 



focus on staff development for teachers, and another 1 percent focus on teacher preparation for 
preservice teachers. A greater proportion (6 percent) of discretionary grantees are providing 
preservice teacher preparation. 

Survey responses indicated that Title V projects serve a majority of the eligible Indian 
students enrolled in their school or institution (table 2). More than half (59 percent) of the formula 
grantees indicated that they serve the entire population of American Indian students enrolled in the 
school or institution served by their project, and an additional 27 percent serve more than half of their 
elieible American Indian student population. Formula grantees serve the largest number of students- 
an average of 319 students per project-while discretionary grantees serve, on average. 189 
participants." 

The school districts and BIA-funded schools that are current or potential formula grantees 
serve a high percentage of students who live in poverty (table 1). Sixty-one percent of the actual and 
potential formula grantees reported that more than one-half of the students enrolled in the district are 
eligible for free or reduced-price lunch. Only 1 1 percent reported that fewer than 25 percent of 
students in their district were eligible for this service. 



Local and Regional Needs 

IETAC service recipients and potential service recipients are from diverse backgrounds and 
settings. In addition, they adhere to a wide range of cultural values, beliefs, and practices that are 
influenced by their tribal background and by other factors. Despite these differences, however. 
American Indian communities confront similar issues and problems that adversely affect teaching and 
learning. 

To determine the needs for technical assistance experienced by grantees and potential 
grantees, we can begin by examining those needs that the lETACs have addressed-that is. the topics 
for which survey respondents have received some form of IETAC help. Next, we look at needs 
identified in other ways: ( 11 the areas of anticipa'ed need described by potential (but not actual) 
IETAC service recipients: (2) the type of assistance that survey respondents have sought and received 
from other technical assistance providers: and i.31 the needs identified by IETAC staff and others 



" This average does not include one discretionary grantee tan Indian education organization) that 
indicated it serves its entire membership of 6,000 people with its annt funding. 

14 



IJ.) 



(e.g.. Indian education organizations. American Indian researchers and educators) who are familiar 
with the general conditions and experiences that American Indian students and their teachers confront. 

Seventy-two percent of all survey respondents indicated that they have received IETAC 
assistance-materials/information. on-site visits, and/or workshops-with grant applications (table 4). 
This finding suggests that this is one of the most important areas of need among Title V grantees and 
potential grantees. Not surprisingly, student assessment and evaluation, and program management- 
topics that are of crucial importance in a good grant application-were also areas in which large 
percentages (51 percent and 48 percent respectively) of survey respondents indicated they had 
received IETAC help. Grantee and potential grantees' preoccupation with this topic is understandable 
because the development of an acceptable grant application is the essential first «tep in the process of 
establishing a Title V Indian education program. The need for parent committee training is also a 
high priority: 46 percent of those who responded to our survey indicated that they had sought and 
received assistance in this area. Curriculum development, a topic for which 42 percent sought 
assistance, was the fifth most popular topic. 

Thirteen percent of survey respondents who had heard of the IETACs indicated that they had 
never requested IETAC assistance, and 2 percent indicated that they did not know if someone else 
from their program had ever requested IETAC services. When asked to identify the most important 
area in which they would be likely to need assistance during the following school year, this group 
who had not (or did not know if they had) received IETAC assistance responded as follows: 

• Thirty-eight percent identified topics related to grant application assistance (i.e.. 
program design, program evaluation, conducting a needs assessment, and OIE 
checklist issues). 

• Twenty-nine percent identified parent committee training issues (i.e.. parent 
recruitment, parenting skills training, managerial issues, committee member roles and 
responsibilities, and conflict resolution), and 

• Twenty-seven percent identified curriculum and instructional topics (i.e.. academic 
curriculum development, cultural curriculum development, tutor training, staff 
development, and cultural awareness/sensitivity training for staff). 




Table 4 

Assistance Provided to BET AC Service Recipients 
Through Materials, Regional Workshops, or On-site Visits, 

by Selected Topics 



In the past three years, have you or anyone else from your district/school received 
assistance from an IETAC in any of the topics listed below? 7 


Topics 


Percentage of Survey Respondents 
Who Received Assistance 

(N = 516) 


Grant application assistance 


72% 


Student assessment and project evaluation 


51 


Program management 


48 


Parent committee training 


46 


Curriculum development 


42 


Cultural awareness/ sensitivity training for 
staff 


39 


Instructional training for teachers and 
tutors 


29 


Other 


6 



Table reads: Seventy-two percent of all respondents reported that they or someone else from their 
district/school received technical assistance from an IETAC through either receiving 
materials, participating in an on-site visit, or attending a regional workshop on grant 
application assistance within the past three years. 



Sixty-three percent of respondents who have received IETAC assistance reported that they 
have sought assistance from other agencies and organizations as well. An analysis of the data they 
report provides some additional insight into existing needs. The three most popular issues for which 
these service recipients have sought and received non-IETAC assistance are: schoolwide change, 
research on effective instructional techniques, and student assessment/program evaluation strategies 



Questions posed in each table are not necessarily identical to those on the survey. In some cases 
ley reflect a summary of two or more actual survey questions 



16 



and methods (table 5). Although we did not explore the reasons behind respondents' decision to seek 
help from other sources, the data do suggest that these topics are of importance to them, and the 
demand for help in these areas may in fact exceed the resources and/or expertise nf the IETACs. 



Table 5 

Topics on Which Other Providers Have Provided Technical Assistance 



In the past three years, have you or anyone else from your district/school received 
assistance from any other technical assistance provider, in any of the topic areas 
listed below? 




Percentage of 




Those Seeking 




Assistance from 




Providers Other 


Technical Assistance Topic 


than IETACs 




(n = 249) 


Implementing schoolvide change 


60 *E 


Research on effective instructional techniques (e.g.. cooperative learning) 


57 


Information on OIE grant application requirements 


51 


Student development topics (e.g.. career awareness, counseling, self-esteem) 


51 


Student assessment, program evaluation strategies and methods 


50 


Project design, development, management, and implementation 


43 


Teaching Indian culture; Native languages 


40 


Indian parental training and involvement 


35 



Table reads: Among those respondents who have received assistance from providers other than 

IETACs. 60 percent have received assistance on the topic of implementing schoolwide 
change. 



ERIC 



06 



The needs identified in our interviews with IETAC staff mirror many of the needs that are 
directly and indirectly revealed in the survey data. Although they described many of the specific 
service needs that they had observed among Title V grantees, IETAC taff were also inclined to 
describe and discuss the conditions and contexts within which many TUe V projects operate, and to 
highlight some of the external challenges that grantees and potential grantees face. The list below 
outlines those needs that were mentioned most frequently and were considered by IETAC staff to be 
particularly significant obstacles to the improvement of Title V projects: it is not a comprehensive list 
of all the educational needs mentioned. 

• Improved relationships between some American Indian communities and LEAs and 
SEAs. The director and staff at one IETAC reported that most of the states within 
their region are "indifferent or hostile" to Indian education needs. Another IETAC 
director described the relationship between the public schools and the Indian 
community in that region as 'antagonistic, distrustful, and lacking respect." 
Conflicts between local school boards and parent committees diminish the ability and 
willingness of Indian parents and other community members to become involved in 
their local education programs, and these conflicts further alienate Indian students. 
Because the IETAC staff members are familiar with local issues and concerns, and are 
knowledgeable about the rules and regulations that govern Title V, they are viewed by- 
many grantees as potential mediators, despite the terms of their contract prohibiting 
them from filling this role. 

• Frequent training of Title V project staff. The turnover rate among Title V staff is 
high— 57 percent have been in their position for fewer than five years and 19 percent 
for less than a year. Experienced project directors tend to leave for furrher 
educational opportunities, to take other administrative jobs, to work for some other 
Indian education organization, or to combat burnout. New Title V program staff are 
often teachers or counselors who have little, if any. experience running federal 
programs. As a result, the IETACs must address the same issues repeatedly in their 
workshops each year. The need for ongoing training of project staff in completing 
grant applications and in all aspects of project management is particularly great. 

• Increased parent involvement. Training parents to become more involved in their 
children's education is a fundamental need in all IETAC regions. Nearly half of Title 
V grantees have approached the IETACs for assistance with their parent committee 
training. School districts often do not know how to overcome the obstacles to 
increased parent involvement (e.g.. language barriers and parents' historically poor 
relationships with schools), and some American Indian parents lack an understanding 
of current school culture and rules. The requirement that eacii Title V grantee have a 
parent committee encourages some American Indian parents to become more involved 
in the education process; however, most are not aware of their rights in the education 
arena and must receive intensive training in order to become full and equal 
participants in school deci.su,uimakim: 



1 S 



• A clearer understanding of the dynamics and impact of culture in education. Many 
educators and school administrators who teach American Indian students and manage 
schools with large numbers of American Indian children have little or no training in 
how to work with students from different cultural backgrounds, and no knowledge of 
American Indian culture in particular. They have difficulties relating to both students 
and parents. 

• Culturally related academic materials. The IETACs reported an increased number of 
requests for cultural materials that are both nonracist and nonstereotypical. In 
addition, many projects request materials that are specifically relev nt tu local tribes, 

• Clarification on the relationship between the cultural and academic needs of 
American Indian students. Increasing requests for culturally appropriate materials 
have led to an emerging issue-the need to clarify the relationship between the cultural 
and academic needs of American Indian children. The original Act mentioned that 
projects should meet "the special educational needs" of American Indian students, and 
the later amendment changed tne wording to "culturally related academic needs. " 
Observations of workshops and informal interviews with selected participants suggest 
that some grantees are unclear about the differences among: (1) direct teaching or 
transmission of American Indian culture, meaning American Indian culture as the 
subject of instructional lessons; (2) the strategic use of information about American 
Indian culture to more effectively teach academic skills and behaviors; and 1 31 
knowledge of American Indian culture as a means for more effective communication 
with American Indian children and their families. Many schools ?nd communities are 
debating the importance of cultural versus basic education. Some educators and 
parents believe that teaching culture is an important end ,n itself because many 
American Indian students have lost their sense of identity; others see teaching culture 
as a "waste of time" and believe the focus should be on basic academics and core 
subjectr Few seem to understand that an emphasis on cultural education and basic 
academics do not have to be mutually exclusive. 

• A national American Indian education research agenda that includes the collection 
of materials, statistics, and other data that will inform education improvement 

efforts. Representatives from several of the organizations we interviewed lamented 
the absence of education research that has included Indian students. They offered 
several suggestions for a research agenda that could contribute to meeting current 
needs. For example, researchers could: (1) measure and report on the effectiveness 
of various educational approaches with Indian students in particular: <2) develop and 
disseminate research and resource materials that could be used by educators during 
their training and with their students; and i3i promote American Indian and Alaska 
Native perspectives in current systemic reform and schoolwule change initiatives. 

'n our telephone interviews, representatives of other agencies and organizations ie.g . SEAs. 
Indian education organizations) confirmed that many of the needs described above are evident in many 
American Indian communities In addition, these and other needs were identified h\ those who 
participated in the discussions and testimony surrounding the meetings of the Indian Nations at Risk 



task force and the White House Conference on ' iian Education. These needs, which are 
summarized in our review of the literature (Funkhouser. Laguarda. & Panton. 1993). include: 

• Staff training and education that would eliminate certain behaviors among school 
personnel that are detrimental to the achievement and progress of American Indian 
students (e.g.. the tendency to relegate American Indian students to low-ability tracks, 
or to misdiagnose and inappropriately place American Indian students who have 
experienced language and other cultural adjustment problems). 

• Culturally relevant and accurate information and curricular materials. 

• Dropout prevention programs and other support services for American Indian students 
that serve to encourage and inspire them to succeed academically. 

• Attention to individual and community health issues (e.g.. nutritional deficiencies, 
alcoholism, teenage pregnancy, high suicide rates). 

• Partnerships and linkages among schools, parents, tribes, universities, business and 
industry, and health and social services so that there can be a holistic approach to 
addressing the multifaceted. yet interrelated needs of American Indian students, and 

• Additional financial support for American Indian education programs that would 
enable local schools and districts to muster the resources to address the factors and 
conditions that contribute to the severe problems of low academic achievement and 
high dropout rates (e.g.. purchase library materials and computers and other 
technologies, hire additional counseling staff). 

Deep-rooted and complex problems exist within American Indian education-many of which 
are beyond the current scope of the IETACs. In the following section we highlight those problems 
and issues that the IETACs do address, and we describe the means by which they meet some of the 
needs of their service recipients, 




Services and Operations 



The IETACs deliver a variety of services to Title V grantees and potential grantees. Under 
the terms of their 1 99 1 —93 contract", the IETACs were required to perform seven specific tasks that 
may be summarized as follows: 

Task 1: Develop materials and provide information and training-through technical assistance 
and workshops— on evaluation strategies and methods and the planning and design of effective 
projects. 

Task 2: Provide technical assistance-preferably through site visits-in: (1) the planning and 
development or improvement of projects; (2) the establishment of an effective project 
management system: (3) the development of successful strategies to implement project 
designs; and (41 the application of project-appropriate evaluation methods. 

Task 3: Provide information services (e.g.. through brochures and newsletters) on topics of 
interest and importance to Title V grantees and potential grantees. 

Task 4: Coordinate activities and share information and materials with OIE. SEAs. American 
Indian tribes and organizations, and other ED-funded technical assistance centers. 

Task 5: Provide regional workshops, conduct site visits, and disseminate material for formula 
grantees and potential grantees on a step-by-step review of formula grant applications, 

Task 6: Provide an opportunity for the center's professional staff to participate m staff 
development opportunities. 

Task 7: Provide OIE with a copy of all materials produced by the center and conduct an 
inventory of all materials produced. 



Although these tasks are clearly delineated and their numerical order represents the priorities 
established by ED. there is a fair amount of overlap among them. For example, many of the topics 
for assistance under Tasks 1 and 2 (e.g.. the development of a sound evaluation plan or project 
design) are e.ements of the preparation of good formula grant applications, which is specifically and 
more directly addressed under Task 5. Similarly, under Task ?. the IETACs. disseminate information 
and materials that address substantive issues relevant to Tasks 1. 2. and 5 



' Under the new interim contract, six tasks are required. Tasks 1 through 4 arc quite similar u> 
those in the old contract, although some changes have been made (e.g.. centers are now required to 
emphasize Goals 2000 themes in their workshops, seasonal bulletins, rather than bi-monthly 
newsletters, must be disseminated). The new Task 5 focuses on mservice training for IETAC staff 
members, and Task 6 requires the centers to conduct an ongoing inventory of all materials produced 



ERIC 



In this section we describe in more detail the activities and services provided. Specifically, 
we examine: (1) IETAC .ratejues for raising awareness of available set vices among recipients and 
potential recipients; (2) strategies that shape specific services to recipients within the boundaries 
established in the RFP; (3) the content of IETAC assistance; and (4) methods by which assistance is 
delivered. 

Outreach and Awareness Raising 

The IETACs are well known by those who either manage Title V projects or are otherwise 
involved in American Indian education. Ninety-three percent of the survey respondents indicated they 
have heard of the IETACs, and among the actual and potential formula grantees, the proportion is 94 
percent. Nearly one-half (45 percent) of these respondents indicated that they first learned about the 
IETACs through their newsletters (table 6). A referral from OIE is the second most common means 
by which respondents first heard about the IETACs. Discretionary grantees are a notable exception; 
only 5 percent of the actual and potential discretionary grantees reported that they first learned about 
the IETACs through a referral by OIE. Other commonly reported means include an IETAC staff 
member and a referral by a Title V project director When asked to describe the means by which 
they learned of the specific types of services available from the IETACs. 68 percent of the survey 
respondents mentioned the IETAC newsletter. 46 percent indicated a meeting or presentation at which 
IETAC staff described their services, and 31 percent identified an IETAC brochure as the source ot 
their information (table 7). 

During the most recently completed contract period, the IETACs' monthly newsletters became 
bimonthly publications to allow time for the protracted process of OIE review and approval. In the 
upcoming contract period. th» number of newsletters that the IETACs will produce will be further 
reduced-to about three per year. Interestingly, our survey indicated that many respondents rely on 
these newsletters for such key information as: schedules for regional workshops (70 percent); 
availability of IETAC services (67 percent); and examples of what other Title V projects are doing 
(55 percent). In fact, approximately one-third of the survey respondents who have received the 
newsletter identified five or more topics they would like to see the IETACs include more often. 
These data suggest that reducing the number of newsletters may reduce access to key information for 
many grantees. 

Although the legislative requirement to provide assistance only "on request" restricts the 
IETACs' ability to take the initiative in identifying and addressing problems, centers sometimes 
remind grantees of their presence and availability by calling those whom they have identified as 

4;< 



having weak grant applications or specific project-related problems. Moreover, they also include 
request-for-assistance forms routinely in the materials they send out. Twenty-two percent of all 
survey respondents reported that an IETAC had contacted them either by mail or by telephone to 
inform them of available services (table 7V 



Table 6 

Manner in Which Survey Respondents First Learned about the lETACs 



How did you first h- ar about the IETACs? 




Percentage of Survey Respondents 




Survey 


Formula 


Discretionary 


Sources 


Respondents 


Grantees 


Grantees 




(n = 469) 


(n = 404i 


(n = 65) 


An IETAC newsletter 


45 "c 


47% 




A referral from the Office of Indian Education 








in Washington. D C. 


14 


16 


5 


Another Title V project director 


1 1 


11 


i: 


Other 


11 


10 


17 


An IETAC staff member 


9 


8 


17 


A school- or district-level administrator 




6 




A parent committee member 


i 


^ 


Jl 


A tribal organisation 


i 


0 


5 



Table reads: Forty-five percent of the survey respondents who answered this question reported that 
they first heard about the IETACs from an IETAC newsletter. 



ERIC 



41 



Table 7 

Manner in Which Survey Respondents First Learned about 
Specific BETAC Services 



How did you learn about the specific services the IETAC provides? 
(CIRCLE NO MORE THAN 3) 



Sources 

An IETAC newsletter 

Meeting/presentation with IETAC staff 

IETAC brochure 

Called IETAC for list of services 

The IETAC contacted me 

Conversation with other Title V directors 

Visited an IETAC 

Other 



Percentage of Survey Respondents 
Survey Formula Discretionary 
Respondents Grantees Grantees 

in = 420) in = 3731 \n = Si) 

68 r r 68" 63% 



46 
31 



16 
14 

8 



48 



15 
12 



39 
54 
P 

15 
-i -> 

13 



Table reads: Sixty-eight percent of the survey respondents who answered this question reported that 
they' learned about the specific services the IETAC provides through the IETAC 
newsletter. 



Seeds Assessment 

As they fulfill the requirements of the RFP. the IETACs target their services and attention 
based on their own assessment of local needs. The IETACs assess local and regional educational 
needs through document reviews, through verbal feedback from grantees and potential grantees, and 
through reviews of grantee applications. LEAs that submit improperly completed or otherwise 
unacceptable applications will receive a deficiency notice from OIE. indicating the nature of the 
problem. When seeking assistance with their applications, applicants often share their deficiency 
notices with IETAC staff This not only helps the IETACs determine which projects need specific 
kinds of help, by reviewing deficiency notices from around their service area. IETACs are able to 
discern which sections of the application are particularly problematic :or many LEAs and therefore 
need to be specifically addressed in their regional workshops Needs are also determined based 



9 

ERIC 



4 b 



direct grantee requests, which may follow a workshop or other IETAC-sponsored event, and by 
discussions with representatives from LEAs. SEAs. tribal colleges, and Indian educational 
organizations throughout the regions. The lETACs reported that they use this information, coupled 
with their contract requirements, to shape the services they provide. 

Although the lETACs may assess that a grantee or potential grantee is in need of help, the 
'upon request 1 ' requirement sometimes hinders their ability to meet the existing need. In many 
instances, projects that are in the most need are also particularly reluctant to ask for help. According 
to the lETACs. reluctance to seek help may be attributed to various factors. In some districts where 
Indian education is a low priority among administrators, little attention is given to the quality of the 
Title V programs. In other districts, an administrator, already overworked and overburdened by the 
responsibility of directing several federal supplementary programs, may not want to spend extra time 
on the Indian education project, even though parents or teachers may feel otherwise. IETAC staff 
explained that parents and teachers are sometimes fearful of going 'over the head" of a reluctant 
administrator *o request assistance. Because its services are not formally requested, the IETAC 
cannot go in. 

The "upon request" requirement stifles the lETACs' opportunity to provide services in those 
districts where there is conflict between the school district and the parent committee, or where the 
Title V director does not share information about IETAC services with the parents. The Title V 
director acts as the "gatekeeper ' for IETAC services to the school district. In cases wb-m the Title V 
director does not want to address the parent committee's needs, the director has no incentive to call 
the IETAC to assist the parents. One IETAC staff member described a situation in which parent 
committee members called the center to learn more about its services because the Title V project 
director had not shared information about the lETACs with them. 

The lETACs also reported frustration when some Title V project directors ignore their 
suggestions about how to further improve their applications and projects. They explained that 
directors of these projects-many of which have been around for years-have little incentive to further 
improve their jj plications: they are already aware of what it takes to be funded, and they are 
reluctant to put in any extra effort beyond the minimum. 

Services Provided 

The lETACs address ,1 wide range of topics and issues m the course of their work with Title 
V grantees and potential grantees In this section we describe 'hose topics and issues that occup) j 



ERIC 



significant portion of IETAC staff time and resources and that are considered particularly important 
b/ IETAC staff and by those whom they serve. 

Grant application. The IETACs focus primarily on helping Title V grantees and potential 
grantees improve the quality of their grant applications and program designs, including plans for 
needs assessment, evaluation, and overall management and administration. Although IETAC staff 
members acknowledge that grant application assistance occupies much of their time, it is difficult to 
calculate exactly how much time and effort is spent in this activity, based on the information provided 
in current IETAC reports. In many cases, much of the IETACs' work that is typically classified 
under Task 1 and Task 2 (e.g., assistance with evaluation and program design) also addresses 
problems and questions faced in preparing the grant application (Task 5). Thus, it would be 
misguided to consider only those activities classified under Task 5 as being application related. The 
difficulty associated with calculating the level of effort expended in this activity is compounded by the 
way in which some centers report their activities— in terms of both the language used and the way 
activities are categorized. For example, in one center's report, on-site visits that are classified under 
Task 2 addressed topics such as "Grant Compliance" and "Grant Preparation'-topics one might 
expect to find under a discussion of Task 5 activities. Similarly, another center summarizes its on- 
site consultations and training sessions in terms of specific topics (e.g., design, evaluation, and parent 
involvement). It is unclear which of these on-site sessions included application related help. 

Despite these challenges, an analysis of each center's comprehensive final report, which 
describes activities conducted during the period February 1, 1991 to November 30. 1993. provides 
some general indication of the extent to which application-related assistance dominates the work of the 
centers. According to these reports. Task 5-related workshops represent between 30 and 40 percent 
of all workshops conducted at four of the centers. * Similarly, data in one report indicate that 52 
percent of that center's on-site visits include application assistance, while at another IETAC, 37 
percent of on-site visits were application related. Given that these figures are likely to be 
underestimates of the true level of effort, grant application assistance is apparently the IETACs' 
primary activity. 

Our survey data support these findings. "Grant application assistance" is the topic for which 
most grantees and potential grantees have received IETAC assistance. Eighty-five percent of these 



' It was not possible to calculate the percentage of all workshops that were Task 5-related from the 
comprehensive reports of two of the centers because of the way their data were aggregated and presented. 
For the same reason, we were unable to calculate the percentage of all on-site visits that were Task 5- 
related for four of the six centers. 



ERIC 



4 7 



respondents indicated that they received materials and information on the topic; 71 percent attended a 
regional workshop; and 41 percent received an on-site visit (tables 8, 9, and 10). 



Table 8 

IETAC Service Recipients' Requests for and Receipt of 
Materials/Information from IETAC Office 



In the past three years have you or anyone else from your district/school requested and 
received materials from an IETAC on any of the topics below? 


Information Topics 


Percentage of Sen ice Recipients 
Senice Formula Discretionary 
Recipients Grantees Grantees 

(n = 397) (n = 349) (n = 48) 


Grant application assistance 


85'? 


879; 


7\7< 


Student assessment and project evaluation 


54 


56 


46 


Program management 


50 


53 


33 


Parent committee training 


50 


51 


46 


Cultural awareness/ sensitivity training for 
staff 


36 


35 


44 


Curriculum development 


35 


32 


54 


Instructional training for teachers and tutors 


28 


26 


37 


Other 


5 


5 


10 



Table reads: Eighty-five percent of the service recipients who responded to this survey question 
reported that they or someone else from their district/school requested and received 
materials from an IETAC on grant application assistance within the past three years. 



27 



ERIC 



4 J 



Table 9 

IETAC Service Recipients' Participation in Regional Workshops 



In the part three years have you or anyone else from your district/school attended a 
regional workshop on any of the topics below? 


Workshop Topics 


Percentage of Service Recipients 
Service Formula Discretionary 
Recipients Grantees Grantees 
(n = 410) m = 362) ui=48) 


Grant application assistance 


71*5 


73 7c 


54% 


Student assessment and project evaluation 


41 


40 


46 


Program management 


40 


40 


35 


Curriculum development 


35 


35 


35 


Parent committee training 


35 


35 


37 


Cultural awareness/sensitivity training for 
staff 


31 


30 


40 


Instructional training for teachers and tutors 


21 


20 


31 


Other 


3 




0 



Table reads: Seventy-one percent of service recipients who responded to this survey question 
reported that they or someone else from their district/school attended a regional 
workshop in grant application assistance within the past three years. 



41J 



Table 10 

IETAC Service Recipients' Participation in On-Site Visits 



In the past three years have you or anyone el«e from your district/school 
participated in an on-site visit on any of the topics below? 



Percentage of Service Recipients 
All Service Formula Discretionary' 



On-Site Visit Topics 


Recipie 


Grantees 


Grantees 




(N = 398) 


(n = 350) 


(n = 4S) 


Grant application assistance 


41% 


401 


441 


Parent committee training 


32 


32 


:>.-> 


Program management 


28 


t-i 


29 


Student assessment and project evaluation 


26 


26 


31 


Cultural awareness; sensitivity training for 


20 


19 


25 


staff 








Curriculum development 


15 


13 


29 


Instructional training fcr teachers and tutors 


14 


13 


23 


Other 






1 



Table reads: Forty-one percent of the service recipients who responded to this survey question 

reported that they or someone else from their district/school participated in an on-site 
visit related to grant application assistance within the past three years 



Regional training workshops, in which participants are guided through a step-by-step review 
of the application, are scheduled throughout the year. Center staff plan carefully, often with the aid 
of large regional maps, to ensure that these workshops are located where the maximum number of 
grantees will find it convenient and affordable to attend. These efforts appear successful: an analysis 
of our survey data shows no significant differences among survey respondents in their attendance at 
workshops, based on urbanicity, Nevertheless. IETAC staff reported that grantees who are the most 
isolated or the most poorly funded find it particularly difficult to attend these sessions because the 
travel costs are prohibitive They added that these grantees are also the ones who are in greatest need 
of training since local resources (e.g.. grant writing assistance or inservice training from their school 
district) are usually limited or unavailable. 



29 



a 

ERIC 



Besides conducting regional workshops, the IETACs also visit individual sites that request 
assistance in preparing a particular section of the application or that need help in any aspect of 
program planning or management. Inexperienced Title V administrators often know very little about 
managing programs or project finances. As a result, the IETACs are often called upon to assist in 
developing management systems and administrative procedures that are suitable for an individual 
site's needs. 

IETAC service recipients can call the centers for assistance on toll-free telephone lines. OIE 
staff explained that the necessity of paying for long distance calls to OIE discourages grantees-many 
of whom have limited resources-from calling OIE rather than the IETACs when they have 
application-related questions. Even though they have no authority to approve applications. IETAC 
staff reported that Title V grantees frequently rely on the centers to act as intermediaries between 
grantees and OIE while applications are being reviewed. For example, grantees who are worried 
because they have started a new school year without receiving any notification of the status of their 
grant award often cail the IETAC. Although the IETAC staff may not know the status of the 
application, they offer comfort by explaining the application approval process and by offering possible 
explanations for the delay: they may also make a phone call to OIE on the grantee's behalf. Grantees 
also call when there have been unexpected modifications to their budget or when they have questions 
about changes or additions to their application that OIE requires. IETAC staff pride themselves on 
their accessibility and responsiveness to grantees in this regard, with one IETAC director adding. 
"My staff know how upset I become if our telephone isn't answered by the second ring." 

The importance attached to application-related assistance is further illustrated by one IETAC 
director's description of how requests for assistance are prioritized at the center' assistance is given 
first to those who are in danger of losing their funding because of a weak application, followed by 
those who have never requested services before, and finally by those who are requesting follow-up 
services. Almost all of the IETACs reported that application-related assistance is their major activity 
m terms of the time and effort they expend in this area. One IETAC director noted that it is the 
"bread and butter" of the operation because if applications are not acceptable, then projects will not 
be funded. IETAC staff believe that ensuring the continuation of good Indian education projects is a 
key part of their overall mission. 

Parent training IETAC staff also expend a great deal of their tune and resources in training 
local parent committees. Half of the service recipients indicated that they had ice^ed materials or 
information from the IETAC on this topic; 35 percent indicated that they had participated in a 
regional workshop, and 32 percent reported that they had received an on-site visit (tables S to 10) 
The 1EA requires that all LEA formula grant projects under Subpart 1 have an advisory parent 



committee that is actively involved in the planning, implementation, and evaluation of the projects. 
IETAC assistance in this area is in great demand for several reasons. First, project staff often have 
had no experience in running or training an advisory body. In addition, the task of recruiting and 
training parents is made even more difficult by the fact that many American Indian parents are 
reluctant to get involved with any school program because of past negative experiences with the 
educational system. Language and cultural differences between parents and school personnel further 
obstruct the development of sound relationships. 

The training of parent committees is time consuming, and it is often challenging for IETAC 
staff to attend to the many requests they receive for assistance in this area. IETAC staff are required 
to travel extensively (one center reported that most of its on-site requests are for parent training), and. 
because parent education levels vary widely in many communities--from those with an eighth-grade 
education to those with graduate degrees-IETAC staff must adapt their presentation of Title V rules, 
regulations, and by-laws accordingly. Nevertheless. IETAC staff members recognize this training as 
one of their most important tasks. They believe that they are uniquely qualified to do it well because 
they share a common cultural heritage and identity with the American Indian parents in their region 
and because they understand the political and economic reality of local school communities. 

On the other hand, the IETAC staff view their inability to provide intense, long-term 
assistance as a serious weakness in their work with American Indian parents. One IETAC staff 
member noted that although the center was effective in establishing a trusting working relationship 
with parents-particularly those in rural, traditional communities-staff members were unsure whether 
these first steps towards self-determination led to any definitive action after they left. Another staff 
member expressed the view that it would be more efficient and effective for the center to work with 
the Title V staff only, building their organizational capacity and "empowering" them to take on the 
responsibility of developing and training their own parent committees. 

Curriculum and instruction. All of the centers offer curriculum and instructional assistance 
to grantees and potential grantees. During our site visits, one center produced a list of 1 1 curricular 
and instructional improvements that it has accomplished with different LEAs in its region. For 
example, it had helped LEAs to: ( 1 ) employ math manipulatives and other research-based, active 
learning techniques in tutoring and instruction; (2) design cultural components that go beyond basic 
craft activity by putting tribal/ Indian art in historical contexts in order to help students recognize the 
value of Indian art; and develop cultural curriculum material and whole language units that 
reinforce academic skills by addressing state-mandated or recommended learning objectives. Staff at 
another center described how their "CRAN Man" -the person with primary responsibility for 
spearheading efforts to meet students' culturally related academic needs (CRAN)--links grantees with 



the knowledge that is available in the American Indian community by identifying local artists, 
linguists, and craftspeople who are willing to work with teachers in their classrooms. In addition, the 
"CRAN Man" amasses curriculum material on American Indian oral traditions, languages, and 
history, and works with teachers during on-site visits to develop "home-grown" materials on local 
tribes. 

Many IETAC training sessions and resource materials also explore how cultural variations 
influence classroom teaching and learning. Individual workshops for Title V staff and center- 
sponsored summer institutes for regular classroom teachers frequently address the teaching of Native 
American students, focusing on teaching skills, learning styles, and cultural curriculum development. 
Thirty-six percent of the service recipients indicated that they received "cultural awareness/sensitivity 
training" information and materials from an IETAC. 31 percent participated in a workshop on this 
topic, and 20 percent received a related on-site visit (tables 8 to 10). 

Despite the availability of cultural training in all IETAC regions, the centers vary in their 
emphasis on curricular and instructional assistance. For example, the staff at one IETAC informed us 
that they "do very little, if any" curriculum development. They explained that, because of limited 
time, personnel, and other resources, they could not define their mission broadly, ana therefore chose 
to focus primarily on providing application assistance and parent committee training; when requests 
for curriculum assistance are received, this center will usually use consultants to respond to the 
request. Although the other IETACs reported that they were involved in some curriculum 
development, none reported extensive work with curriculum; several staff members explained that 
they helped grantees to develop their own curriculum at times. 

When asked to identify the activities that would have the greatest potential for improving 
education among Indian students. IETAC staff invariably mentioned activities that are geared toward 
improving some aspect of curriculum or instruction. Given the perceived importance of this type (if 
assistance, it is disturbing to some IETAC staff that application and program management and design 
issues dominate IETAC activities and prevent them from providing more content-specific help (e.g.. 
information on curriculum development, instructional techniques, and counseling strategies) to 
grantees. For example, the percentage of survey respondents who reported that they received 
materials, an on-site visit, or ai tended a workshop on the topic of instructional training for staff 
(29 percent) is much lower th in the percentage of those who received program management (4S 
percent), or assessment- and evaluation- related assistance (51 percent). Thirty-nine percent reported 
that they received assistance in the area of cultural awareness/sensitivity training (table 4). 



The desire for increased IETAC involvement with Title V projects-beyond managerial and 
administrative assistance-was also expressed by some IETAC staff who were of the opinion that more 
direct work with students is needed, not only during the regular school day. but also in afterschool 
programs in the community. This need was echoed by teachers during an on-site visit that we 
attended. Staff members asked the IETAC presenter if he could take some of their American Indian 
students on a weekend retreat to discuss career education and cultural issues that were of particular 
interest to them. Many grantees, such as this one, have projects that address student development and 
counseling issues like dropout prevention, self-esteem, career awareness, team building, and 
leadership development. Currently, most of the IETACs' work is in training adults to work with 
students in these areas; however, some IETAC and school staff believe that students could reap 
significant benefits from interacting directly with center staff and consultants because several of them 
have expertise in these areas. 

Meeting some of the needs listed above would exceed the IETACs' resources and. in some 
cases, fall beyond the IETACs' scope of work. Many of the jentified needs require intensive and 
continuous attention over a period of years. However, due to limited resources (e.g.. small IETAC 
staff, insufficient funds to hire more consultants) and a large number of Title V grantees. IETAC 
assistance is often offered as a one-time event with follow-up provided only on request. More 
intensive assistance with in-depth follow-up (e.g.. additional on-site visits to ensure that a newly 
taught skill or technique is being implemented correctly) would facilitate the improvement of Title V 
projects but. at current funding levels, would have to be targeted to fewer projects. 

Methods for Providing Services 

IETAC services are delivered via workshops, on-site visits, telephone consultations, visits by 
service recipients to the IETAC offices, and the mail. In addition, the IF. T ACs often use fax 
machines and sometimes use computers and other technologies to transmit information and materials. 
These methods are used to address the many issues and topics that are of interest to service recipients 
For example, monthly reports from several IETACs revealed that the topics covered at workshops or 
during on-site visits within a one- or two-month period included a broad range: 

• Identifying children of alcoholics 

• Outcomes-based education 

• Career education 



• Program management strategies 

• An overview of IEA and Education Department General Administrative Regulations 
(EDGAR) 

• American Indian learning styles 

• Monitoring Title V project progress 

• Strategies for managing American Indian students' classroom behavior 

Materials. Materials development is an ongoing activity at each IETAC. One center director 
reported that when her staff are not delivering direct services, they are working on improving 
workshop materials or doing research on new workshop topics. Many of the resource and training 
units developed by this center are a direct result of information that staff in the field have gathered 
about grantee needs and requests. Every workshop and on-site visit requires the development of 
handouts that focus on a particular topic of interest. One staff member estimated that she may spend 
20 hours or more in developing materials for an on-site visit that addresses a special issue. 

Despite the efforts of some staff at each center to make use of the materials from other 
IHTACs, there is substantial duplication of effort, particularly in developing materials on needs 
assessment, evaluation, and the preparation of grant applications. One IETAC staff member observed 
that creating and maintaining a computerized database of all lETAC-created materials could save the 
IHTACs time and effort. Staff could scan the list of new materials developed each month by all 
centers, and requested items could be mailed out immediately. Furthermore, because staff members 
have different areas of interest and knowledge, an IETAC clearinghouse of materials would allow 
each center to share all their expertise, thereby giving service recipients in all regions access to the 
highest-quality materials available. 

Workshops and on-site visits. IETAC staff and consultants are careful to demonstrate then- 
cultural awareness and sensitivity at workshops and during on-site visits, especially in traditional 
reservation communities. For example, several individuals informed us that in certain communities it 
is essential to include cultural elements (e.g.. a traditional song or dance) or to draw analogies and 
comparisons to traditional religious life to illustrate specific points or concepts. Without this, the 
information being presented might not be accepted. One consultant explained; "You have to do more 
cultural Ntuft'. you have to establish a connection, or people will tight you.'' 



34 

Q 

ERIC 

ummmmmM 



IETAC regional workshops offer participants a "smattering of everything 1 ' and are held over a 
one- or two-day period. Sometimes multitopic workshops are scheduled over two days so that 
participants who have traveled far can get the most out of their trip. Typically, the first day is 
dedicated to iss'es of grant application or program management; the second day is reserved for 
individualized assistance or addresses a topic that the IETAC staff have determined-through informal 
feedback, an analysis of grant applications and deficiency notices, or direct requests--to be of interest 
to those in attendance. 

Center directors reported that a benefit of these regional workshops is that they give 
participants an opportunity to come together to network informally-an opportunity they may not 
otherwise have unless they also attend large state or national conferences dealing with Indian 
education. Several grantees with whom we spoke, particularly those from isolated communities, 
confirmed the importance of this networking opportunity. 

Information dissemination and referrals. Requests that do not require a workshop or an on- 
site visit are generally handled over the telephone, by mail, or by fax. More than one-half of the 
survey respondents reported that they have computers with modems, telephones with conference call 
capabilities, fax machines, and televisions with video players (table 11). Forty percent of the 
discretionary grantees and 25 percent of formula grantees have computers with electronic mail. 
However, our survey revealed that only 7 percent of respondents with modems reported that the 
IETACs used computers with modems to communicate with them; 5 percent indicated that the 
IETACS usee electronic mail to communicate with them (table 12). In contrast. 54 percent of those 
with fax machine.'* communicated with the IETACs via a fax machine, and 23 percent of those with 
this capability communicated with the IETACs via telephone conference calls. Other technical 
assistance providers used computers with modems and electronic mail to communicate with many 
more of our survey respondents than did the IETACs. Twenty-one percent reported that other 
technical assistance providers and agencies communicated with them via computers with modems, and 
16 percent used electronic mail for this purpose (table 12). 

IETAC staff appear to meet an important need for information among American Indian 
educators by serving as a reference service. Each month, the centers receive dozens of calls for 
information on educational, social, political, economic, and health issues directly or indirectly related 
to the education of American Indian children and adults. Requests come for information on diverse 
topics ranging from teen suicide to scholarships and internships. 

Requests for information on effective practices m Indian education are particularly commoi . 
One way in which the centers meet these requests is by disseminating information on the Effective 



Table 11 

Technology Available to Survey Respondents 



Do you have the following technology available? 


Technologies 


Percentage of Survey Respondents 
Survey Formula Discretionary 
Respondents Grantees Grantees 

(n = 505) in = 434) (n = 70) 


Fax machines 


86 % 


86< 7 c 


89% 


Televisions with video players 


80 


81 


80 


Telephones with conference-call capabilities 


58 


55 


76 


Computer with modem 


51 


50 


59 


Computer with electronic mail (E-MAIL) 


27 


25 


40 



Table reads: Eighty-six percent of the 505 survey respondents who answered this question reported 
that their project had access to a fax machine. 



Table 12 

How Tec hnology Is Used to Reach Service Recipients 



Which technologies have the IETACs or other technical assistance providers used to either 
communicate with you or provide services to your program? 



Percentage of Service Recipients Reporting 



Technologies 

Fax machines 



Telephones with conference-call 
capabilities 

Televisions with video players 



Computer with modem 



Computer with electronic mail (E-MAIL) 



Technology used by 
IETACs 

54% 

(ii = 350) 



in « 225 i 

17 

<n - -22) 



mi - iQT) 
5 

i n = i J 1 ) 



Technology used by 
Other Assistance 
Providers 

40 T 



m ■■■■ ! 
18 

21 



16 



Table reads: Fifty-four percent of the 350 service recipients who reported that their program had 

access to fax machines further reported that an IETAC communicated with or provided 
services to their program by fax machine. 



Showcase Projects that are selected from each IETAC region every year. In 1487. 01 E launched the 
initiative to recognize effective Title V projects at the regional level and to showcase these projects at 
the annual National Indian Education Association (NIEA) conference. The goal of the program is to 
encourage the development of educational methods and practices that improve effectiveness. The 
centers feature Showcase programs in their newsletters, distribute a booklet of programs at pro- 
application workshops as a source of ideas, and encourage Showcase winners to present at local 
conferences 



9 

ERIC 



53 



The centers try to keep abreast of the diverse issues about which their service recipients are 
concerned in many ways, including subscribing to education journals and magazines, conducting 
research in nearby libraries, and receiving newsletters from other Indian education organizations. 
When they find information that they deem relevant and important to a large number of grantees and 
potential grantees, they include it in newsletters they distribute to grantees and potential grantees. 
Although it does not happen frequently, when IETACs do receive requests for services or information 
that fall outside the scope of their contract, but that are relevant to other technical assistance centers 
(e.g., Drug-Free Schools and Communities Regional Centers. Desegregation Assistance Centers), 
they refer these requests to the appropriate providers. 



IETAC Staff 

1ETAC staff are typically generalists. Their ability to address a broad range of issues makes 
them helpful to Title V grantees. This type of staffing arrangement appears to fit the resource level 
of the IETACs and the types of requests for assistance that they usually receive. 

IETACs can meet requests tor specialized information by hiring consultants and by referring 
clients to other service providers. Each IETAC maintains a pool of roughly five to 35 consultants. 
They are used when the expertise that is required is not available at the center. Two centers reported 
that they make little or no use of their consultants, preferring to send their permanent staff in 
response to requests for on-site visits. Several center directors pointed out the difficulty of finding 
aood consultants for Si 50 a day. the maximum amount allowed under the IETAC contracts. 
Educators wishing to explore specific in*." actional strategies in detail (e.g.. integrated language arts, 
use of math manipulatives, the writing process) will find limited resources at their regional IETAC 
but will receive referrals to other information sources. In this sense. IETACs serve as information 
and service brokers. 

The number of full-time equivalent staff members ranges from three in Center VI. which 
serves Alaska, to seven in Center V, which serves Oklahoma and Texas. Most of the IETACs have a 
core set of staff members that has remained stable over time. It is common, however, for a few of 
the mam technical assistance providers to turn ovei every few >ears. Several directors noted that they 
are aware of the potential for burnout among staff because of the centers' demanding travel schedules. 



ERIC 



38 



53 



Staff Strengths 



In general, IETAC staffs' skills meet the demand placed on them by center work. IETAC 
staff members and IETAC service recipients generally agree on what they consider to be IETAC 
strengths. These strengths are described below. 

Skill in cross-cultural translation. Several IETAC staff members described their role as that 
of translator-between school districts and the federal government, between schools and American 
Indian communities, and between American Indian organizations and Title V grantees. These 
translation skills allow IETAC staff to demystify the federal government and Title V program 
requirements. The language of Congress and the federal bureaucracy is off-putting for many and 
confusing for most, especially parents who must understand the Title V requirements and know their 
rights and responsibilities in order to be effective committee members. In the words of one IETAC 
director. "We can live in [multiple] worlds, so we are the 'way showers'." 

In all regions. IETAC work includes improving communication between American Indian 
parents and school systems In one region where this is a prominent concern. IETAC staff have 
addressed conflicts between American Indian traditions and the schools' interest in instructional 
technology. IETAC staff distinguish between "state of the art " and "appropriate" technology when 
discussing technology as an ins'ructional tool because some tribes do not permit electricity on the 
reservation, and the introduction of new technologies can disrupt long-standing intratnbal 
relationships of status and power because those with the most tribal influence might not be those with 
access to or acumen in the new knowledge and skills. 

Breadth in educational experience and interest. Most IETAC staff have completed 
undergraduate or graduate studies in education. Several also report backgrounds in related areas such 
as counseling and psychology. In addition, centers typically have at least one staff member who ha.; 
special expertise in program evaluation. The professional experiences and special interests of IETAC 
staff members cover a wide range and complement one another. They include school administration, 
instruction, counseling, judicial affairs. American Indian music and literature, and personal and 
community health. In fact, many survey respondents -3 1 percent of the total-ranked the IETAC's 
expertise in curriculum and instruction as being among the three most valuable characteristics. Even 
more-53 percent-ranked the center staffs' abilities to locate or develop useful materials as being 
among the three most valuable IETAC characteristics. 

Knowledge of and respect for many different Indian cultures. IETAC staff members-most 
of whom are American Indian-report that then personal knowledge of American Indian cultures and 

34 



GO 



languages is important to their success in working in some areas. According to OIE and IETAC 
staff, traditional American Indian educators, parents, and other community members expect that a 
knowledge and appreciation of American Indian history-, art. traditions, and spiritual life will be an 
integral part of gatherings, including those that involve IETAC presentations. In fact, OIE staff say 
that in some communities the IETAC representative must have the same tribal background in order to 
be accepted. IETAC staff members take great pride in their ability to read and respond to their 
audiences' expectations of these shared understandings. 

The Center III IETAC. the Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory, and others sponsor 
Indian Education Summer Institutes in several northwestern states. An independent evaluator 
surveyed a r.indom sample of participants for a few months to several years after their participation. 
Of those who participated in a summer institute from 1988 to 1991. 44 percent said that learning 
about American Indian cultures and how to teach in a more culturally sensitive manner was the most 
important aspect of the institute. Twenty-six percent said that having American Indian presenters and 
participants to provide models for them was the most important (Savard. 1992). 

Our survey data indicated that although cultural sensitivity and a shared ethnic; cultural 
identity with IETAC staff are very important to some service recipients, many more service recipients 
identified other IETAC characteristics as being most valuable to them (table 13) 

lETACs and OIE 

Our interviews with IETAC staff, the Contracting Officer's Technical Representative (COTR) 
in OIF., and sev eral of OIE's education program specialists raised issues about the working 
relationships between the lETACs and OIE. These issues revolve around the lETACs' roles and 
responsibilities and the nature and frequency of communications between OIE and IETAC staff. 

Roles and Responsibilities 

Our conversations with the COTR and members of the Oil: program staff indicate that the 
r^lcs and responsibilities of the lETACs are not entirely clear to some OIE staff members: there are 
aNo varied opinions on what these roles and responsibilities should be. This confusion appears to 
,ii isc in part from OIE's organizational structure, in which different divisions manage the lETACs- and 
Title V projects The lETACs are administered by the Division of Program Support, and Title V 
projects .ire administered by the Division of Ping ram Operations. According to all OIE staff with 

40 

ERIC t.1 



whom we spoke, the Division of Program Support does not confer with program operations staff in 
defining the IETACs' roles and responsibilities. Rather, communication tends to be initiated by 
OIE's program staff, if at all. primarily to find out if an 1ETAC legally can perform a certain task 
(e.g.. assist a Title V project that needs assistance but will not seek it out). According to the COTR 
and other OIE staff, the RFP for the September 1994-May 1995 interim 1ETAC contracts was 
prepared with no input from the Division of Program Operations. 

OIE program staff spend much of their time reviewing paperwork-making sure that Title V 
applications, reimbursement requests, and. to a lesser degree, evaluations have the right information 
in the right places. Generally, these staff members are pleased if 1ETAC assistance to Title V 
grantees and potential grantees improves the quality of the applications and evaluations that OIE 
receives from the field and thus reduces the number of inaccuracies that OIE identifies. One OIE 
staff member suggested that the IETACs (and OIE) should be more active in promoting educational 
quality for American Indian students. Many IETAC staff members say they would like to pursue this 
function more aggressively because it is ultimately more fruitful than a narrow focus on the 
completion of paperwork. Although the accurate completion of paperwork is an important goal 
among OIE program staff, they rarely communicate their expectations for completion of Title V 
paperwork to IETAC staff. A couple of OIE program staff members observed that this lack of 
communication is a weak link in the system. 

S'ature and Frequency of Communication 

IETAC staff reported that communication between OIE and the centers is poor and that what 
is missing is interaction. The IETACs reported that they send materials and reports to OIE and 
receive virtually no feedback, even when they request it. For example: (1) several months before 
our visit, one center had asked ED in writing about the legality of using Title V funds for general aid 
to one school, and. at the time of our visit, the center had not yet received even an acknowledgment 
that its request for information was under consideration; and (2) another center director said that 
multiple requests to OIE for solid examples of multiyear grant applications have gone unmet. At the 
lime of our site visits, which took place between August and October, several center directors stated 
that they had yet to receive a list of discretionary grantees in their region, even though the school 
year had already begun. OIF indicated, however, that lists of grantees are routinely distributed at the 
Annual National Indian Education Association Conterences. which are held in October or November 
each year. Virtually all of the IETACs complained that the delay in forwarding copies of Title V 
grant applications r reven's the centers from using them as an educational tool during on-site work 
with individual grantees. At every center we visited. IETAC staff reported occasions when they had 

41 



G2 



learned about new developments in the Title V program from the grantees rather than from OIE. 
They said this was embarrassing and undermined their credibility with their clients. A prompt 
response by OIE to the IETACs' requests and routine as well as frequent updates on developments in 
Indian education policy would address these communication problems. 

According to the education program specialists we spoke with, there are no formal channels 
for program operations staff to communicate with the IETACs. Although there is nothing to prevent 
the program specialists and IETAC staff from calling one another, they seldom do so. One education 
program specialist said she never calls the IETACs and is not aware of the specific type of technical 
assistance they provide. Two others admitted that they are more likely to call IETAC staff they 
know-if they call at all—regardless of the region they serve. Furthermore, education program 
specialists are well aware that theii influence with IETACs is limited, despite the fact that staff in the 
Division of Program Operations may be well suited to consult with IETAC staff about the needs of 
Title V grantees and the effects of IETAC assistance on Title V projects. 

The COTR for the IETAC makes roughly one visit to each IETAC during the three-year 
contract period. The COTR communicates with IETAC directors by telephone on a weekly basis, 
usually concerning IETAC reports and clarification of federal policy. 

Coordination 

The coordination of federally supported educational programs is a growing concern among 
federal policymakers. The IETACs are required by contract to: 

... coordinate activities and share information on center activities with the U.S. Office 
of Indian Education, state education agencies, and with other Department of 
Education-funded technical assistance centers to keep [Title V] grantees informed and 
updated on resources availability. In addition, [each IETAC] shall share information 
and coordinate center activities with Indian tribes, the Bureau of Indian Affairs, higher 
education institutions, and professional Indian associations in the region to maximize 
support resources for its clientele. (ED, 1991 1 . p. 27) 

This coordination requirem it reflects the assumptions that information about available 
resources enables local educators to better serve American Indian students, that knowledge of Indian 
education efforts motivates Indian organizations to support these efforts, and that organizations 
involved with Indian education know how to coordinate once they have access to information about 
what others are doing. However, the work of the IETACs suggests that these assumptions are overly 



simplistic and only partially true. Although access to up-to-date information is necessary for 
improving education for American Indian students, efficient and productive use of that information 
must be the goal. Coordination beyond information exchange is an intricate web of networks and 
activities, and the process of identifying, combining, and recombining the knowledge and skills of 
multiple technical assistance providers with sufficient flexibility to improve education for students in 
overlapping categorical programs is uncharted territory. 

In this section we: (1) describe the extent to which Title V grantees and potential grantees are 
aware of, and seek assistance from, technical assistance providers other than the IETACs; (2) discuss 
the factors that motivate the IETACs to coordinate with different organizations and programs; (3) 
describe the types of coordination activities IETACs engage in; and (4) examine the impediments to 
coordination that IETACs face in their day-to-day work. 

The Use of Son-IETAC Services by Title V Grantees and Potential Grantees 

Although there are many federally funded technical assistance centers within each IETAC 
region (Appendix C), it appears that the majority of IEA grantees and potential grantees are 
unfamiliar with these organizations. Over 60 percent of the survey respondents who received IETAC 
services stated that they were not familiar with the following ED-sponsored technical assistance 
centers: Chapter 1 Technical Assistance Centers (62 percent), the regional educational laboratories 
(65 percent), the Bilingual Multifunctional Resource Centers (77 percent), and the Chapter 1 Rural 
Technical Assistance Centers (81 percent). This finding was surprising because, as will be discussed 
further in this section, these particular technical assistance organizations provide services and training 
that are relevant and potentially beneficial to many American Indian students and tlvir teachers. In 
addition, as mentioned earlier. 43 percent of Title V project directors are federal program 
coordinators who direct a number of these other programs. 

We asked IETAC service recipients where they would first seek assistance on a series of 
issues. A majority of survey respondents indicated that, if the need existed, they would first seek 
assistance from the IETACs in all key issue areas listed, except one: implementing schoolwide 
change (Exhibit 1). One possible explanation for this finding is that, for the most part, the IETACs 
work specifically with Indian education programs -programs that are themselves often isolated from 
other school programs and activities. Center staff have little opportunity to interact with the larger 
school community: thus it is understandable if grantees and potential grantees do not perceive them as 
operating in a broader, more influential role. 

43 



Survey respondents reported that-apart from the IETACs that they typically consult first— they 
are more inclined to seek assistance on key issues from the SEAs. LEAs. and OIE than from the 
other ED-sponsored technical assistance centers. This holds true even for issue areas in which the 
federally funded technical assistance providers have particular expertise. For example, although the 
Bilingual Multifunctional Resource Centers are noted for minority language-related educational 
services, only 13 percent of those who responded indicated they would seek assistance on teaching 
Indian culture/native languages from them first (Exhibit 1). Similarly, project design and 
development are key areas in which the Chapter 1 Technical Assistance Centers and Chapter 1 Rural 
Technical Assistance Centers are experienced and capable of offering assistance. However, only 4 
percent of respondents indicated they would first seek assistance on this topic from a Chapter 1 
Technical Assistance Center or Rural Technical Assistance Center (Exhibit 1). Survey respondents 
who are not familiar with the IETACs say the same-they would turn to SEAs. LEAs. and OIE before 
seeking help from other ED-sponsored technical assistance providers. 

This tendency to seek assistance from non-ED-sponsored assistance centers other than the 
IETACs is also evident in the information that respondents provided about who they have actually 
received assistance from in the past. Although the total number of respondents who answered each of 
the questions related to this issue was too small for in-depth analysis, the pattern was consistent with 
'he responses to the other related questions in the survey. Among those who have received 
assistance-information and materials, a workshop, or an on-site visit-from an organization other than 
the IETACs. most have received this assistance from an SEA or LEA, 

Survey respondents indicated that they rely primarily on the IETACs and. to a lesser extent. 
SEAs. LEAs. and OIE. as their source of information and technical assistance. Fewer look to other 
federally funded technical assistance providers for help. Given this reality, it is particularly important 
that the requirement under Task 4 of the RFP for the IETACs to coordinate with federally funded 
technical assistance centers be adequately fulfilled. The survey data suggest that the IETACs are the 
primary avenue through which IEA grantees and potential grantees are likely to learn of programs, 
activities, and resources that are of potential interest and importance to them and that are available 
through other federally funded technical assistance providers. 

IEA gnntees tend to rely heavily on a single source-the lETACs-which they perceive as 
being uniquely qualified to meet their needs. It is therefore imperative for any other technical 
assistance provider who seeks to serve this population to extensively and effectively communicate 
expertise and knowledge of Indian education issues to Title V grantees and potential grantees. In 
addition, an assistance provider should not only identify and provide information, training, and 
materials that are obviously and directly relevant to Indian education, but should also be skilled at 



44 



recognizing common needs among different programs and be able to adapt and modify materials, 
information, and training so that the assistance can be useful in multiple program settings (e.g., 
Chapter 1, Migrant Education. Indian Education). 

Impetus to Coordinate with Others 

Apart from the contract requirement to coordinate, the IETACs coordinate with others for 
several reasons: because they themselves need information, because others invite them to coordinate, 
and because they encounter problems whose solutions are attainable only through pooled resources. 
The list of "others" with whom the IETACs could conceivably coordinate is extensive; the number of 
federally funded technical assistance providers alone ranges from 12 in IETAC region VI to 46 in 
IETAC region I (see Appendix C), Add SEAs. Indian organizations, and colleges and universities, 
and the potential for coordination is great. 

Inter-IETAC coordination. IETAC directors maintain regular telephone contact, usually to 
deal with day-to-day details of IETAC contract work. For in-depth and long-range coordination, 
however, they look to OIE for direction. OIE leadership in this area has never been strong, say 
center staff, but it has grown weaker over the past few years. During previous contract periods, for 
example. OIE required and sponsored inter-IETAC teams to meet twice a year to address special 
issues (e.g.. management specialists met to discuss project design training; IETAC evaluation experts 
met to discuss criteria for identifying successful practices). IETAC staff said that these team meetings 
were effective vehicles for cross-center fertilization of ideas. During the 1991-93 contract period. 
OIE had to reduce the number of these events because of budget limitations. The resulting isolation 
is especially acute for Center VI. the new Alaska-based IETAC that was established with the 1991 
competition. 

Coordination with other federally funded technical assistance programs. The IETACs tend 
to coordinate with the federally funded technical assistance centers on work that clearly addresses 
issues of concern to educators of American Indians and Alaska Natives. The ED-sponsored technical 
assistance programs involved in this coordination are the Title VII Multifunctional Resource Centers, 
the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Regional Centers, and the regional educational laboratories. 

The Regional Educational Laboratory pr gram is currently involved in an American Indian 
education initiative. The initiative began in early 1991 as part of the laboratory network program-an 
effort to spark and sustain cross-lab work on pressing education issues (e.g., adult education, 
curriculum frameworks i. The labs have different levels of involvement in the various network 

45 

U O 



projects, depending on regional needs. All ten laboratories participate in the American Indian 
education initiative and have designated a lab staff member as the official American Indian education 
contact person. Two of the ten labs-Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory and the Mid- 
continent Regional Educational Laboratory-are especially active in the American Indian education 
initiative. Both have sought the expertise of IETAC staff members in formulaiing plans and 
developing materials and technical assistance strategies. The initiative recently released its first 
product--a directory of resources for American Indian education (available through ERIC). 

Striking in their absence among IETAC coordination partners are the Chapter 1 Technical 
Assistance Centers (TACs) and Rural Technical Assistance Centers (RTACs). Although there is 
overlap among students eligible for Title V and Chapter 1. the programs are minimally coordinated at 
either the local or federal level. Nobody seems to know why. The lack of connection and 
coordination between the two programs is even more puzzling, given that 51 percent of our survey 
respondents who identified themselves as the federal program coordinators for their school indicated 
that they also worked with the Chapter 1 program. 

We found a perception among many of the local educators we interviewed (and some IETAC 
staff members) that because the two programs have distinct legislative histories, funding streams, and 
program requirements, they are and should remain disassociated. Consequently. IETAC staff are 
virtually never asked to help the two programs coordinate their efforts at the local level.'" 

One IETAC staff member explained that, at the local level, coordinating the provision of 
technical assistance to school districts— for example, between Chapter 1 and Title V-would upset the 
tribes who view the needs of Indian students as unique. Additionally, they fear that coordination 
efforts would result in the unique educational and culturally related needs of the typically smaller 
American Indian student population being overlooked. Investigating the validity of these concerns 
was beyond the scope of this study. 



" Although we do not know the extent to which all Chapter 1 TACs and RTACs are called upon 
to help coordinate compensatory and Indian education services, coordination between the two 
programs is a major objective of the Region t!) RTAC. which serves exclusively BIA and tribally 
operated schools. According to the Region 10 RTAC director and OIE staff, the Region 10 RTAC 
has worked with IETAC IV on issues related to coordination within BIA sc: ools. particularly since 
the BIA has advocated the implementation of Chapter 1 schoolwide projects. Indeed, schoolwide 
projects do appear to facilitate coordination between Chapter 1 and Title V in BIA schools, according 
to the Region 10 RTAC director. 

46 

ij'd 



Another IETAC staff member argued that Indian education should not be equated with the 
compensatory or remedial education often provided under Chapter L Chapter I, which serves low- 
achieving students who attend poor schools, is intended to compensate for the adverse effects of 
poverty on academic achievement. Being an American Indian is not a deficiency that would require 
remediation. Rather, Indian education focuses on bridging the cultural and communication gap that 
exists between many Indian communities and the schools that e lucate their children. 

Equating Indian education with compensatory or remedial education is undesirable for these 
obvious reasons. However, many American Indian communities are poor (Szasz, 1991) as well as 
culturally distinctive. Because of this dual distinction, the behaviors of American Indian communities 
that are associated with poverty are commonly and erroneously labeled as American Indian cultural 
attributes by school administrators and faculty members. This confusion obstructs (1) the productive 
and respectful use of American Indian culture as a focus of instructional enrichment and as a medium 
for academic instruction; and (2) the coordination of two programs that, taken together, could have a 
more profound effect on American Indian students than either one in isolation; Chapter l--a program 
designed to improve the academic achievement of children from poor communities, and Title V— 
designed to address the culturally related academic needs of American 'ndians and Alaska Natives 
Working together. Chapter 1 TACs and lETACs could help local schools sort out these issues. 

Coordination with SEAs. The IETACs are required to negotiate a letter of cooperative 
agreement with all states that serve more than 5,000 American Indian students under Title V. At a 
minimum, these letters must be negotiated each IETAC contract period; some iETACs renegotiate 
with states each year, according to OIE staff. The negotiation process strengthens the IETACs" 
visibility and often leads to joint meetings and invitations to present at one another's training events 
One IETAC staff member suggested that the process of developing the letter of cooperative agreement 
is more helpful than the substance of the letter itself in promoting positive relations between the two 
.organizations because it requires the two organizations to introduce themselves, their missions, and 
their objectives to one another. 

In addition, the IETACs routinely advise their state cuiuacts of their workshop schedules and 
send them materials upon req ■ test . The states vary in their commitment to Indian education and their 
associations with the lETACs. Several IETAC staff members identified specific states that have a 
record of not paying attention to Indian education concerns, but others have introduced legislation in 
promote Indian languages and culture in the curriculum The lETACs are generally called upon to 
collaborate most with those states that are active in Indian education (e.g.. Washington. Oregon. New- 
York >. 

47 

o 
IC 

^ BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Coordination with American Indian organizations. The IETACs are commonly invited by 
Indian organizations to present at conferences, critique materials, and provide technical assistance to 
their staff or membership. For example. Center I routinely presents at conferences of the National 
Indian Education Association and responds to occasional requests from the National Indian Policy 
Center and the National Congress for American Indians. Center V shares information with several 
Indian organizations, including the American Indian Resource and Education Coalition. One IETAC 
director pointed out that, in the center's work with American Indian organizations, staff members take 
care to address only education-related issues and steer clear of the advocacy activities that many of the 
organizations engage in. 

Coordination with institutions of higher education. To make IETAC-sponsored staff 
development activities more attractive to potential participants, at least four IETACs have established 
cooperative arrangements with a neighboring college or university to provide IETAC workshop 
participants with continuing education units that can be applied toward recertification 

Coordination Activities 

Effective coordination with others committed to improving Indian education is an ambitious 
undertaking that involves a variety of activities, each claiming different levels of time, effort, and 
skill Furthermore, coordination is an aspect of both the IETACs' work and the work of the Title V 
grantees they serve. Thus, the IETACs can serve as practitioners, advocates, and facilitators of 
coordination aimed at improving education for American Indians and Alaska Natives. Our interviews 
with IETAC staff shed light on these dimensions of coordination as well as four types of IETAC 
coordination activities: (11 information sharing; (2) invitational presentations; (3) organizational 
support and capacity building; and (4) collaborations. 

Information sharing. Sharing information with others involved in improving education for 
Indian children and adults is the IETACs' least demanding coordination activity in terms of staff 
effort and skill. However, it serves as the foundation for all other coordination activities. According 
to many IETAC staff, a key impediment to coordination is the lack of information about other 
organizations and their Indian education activities. Thus, making one's organization known and 
finding out about others is an essential first step in the continuum of coordination activities. 

The IETACs routinely exchange newsletters, brochures, selected materials, and referrals for 
service or information with American Indian organization:. SFAs, and other federally funded 
technical assistance providers (primarily the regional educational laboratories. Title VII 



48 



Multifunctional Resource Centers, and Drug-Free Schools and Communities Regional Centers). All 
the information that the IETACs gather through these same channels is entered into the IETAC 
communications network that extends to all Title V grantees. 

In their work with Title V grantees, the IETACs also serve as advocates of coordination in 
local school districts. Several of the IETACs said they exhort grantee project staff and parent: to find 
out about the other federal program dollars flowing into their schools that may be used to improve 
education for Indian children. One IETAC staff member said, "Parents don't realize that their 
children bring a lot of [federal] money into those schools. We show them what kinds of programs 
this money can buy; we open their eyes to the business of the [whole] school. '' 

Invitational presentations. IETACs are commonly invited by American Indian organizations 
and SEAs to present at various conferences. Other state and federally funded technical assistance 
providers are often in attendance, also making presentations." Attending the same meeting or 
conference signals to participants that the IETAC and the other technical assistance providers are all 
potential resources. In addition, several IETACs and Title VII Multifunctional Resource Centers 
regularly invite one another to conduct workshops on topics of mutual concern (e.g., culturally related 
thematic units) at their respective gatherings. 

Organizational support and capacity building. Because coordination depends on the IETAC 
staff members' estimation of the competence and work style of others, continuous outreach into both 
the Indian education and technical assistance worlds is crucial for building relationships as well as 
organizational support and capacity. Much of the networking is done informally, according to IETAC 
staff, but there are several formal arrangements. Below are some examples: 

• As part of the regional educational laboratories' American Indian education initiative, 
the laboratories and IETACs convened at the annual National Indian Education 
Associ ition conference in 1992 and 1993 to discuss ways the two programs can 
benefit from and strengthen one another. One IETAC director complained that, 
despite these noble intentions, the first meeting turned into a "what information do we 
each have" session, rather than a serious discussion of what the two programs could 
accomplish through their association. Nonetheless, to the extent that the IETACs and 
labs are establishing a rapport and getting to know one another's work, they may be 
laying the foundation for future collaborations. 



ERIC 



i! Under this type of coordination activity, Center IV mentioned presenting at workshops 
sponsored by the BIA, at which the Chapter 1 RTAC also presented. 

49 

J 



• One IETAC staff member works for the IETAC part time and serves as a consultant 
to three other federal technical assistance programs. She has (1) assisted the Mid- 
continental Regional Educational Laboratory in planning its American Indian 
education initiative; (2) helped the midwest Drug-Free Schools and Communities 
Regional Center develop information and assistance for American Indian communities: 
and (3) conducted parent involvement workshops for American Indian communities as 
a consultant to a Title VII Multifunctional Resource Center. 

• One center has invited lab staff to conduct professional development for them. In 
1992 the topic was early childhood education. In 1993, to help the IETAC address its 
interest in delivering the standard preapplication workshops more cost-effectively, the 
distance learning specialist from another lab was invited to conduct a one-day 
workshop for center staff to explore the application of distance-learning technology to 
IETAC work. 

• One center's director sits on an SEA's Bilingual Advisory Board. Through this 
association, the IETAC both influences and learns about state policy that affects 
Indians. 

Collaborations. We use the term collaboration here to denote when multiple organizations 
share decisionmaking roles, planning, budgets, and other resources to provide a service that none of 
ihe collaborators could provide alone. Collaborations are the IETACs' most demanding coordination 
activities, requiring them to share interpersonal and organizational skills and resources. The IETACs 
tend to form collaborations when there is an authentic and substantive focus and not simply in 
response to the contractual requirement to coordinate. IETAC staff also acknowledge a personal 
dimension in the process of selecting collaborators: IETAC staff call on those whose work they know 
and respect. The following are two examples of IETAC collaborations with other organizations: 

• Summer institutes. 12 For the last several years, three IETACs have cosponsored 
summer institutes in a number of states. The institutes are collaborations among 
different groupings of SEAs, universities, Title VII Multifunctional Resource Centers, 
a Regional Educational Laboratory, Indian schools, and the IETACs. In all three 
regions, the collaborating university awards credit to institute participants. 

The summer institutes are the IETACs' main contact with classroom teachers; the goal 
is to infuse a working knowledge of American Indian children and effective 
instructional practices into the mainstream educational program in local schools. One 
center director explained, "We want to close the gap between [classroom) teachers and 
Title V. Somehow, teachers don't get the benefit from Title V. Some districts are 



; Under the terms of the interim contract, each IETAC is required to "hold a spring/ summer 
institute! s) no less than five (5) days in length..." The centers are also expected to coordinate with 
institutions of higher education so that participants can earn college credit 



50 



fragmented--Johnson-0'Malley. bilingual education. Title V-and there's little chance 
to connect [services to American Indian students]." 

The one-week institutes focus on effective teaching skills, learning styles, and cultural 
curriculum development to introduce teachers-many of whom are non-Indian--to 
traditional tribal culture. The IETACs believe that hands-on exposure to American 
Indian cultures will give teachers a chance to "connect" with their American Indian 
students. Some summer institutes also respond to state agendas; in Minnesota, for 
example, one institute attempted to help teachers understand and implement the new 
state-mandated cultural curriculum. 

Expositions. Center V cosponsors the Indian Education Exposition in Oklahoma 
along with the regional Title V project. Johnson-O'Malley program, and the BIA. 



Impediments to Coordination 

Despite this list of coordination efforts. IETAC staff point to the untapped potential for 
coordination. Given the press of daily work schedules, coordination is not at rhe top of the IETACs' 
agenda. When choices have to be made. IETAC staff choose to spend their time fulfilling direct 
requests from clients rather than initiating coordination. Several IETAC staff members suggested that 
OIE lead and support the IETACs in developing and implementing a multiyear agenda of 
collaborative initiatives (something similar to the laboratories' network). ED leadership may be 
especially crucial when it comes to stimulating and sustaining coordination among the IETACs and 
the Chapter 1 technical assistance programs because perception and inertia, rather than any real 
structural problem, appear to be the main barriers. 

A wide range of interview respondents reported that the IETACs are generally known for 
their expertise in helping schools and districts understand the legal aspects of the Title V categorical 
program, including informing them about regulations, assisting them in meeting reporting 
requirements, and teaching parents about their roles and responsibilities as members of a parent 
advisory committee. The perception among some that IETAC work is strictly relegated to Title V 
project management dampens requests for assistance with other school issues-such as multicultural 
curriculum and instruction, or culturally appropriate Chapter 1 tutoring-that may have more far- 
reaching effects on the education of Indian students. To the extent that this perception of a narrow 
IETAC mission is accurate, the constraint on IETAC services flies in the face of current research that 
identifies the whole school as the unit for educational program improvement (e.g.. Barth. 1941; 
Brown, 1491: Elmore & Associates. 1991). 



51 



Protection of program "turf" and the distrust of others' motivations thwart coordination at all 
levels, from local to federal. For example, the organizational separation of the Johnson-O'Malley 
program, which is administered by the B1A (of the U.S. Department of the Interior), and Title V. 
which is administered by ED, has imposed restrictions on what would otherwise be fertile ground for 
coordination. IETAC staff are not allowed to train Johnson-O'Malley program staff and parents, but 
at the local level Johnson-O'Malley and Title V administrators and parent committee members are 
often the same people. Furthermore, the Johnson-O'Malley program does not have a technical 
assistance program for its grantees. 

There is no efficient programmatic structure for sharing materials among centers. Every 
IETAC develops materials and provides training on needs assessment, the preparation ot grant 
applications, and project evaluation. Most staff members agreed that a central repository or 
clearinghouse-possibly run by one of the IETACs-would facilitate coordination. 

Cost concerns cut across all coordination activities. According to OlE staff, it was budget 
considerations that prompted them to reduce the number of annual meetings among IETAC staff, 
This has had a deleterious effect on inter-lETAC coordination, according to IETAC staff members. 
Within individual IETACs. the costs of travel, staff time, and other resources for coordination efforts 
are always weighed against those for direct services to clients. 

IETAC staff also reported that a prohibition against out-of-region travel for any purpose has 
quashed several potential collaborations among IETACs. and between IETACs and other federally 
funded technical assistance providers. For example, although Center II and Center II' IETACs both 
conduct summer institutes for educators of Indian children. OIE discourages collaboration between the 
two institutes because they occur in two different (but adjacent) regions. In another instance, when 
one of the regional laboratories invited an IETAC director to collaborate in the development of a 
training package for teachers in a state served by both the lab and the IETAC. OIE disallowed the 
travel, according to IETAC staff, because the lab is located in a state outside the IETACs region. 

IETACs and several other federally funded technical assistance programs do similar work. 
For example, the IETACs. Chapter 1 TACs and RTACs. migrant Program Coordination Centers, and 
Title VII Evaluation Assistance Centers all develop materials and training to assist their clients in 
evaluation issues such as test selection, evaluation design, and data management and analysis. Despite 
variations associated with their target student populations (e.g.. bilingual and migrant programs serve 
students who can't be tested in English; mobility confounds efforts to match pre- and post-test scores 
for migrant children) and differences in the reporting requirements for different categorical programs, 
(he principles of assessment mil evaluation .ire similar across programs (e g., establishing desired 

5: 



a 

ERIC 



outcomes; identifying meaningful and objective indicators of change: gathering data to assess 
progress; identifying milestones or interim evaluation points; methods for analyzing, interpreting, and 
reporting data). Other aspects of categorical program work-such as grant/contract management, 
fiscal accountability procedures, and strategies for assessing program needs--also lead to similar types 
of technical assistance substance and strategies across program areas. 

These similarities do not mean, however, that service recipients are saturated with technical 
assistance. Indeed, the busy fieldwork schedules of the ten ED-sponsored technical assistance 
programs reviewed in a recent study (Haslam, Janger. Laguarda, Panton & Pringle, April 1994) 
suggest that this is far from true. It does suggest coordinated service provision may indeed make the 
delivery of technical assistance more efficient and effective. For example, in schools and districts 
where limited English proficiency, cultural dissonance, and poverty affect the development of many 
students, a coordinated approach to technical assistance may facilitate a more integrated approach to 
improving educational opportunities and outcomes for all students. 



53 



ERIC 



III. EFFECTS OF IETAC SERVICES 



The success of the IETACs depends on their ability to provide useful information and 
assistance to those who request it. If their services are not perceived as useful or beneficial. Title V 
grantees and potential grantees will not continue to seek their help, and important needs may go 
unmet, 

In this section, we report on the survey respondents" assessment of the quality of IETAC 
services and describe the outcomes and effects of these services from the perspective of service 
recipients. IETAC staff, and the staff of agencies and organizations who are familiar with the work of 
the IETACs and those whom they serve. 



Service Quality 

Based on the survey data, it appears that the IETACs are fulfilling the needs of most of those 
who seek their assistance. IETAC accessibility, icsponsiveness. and their ability to locate and 
develop useful materials and resources were the three most valued IETAC attributes, according to the 
majority of survey respondents who ranked them (table 13). Relatively few survey respondents 
indicated that a shared ethnic/cultural identity with IETAC staff was particularly valuable to them. 
Although this appears to contradict the opinions expressed by IETAC staff that a shared 
ethnic/cultural identity with those whom they serve is very important to their success, a closer 
analysis of the survey question ("I share an ethnic/cultural identity with IETAC staff") and the 
identity of the survey respondents suggests that this may not necessarily be the case. IETAC staft 
emphasized the importance of this feature in their relationships with parent groups, particularly those 
residing in traditional American Indian communities. However, the surveys were completed primaril 
by Title V project staff-not representatives of parent groups-who were not necessarily of American 
Indian bad-grounds themselves. Furthermore, a Title V project director, regardless of ethnic 
background, might be more inclined to focus on the needs of the project as a whole. 



54 



Table 13 

IETAC Attributes Valued by Service Recipients 



What do you value most about IETAC services? (rank your top 3 responses) 13 



IETAC 

Characteristics 



Their accessibility 

Their response time 
to questions and 
requests 

Their ability to 
locate/develop useful 
materials and other 
resources 

Expertise/knowledge 
in curriculum and 
instruction 

Their sensitivity to 
local Indian culture 

Opportunities to 
network with other 
grantees 

I sha j an 
ethnic cultural 
identity with IETAC 
staff 

Other 



1st 

in = 402) 



12 



2nd 

(n = 373) 
19% 



18 



3rd 

(n = 356) 



14 



27 



16 



11 



10 



Percentage of 

Population 
Selecting Each 
Characteristic 
as Either 1st, 
2nd, or 3rd 

(n = 402) 



62 



53 



31 



Table reads; Forty-four percent of survey respondents ranked IETAC accessibility as the most 
valuable IETAC characteristic. 



Approximately 16 respondents (3 percent) indicated that they did not value IETAC" services 



Responsiveness 



Eighty-five percent of those who are familiar with the IETACs indicated that they requested 
materials or assistance from an IETAC. Nearly all of these respondents (99 percent) stated that they 
received the assistance they requested, and 98 percent said the IETAC response to their request came 
at "about the time needed" or "more quickly than needed.'' This finding supports the claim made by 
IETAC staff that all requests for service are answered-whether through an on-site visit, a telephone 
consultation, a written explanation, or some other means. 

The IETACs also received positive ratings for the follow-up assistance they provide. Nearly 
all (98 percent) of those who reported that they requested follow-up services indicated that the IETAC 
had followed up on their requests by sending additional materials, providing additional contacts on a 
specific topic, or setting up an on-site visit. Eighty-four percent of these service recipients described 
the IETACs' follow-up assistance as "very responsive" to their needs, and 14 percent described the 
follow-up assistance as "moderately responsive." 



ERIC 



Usefulness 

Those respondents who received different types of assistance (e g.„ materials, workshops, on- 
site visits) in various topic areas were typically very positive about their experiences. Few (less than 
10 percent of those who rated the usefulness of each topic) reported that they found the assistance that 
was offered to be "not at all useful." while two-thirds or more found the assistance to be "very 
useful. " 

IETAC service recipients who rated the usefulness of IETAC materials and services (e.g.. 
workshops, on-site visits) vis-a-vis materials and services provided by other technical assistance 
providers also judged the IETACs very favorably (table 14). Over half (54 percent) of the service 
recipients who compared IETAC materials and workshops with the materials and workshops provided 
by other technical assistance providers indicated that IETAC materials and workshops were "more 
useful" than those provided by other technical assistance providers. Similarly. 60 percent gave the 
IETAC on-site visits a superior rating. Very few service recipients (between 5 and 8 percent in each 
of the three areas) reported that IETAC materials, workshops, or on-site visits were "less useful" than 
the services provided by other technical assistance providers. 

Overall, our survey respondents could find little to say that was negative about IETAC staff 
and their services Two-thirds (66 percent) of the service recipients who responded to the question on 

56 



V V 



IETAC shortcomings indicated that there were "no shortcomings " in IETAC services. Respondents 
who did indicate shortcomings were divided fairly evenly across the list of possible shortcomings: 'I 
had heard the training before...'' (6 percent), "the assistance was too managerial with little focus on 
curriculum issues, parenting skills..." (5 percent), and "the assistance did not apply to our project" (4 
percent). A few also felt that the IETACs did not provide a direct answer to their questions (4 
percent), and that the IETACs did not spend sufficient time with their program (3 percent). 

Further analysis of the data discussed in this section by type of grantee (e.g.. formula versus 
discretionary grantees), urbanicity. grant amount, number of years the program was funded, and 
focus of the Indian education project yielded no significant differences among subgroups of 
respondents in terms of their perceptions of IETAC usefulness and responsiveness. 

Indeed, several of the SEA and organization representatives said that the place for 
improvement in technical assistance for Indian education is in the nature and scope of the IETACs' 
mandate to assist. Specific recommendations for improving the IETACs' effectiveness by changing 
their mandate include the following: 

• IETACs should be permitted and encouraged to address systemic changes in local 
schools and districts that would benefit American Indian children; IETACs need to 
develop local capacity for integrating Indian education issues into the mainstream 
education discourse by focusing technical assistance on school improvement, with an 
emphasis on multiculturalism: 

• Rules and regulations that currently prohibit or discourage IETACs from involving 
themselves in some of the most pressing needs that face American Indian communities 
today-such as awareness of alcohol abuse, youth leadership, and community 
weilness-should be reversed: 

• IETAC assistance is high-quality but. by design, low-intensity: higher-intensity 
assistance may increase effectiveness; and 

• 01 E and the IETACs should share information about successful Indian education 
programs with a larger audience through the National Diffusion Network and other 
networks geared to promote effective educational practices, 



57 



Table 14 

IETAC Technical Assistance Compared with Assistance from Other 

Providers 



How does IETAC technical assistance compare with that of other technical 
assistance providers? 


Ratings by Service Recipients Materials 


Workshops 


On-site Visits 


(n = 236) 


(n=228) 


(n = 179) 


More Useful 54 % 


54% 


60% 


About the Same 41 


37 


33 


Less Useful 5 


8 


8 



Table reads: Fifty-four percent of survey respondents reported that IETAC materials 
were more useful than materials provided by other technical assistance 
providers. 



Reported Outcomes 

Survey Respondents ' Assessments of IETAC Effectiveness 

When IETAC service recipients were asked whether they had changed their projects based on 
IETAC assistance. 43 percent reported that they had. The influence of the IETACs is most evident 
among formula grantees. For example. 45 percent of formula grantees indicated that they had made 
changes to their projects; only 27 percent of discretiona r y grantees indicated that they had made 
changes. 

Of those that changed their projects. 54 percent identified needs assessment procedures as the 
programmatic feature that was changed. 52 percent pointed to program design, and 46 percent said 
evaluation design (table 15V This overall pattern holds up across formula and discretionary grantees 
although the proportions vary. 



58 

I J 



Table 15 

Programmatic Changes Resulting from IETAC Assistance 



How has IETAC assistance helped you to change your Title V pi ogram? 
(CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY) 







Formula 


Discretionary 


Type of Change 


Total 


Grantees 


Grantees' 




(n = 183) 


(n=166) 


(n=17) 


Needs assessment procedures 


54% 


56% 


41% 


Program design 


52 


54 


35 


Evaluation design 


46 


48 


29 


New curriculum materials 


25 


25 


24 


Teaching practices 


20 


20 


18 


Other 


9 


9 


6 



Caution: This 'n" is very J mall--each respondent accounts for approximately 6 

percentaae points 

1 1 

Table reads: Of those who reported that an IETAC helped them change some aspect of their 
program, 54 percent mad': changes to their needs assessment procedures. 

Perceptions of IETAC Effectiveness among Other Organizations 

To understand the perceptions of other organizations regarding the effectiveness of IETAC 
services, we conducted telephone interviews with informed individuals in five state departments of 
education (spread across the major geographic regions of the country) and in four Indian education 
organizations. Although the views of these individuals are by no means nationally representative, 
they do offer an impression of how the IETACs' services are perceived by some who are involved 
with Indian education and are familiar witn the IETACs, but who are not local Title V grantees 

Overall, these individuals report a positive view of the IETAC staff and their work, 
specifying that IETAC staff are well informed and generally well regarded, accessible, and pleasant to 
work with One SEA representative noted that because of thee staff characteristics and the fact that 
IETACs have entry into many schools that serve American Indian children, the IETACs are 
particularly well positioned to serve as a catalyst for broad-based educational change that will improve 



learning conditions for American Indian students. However, the IETAC mandate must change for 
this potential to be realized. 



IETAC Perceptions of Their Own Effectiveness 

OIE's accountability procedures require IETACs to tell OIE what they are doing and what 
they have accomplished in terms of adherence to the Baseline Management Plan, which is required by 
the contract's statement of work. The IETACs do this through monthly reports, annual reports, and 
an end-of-contract-period report. The reports are very detailed, listing all center work by task and 
accounting for all workshops, on-site assistance, telephone calls, and dissemination activities. The 
annual and end-of-contract-period reports also include a self-assessment of effectiveness that typically 
lists the skills and capacities taught to grantees by IETAC staff and summarizes workshop evaluation 
scores. 

The IETACs' accountability for the ultimate effects of their work is limited. Two center 
directors in particular observed that, although the reporting requirements are effective in forcing the 
IETACs to assemble reliable data that can help them organize and implement their own programs, 
they are of little use in gauging improvement in Title V grantee projects. The IETACs are not. for 
example, required to track the effects of their services in terms of project-related changes made by 
grantees, or the quality and characteristics of actual educational services to students. Several IETAC 
staff members pointed out that given the small contribution that Title V projects make tc the overall 
educational program in most schools, combined with all of the other intervening variables in schools, 
tracking the influence of IETAC services would be impossible. 

Instead. IETACs look to more immediate and short-term indications of client satisfaction to 
gaus'e the value of their work. The primary source of formal feedback that the IETACs receive from 
their service recipients is workshop evaluation forms. These are distributed at every workshop, and 
participants are asked to rate components of the session (e.g.. presentation, knowledge of subject, 
usefulness of information) on a five-point Liken scale. Our document review indicated that 
participants in IETAC workshops give them high marks, with most receiving a 4- rating. Although 
they are proud of the high scores they receive, most IETAC directors acknowledge the limitations of 
the forms, adding that they must be 'taken fur what they're worth." Several stated that because 
comments ;ind suggestions for improvement are rarely offered, they have little to guide them in 
making changes and improvements. 



ERIC 



hi) 



bi. 



There is no formal mechanism in place to provide feedback on the quality of IETAC 
materials, phone and mail assistance, or on-site visits, Evaluation forms are deemed inappropriate for 
these services because respondents would not be anonymous. For these services, the IETAC staff 
reporred that they rely on conversations with grantees during and after the service, body language, 
facial expressions, and level of engagement during consultations and training sessions. They also 
receive unsolicited comments in the mail, over the telephone, and at conferences and other events that 
grantees and potential grantees attend. 

Although some IETAC staff pointed to the progress that some parent committees luve made 
in their region and to improvements in the quality of instructional materials that are now available in 
some districts, few could provide definitive indicators of how their work with grantees has led to 
direct improvements in education for American Indian students. Typically. IETAC directors pointed 
out that they cannot accurately isolate IETAC effects because of: (!) the limited contact that they 
typically have with grantees; (2) the supplementary nature of the Title V program and its lack of 
connectedness to the regular school program in most districts; and (3) the presence of many other 
intervening programmatic variables (e.g., Chapter 1. Title VII) that influence American Indian 
students. 

Several IETAC directors reported improvements in the uveal! quality of IEA grant 
applications in recent years and a reduction in the number of deficiency notices that grantees have 
received. These reported improvements in program design, needs assessments, and evaluation 
designs were offered as evidence of IETAC effectiveness. One director concluded: "If our job is 
creating better Title V applications, then we ran see we are doing that." 

Despite their apparent effectiveness and videspread recognition of the need for application- 
related assistance, IETAC staff expressed mixed feelings about being so heavily involved in this 
process. Many staff members noted ironically that although they are responsible for ensuring the 
submission of high-quality formula grant applications, they have no authority to require applicants to 
meet high standards in order to receive funding. Several pointed to occasions when grantees ignored 
their suggestions for project improvement, claiming that the changes were unnecessary for securing 
grant funds. Other IETAC staff pointed out that standards and requirements for acceptability seem to 
vary from year to year, with the result that it is difficult to give advice on what constitutes a "good ' 
application Frustration over this issue led one director to comment that "since Oil-, is responsible I'm 
assessing the applications, it should be responsible for providing the required training . 



ERIC 



hi 



b2 



Strengths and Limitations of the IETAC Role 



High visibility is a measure of IETAC success in itself; being recognized as a resource is an 
important precondition for assisting and ultimately influencing local Title V projects. The fact that 92 
percent of 512 survey respondents reported that they have heard of the IETACs and 90 percent of 473 
respondents said they are familiar with IETAC services suggests that the IETACs have positioned 
themselves to be influential change agents. 

The important question is: Change agent for what? As illustrated in table 15. the areas in 
which the IETACs currently appear to have the most influence are those associated with the 
preparation of the Title V grant application: needs assessment procedures, program design, and 
evaluation design. These are in fact strategic areas that can help inform-and be informed by-school 
and district plans and activities that are aimed at educational improvement for all students (e.g.. Goals 
2000 plans, standard-setting activities, alternative assessment designs). However, the evidence 
suggests that OIE will need to provide clear signals of intent and support to IETAC staff and 
Title V grantees for many grantees to take a strategic approach rather than focusing more narrowly on 
project procedures. 

Time is also at issue. There is a widespread perception among IETAC staff that attention to 
improving applications reduces their availability to provide grantees with more of the substantive 
assistance needed to improve conditions for American Indian students within the context of schools 
and districts. One IETAC director pointed out that "good applications do not necessarily mean good 
programs " In this director's view. IETACs should be more involved in helping grantees develop and 
implement a more integrated vision of Indian education-which is more directly related to educational 
improvement-rather than focusing so heavily on applications and other managerial and administrative 
concerns related to an isolated project. 



What Influences IETAC Effectiveness 

Based on our analysis of the findings described in this report, we have been able to identify 
several key factors and conditions that facilitate and impede IETAC effectiveness. The findings and 
conclusions related to each are summarized below 



62 



a 

ERIC 



Factors and Conditions that Facilitate Effectiveness 

Cross-cultural knowledge and sensitivity. The fact that IETAC staff members and consultants 
are knowledgeable of and sensitive to local American Indian culture is very important to some 
American Indian parents and staff, particularly those who live in very traditional communities. 
Although those who are not American Indian may possess this sensitivity, the fact that the majority of 
IETAC staff are American Indian and are familiar with the language and customs of various tribes is 
important, and cannot be overlooked or discounted. A failure to recognize and consider the unique 
attributes of American Indian culture in the process of delivering technical assistance might harm the 
relationship between technical assistance providers and those whom they serve and reduce the 
effectiveness of the assistance offered. 

Widespread recognition. The IETACs are well known among those who are involved in the 
field of Indian education. Their high visibility enables them to be a useful and valuable conduit for 
knowledge and information on a range of topics and issues that are of interest and relevance to Title 
V grantees and potential grantees. 

Well-planned and organized services. A great deal of thought and planning goes into the 
scheduling of each IETAC workshop. IETAC staff are aware that most grantees and potential 
grantees operate with limited resources and are often widely dispersed throughout the region. Using 
regional map* and other information. IETAC staff endeavor to select workshop sites that are 
accessible to as many grantees as possible-even those located in remote areas. In addition, IETAC 
staff are aware that attending workshops is costly to many grantees and potential grantees, particularly 
in terms of travel costs and personnel time. Thus, centers use various strategies to make their 
workshops attractive and worthwhile to those who must travel far. and who have limited resources. 
For example, workshops are sometimes held over a two- rather than one-day period so that attendees 
can get the most for their effort; multiple topics-that are often decided upon based on an analysis ot 
attendees' needs-are addressed during each workshop so a wider range of needs can be met: and time 
for individual consultations and assistance is often scheduled for those who need specific help for their 
projects. 

Experience and responsiveness. The IETACs have the knowledge and skills to fulfill their 
responsibilities and are able to satisfy the terms of their contracts. In addition, the centers are 
responsive to the needs of those whom they serve (e.g., telephone calls are answered promptly, 
information is gathered in a timely manner) and they communicate this sense of caring to those whom 
they serv:. 

ft 3 



b-i 



Factors and Conditions that Impede Effectiveness 

Over-emphasis on grant application assistance. Title V grantees focus a great deal of 
attention on their grant applications and the managerial and administrative details that must be 
attended to in order to satisfy federal requirements. As a result, much of the technical assistance they 
seek and receive from the IETACs is concentrated in these areas (e.g., completing the needs 
assessment section of the grant application, developing program management strategies). Assistance 
related to the content and substance of Title V projects, or that addresses some of the other identified 
needs described earlier in this report, is offered far less frequently and appears to be of secondary 
importance-even though this type of assistance is likely to have a more direct impact on the quality 
of the educational services that American Indian students receive. Although service recipients are 
generally satisfied with the quality and usefulness of the work the IETACs do. many Title V grantees 
and representatives of SEAs and other Indian education organizations believe that with a broader 
mandate and a redirection of resources, the centers could be more effective in helping grantees to 
improve the overall quality of the educational services they provide. 

Accountability requirements that emphasize the quantity of senices over the quality and 
intensity of the assistance. IETACs are required to demonstrate that they serve a large number of 
grantees, so they keep detailed records of each individual contact (e.g.. phone calls, mailings, on-site 
visits) they make. In contrast, they are not required to provide information on the intensity of the 
assistance provided, or to demonstrate that the service recipient used the information they received to 
implement specific changes or achieve improvements in their project. According to one director, two 
or three face-to-face encounters with a single grantee-including regional workshops-is the high end 
of current grantee-lETAC contact. Unfortunately, ihis low-intensity assistance that the IETACs offer 
is unlikely to have a lasting effect, regardless of the quality of each individual assistance episode. 
Several decades of research have demonstrated that educational change is a complex process ;hat takes 
time (Chimenne. Haslam. & Laguarda. 1994; Fullan. 1991: McLaughlin. 1990). and the IETACs do 
not provide the sustained, long-term help to individual grantees that is necessary for this to occur. 

Contractual and legislative requirements that restrict IETAC initiative. Conflicts among and 
between individuals involved in a Title V project (e.g., parents, teachers, school administrators), a 
lack of authority among some to request IETAC services, and the absence of desire and motivation 
among some Title V directors and staff to strive for excellence rather than the minimum standards of 
acceptability, all serve to hinder the work of the IETACs in some school districts. When such 
conditions exist, the IETACs may not be invited In to provide assistance even though help is 
desperately needed and some individuals (e.g.. a parent group) do want a center's help. Because the 
IETACs must he formally invited in to offer specific help, their ability to take the initiative in making 



64 



suggestions for improvements, to go beyond the specific request that has been made to address other 
noticeable problems, or to coax relucrant administrators to strive for greater improvements, are all 
restricted. 

Limited support for coordination . There is little leadership and support for coordination 
among technical assistance providers at the federal level (e.g.. the COTRs in charge of each technical 
assistance program rarely communicate with each other). In addition, contract regulations that 
prohibit out-of-region travel for IETAC staff and that have reduced funding for meetings of IETAC 
directors effectively eliminate opportunities for increased coordination between the IETACs and other 
technical assistance providers, and among the IETACs themselves. As a result, some of the benefits 
of coordination that might have accrued to IETAC staff (e.g.. staff development opportunities) and 
their service recipients (e.g.. access to new information and materials) are not realized. 

Limited use of technology. The IETACs could make greater use of technology to more 
efficiently produce and disseminate information and materials to service recipients. For example, 
although each center spends a great deal of time researching and preparing materials on a range of 
topics that are relevant to all IETAC service recipients, there is no central database or clearinghouse 
into which such documents are deposited and organized. Similarly, although many IETAC service 
recipients have computers. E-mail, and other technologies that they use to communicate with other 
technical assistance providers, the IETACs have used these technologies with less frequency. 

Poor communication and coordination between the IETACs and OIE Most Title V 
grantees regularly interact with both OIE and the IETACs. and the content and quality of their 
projects are shaped by these interactions. When there are inconsistencies in the information and 
guidance that are provided by each organization it is. at the very least, frustrating to grantees. The 
current relationship between OIE and the IETACs does not include the mutual exchange of ideas and 
information that could lead to the development of programmatic changes and improvements-within 
the IETACs. 0!E. and or Title V projects--that might ultimately improve educational services to 
American Indian students. 



h5 

o 

ERIC 



IV. APPROACHES FOR IMPROVING 
ED-SPONSORED TECHNICAL ASSISTANCE 



In this section we suggest several approaches for ED to consider that are likely to enhance the 
ability of technical assistance providers to contribute to educational improvements for American 
Indian students. In many cases, the new directions suggested are also relevant and potentially useful 
to ED-sponsored technical assistance providers who offer assistance to programs that target other 
groups of students (e.g., limited English proficient, migrant). 

The approaches outlined below reflect the suggestions of those whom we have interviewed, as 
well as the conclusions that we have reached based on our analysis of all the data collected throughout 
our study. Specifically, they address new roles and responsibilities for assistance providers, the 
internal operations and relationships among groups of assistance providers who address the same 
program needs, and the relationships between ED-sponsored technical assistance providers and ED. 



Roles and Responsibilities 



1 . Reassign grant application-related responsibilities. 

The IETACs are similar to other technical assistance providers that support categorical 
programs (e.g.. Chapter 1 TACs and RTACs. Migrant Education Program Coordination Centers. 
Title VII Multifunctional Resource Centers) in that they focus a great deal of attention on helping 
their service recipients understand and perform tasks related to meeting program regulations. If. 
however, the assistance providers' application-related responsibilities were relieved or eliminated, they 
would be able to focus more of their energies on helping grantees meet the instructional, curricular. 
and developmental needs of their Indian students. 

The IETAC staf f view the latter ta?k as more directly related to genuine program 
improvement; however. Title V grantees will continue to need assistance with the administrative and 
managerial tasks associated with completing applications and designing sound programs. One 
possible solution is to have one or more centers specialize in ijrant application assistance, thereby 
eliminating the need for others to offer this service. Assistance providers in other regions would then 
have ihe time and resources to responu to the non-application needs of grantees in more than one 

by 



region. Another solution is to give OIE this responsibility. There are approximately 25 full-time 
IETAC staff members. Estimates of the amount of time spent on assistance that is directly or 
indirectly related to the grant application-based on conversations with IETAC staff and a review of 
IETAC documents-range from n minimum of one-third of their time to as high as 90 percent. This 
suggests that OIE would need to hire a minimum of eight full-time staff to work exclusively on 
helping grantees in this area. Twice that number might be necessary to ensure that grantees continue 
to enjoy the level of attention and responsiveness that they have come to expect from the lETACs. In 
addition. OIE would have to take steps to increase its outreach and accessibility to grantees and 
potential grantees (e.g.. improving communication through the creation of a toll-free telephone line 
for Title V grantees) if quality service is to be maintained. 

With the elimination of the requirement to provide grant application assistance, technical 
assistance providers may need to work harder to establish connections with the Indian education 
community. Since applications may be approved-arid programs funded-without the services of a 
technical assistance provider, request for technical assistance may decrease. Assistance providers may 
find that they are required to be more assertive in their efforts to disseminate information on the kinds 
of help that are available, identify- needs, and convince potential service recipients of the need for 
their services as a means of improving Title V program qualitv. 



2 Direct assistance providers to offer more intensive assistance in improving the content of 
Title V programs (e.g., curriculum and informational materials, instructional approaches, and 
counseling practices). 

The heavy emphasis on preapplication workshops and application "clean-up" steals time from 
more complex and more far-reaching types of assistance. As Turnbull (1994) points out in her paper 
on technical assistance and systemic reform, sustained, long-term assistance that includes the 
transmittal of new information and materials, the modeling of new skills, and the observation and 
ongoing critique of the implementation of new instructional strategies, curriculum, and policies, is 
likely to be more effective in improving education programs than the pattern of one-time-onlv 
assistance that most technical assistance service recipients currently receive. More intensive 
"coaching" must be characteristic of the technical assistance the centers provide if it is to result in the 
"the profound changes in individual and organizational capacity" that are needed in main schools and 
districts (Turnbull. 1994). The problems of poor student achievement, alienated parents, inadequately 
prepared school staff, and resource-starved school districts that we know are present in main- 
communities are widespread and deepseated. Intensive, long-term help is required to combat them 



b6 



ERIC 



The evaluation of the Chapter 1 program improvement initiative (Chimerine. Haslam, & 
Laguarda. 1994) illustrates how difficult it is to "create and support technical assistance programs that 
recognize and address the complexity of school change and the professional needs and capabilities of 
educators." The study's findings suggest that technical assistance should not only be sustained over a 
reasonably long period of time, but it should move beyond the simple transfer of knowledge and 
skills; assistance should enhance participants' problem-solving skills, and participants should be fully 
engaged in the change process, not passive recipients of assistance. 

3 Direct assistance providers to help promote in the mainstream operations of schools and 
districts, the integration and institutionalization of teaching practices and materials that are effective 
with American Indian students. 

Several SEA and Indian education organization representatives suggest that the lETACs 
should adopt and promote a more integrated approach to Indian education, one that views effective 
education for American Indians within the contest of-not separate from-mainstream education. In 
addition, most IETAC staff members believe that working with the Title V program in isolation from 
the wider school environment is unlikely to result in educational improvements and changes that will 
promote real academic progress among American Indian students. American Indian students still 
return to c ! assrooms that lack culturally appropriate curriculum, and to teachers and fellow students 
who frequently make inappropriate and insensitive comments, exhibit hostile attitudes, or display a 
general lack of cross-cultural understanding. 

Technical assistance providers should help Title V grantees to develop strategies for 
integrating their projects with general school programs, and they could contribute to schoolwide and 
districtwide improvement initiatives by helping teachers and administrators develop new programs and 
structures that address the needs of their American Indian students. The Indian Nations at Risk task 
force made similar recommendations in its report when it called for greater integration of "the 
contemporary, historical, and cultural perspectives of American Natives" in education (ED. October 
199 P. p. 24). The report added that education should have "a multicultural focus to eliminate racism 
and promote understanding among all races." 

4 Authorize technical assistance providers to he more proactive in their relationships with Title 
V grantees, and require that grantees seek technical assistance when particular needs or areas of 
weakness in their project have been identified by ED or the technical assistance provider. 



Because of their close contact with grantees, the lETACs are often the first to become aware 
of which local projects are particularly weak, which are blatantly out of compliance (e.g., using funds 
for unauthorized activities), and which have internal conflicts that have prevented them from 
requesting assistance. Currently the IETACs have no authority to ensure that these projects take the 
necessary steps towards improving their services to American Indian students. This has hindered 
their ability to influence change and improvements. By: (1) aut orizing technical assistance 
providers to initiate contact with school district and Title V project personnel, or (2) requiring that 
grantees seek technical assistance when needed (e.g.. by making it a condition for future funding), 
policymakers could enable assistance providers to positively affect the weakest projects in their 
region. The second option, while taking a stronger stand on the provision of assistance, has the 
possible disadvantage of placing the assistance provider in a new and perhaps unwelcome role— that of 
a manda*ed intervention rather than an invited helper. 



5 Organize technical assistance to develop the capacity of communities to address some of 
their own local needs. 

Technical assistance providers could assist American Indian educators within SEAs. LEAs, 
tribal colleges, and other local institutions to address local parent committee training needs. 
Assistance providers could also offer training in conflict mediation and team building where 
necessary. Not only would this allow assistance providers to devote more of their time to other areas 
of need, but these local personnel would oe in a better position to offer the kind of long-term follow- 
up that is necessary 'br real change and improvements to occur. 



6 Organize technical assistance to encourage and facilitate the building of partnerships and 
networks among Title V projects and organizations in local communities (e.g., tribes, businesses, 
health care and social service providers) for the purpose of sharing information, and locating and 
directing additional resources to meeting the multiple needs of American Indian students. 

Among the many goals of current education reform efforts is that of better integrating 
education and related services. To this end. technical assistance providers should work to increase 
awareness of locally available resources and offer guidance on how these resources can be effectively 
integrated into service recipients' programs in order to increase their impact. 

Based on information provided by IETAC staff members, and on comments written in the 
surveys l.y several Title V directors, it is apparent that many Indian education projects arc in need of 



ERIC 



additional resources to more effectively meet the needs of their students. Through the establishment 
of partnerships and linkages between grantees and local organizations, some of these needs can be 
addressed. For example, local organizations may share facilities for afterschool programs and 
activities, college students and staff may volunteer their services by being mentors to students, 
businesses may make financial donations or provide students with valuable volunteer or paid 
employment opportunities, and counselors from local agencies may be invited in to provide follow-up 
services to students. 

Technical assistance providers such as the Special Education Regional Resource Centers, the 
Vocational Education Curriculum Coordination Centers, and the Title VII Multifunctional Resource 
Centers actively promote the creation of networks among their service recipients (e.g.. state 
policymakers, program managers, superintendents, principals) for the purpose of sharing information 
and addressing issues of mutual concern. Title V grantees could derive similar benefits from the 
establishment of formal networks that are facilitated by technical assistance providers. 

7 Fund each technical assistance provider to develop and carry out research projects that 
address questions that are important in their own regions, and that are also relevant to the broader 
American Indian education community. 

In recent vears. a number of American Indian educators from around the country have called 
for more research efforts in the area of American Indian education. For example, one of the 
recommendations made by the Indian Nations at Risk task force was for the establishment of a 
national research and school improvement center for Indian education that "would serve as a resource 
for schools educating American Indian children, tribes, state departments of education, and 
universities. .."(ED. October 1991. p. 29). The IETACs have close, ongoing relationships with 
American Indian students, parents, and educators in every region of the country. With additional 
resources and an appropriately trained staff, they could take advantage of their proximity and access 
to American Indian students and institutions (e.g.. tribal colleges) to contribute to a national American 
Mdian jducation research agenda by conducting studies on a range of topics that are of interest to 
educators (e.g.. a broad-based study of American Indian children's learning styles and their effects on 
student assessment). In addition, regionally based centers could disseminate research findings 
nationwide. 

There is precedent for combining research and assistance roies In addition to their technical 
jssistance responsibilities, the reg ; onal educational laboratories also conduct applied research and 
disseminate findings on a range of educational topics ind issues to school districts, state pohc\ makers. 

"0 



[Ji 



and other interested parties. In a recently completed evaluation of the regional educational 
laboratories (Policy Studies Associates, forthcoming), service recipients indicated that they value the 
laboratories' knowledge of research and their ability to integrate this knowledge with the assistance 
they provide. c or example, workshops frequently include information generated from ongoing or 
recent applied research and development. 



8. Permit some specialization of functions across centers, coupled with more active 
coordination among the centers. 

The existing duplication of effort across the IETACs could be lessened by encouraging 
assistance providers that serve the same program to pool their resources in such functions as materials 
development. Taking this coordination a step further, particular centers could develop special 
expertise in one or more issues (e.g.. adult education, curriculum development) and then act as 
resources to the other centers. Such specialization could go hand-in-hand with the development of 
closer collaboration across the network of centers that serve the same program, and would help to 
expand the notion of collaboration among technical assistance providers beyond information sharing to 
include the exchange of products and training materials. Some examples of this kind of collaboration 
among technical assistance centers within the same program are found in the Special Education 
Regional Resource Centos (which coordinate activities through 12 collaborative work groups that 
draw members from each of six centers) and the Title VII Multifunctional Resource Centers and 
Migrant Educarion Program Coordination Centers (both of which permit up to ten person-days a year 
for staff to share ideas and information with other centers in the program). 

This concept of specialization coupled with increased coorcii..ution may be extended to include 
all federal technical assistance programs. Recipients of federal technical assistance in. various 
programs (e.g.. Chapter 1. special education, Indian education, bilingual education) regularly seek 
help in trying to understand and comply with federal requirements and regulations related to their 
programs; however, much uf this information and assistance has little direct bearing on the content or 
quality of the educational services they provide (Turnbull. 1994). If a distinction were made between 
administrative and managerial technical assistance services versus assistance that is targeted at 
improving the quality and content of education services--and centers allowed to specialize in one or 
the other-services might be provided more efficiently. For example, a technical assistance provider 
who is knowledgeable and familiar with an issue cutting across several different programs could 
provide help in these areas to service recipients in a various programs In addition, this technical 
assistance provider would he able to recognize the similarities between programs and could, on man\ 
occasions, enjoy 'economies of scale " (e g . by scheduling one workshop on needs assessment that 



ERIC 



<J2 



representatives of different programs--who need this information and skill because of similar program 
requirements-would find useful). This would allow other technical assistance providers to 
concentrate their efforts and resources on "capacity buiiding" activities that will likely improve the 
quality of the services that the recipients of technical assistance provide to students. Financial 
benefits (e.g., a reduction in travel costs) might also be realized. 

Internal Operations 

9, Expand the use of technology in order to more effectively meet the needs of Title V grantees 
and potential grantees. 

The creation of a database uf documents related to Indian education for use by educators, 
parents, and students would facilitate the dissemination of needed materials and information to local 
communities. Our survey data indicate that almost half of all IETAC service recipients and potential 
service recipients have access to a computer that could be used to tap into a database of reports, 
curriculum, and raining materials that are maintained by a technical assistance provider. This kind of 
support is available to other programs. For example, each Title VII Multifunctional Resource Center 
is responsible for gathering information (e.g.. research findings, curriculum materials) on a particular 
topic in bilingual education. Materials are then forwarded to a central clearinghouse where they are 
organized, filed, and disseminated on request to Title VII programs. 

Our survey data also indicate that the majority of IETAC service recipients and potential 
service recipients have access to televisions with video players. Another possible use of technology 
involves the development of training videos that address some of the more frequent and standardized 
requests of grantees (e.g.. steps to follow in conducting a needs assessment, or a guide for developing 
program objectives). A team of OIE staff, technical assistance center directors, and experienced Title 
V administrators could preview each video to ensure that all relevant questions and issues are 
adequately addressed. A document providing information on subsequent modifications couL he 
published annually and disseminated to each grantee in order to keep video information from the 
centers current. E-mail may also be used to keep grantees abreast of new developments. 

The telephone conferencing capabilities of service recipients could aiso be used more 
effectively Assistance providers could schedule and organize telephone conference calls among 
groups of Title V grantees who might benefit fr m the opportunity to network with others >*r to 
discuss issues of mutual concern 



l u3 



In addition to using technology as a tool for improving the delivery' of technical assistance, 
technical assistance providers can also help to promote the use of technology by American Indian 
students in educational settings. This would be in keeping with the re :ommendation made by the 
Indian Nations at Risk task force which called for the creation of "a national information center to 
collect and distribute information on educational technology and programs that use technology for 
improving schools and learning'' (ED. October 1991 s . p. 29). 

10 Require the provision of professional development in all areas relevant to the technical 
assistance providers' work (e.g., curriculum development, issues in adult education, conducting a 
needs assessment) in order to build the capacity of center staff. 

Therf is an ongoing need for state-of-the-art knowledge in all aspects of education among 
assistance providers, particularly as it relates to the unique cultural and academic needs of American 
Indian students. However, the average amount of time devoted to formal professional development 
for IETAC staff in 1992 was one day per staff member, the minimum amount required under their 
contract. 4 Although the nature of technical assistance makes protecting time for study, reflection, 
and planned change difficult for assistance providers, it is essential that sufficient time be made 
available, given the rapid pace of knowledge development in education and related fields. Tribal 
colleges are a potentially important source of information and training for technical assistance 
providers who work with Tide V grantees. For example, they can provide assistance providers with 
resources (e.g.. faculty expertise, general and tribe-specific education information and materials), and 
help to identify emerging needs and relevant issues of local or regional concern. 

1 I Require technical assistance providers to demonstrate staff skills appropriate to any addition 
to their mission. 

The skills needed for helping local educators understand Title V regulations and complete a 
grant application are different from those needed to conduct research, or to work through the complex 
issues associated with overhauling a school system to improve education for American Indian children 
and adults. Any changes in the mle of a technical assistance provider would require staff who 
possess a combination .it breadth and depth m knowledge and skill m many areas-a team that 
includes both general ists and specialists Perhaps more important, it would also require a staff who 



1 I nder the terms ot the mteinil contract, the number of days reserved for staff development has 
'teen increased to fivx 



91 



demonstrate acumen in sustaining relationships with tht power brokers and gatekeepers in schools, 
districts, and communities. 



Relationships with ED and OIE 

12. Change the accountability measures that govern technical assistance operations and 
reporting procedures to emphasize the provision of more intensive services that are geared towards 
achieving real program improvements. 

ED could significantly influence and shape the work of all technical assistance providers by 
modifying current accountability requirements and establishing performance indicators that measure 
outcomes" rather than volume of activities. Current measures emphasize racking up numbers of 
contacts with service recipients-through mailings, telephone calls, and face-to-face visits. As a 
result, technical assistance providers endeavor to serve as many people as possible. 
However, this emphasis on broad coverage runs counter to the intensive and sustained attention that is 
needed to help service recipients make fundamental and lasting improvements in education for the 
students whom they serve. A federal focus on long-term improvement might prompt technical 
assistance providers to target services to fewer service recipients and to build in opportunities for 
continuity and follow-up in their relationships with clients. 

Under these conditions, a different set of accountability measur > would be required: 
measures that would reflect this move to a more h.gh-intensity-low-coN ge approach to technical 
assistance. In discussing the evaluation of technical assistance. Turnbull < 1994) makes the following 
suggestions for improving on the inherent limitations of counting contacts and administering customer 
surveys-two of the common means by which Hie performance of federal technical assistance 
providers are now measured: 

Develop an appropriate measure of continuity in service (e.g.. centers could assess 
depth (versus breadth) of service by keeping track of the number of times a single 
service recipient received information or tnuniiii' >. 

CUect and .malvze information on reciprocity in the relationship with service 
recipients (e.g. . 'centers couU document evidence that feedback has resulted m 
modifications to a workshop ). 



Do 



Develop customer surveys that collect data on specific examples of how new 
information or training has been applied to service recipients' projects--not just on 
service recipients' ratings of the quality of information and training received; this 
information could be compiled and included in center reports, and 

Invest the resources necessary to create more complex measures that will provide 
more detailed information on center processes, service content, and their effects (e.g.. 
case studies of interactions between service providers and service recipients over 
time). The regional educational laborar tries currently conduct a more deta !ed 
assessment of their operaiions-with the help of outside consultants-than is typical of 
most technical assistance providers. It is also possible to build in-house capacity to do 
this. 



1 3 . Modify the reports that assistance providers produce so the connections among goals, 
activities, and outcomes are evident. 

Although many technical assistance programs require individual assistance centers to conduct 
an evaluation of their services, the reports that are currently produced shed little light on the impact 
of assistance activities on service recipients (Haslam et al.. 1994). They ten i to focus on compliance 
issues rather than the quality of the services that have been provided and the contributions to the 
institutions and organizations assisted. While the monitoring of contract compliance cannot be 
ignored, new reporting requirements that provide clearer evidence of the link among goals, activities, 
and outcomes are essential. 

One example of how this might be accomplished is to require assistance providers to keep a 
record of the goals or problems that Title V grantees identify when they make requests for a specific 
type of on-site visit. After the initial on-site visit, the assistance provider would maintain contact with 
the grantee-offering additional follow-up assistance as needed-in order to determine the extent to 
which the originally stated goals have been met or the problem solved. Contractual compliance and 
accountability would be maintained-assistance providers would document all the services provided to 
the service recipient-and outcomes associated with these services would also be presented 
Performance indicators that assess the extent to which stated goals have been addressed or problems 
solved could be developed between the assistance provider and service recipient during their initial 
meeting. 

Indicators that could be aggregated ul'oss the entire program would mirror the elements of 
accountability suggested above. Important fexures of such indicators would be the inclusion of 



9 

ERIC 



75 



J O 



measures of continuity and interaction in service relationships and of the effects on the education of 
American Indian students. 



Instead of organizing their periodic reports around the required tasks in the contract, as is 
currently the case, technical assistance providers could submit reports to ED that are organized 
around the goals or problems each center addressed in a given period This would facilitate 
increased analysis as data on groups of service recipients who share similar goals or problems could 
be aggregated, and patterns of need would be readily apparent. 



14. Create formal opportunities for the exchange of more meaningful information between 
technical assistance providers and OIE. 

Currently, the relationship between OIL and the IETACs focuses overwhelmingly on 
minutiae, according to our analysis. Although the centers frequently include suggestions for 
improving services in their reports, they indicate that they receive no feedback from OIE. Strategies 
for achieving the shared, overarching goal of enhancing Indian education programs and the services 
received by American Indian children are rarely, if ever, discussed. Ongoing communication that 
serves to clarify each organization's goals, roles, and responsibility vis a vis ( 1) each other. (2) Title 
V grantees, and (3) the students served by these projects mav help to uncover new ways in which 
each organization can further facilitate and enhance the efforts and accomplishments of the other, as 
they seek to a* l iieve their shared goals. 

The success of efforts to change accountability and reporting requirements will depend on 
frequent and substantive communication between technical assistance providers and their program 
officers. Program officers' responsibilities, which now focus heavily on monitoring compliance, will 
expand under the revisions suggested above. 15 Program officers will need to offer regular guidance 
(e.g., assessing the appropriateness of performance indicators) and feedback (e.g.. assessing the 
suitability of an assistance provider's plan to address a grantee's problem), based on reports received, 
that will enhance program quality. 



'* A review of ED-sponsored technical assistance programs iHaslam et al.. 1994) found that most 
technical assistance program officers in ED "do not have extensive experience or training in technical 
assistance or the substantive content of the various programs. " ED may wish to consider the impact on 
staffing of a shift away from compliance monitoring towards a focus on issues related to educational 
improvement. 

76 



9 

ERIC 



07 



The avenues for communication among staff from OIE's program support and program 
operation offices and technical assistance providers need to be formalized by the creation of occasions 
that facilitate the exchange of information (e.g., regularly scheduled telephone conferences, periodic 
meetings). This would help to enhance effectiveness of technical assistance serves and improve 
service quality. It would ensure that the assistance providers are kept abreast of all regulatory and 
programmatic changes that affect Title V application procedures or program operations. This would 
reduce the likelihood of the centers communicating outdated information to the field, and facilitate the 
timely and accurate communication of all relevant information between OIE and Title V grantees. 
OIE and IETAC staff possess potentially useful information and ideas that can enhance services to 
Title V projects and help them to improve the overall quality of the services they provide to American 
Indian students. With no formal opportunity for OIE and IETAC staff to offer feedback and share the 
information that each has gathered over the course of their work with grantees, this potential is lost. 

Reorganization of Technical Assistance 

15. American Indian staff who have a personal knowledge of American Indian cultures and 
languages should be adequately represented within organizations that provide technical assistance to 
organizations, schools, and LF\s that serve American Indian students. 

IETAC staff members believe that their personal connections with Indian culture are a key to 
their success in working with Indian tribes and schools and Title V parent advisory committees. 
Many traditional American Indian educators and community members say that knowledge and respect 
for American Indian history, art. traditions, and spiritual life are essential traits in the individuals who 
help them improve the educational and job opportunities for their children. 

Several IETAC staff reported that, without this shared identity and cultural understanding, 
their ability to deliver technical assistance services would have been greatly diminished. Service 
providers who la not take the unique culture of American Indians into consideration as they make 
initial contacts with Title V grantees and potential grantees, select am* share materials, and deliver 
training, are likely to experience limited success. 



16. Ensure that the interests of American Indian students, who represent a very small 
proportion of the total number of students who are served by programs that receive technical 
assistance services, are protected and promoted under any new configuration of technical 
assistance. 

Large numbers of non-Indian students are served by prop.rams that receive assistance from the 
Chapter 1 Technical Assistance Centers. Drug-Free Schools and Communities Regional Centers, and 
other technical assistance providers. IETAC staff and other American Indian educators are concerned 
that the unique educational and cultural needs of American Indian students might be overlooked under 
any other system for delivering technical assistance. This concern arises from the convergence of 
several factors, including the following: (1) American Indian students are few in number-a minority 
among other minority groups; (2) misunderstandings exist around how to effectively use culture as a 
focus of instructional enrichment, and as a medium for academic instruction; and (3) there is a 
paucity of culturally appropriate teaching materials for American Indian students in many school 
districts. To ensure that the unique cultural and educational needs of American Indian students are 
not overlooked, efforts must be made to involve American Indian educators at all levels of planning, 
organization, and implementation of any new arrangement for the delivery of technical assistance. 



REFERENCES 



Barth. R. S. (1991). Improving schools from within. San Francisco. CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers. 

Brown. R. G. (1991). Schools of thought. San Francisco. CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers. 

Chimerine. C. B.. Haslam. M. B.. & Laguarda. K. (1994). Formative evaluation of the Sine-Site 
Program Improvement Initiative. Washington. DC: Policy Studies Associates. 

Elmore. R. F.. & Associates. (1991). Restructuring schools: The next generation of educational 
reform. San Francisco. CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers. 

Fullan. M. G. (1991). The new meaning of education change. New York. NY; Teachers College 
Press. 

Funkhouser. J. E.. Laguarda. K. G., & Panton. K. L. M. (1993). The condition of Indian 

education and the potential benefits of technical assistant services. Washington. DC: Policy 
Studies Associates. 

Haslam. M. B.. Janger. M. I.. Laguarda. K. G.. Panton. K. L. M.. & Pringle. B. A, (1994). A 
review of technical assistance programs supported by the U.S. Department of Education. 
Washington. DC: Policy Studies Associates. 

Hodgkinscn. H. (1992. September). The current condition of Native Americans. ERIC Digest 
Charleston. WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. 

McLaughlin. M. W. (1990. December). The Rand Change Agent Study revisited: Macro 

perspectives and micro realities. Educational Researcher. Volume 19. Number 9, 11-16. 

Savard. W.G. (1992). "Evaluation Report: Indian Education Summer Institutes and Indian 
Education School Impiovement Programs.'' Gladstone. OR: Educational Planning and 
Evaluation. Prepared for the Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Szas7. M. C. (1991). Current conditions in American Indian and Alaskan Native communities. Ir. 
U.S. Department of Education. Indian nations at rifk. Task Force commissioned papers 
Washington. DC: Author, 

Turnbull. B.J. (1994. indraft). Evaluating technical assistance for systemic reform Washington. 
DC: Policy Studies Associates. 

L'.S. Department of Education. (1991 s ), Indian Education Technical Assistance Centers RFP *91- 
012. Washington. DC: Author. 

VS. Department of Education. ( 199P. October). Indian nations at risk: An educational strategy 
for action. Washington. DC: Author 



79 



a 

ERIC 



.00 



U.S. Office of Education. (1979). Education Resource and Evaluation Centers. Washington. 
Author. 



a 

ERIC 



so 



Technical Appendix 



Weighting 

A random sample of public school districts with formula grants was drawn using the 
proportional sampling technique. This technique ensured that the proportion of sampled public school 
districts would represent the proportion of public school districts that are located in each IETAC 
region. In addition, we sent surveys to 90 IETAC-identified BIA schools 16 ; however, when the 
surveys were returned, we learned the mailing lists were not complete and that there were actually 
173 BIA schools that either had formula grants or were eligible for formula grants (potential 
grantees). Because the demographic characteristics of the BIA schools varied little, we determined 
that our sample of 90 BIA schools could be considered representative of the BIA school population. 
Based on recommendations from OIE, we merged the BIA and school district formula grantees and 
potential grantees into a single "formula grantee' category. However, after developing the category, 
we found that the BIA schools were overrepresented in the sample and the school districts were 
underrepresented. Therefore, we weighted the sample to reflect each population's proportion in the 
total population of actual and potential formula grantees. 

Table 1 represents the proportion of each respondent group in the overall population of actual 
and potential formula grantees: 



h BIA schools include BIA-.ipcaied schools and BIA-funded schools (i.e., BlA-contract, BlA-grunt. 
and BIA-cooperative schools) which receive BIA funds but are not operated by the BIA 



A-1 

ERIC 102 



Table 1 

Population of Actual and Potential Formula Grantees 
by Respondent Group 



Respondent Groups 


\ ? w i III Mm jmmm a M t M >"l 

iyumDer in ine 
Population 


Pi i*/*d m tnno t\f tno l/\t/9l 

rercemage oj me i oiai 
Population 


Public school districts with Title V 
grants 


1.118 




DiA-operatcu scnoois 


93 




BIA-funded schools 
(not including those with 
discretionary grants) 


80 


6"c 


Total formula grantees 
and potential grantees 


1.291 


100% 


Table 2 represents the proportion of each respondent group included in our sample: 


Table 2 

Sample of Actual and Potential Formula Grantees 
by Respondent Group 


Respondent Groups 


Number in the 
Unweighted Sample 


Percentage of the 
Unweighted Sample 


Public school districts with Title V 
grants 


354 


80% 


BIA-operated schools 


65 


15% 


BIA-funded schools 
mot including those with 
discretionary grants) 


23 


51 


Total formula grantees 
and potential grantees 


442 


100'T 



To ensure that our sample population reflected the total population, we weighted each 
category. For example, the public school districts accounted for 87 percent of the total population 
(table 1) but only 80 percent of the sample (table 2). To account for this difference, the influence of 
each public school respondent must be increased by 1.0875 (or .87/. 80). The weights for each 
category are as follows: 



Public school districts 
BIA-operated schools 
BIA-funded schools 



1.0875 
.4666 
1.1600 



The weighted sample population now reflects the overall population in terms of the proportion 
of each group in the overall sample. The table below shows the weighted sample N's. 



Table 3 

Weighted Sample of Actual and Potential Formula Grantees 

by Respondent Group 



Respondent Croup 


Number in the 
Weighted Sample 


Percentage of the 
Weighted Sample 


Public school districts with Title V 
grants 


385 


Sl% 


B1A schools 


30 


1% 


BIA contract schools (not including 
those with discretionary grants) 






Total formula grantees and potential 
grantees 


27 
442 


b% 



o 

ERIC 



A-3'iUi 



< 

mm i 

o 

z 

Ed 
fiu 
a. 

< 



V2 



cs 

u 

H 

Ed 
>— « 

as 

Ed 
H 

z 

Ed 
U 

Ed 
U 

z 
< 

H 



u 

Ed 
H 

Z 

o 

U 

O 

Ed 

Z 

5 

z 




a 

ERIC 



A -6 




ERIC 



A- 



3 



s 
o 
'So 

a* 

U 

u 2 

II 

u 

s s 

c« 

La _ 

4> CS 

'> '5 
eu <u 

<u 

w — 

mm y* 

2 <U 

"35 r « 

< 



u 

.Q 

s 



< 



c 



"is 



1> u 







igual 


3 
3 








ice 






3 


-./> 
as 






'.j 


ion; 


SOUl 


30 












3 




if? 











c 



=0 

as 



■ ml 



9 

ERIC 



A-8 




UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 



WASHINGTON. D.C. 20202- 



APR 20 m 



Dear Survey Respondent: 

The Office of the Under Secretary of the U.S. Department of Education (ED), in cooperation 
with the Department's Office of Indian Education, has commissioned Policy Studies 
Associates (PSA) to conduct a study of the Indian Education Technical Assistance Centers 
(IETACs). 

The goals of the study are to describe the operations and effectiveness of the IETACs and the 
context in which they exist, and to develop options to enhance \eir overall effectiveness. 
During the past few months PSA has conducted site visits to each of the six IETACs, 
observed workshops, and interviewed IETAC staff members. In addition, PSA has 
conducted telephone interviews with representatives of several state education agencies and 
Indian education organizations who are familiar with the IETACs and the population they 
serve. 

An important part of our data collection effort is a survey of actual and potential IETAC 
service recipients such as yourself. Because of your work in educating Indian students, you 
can provide us with valuable information on the effectiveness of IETAC services. We 
therefore request that you assist us by voluntarily completing the attached survey at your 
earliest convenience. For this study to be useful in strengthening IETAC services, it is 
essential that every survey form be completed and returned. 

Please be assured that all responses will be confidential. Findings will be aggregated across 
broad categories (e.g., urban public school districts, reservation schools). Specific schools 
and individuals will not be identified. 

Please do not hesitate to contact Nancy Loy, the U.S. Department of Education's project 
officer, at (202) 401-1958 if you have general questions or concerns about the study or the 
survey. Questions about specific survey items should be directed to Kelly Colopy (PSA 
Survey Coordinator) at (202) 939-5315. Thank you for your cooperation and assistance. 



Sincerely, 





, Acting Director 
Indian Education 





ERIC 



Survey of Indian Education Technical Assistance Center (IETAC) 
Service Recipients and Potential Service Recipients 



Public repotting burden for this collection of information is estimated to average 22 minutes per 
response, including me time for reviewing instntctioas, searching existMtg data searces, gathering 
and ^aiqtatnmg the data needed, and completing and reviewing die collection of inform* too. 
Send comments regarding this burden estimate or any other aspect of this callection of information, 
including suggestions for red&cing this burden* to the U.S. Department of Education, Information 
Management and Compliance Division, Washington, D.C. 2C«024$!H; and to the Office of 
Management and Budget, Paperwork Reduction Project 1875-0098, Washington, D.C. 20503. 
Expires- September 1994. 



Respondent Name: 
Respondent Title:_ 



1 . How long have you beer, the Title V program director: Years 

(IF YOU ARE NOT THE TITLE V PROGRAM DIRECTOR, SKIP TO Q.lb.) 

la. What are your other responsibilities, if any. in addition to Title V program director? (CIRCLE ALL 
THAT APPLY) 

a. Nc other responsibilities 1 

b. Principal 1 

c. Teacher 1 

d. Paraprofessional/'tutor 1 

e. Federal programs coordinator 1 

t*. Counselor or student advisor 1 

lb. If you are the Federal programs coordinator, what other Federal programs do you work 
with? (CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY) 

a. I am not the Federal programs coordinator (SKIP TO Q.2) 1 

b. Jo.tnson O'Malley 1 

c. Impact aid 1 

d. Chapter 1 basic program 1 

e. Chapter i migrant education program 1 

f. Title VII. bilingual education 1 

g. Special education 1 

h. Gifted and talented programs 1 

i. Others (SPECIFY)_~ ... 1 



Where is your project locateil'.' (CIRCLE ONE) 



b. 
c. 



Urban area 1 

Rural area/non-reservation 2 

Rural area/reservation 3 



Type of Institution: (CIRCLE ONE TYPE OF INSTITUTION. THEN FILL IN THE NUMBERS 
REQUESTED TO THAT TYPE OF INSTITUTION) 



a. Public school district 1 

Total district enrollment: 

Percent of students eligible for free- or reduced-price lunch: 

Number of Indian students in the district: 

Number of Indian students served by Title V project: 

b. BIA school 2 

Total school enrollment: 

Percent of students eligible for free- or reduced-price lunch: 

Number of Indian students in the school: 

Number of Indian students served by Title V project: 

c. BIA contract school (tribal or Indian-controlled school) 3 

Total school enrollment: 

Percent of students eligible for free- or reduced-price lunch: 

Number of Indian students in the school: 

Number of Indian students served by Title V project: 

d. Institution of higher education 

Number of participants served by Title V project: 

e. Indian organization 5 

Number of participants served by Title V project: 

f. Indian tribe 6 

Number of participants served by Title V project: 

g. State education agency 7 

Do you currently have a grant from the U.S. Department of Education's Office of Indian Education? 
(CIRCLE ONE) 

Yes 1 



a. 

b. No (SKIP TO Q.6) 
If Yes, what type of grant? (CIRCLE ONE) 

a. Subpart 1 Formula Grant 1 

b. Subpart 1 Discretionary Grant (cultural enrichment/Indian-controlled schools) ... 2 

c. Subpart 2 Discretionary Grant (special programs) 3 

d. Subpart 3 Discretionary Grant (adult education) -* 

How many years has your project been funded by the U.S. Department of Education's Office of Indi 
Education? 

What was your Title V grant amount for the school year 1 993-94° 



117 



What is the primary focus of y jur Indian Education project? (CIRCLE ONE) 



a. Supplemental academic tutoring for Indian students 1 

b. Cultural enrichment/Indian language classes 2 

c. Counseling/career awareness 3 

d. Staff development for teachers 4 

e. Teacher preparation for pre-service teachers 5 

f. Adult Education 6 

g. Other (SPECIFY) 7 



Have you heard of the Indian Education Technical Assistance Centers (IETACsV? 

The IETACs are as follows: 

Center 1 = ORBIS, Washington, D C. 

Center 2 = North Plains IETAC, Bismarck, ND 

Center 3 = Gonzaga University, Spokane, WA 

Center 4 = S.W. Regional Resource Center, Tempe, AZ 

Center 5 = American Indian Resource and Development, Norman, OK 

Center 6 = Cook Inlet Tribal Council, Anchorage, AK 



a. Yes 1 

b. No (SKIP TO Q.23) 2 

How did you first hear about the IETACs' I first heard about the IETAC from: (CIRCLE ONLY 
ONE) 

a. An IETAC newsletter 1 

b. A referral from the Office of Indian Education in Washington. D.C 2 

c. An IETAC staff member 3 

d. Another Title V project director 4 

e. A school or district level administrator 5 

f. A parent committee member 6 

g. A tribal organization 7 

h. Other (SPECIFY) S 



What other ways, if any, have you heard about the IETACs? (CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY) 

a. An IETAC newsletter 

b. A referral from the Office of Indian Education in Washington, D.C 

c. An IETAC staff member 

d. Another Title V project director 

e. A school or district level administrator 

f. A parent committee member 

g. A tribal organization 

h. Other (SPECIFY) 



Are you familiar with the services the IETAC provides? 

a. Yes 

b No (SKIP TO Q. 10) 



3 



9. 



How did you learn about the specific services the IETAC provides? (CIRCLE NO MORE THAN 3^ 



a. IETAC newsletter 1 

b. IETAC brochure 2 

c. Visited an IETAC 3 

d. Called IETAC for a list of services 4 

e. The IETAC contacted me by mail or telephone 5 

f. Conversation with other Title V project directors 6 

g. A meeting/presentation where IETAC staff described their services 7 

(SPECIFY) 

h. Other (SPECIFY) 8 



10. Do y~>u receive the IETAC newsletter? 

a. Yes I 

b. No (SKIP TO Q.ll) 2 



10a. IETAC newsletters generally contain some of the information listed in the table below. Please indicate 
in the table which information you find most useful, least useful, and which information you would like 
to see more of: 



Newsletter Information 


Most Useful? 


Least Useful? 


Would like to 




(CIRCLE ONE) 


(CIRCLE ONE) 


see more of? 

(CIRCLE ALL 
THAT APPLY) 


a. Schedules for regional workshops sponsored 








by the IETAC 


1 


1 




b. Announcement of conferences/workshops 








aside from these sp nsored by the IETAC 








c. Examples of what ouer Title V projects are 








doing 


3 


3 




d. List of materials available at the IETAC 


4 


4 




c. Instructional tips 


5 


5 




f. Articles on special needs of Indian students 


6 


6 




g. Articles on recent research in education 


n 


7 




h. Announcements of scholarships or grants for 








Indian students or educators 


8 


8 




i. Information on Indian Adult Education 


9 


9 




j. Information for parents and parent committee 








members 


10 


10 




k. Background information on legislation 








affecting Indian Education 


! 1 


11 




!. Other SPECIFY 








1 


11 


i: 




|l : 







11. In the past three years, have you or anyone from your district/school (e.g.. principal, teacher. Title V 
aide, parent committee member) attended a workshop or requested materials or assistance of any kind 



from an IETAC? 

a. Yes 1 

b. No (SKIP TO Q.21) 2 

c. Don't Know (SKIP TO Q.22) 9 

11a. If you or anyone else from your district/school (e.g.. principal, teacher. Title V aide, parent committee 
member) requested materials or assistance from an IETAC. did the IETAC provide the assistance 
requested? 

a. Yes 1 

b. No iReason why service not provided 

(SKIP TO Q.lle) 2 

c. No one from our district/school has requested materials or assistance 

from an IETAC (SKIP TO Q.lle) * 

lib, In general, how timely is the IETAC response to your requests for assistance? The esponse is usually: 

a. Slower than needed 1 

b. About the time needed 2 

c. More quickly than needed 



ERIC 



In the following table, please indicate whether in the past three years you or anyone else from your 
district/school (e.g., principal, teacher, Title V aide, parent committee member) has requested and 
received materials from an IETAC in any of the topics below. 

For each topic listed in Column 1, please indicate if you received materials/ information from an 
IETAC office (Y=Yes, N=No), and rank the usefulness of the materials. If you did not receive 
materials/information in a specific topic, please circle N (no) and move to the next topic. 



Column 1 


Column 2 




Topics 




Materials/ 
Information from IETAC 
Office 

1 = Not at all useful 

2 = Somewhat useful 

3= Very useful 




Received 


Usefulness , 


a. 


Grant application assistance 


Y 


N 




2 3 


b. 


Parent Committee training 


Y 


N 




2 3 


c. 


Curriculum development 


Y 


N 




2 3 


d. 


Cultural awareness/sensitivity training for staff 


Y 


N 




2 3 


e. 


Instructional training for teachers and tutors 


Y 


N 




2 3 


f. 


Program management 


Y 


N 




2 3 


g- 


Student assessment and project evaluation 


Y 


N 




2 3 


h. 


Other (SPECIFY) 


Y 


N 


1 


2 3 



lid. In the following table, please indicate whether in the past three years you or anyone else from your 

district/school (e.g., principal, teacher, Title V aide, parent committee member) has participated in an 
on-site visit in any of the topics below. 

For each topic listed in Column 1, please do the following: 

Column 2. Indicate if you participated in an on-site visit from the IETAC (Y = Yes, N=No), and rate 
the usefulness of the visit. 

Column 3. Indicate whether you received materials in the on-site visit (Y = Yes, N = No), and rate the 
usefulness of the materials. 

If you did not participate in an on-site visit for that particular topic, please circle N and skip to 
the next topic on the list. 



Column 1 


Column 2 


Column 3 


Topics 




On-Site Visit 




On-Site Visit 














Materials 






l 


= Not at all useful 


l 


= Not at all useful 






2 


= Somewhat useful 


2 


- Somewhat useful 








3= Very useful 




3 = Very useful 






Participated 


Usefulness 


Participated 


Usefulness 


a. Grant application assistance 


Y 


N 


1 ~i 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 


b. Parent Committee training 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


Y 


N 


i i 


3 


c. Curriculum development 


Y 


N 


1 1 3 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 


d. Cultural awareness/sensitivity training for staff 


Y 


N 


1 1 3 


Y 


N 


i i 


3 


e. Instructional training for teachers and tutors 


Y 


N 


1 ^ 3 


Y 


N 


i i 


3 


f. Program management 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


Y 


N 


i i 


3 


g. Student assessment and project evaluation 


Y 


N 


1 2 * 


Y 


N 


i i 


3 


h. Other 
















(SPECIFY) 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 



a 

ERIC 



1'^ 



lie. In the following taKe, please indicate whether in the past three vears you or anyone else from your 

district/school (e.g., principal, teacher, Title V aide, parent committee member) has attended a regional 
workshop in any of the topics below. 

For each topic listed in Column 1, please do the following: 

Column 2. Indicate if you attended a regional workshop for that topic (Y = Yes, N = No), atiu --ate the 

usefulness of the workshop. 
Column 3. Indicate whether you received materials in the workshop (Y = Yes, N = No), and rate the 

usefulness of the materials. 

If you did not attend a workshop for that particular topic, please circle N and skip to the next 
topic on the list. 



Column 1 


Column 2 


Column 3 J 


Topics 




Regional 






Regional 




Workshop 






Workshop 














Materials 




l 


= Not it 


all useful 




l 


- Not at all useful 




2 


= Somewhat usefu 






= P— new 


hat useful 






3= Very useful 






3= Ver 


v useful 




Attended 


Usefulness 


Received 


Usefulness 


a. Grant application assistance 


^ * 

i 


N 


1 2 


3 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


b. Parent Committee training 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


c. Curriculum development 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


d. Cultural awareness/sensitivity training tor staff 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


e. Instructional training for teachers and tutors 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


f. Program management 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


g. Student assessment and project evaluation 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 


h. Other 
















(SPECIFY) 


Y 


N 


1 2 


3 


Y 


N 


1 2 3 



1 If. Which of the following IETAC services have been the most valuable to you 1 Please rank the following 
three items where 1 = least valuable, and 3 = most valuable. 

a. Materials/Information from the IETAC office 

b. Regional Workshops _. 

c. On-site Visits _ 



12 



At either the workshops or on-site training, did you or anyone from your district/school make any 
requests for follow-up -srvices (e.g., request new/additional materials or an additional on-site visit)? 



12a. 



a. Yes 1 

b. No (SKIPTOQ.13) 2 

c. No one from our district attended a workshop or 
participated in an on-site visit (SKIP TO Q.13) 9 

Did the IETAC follow-up on any requests you made (e.g., sending additional materials, providing other 
contacts, setting up an onsite visit)? 

a. Yes 1 

b. No (SKIP TO Q.12c) . . 2 

12b. How responsive was the follow-up assistance to your needs? (CIRCLE ONE NUMBER) 



Not At All 
Responsive 


Hardly 
Responsive 


Moderately 
Responsive 


Very 

Responsive 


1 


2 


3 


4 



(SKIP TO Q.13) 

If they did not follow-up, did you contact the IETAC staff to repeat your request? 



a. Yes 

b No (SKIP TO Q.13) 



1 2d. What was the outcome of the repeated request? (CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY) 



a. Technical assistance was provided 1 

b. Referral to another technical assistance provider 1 

(SPECIFY) 

c. No assistance or referrals 1 

d. Other (SPECIFY) . . i 



a 

ERIC 



i ' * I 



What do you value most, if anything, about IETAC services and staff compared to other resources 
available to you? (PLEASE RANK YOUR TOP THR EE BY PLACING THF. NUMBER OF THE 
ITEM IN THE SPACE PROVIDED . IF YOU DO NOT VALUE IETAC SERVICES, PLACE A "9" 
IN THE 1ST CATEGORY, THEN SKIP TO Q.14) 

1ST 

2ND 

3RD 

Their accessibility 

Their response time to questions and requests 

Their ability to locate/develop useful materials and other resources 

Their sensitivity to local Indian culture 

Their expertise/knowledge in the area of curriculum and instruction 

I share an ethnic/cultural identity with IETAC staff 

Opportunities to network with other Title V grantees 

Other (SPECIFY) 

I do not value the IETAC services 



1 

2 

3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
9 



What were the shortcomings, if any, of the IETAC services? (CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY) 



e. 



a. No shortcomings 

b. The assistance did not address my request 

c. The assistance did not apply to our project 

d. The assistance was too managerial (little focus on actual curriculum 

issues, parenting skills, tutoring skills) 

I had heard this training before, so I didn't learn very much 

f. The IETAC staff did not spend enough time with our program . . . 

Centers often will not give a direct answer to my questions 

Other (SPECIFY)_ 



What suggestions do you have for improving technical assistance from the IETACs? (IF YOU NEED 
MORE SPACE, PLEASE CONTINUE YOUR ANSWER ON THE BACK OF THE PAGE). 



10 



16. Are there issues you would like the IETAC to address that it currently does not address? If so, please 
list the.i below: (IF YOU NEED MORE SPACE, PLEASE CONTINUE YOUR ANSWER ON THE 
BACK OF THE PAGE) 



17. Have you changed your Title V program based on I'cTAC assistance? 

a. Yes 1 

b. No (SKIP TO Q.18) 2 

17a. How has the IETAC assistance helped you change your Title V program? (CIRCLE ALL THAT 
APPLY) 

a. Changed the program design 

b. Changed teaching practices 

c. Adopted new curriculum materials 

d. Changed our needs assessment procedures 

e. Changed our evaluation design 

f. Other (SPECIFY) 



11 



Er|c 



r r e you familiar with the following technical assistance organizations in your area? 

Yes No 

a. Chapter 1 Technical Assistance Center 1 2 

b. Chapter 1 Rural Technical Assistance Center (RTAC) 1 2 

c. Bilingual Multifunctional Resource Center (MRC) 1 2 

d. Regional Educational Laboratories 1 2 



•.H 



u >- 

s o 
I *2 

f | 

15 U 
cj i/l 

O < 
- UJ 



o 
E 
<u 

3 

O 



53 

u 
o 

> 
"3 



o 

Us 

c -a 

.2 3 

55 g 

EJ * 

§ o 
£0 >, 

0 c 

XL .2 

.a 5s 

JS N 

u 

1 ° 

^3 U 

c x: 



"a 

O0 



"3 

e 



X 

. O 

CO .O 

U 

3 U 

to 

c -5 

a * . 

u 1 — 
3 C ID 

_ U CO 

Sum 

2 'I * 
"-go 
°* a tt 

C w- Z 

'2 £ 2 
c c 
° • 5 

<J to < 

o S3 Z 

w — <■ 



S o 



£ a. 

O S 



■ -2 1 

e w 

S 9 L 

.2 u o 

cc a j 



B 

O 

u 
B 
.3 



u 

PS 



a 2 o «* 
= 3 8 S 
£ 5 cc u 



a a m < 

u os h 55- 



u - 



B 

•I a 

E <9 < 

"S -o < £2 

£ M H f- 



B 

O 



u 
Cfl 



5 d 



B 

O 



S3 73 



e < 



3 



o 



C 
u 

E u 
to oo 

11 

— • u 



OO 
to 
3 
OO 

a^ 

1 .2 

.5 "5 
•S 5 



u 
OS 





OO 




c 






u 


c 


nb( 


ear 


c 






u 


"o 


> 










"!5 


k. 

u 


c 


c. 


o 


O 




O 


u 


U 


S 






00 


to 


C 


u 

* ' 



-a 

^ ^ o 

6 1 1 

£ « E 
S3 

« 5 S 

to > ed 

to eu 

eo to 

- E .Si 

C M 00 

to u. eu 

■O OO — 

2 S 2 

c/5 Q. to 



5J 

E 

u 

SO 

to C 

c o 

m — 

- E « 

B - B 

oo — u 

'» = £ 

u i a 

"Or: — 

3 S-E 



0> 



O > "3 
u C 





:o 


u 




i) 


1) 






■si 






-~> 
















a 


to 


> 


i— 








SO 


-3 




c 










u 




u 

"3 


ob 
u 


nuns 




o 



s e 



E 3 



c: 
re 

E 

"re 

g c 

3 u 

c. E 

eu 

C > 

2 ~ 
•5 > 



9 

ERIC 



In the past three years, have you or anyone else from your district/school (e.g., principal, teacher, Title 
V aide, parent committee member) received technical assistance from any other assistance provider 
(e.g., State Department of Education, Indian Education organizations, Regional Educational 
Laboratories, Multifunctional Resource Centers (MRC), Drug Free Centers) other than the IETAC? 

a. Yes 1 

b. No (SKIP TO Q.19d) 2 

c. Don't know (SKIP TO Q.19d) 9 




19a. In the table below, please indicate whether you have received assistance in any of the issue areas listed 
in Column 1. Using the numerical key (below) as a guide, indicate who provided the assistance by 
placing the number that corresponds with the appropriate organization, in the box or boxes under the 
type of service you received (see Columns 2, 3, and 4) 

NOTE: If you received services in the same issue area from more than one organization, please enter 
all of the appropriate numbers in the box(es). 



KEY: 



State Education Agency (SEA) = / Indian Education TAC (IETAC) 

School Distrct (LEA) = 2 Chapter 1 Rural TAC = 

Chapter I TAC = 3 Regional Laboratories = 

Multifunctional Resource Center (MRCs) = 4 Other (specify) 

U.S. Department of Education's Office of Indian Education = 5 



6 
7 
8 
9 



Column 1 | 


| Column 2 


Column 3 


Column 4 


Issues 


Type of Service 




Provision of 


Workshop 


On-site Visit 




Information/Materials 


Including Workshop 


Including On-Site Visit 




via Mail or Telephone 


Materials 


Materials 



Implementing school-wide 
change 

Teaching Indian 
culture/native languages 

Research on effective 
instructional techniques 
(e.g. cooperative learning) 

Student assessment/ 
program evaluation 
strategies and methods 

Project design, 
development, 
management, and 
implementation 

Student development 
topics (e.g. career 
awareness, counseling, 
self-esteem) 

Information on OIE grant 
application requirements 

Indian parental training 
and involvement 



o 

ERIC 



19b. Please indicate how IETAC materials, workshops, and on-site visits compare with the services of other 
technical assistance providers in terms of usefulness to your program. (CIRCLE ONE NUMBER FOR 
EACH TYPE OF SERVICE ) 





Less useful than 


About the same as 


More useful than 




services of other 


services of other TA 


services of other 




TA providers 


providers 


TA providers 


a. IETAC materials are: 


1 


2 


3 


b. IETAC workshops are: 


1 


2 


3 


c. IETAC on-site visits are: 


1 


2 


3 



19c. Any additional comments on technical assistance from providers other than the IETAC: 



15 



19d. In the table below, please indicate which technologies you have available to your project and whether 
the 1ETAC or other technical assistance providers or agencies use these technologies to communicate 
with or provide services to your project. 

For each technology listed in Column 1, please do the following: 

Column 2. Indicate if you have the technology available (Y = Yes, N=No). If No, skip to the next 
technology listed. If Yes, answer Column 3 and Column 4 then move to the next 
technology on the list. 

Column 3. Indicate whether the IETAC has used this technology to communicate with or provide 
technical assistance to your project (Y = Yes, N=No). 

Column 4. Indicate whether another technical assistance provider (e.g. Chapter 1 TAC, Bilingual 
Multifunctional Resource Center) or agency (e.g., U.S. Department of Education Office 
of Indian Education, State Education Agency) has used this technology to communicate 
with or provide assistance to your project (Y = Yes, N = No). If Yes, please specify the 
technical assistance provider or agency. 



Column 1 


Column 2 


Column 3 


Column 4 


Technologies 


Do you have 
the following 
technology 
available? 


Has the IETAC used 
this technology to 
communicate with or 
provide services to 
your program? 


Have other TACs or agencies 
used this technology to 
communicate with or provide 
services to your program? 


a. Computer with Modem 


Y N 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 


b. Computer with 
Electronic Mail 
(E-MAIL) 


Y N 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 


c. Telephones with 
conference call 
capabilities 


Y M 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 


d. Fax machines 


Y N 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 


e. Televisions with video 
players 


Y N 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 



20 THANK YOU FOR TAKING THE TIME TO COMPLETE THE SURVEY. THE REMAINDER 
OF THE SURVEY IS ONLY FOR THOSE WHO HAVE NOT REQUESTED IETAC 
SERVICES. 



16 



COMPLETE ONLY IF YOU HAVE NjQI REQUESTED ASSISTANCE 

FROM THE IETAC 



21. Why haven't you requested IETAC services? (CIRCLE ALL THAT APPLY) 



a. I'm not familiar with the services they provide 1 

b. My program doesn't need the assistance the IETAC provides 1 

c. I do not have time, to work with the IETAC 1 

d. I do not have the resources to work with IETAC 1 

e. I can find better quality assistance elsewhere 1 

f. Other (SPECIFY) . 1 



22. Please choose 3 items from the 19 items listed below that you are most likely to need assistance with in 
the school year 1994-95. Rank them in the space provided. (PLACE THE NUMBER OF THE ITEM 
IN THE SPACE PROVIDED) 

1ST 

2ND 

3RD 

Grant Application Assistance 



Program design (e.g., developing objectives) 1 

Designing and conducting a needs assessment 2 

Designing and conducting a program evaluation 3 

OIE checklist issues 4 

Parent Committee Training 

Managerial issues 5 

Roles and Responsibilities 6 

Parliamentary procedures 7 

Parenting skills 8 

Conflict resolution 9 

Recruiting parents 10 

Other Assistance 

Academic curriculum development 11 

Cultural curriculum development 12 

Cultural awareness/sensitivity training for staff ! 3 

Tutor training w 

Staff development 15 

School board training 16 

Budgeting and financial management 17 

Other (SPECIFY) 18 

None of the above 19 



ERIC 



17 

1 j 3 



23. 



Axe you familiar with the following technical assistance organizations in your area? 



Yes No 

a. Chapter 1 Technical Assistance Center 1 2 

b. Chapter 1 Rural Technical Assistance Center (RTAC) 1 2 

c. Bilingual Multifunctional Resource Center (MRC) 1 2 

d. Regional Educational Laboratories 1 2 



18 



ERIC 



c 




« 


>• 


u 


an 


z 






in 
t/i 


2d 






for 


< 


CO 


UJ 


CJ 




c 


< 










kel 


a. 

' — ' 








CO 




CJ 


o 


O 


E 




V 










M 






o 






o 

3 






1 


CJ 






C 




o 


"5 




c 


CO 

is; 






3 


CO 




at 
i_ 




o 






5 




CO 

is: 




1 


CO 




OO 


CO 


t_ 






•€ 




c 





co "2 

CJ c 

E 3 

X 

. o 

co .O 
U 

3 *> 

vi .3 
c 

c — 



c 

CO 

c 



CO 



ce 3 

cj C/5 

cj CO 

CO — 

™ OS 

•g O 

co u. 
to CJ 
«= .- Z 

"2 £ S 

U to < 

° 3 z 

cj — <■ 

^ £ o 
s - tc 
£ "S ° 

H S O 



Other 
(SPECIFY) 












1 






Regional 

Educational 

Laboratories 






i 






I 






Bilingual 
Multifunctional 
Resource 
Center (MRC) 












i 
i 






Chapter 1 
Rural 

TAC 
(RTAC) 














■ 


i 


Chapter 
1 TAC 


















Ind an 
Education 
TAC 
(IETAC) 


















Office of 
Indian 
Education 
(OIE) 


















School 

Districts 

(LEA) 


















State 

Education 

Agencies 

(SEA) 














1 




Issues 


Implementing school-wide 
change 


Teaching Indian 
culture/native languages 


Research on effective 
instructional techniques 
(e.g. cooperative learning) 


Student assessment/ 
program evaluation 
strategies and methods 


Project design, 
development, management, 
and implementation 


Student development topics 
(e.g. career awareness, 
counseling, self esteem) 


Information on OIE grant 
application retiuitemenis 


Indian parental training and 
involvement 



CO 



o 

ERIC 



In the past three years, have you or anyone else frr n your district/school (e.g., principal, teacher, 
V aide, parent committee member) received techr al assistance from any assistance provide; (e.g.. 
State Department of Education, Indian Education organizations. Regional Educational Laboratories, 
Multifunctional Resource Centers (MRC), Drug Free Centers)? 

a. Yes 1 

b. No (SKIP TO Q.24b) 2 

c. Don't know (SKIP TO Q,24b) 9 



20 



24a. In the following table, please indicate whether you have received assistance in any of the issue areas 
listed in Column 1. Using the numerical key (below) as a guide, indicate who provided the assistance 
by placing the number that corresponds with the appropriate organization, in the box or boxes under 
the type of service you received (see Columns 2, 3, or 4). 

NOTE: If you received services in the same issue area from more than one organization, please enter 
all of the appropriate numbers in the box(es). 



KEY: 



State Education Agency (SEA) = ; 

School District (LEA) = 2 

Chapter 1 TAC = 3 

Multifunctional Resource Center (MRCs) = 4 



U.S. Department of Education's Office of Indian Education = 5 



Indian Education TAC (IETAC) = 6 

Chapter I Rural TAC = 7 

Regional Laboratories = 8 

Other (specify) = 9 



Column 1 | 


| Column 2 


Column 3 


Column 4 


Issues 


Type of Service 




Provision of 
Information/Materials 
via Mail or Telephone 


Workshop 
Including Workshop 
Materials 


On-site Visit 
Including On-Site Visit 
Materials 


Implementing school-wide 
change 








Teaching Indian 
culrure/nativ: languages 








Research on effective 
instructional techniques 
(e.g. cooperative learning) 








Student assessment/ 
program evaluation 
strategies and methods 








Project design, 
development, 
management, and 
implementation 








Student development 
topics (e.g. career 
awareness, counseling, 
self-esteem) 








Information on OIE grant 
application requirements 








Indian parental training 
and involvement 









US 



ERIC 



24b. In the table below, please indicate which technologies you have available to your project and whether 
technical assistance providers or other agencies use these technologies to communicate with or provide 
services to your pr< ?ct. 

For each technology listed in Column 1, please do the following: 

Column 2. Indicate if you have the technology available (Y =Yes, N= No). If No, skip to the aext 

technology listed. If Yes, answer Column 3 then move to the next technology on the list. 

Column 3. Indicate whether another technical assistance provider (e.g. Chapter 1 TAC, Bilingual 
Multifunctional Resource Center) or agency (e.g., U.S. Department of Education Office 
of Indian Education, State Education Agency) has used this technology to communicate 
with or provide assistance to your project (Y=Yes, N = No). If Yes, please specify the 
technical assistance provider or agency. 



Column 1 


Column 2 


Column 3 


Technologies 


Do you have 
the following 

tarhnnlnirv 

iccunuiugj 
available? 


Have other TACs or agencies used 
this technology to communicate 
with or nrovide services to vour 
program? 


a. Computer with Modem 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 




b. Computer with 
Electronic Mail 
(E-MAIL) 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 




c. Telephones with 
conference call 
capabilities 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 




d. Fax machines 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 




e. Televisions with video 
players 


Y N 


Y (SPECIFY) N 





25 THANK YOU FOR TAKING THE TIME TO COMPLETE THE SURVEY. 



•vi 

q S Govo'nneni Pnri -g 0*m '99S - JB* *?' XUB? 

ERIC 



133 



9 

ERIC 



140 



