ED328644 1990-08-00 Meeting the 
Educational Needs of Southeast Asian 
Children. ERIC/CUE Digest No. 68. 

ERIC Development Team 
www . eric . ed . gov 

Table of Contents 

If you're viewing this document online, you can click any of the topics below to link directly to that section. 

Meeting the Educational Needs of Southeast Asian Children. ERIC/CUE 



Digest No. 68 1 

IMMIGRATION HISTORY 2 

CULTURAL INFLUENCES ON CHILD REARING PRACTICES 2 

PSYCHOSOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 3 

EDUCATIONAL ISSUES 3 

CONCLUSIONS 4 

REFERENCES 4 



ERIC M| Digests 



ERIC Identifier: ED328644 

Publication Date: 1990-08-00 

Author: Bempechat, Janine - Omori, Miya C. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education New York NY. 

Meeting the Educational Needs of Southeast 
Asian Children. ERIC/CUE Digest No. 68. 

THIS DIGEST WAS CREATED BY ERIC, THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER. FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT ERIC, CONTACT 
ACCESS ERIC 1-800-LET-ERIC 



ED328644 1990-08-00 Meeting the Educational Needs of Southeast Asian Children. 
ERIC/CUE Digest No. 68. 



Page 1 of 6 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



INTRODUCTION 

Central to the increasing ethnic diversity of American classrooms is the recent influx of 
Southeast Asian children (Vietnamese, Cambodian, and Laotian). Since 1975, 800,000 
Southeast Asian refugees have arrived in the United States, and approximately half are 
under 18 years of age. For these children to acclimate successfully to American life, 
teachers and classroom activities must be sensitive to the various cultures they reflect, 
and to the unique, and sometimes difficult, personal experiences they have had. This 
digest discusses the psychosocial development of Southeast Asian refugee children in 
an attempt to identify effective ways of teaching them. 

IMMIGRATION HISTORY 

There have been three primary waves of Vietnamese immigration. The first began in 
April 1975, after the fall of Saigon; the second was between 1975-1978; and the third, 
between 1 978-1 980 (Huang, 1 989). The first wave of immigrants tended to be more 
educated and Westernized, relative to later arriving immigrants (Blakely, 1983; Huang, 
1989). 

Cambodians and Laotians left their countries under devastating conditions. Many 
endured boat crossings in unsafe vessels and experienced violence at the hands of sea 
pirates. They spent anywhere from a few months to a few years in refugee camps in 
Thailand, Hong Kong and the Philippines (Nicassio, 1985). Obviously, these varied 
conditions of arrival had a significant impact on the refugees' subsequent adaptation to 
American life. 

CULTURAL INFLUENCES ON CHILD REARING 
PRACTICES 

Most Southeast Asian groups share cultural values that influence parental socialization 
practices. Chief among these are the Confucian principles of filial piety and ancestral 
unity, primogeniture and lineage (Morrow, 1989; Vernon, 1982; Yamamoto & Kubota, 
1983). The principle of "pride and shame"-that an individual's action will reflect either 
positively or negatively on the entire family-is inherent within each culture. Children are 
taught to respect their parents, older siblings, and other adults in positions of authority 
(i.e., teachers); and individual family members are made aware of their place in the 
vertical hierarchy. Mutual interdependence is fostered from an early age, such that 
obligation to parents and family are expected to outweigh personal desires or needs 
(Morrow, 1989). This is in stark contrast to Western values of assertiveness and 
independence. 

In the Southeast Asian culture, individuals strive to attain the Confucian goal of harmony 
in social relationships, and in life in general (Le, 1983). Southeast Asians emphasize the 
family as most important in their child rearing practices. A typical punishment for a 
betrayal of obligation to others is to lock the child out of the house, which shames the 



Page 2 of 6 



ED328644 1 990-08-00 Meeting the Educational Needs of Southeast Asian Children. 

ERIC/CUE Digest No. 68. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



child; the child "loses face." 

PSYCHOSOCIAL DEVELOPMENT 

The psychosocial development of Southeast Asian children is influenced by the 
conditions under which they arrived. Some children arrived with their parents, others 
arrived as foster children through Operation Babylift, and the rest arrived as 
unaccompanied minors (Huang, 1989). The evidence suggests that the latter, mostly 
males, are particularly at risk. They tend to experience depression and behavioral 
problems, such as tantrums, withdrawal, and hyperactivity (Huang, 1989). 
Another group at risk consists of Amerasian children (with Vietnamese mothers and 
American fathers), who were shunned in their homeland and whose arrival in the United 
States has not been particularly welcomed. One factor that has contributed to the stress 
of Amerasians is their lack of a family unit in a culture where the family is highly valued 
(Huang, 1989). 

Although some evidence suggests that younger children may adjust more easily to their 
new environment than older children, for many, psychosocial development is marked by 
the tension between traditional and American cultural beliefs. Cohon (1983) notes that 
children may be emotionally at risk if they do not make friends. However, the 
development of friendships (and thus increasing familiarity with American ways) may 
put them at odds with their parents (Ascher, 1989). 

EDUCATIONAL ISSUES 

"If you want your children to be educated, you should love and respect their teachers" 
(Vietnamese proverb, Boston Public Schools, 1990). Walker (1985) has noted that 
younger children seem to adjust more easily to the school environment than older 
children, largely because this is their first experience with formal schooling. Those who 
have had some schooling in their native countries need to adjust to different teaching 
and learning styles. American education tends to be more Socratic, as opposed to the 
more passive learning characterized by Eastern education (Walker, 1985). Thus, 
teachers need to be aware that some Southeast Asian children may have difficulty 
expressing themselves and being assertive in the classroom. Furthermore, parents' and 
children's respect for authority in general, and for teachers in particular, may inhibit 
them from voicing their views, as well as discussing any problems they may be 
encountering. This is exemplified by proverbs taught to children, such as "First you learn 
respect, then you learn letters." 

A major problem encountered by school personnel and parents alike is the language 
barrier. It is not uncommon for official notices to go unanswered and for parents to miss 
opportunities to meet with teachers (Blakely, 1983). Not surprisingly, teachers and 
administrators often feel that Southeast Asian parents do not care about their children's 
education. However, the evidence suggests that parents are indeed quite concerned 
about their children's school progress (Bempechat, Mordkowitz, Wu, Morison, & 



ED328644 1 990-08-00 Meeting the Educational Needs of Southeast Asian Children. Page 3 of 6 

ERIC/CUE Digest No. 68. 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Ginsburg, 1989; Boston Public Schools, 1990). In a study of working class (fifth and 
sixth graders) Southeast Asian and Caucasian children's perceptions of parent 
involvement, the refugee children reported significantly higher levels of parent 
involvement and concern over day-to-day progress, as well as greater control and 
supervision over after school time (Bempechat, et al., 1987). 

A recent report of the Boston Public Schools (1990) indicates that Vietnamese parents 
see schooling as critical for their children's futures, but are accustomed to granting the 
responsibility for education to teachers. Similarly, Morrow (1989) reports that in their 
home countries, all educational issues (e.g., curriculum, discipline) were the province of 
school officials, and parents generally had little or no contact with the school. 

CONCLUSIONS 

There are several ways for educators to facilitate learning for Southeast Asian American 
refugees and the school involvement of their parents. They include the following 
(Keirstead, 1987; Huang, 1989, Morrow, 1989): 

Use Southeast Asian bilingual teachers and school-home liaisons as resources. 
Familiarize yourself with Vietnamese, Cambodian, and Laotian culture. 
Find out the migratory conditions specific to each family. 

Ask all the children in a class to share information on their native culture and exhibit 
respect for the characteristics of each. 

Invite children to discuss issues with you privately if they aren't comfortable speaking 
out in a group. 

Ask parents who immigrated earlier to help more recent immigrants understand school 
policy, and to translate communications, if necessary. 

REFERENCES 

Ascher, C. (1989). Southeast Asian adolescents: Identity and adjustment. ERIC Digest 
No. 51 . New York: ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education, Teachers College, 
Columbia University. ED 306 329 

Bempechat, J., Mordkowitz, E., Wu, J., Morison, M. & Ginsburg, H. (1989). 
Achievement motivation in Cambodian refugee children: A comparative study. Paper 
presented at the biennial meeting of the Society for Research in Child Development, 
Kansas City. 

Blakely, M. (1983). Southeast Asian refugee parents. An inquiry into home-school 
communication and understanding. Anthropology and Education Quarterly, 14, 43-68. 



Page 4 of 6 ED328644 1 990-08-00 Meeting the Educational Needs of Southeast Asian Children. 

ERIC/CUE Digest No. 68. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



Boston Public Schools. (1989). Drawing on diversity: A handbook of effective teaching 
techniques for the multicultural classroom. Boston: Author. 

Cohon, J. (1983, February). Southeast Asian refugees and school health personnel. 
Journal of School Health, 1 51-1 58. 

Huang, L. (1989). Southeast Asian refugee children and adolescents. In T. Gibbs & L. 
Huang (Eds.), Children of color. San Francisco: Jossey Bass. 

Keirstead, C. (1987, Winter). Lowell looks for answers. Equity and Choice, 28-33. 

Le, D.D. (1983). Mental health and Vietnamese children. In G.J. Powell (Ed.), The 
psychosocial development of minority group children, New York: Brunner/Mazel, Inc. 

Morrow, R. (1989). Southeast Asian parent involvement: Can it be a reality? Elementary 
School Guidance and Counseling, 23, 289-297. 

Nicassio, P. (1985). The psychological adjustment of the Southeast Asian refugee. 
Journal of Cross-Cultural Psychology, 16, 153-173. 

Vernon, P. (1982). The abilities and achievements of Orientals in North America. 
Calgary: Academic Press. 

Walker, C. (1985). Learning English: The Southeast Asian refugee experience. Topics 
in Language Disorders, 5, 53-65. 

Yamamoto, J., & Kubota, M. (1983). The Japanese-American family. In G.J. Powell 
(Ed.), The psychosocial development of minority group children, New York: 
Brunner/Mazel, Inc. 



This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under OERI contract no. RI88062013. 
The opinions expressed in this report do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies 
of OERI or the Department of Education. 



Title: Meeting the Educational Needs of Southeast Asian Children. ERIC/CUE Digest 
No. 68. 

Document Type: Information Analyses— ERIC Information Analysis Products (lAPs) 
(071); Information Analyses— ERIC Digests (Selected) in Full Text (073); 
Available From: ERIC Clearinghouse on Urban Education, Teachers College, Box 40, 
Columbia University, New York, NY 10027 (free). 

Descriptors: Adjustment (to Environment), Asian Americans, Cambodians, Cultural 
Influences, Culture Conflict, Elementary Secondary Education, Immigrants, Laotians, 



ED328644 1 990-08-00 Meeting the Educational Needs of Southeast Asian Children. 
ERIC/CUE Digest No. 68. 



Page 5 of 6 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Limited English Speaking, Literature Reviews, Psychological Needs, Refugees, 
Vietnamese People 

Identifiers: Asian American Students, ERIC Digests 
### 



[Return to ERIC Digest Search Page] 



Page 6 of 6 



ED328644 1 990-08-00 Meeting the Educational Needs of Southeast Asian Children. 

ERIC/CUE Digest No. 68. 



