Communication strategies 

in a telecollaboration project 

with a focus on Latin American history 


Susana S. Fernandez 1 


Abstract 

T his paper will present and discuss the linguistic challenges that 
Argentinian university students of history and Danish university 
students of Spanish met during the course of a telecollaboration 
project based on synchronous communication in Skype. The purpose 
of this discussion is to identify linguistic pitfalls and the solutions 
adopted by both native and non-native participants in order to keep 
the conversations going in spite of misunderstandings, vocabulary 
limitations and other breaches in communication. The purpose of 
the discussion is to detect areas of strategic competence that need to 
be addressed in class, particularly for the benefit of the non-native 
speakers. 

Keywords: telecollaboration, communication strategies, native/non-native 

communication, strategy training. 


1. Introduction 


The overall object of the telecollaboration project - for literature on 
telecollaboration and its role in language learning see e.g. O’Dowd (2007) - 
presented in this paper has been the acquisition of intercultural competence, with 


1 . Aarhus University, Aarhus, Denmark; romssf@cc.au.dk 

How to cite this chapter: Fernandez, S. S. (2016). Communication strategies in a telecollaboration project with a focus 
on Latin American history. In S. Jager, M. Kurek & B. O’Rourke (Eds), New directions in telecollaborative research 
and practice: selected papers from the second conference on telecollaboration in higher education (pp. 239-244). 
Research-publishing.net. https://doi.org/! 0. 1 4705/rpnet.20 1 6.telecollab20 16.513 


2016 Susana S. Fernandez (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) 


239 


Chapter 28 


particular focus on the learning and teaching of Argentinian regional history, 
by a group of Argentinian pre-service history teachers and a group of Danish 
university students of Spanish (a number of them pre-service Spanish teachers). 
The project 2 and its results regarding the acquisition of intercultural awareness 
have been described in detail in Fernandez and Pozzo (2015, in preparation). In 
the present discussion, the focus will be narrowed to linguistic aspects of this 
very particular kind of asymmetrical telecollaboration in Spanish, where Native 
Speakers (NS) of Spanish were coupled with Non-Native Speakers (NNS) of 
Spanish with a level no higher than B1 in most cases. Although the project 
included several forms of collaboration (e-mail communication, production and 
exchange of teaching materials and Skype conversations), the present paper 
focuses on the Communication Strategies (CS) applied by both groups in their 
Skype conversations. 

The selected focus on CS relies on the conviction - reaffirmed in the language 
pedagogical literature (e.g. Cohen & Macaro, 2007; Griffiths, 2013) - that 
teaching learning strategies in the foreign language classroom (including CS, 
i.e. strategies that allow the learners to engage in communication despite the 
lack of sufficient linguistic resources) promotes both language learning and 
facilitates communication in the target language. As many telecollaboration 
projects nowadays include internet-mediated synchronous communication, 
the discussion presented in this paper aims at contributing to generally more 
successful exchanges by bringing attention to the necessary preparation work 
that should be done in order to exploit online communication to its full extent. 


2. Methodology 


In the present project, several data collection tools were employed (demographic 
questionnaires, e-mails, evaluation forms, reflection essays, interviews and audio 
recordings of Skype conversations), but only transcribed recordings of Skype 


2. The telecollaboration project presented here is part of a broader research project, ‘Construction de espacios interculturales 
en la formation docente: competencia comunicativa intercultural, cultura regional y TIC’, funded by the Secretariat of 
Science, Technology and Innovation of the province of Santa Fe, Argentina. The Linguistic Research Programme at Aarhus 
University has also contributed financially to the telecollaboration project. 


240 


Susana S. Fernandez 


conversations will be used in this paper in order to examine the use of CS. Out of 
21 Skype conversations held by seven groups of students (each group consisting 
of around 4-5 Danish students and 1-2 Argentinian students), ten conversations 
have been retrieved 3 , amounting a total of 25,860 words. 

The analysis of this material, qualitative in nature, has the purpose of identifying 

• different types of CS used by the NS and NNS groups of participants; 

• aspects of CS use that need to be trained prior to a new edition of the 
project (potentially also applicable to other telecollaboration projects 
with synchronous communication between NS and NNS). 

In order to identify CS, the threefold classification of functions provided by 
Jamshidnejad (2011) - “promoting meaning transfer in communication, 
promoting the accuracy of language in communication, keeping the interaction 
going” (p. 3762) - was adopted, and the individual strategies were labelled 
based on Dornyei and Scott’s (1997) classical taxonomy, with additions by 
Jamshidnejad (2011) and this researcher. 


3. Results 

As regards the NS group (the Argentinian participants), two groups of CS are 
salient: strategies for promoting meaning transfer and strategies for keeping the 
conversation going. Among the former, the material presents multiple examples 
of comprehension checks {Do you understand? 4 ), self-rephrasing {Are you at the 
faculty? At the university?), self-repetition, syllable spelling (dic-ta-tor-ship), 
definition and other-repair (i.e. correcting the interlocutor), all of which are to 
be expected, as the NNS interlocutors show clear problems of comprehension 


3. In spite of careful instruction on how to record the conversations, the remaining 1 1 conversations did not get recorded due 
to technical problems or forgetfulness on the side of the participants. 

4. Because of space constraints, only a few examples will be provided, directly in own translation into English from the 
original Spanish source. 


241 


Chapter 28 


and self-expression. The interesting fact about the NS group and its strategy 
use is that there are clear personal differences, with some participants being 
skillful in the use of strategies and extremely attentive to the needs of their NNS 
interlocutors and other participants being oblivious to this or even impatient. 

The second group of strategies exhibited by the NS group, aimed at keeping 
the conversation going, includes three types of strategies: continuers {Have you 
noted something that we can discuss?), change of topic/introduction of a new 
topic {And in Denmark? Tell us something about Denmark! / Another thing that 
we had planned to talk with you about is...), and the most extreme one, ending 
the conversation because of lack of understanding {Eh, we will do the following 
because we are not understanding each other: I will talk to the coordinator and 
we plan another encounter). Probably because of their linguistic superiority, the 
NS group is clearly in charge of the development and direction of the conversation 
and in several cases it is clear that the very frequent strategy of changing topic 
has the result of keeping the conversation at a very superficial level. 

As for the NNS (the Danish participants), apart from the expected strategies 
aiming at overcoming their lack of understanding 5 (asking for repetitions, 
confirmation requests, expressing non-understanding, using translation for 
understanding) or their lack of linguistic resources (word coinage, self-repair 
and retrieval), the most interesting group of strategies exhibited by this group 
can be labeled as ‘LI -based intragroup strategies for keeping the conversation 
going’. They are all about engaging in interactions in Danish with other Danish 
members of the group while the Argentinian interlocutors, still online, remain out 
of the conversation. These strategies include co-construction, translating to each 
other for understanding, intragroup comprehension checks, intragroup other- 
repair, choosing the best L2 speaker in the group as unwilling spokesperson, 
and making different kinds of intragroup comments. Up to 1 7 consecutive turns 
of intragroup conversation in Danish have been counted in the material, which 
can be seen as a major interruption to the natural flow of conversation across the 
telecollaborating partners. 

5. A couple of examples seem to fall into the category ‘promoting accuracy’ as some self-repairs by NNS do not seem to be 
motivated by problems in promoting meaning transfer. 


242 


Susana S. Fernandez 


4. Discussion and conclusion 

Based on the communication problems observed in the material presented 
above, the following suggestions for CS training might help improve online 
synchronous communication in new editions of this or similar projects: 

• making NS aware of possible NNS language challenges; 

• scripting the conversations in bigger detail so that NNS are better 
prepared to both ask and answer questions; 

• assigning different roles/tasks to different group members; 

• training students to use CS in the target language so that NNS rely less 
on help from the intragroup; 

• teaching students how to pose elaboration questions in order to avoid 
too rapid topic changes. 

Although the two groups of interlocutors exhibited a number of CS that in 
different ways contributed to the completion of the communication task, it is 
clear from this brief analysis that not all these strategies are equally suited and 
not all participants are skillful enough at choosing the most adequate strategies 
at any given moment. Focusing on CS and on possible language challenges prior 
to the telecollaboration task could pave the way for a more fluent communication 
between native and non-native participants. 


References 


Cohen, A., & Macaro, E. (2007). Language learner strategies. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Domyei, Z., & Scott, M. L. (1997). Communication strategies in a second language: definition 
and taxonomies. Language Learning, 47( 1), 112-130. http://dx.doi.org/10.llll/0023- 
8333.51997005 


243 


Chapter 28 


Fernandez S., & Pozzo M. I. (2015). La telecolaboracion como herramienta para la enseiianza 
/ aprendizaje de la historia regional argentina en Dinamarca: un proyecto de intervencion 
didactica. In M. I. Pozzo (Ed.), Construction de espacios intercuhurales en la formation 
docente: competencia comunicativa intercultural, cultura regional y TIC. Rosario: 
Laborde Editor. 

Fernandez, S., & Pozzo, M. I. (in preparation). Intercultural competence in synchronous 
communication between native and non-native speakers of Spanish. 

Griffiths, C. (2013). The strategy’ factor in successful language learning. Bristol: Multilingual 
Matters. 

Jamshidnejad, A. (2011). Functional approach to communication strategies: an analysis of 
language learners’ performance in interactional discourse. Journal of Pragmatics, 43( 15), 
3757-3769. http://dx.doi.Org/10.1016/j.pragma.2011.09.017 

O’Dowd, R. (2007). Online intercultural exchange: an introduction for foreign language 
teachers. Bristol: Multilingual Matters. 


244 


$ 


search-publishing.net 


Published by Research-publishing.net, not-for-profit association 
Dublin, Ireland; Voillans, France, info@research-publishing.net 

© 2016 by Editors (collective work) 

©2016 by Authors (individual work) 

New directions in telecollaborative research and practice: selected papers from the second conference on 
telecollaboration in higher education 

Edited by Sake Jager, Malgorzata Kurek, and Breffni O’Rourke 

Rights: All articles in this collection are published under the Attribution-NonCommercial -NoDerivatives 4.0 
International (CC BY-NC-ND 4.0) licence. Under this licence, the contents are freely available online as PDF 
files (https://doi.org/10.14705/rpnet.2016.telecollab2016.9781908416414) for anybody to read, download, copy, 
and redistribute provided that the author(s), editorial team, and publisher are properly cited. Commercial use and 
derivative works are, however, not permitted. 



Disclaimer: Research-publishing.net does not take any responsibility for the content of the pages written by the 
authors of this book. The authors have recognised that the work described was not published before, or that it 
was not under consideration for publication elsewhere. While the information in this book are believed to be true 
and accurate on the date of its going to press, neither the editorial team, nor the publisher can accept any legal 
responsibility for any errors or omissions that may be made. The publisher makes no warranty, expressed or 
implied, with respect to the material contained herein. While Research-publishing.net is committed to publishing 
works of integrity, the words are the authors’ alone. 

Trademark notice: product or corporate names may be trademarks or registered trademarks, and are used only for 
identification and explanation without intent to infringe. 

Copyrighted material: every effort has been made by the editorial team to trace copyright holders and to obtain 
their permission for the use of copyrighted material in this book. In the event of errors or omissions, please notify 
the publisher of any corrections that will need to be incorporated in future editions of this book. 

Typeset by Research-publishing.net 

Cover design and cover photos by © Raphael Savina (raphael@savina.net) 

UNICollab logo - Harriett Cornish, Graphic Designer, KMi, The Open University 

ISBN13: 978-1-908416-40-7 (Paperback - Print on demand, black and white) 

Print on demand technology is a high-quality, innovative and ecological printing method; with which the book is 
never ‘out of stock’ or ‘out of print’. 

ISBN13: 978-1-908416-41-4 (Ebook, PDF, colour) 

ISBN13: 978-1-908416-42-1 (Ebook, EPUB, colour) 

Legal deposit, Ireland: The National Library of Ireland, The Library of Trinity College, The Library of the 
University of Limerick, The Library of Dublin City University, The Library of NUI Cork, The Library of NUI 
Maynooth, The Library of University College Dublin, The Library of NUI Galway. 

Legal deposit, United Kingdom: The British Library. 

British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data. 

A cataloguing record for this book is available from the British Library. 

Legal deposit, France: Bibliotheque Nationale de France - Depot legal: novembre 2016. 



