DOCUMENT RKSUME 



ED 316 294 



JC 900 162 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



McNamara, Lois L* 

Internationalizing the Curriculum: One Instructor's 
Experience, 

Valencia Community Coll., Orlando, Fla* 

90 
lOp. 

Reports - Descriptive (141) 
MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

^American Indian Culture; *Black Influences; 
Community Colleges; *Cross Cultural Studies; Cultural 
Exchange; ^Cultural Influences; Curriculum 
Enrichment; Financial Support; General Education; 
Instructional Improvement; * Instructional Innovation; 
Jazz; ^Learning Modules; Middle Eastern Studies; Two 
Year Colleges 



ABSTRACT 

Using a Title VI Grant from the U.S. Department of 
Education, one faculty Tiember at Valencia Community College (VCC) 
developed international or intercultural modules for existing courses 
to explore both Western and non-Western contributions to the 
humanities. During the first year of grant implementation, a module; 
on Jewish and Islamic contributions to medieval European society and 
culture was developed for inclusion in a Late Roman-Medieval 
Humanities course • In the second year of the grant, two intercultural 
mcaules were designed for inclusion in an Introduction to Humanities 
course: "Afro-American Contributions to Literature" and "Native and 
Af re- American Contributions to Art, Architecture, and Music." These 
modules included comparisons of Greek tragic heroines to contemporary 
members of civil disobedience movements; a discussion of the work of 
Langston Hughes and Zora Neale Hurston; slide presentations of 
Keso-American pyramids and Native American handicrafts, and musical 
presentations of jazz. (JMC) 



* Reproductions supplied by EURS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



9 



4 



Internationalizing the Curriculum: One Instructor's Experience. 



by Lois L. McNamara 




Valencia Community College, Orlando, Florida 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED B\ 

L» L> McNamara 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



U,8. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Offic* of fc'ducalionfll Re»eflrch and Iniprovenif nl 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCflS iNFORMATION 
CBNTPR(F:RiC) 

Thiji documeni has been reprotkrced as 
f*^CGiv«»d from Ihp pHfSon or organizahon 
origtnJting il 

XMmof cHanges have txien made lo improve 
fopfoduction quoltly 

# PonUs o( View ot opinions stated tn this tUfcu 
mfiht do not necensanly represent ofdcial 
OERI posftton or pol«cy 



ERIC 



2 



BEST COPY AVAii m l 



Lois L. McNamara 
INTERNATIONALIZING THE CURRICULUM; ONE INSTRUCTOR'S EXPERIENCE 

In 1987, Valencia Community College received a U.S. Department 
of Education Title VI Grant for Undergraduate International Studies 
and Foreign Language Programs. The grant that Valencia had written 
consisted of three components; one part funded the development of 
an International Horticultural Business Program; the second 
component provided assistance to area middle school teachers in 
developing international studiejs materials for geography courses; 
the third component invited college faculty to develop 
international or inter* cultural modules for existing courses. (A 
module was defined as teaching materials for three to six classes 
for an established course.) Faculty members who chose to develop 
such a module received a stipend at the completion of their work 
and a monetary allocation to purchase audio-visual or library 
materials for the modules they were developing. 

I was happy to participate in the third component of this 
grant because I had been becoming steadily more convinced that our 
general education courses, including the Humanities courses I 
teach, were too Euro- or ethnocentric. I might add that I 
cufstomarily began a course with an explanation of my conviction 
that important thinking and artiotic achievements hai taken place 
all over the world; I explained to my students that the peopJe who 
d^icided on their general education requirements beiieved that our 
students should have a foundation of knowledga about western 



ERIC 



3 



civilization because that is the culture they live in. I assured 
them that when they go on to the university, there will be many 
courses available to them regarding the cultures of Africa, the 
Orient, and other nonwestern civilizations. Nevertheless, I felt 
uneasy because I know that by their omission I was sending a silent 
message that nonwestern achievements are either insignificant or 
nonexistent. over the years, particularly as a result of my 
travels in Peru and Mexico, I had become convinced that the 
architectural, engineer irjg, and astronomical achievements of the 
New World inhabitants were just as great, and in some cases 
greater, than the achievements of the Egyptians, Romans, and the 
Europeans who vrere my ancestors. 

During the first year of our grant implementation (1987-88), 
I developed f\ module on Jewish and Islamic contributions to 
medieval European culture. This module was designed for inclusion 
in our Late Roman-Medieval Humanities course. Traditionally, this 
course had been taught in four units, with the first unit being one 
on the development of Christianity, followed by three units on 
medieval culture in Europe. In developing this teaching module, 
I added to the curriculum materials which showed aspects of the 
Jewish religion that Christianity had borrowed from Judaism; I also 
added to the curriculum for this course materials for teaching 
about the early development of Islam, as well as information on 
Jewish and islamic contributions to medieval European society. For 
example, in the first unit I added readings from the Hebrew Bible 
to show the emphasis on ethics which Christianity borrowed from 
Judaism. In teaching about the early development of Islam, I 



ERIC 



4 



assigned readings from the Quoran and developed a set of slides to 
depict Islamic practices and holy sites in Mecca. Later in the 
course, I included a lecture on scientific and technological 
developments in the Arab world which were transmitted to Europe 
towards the end of the Middle Ages. Most students Know the term 
Arabic numerals but have seldom credited this invaluable 
development to another culture. (Imagine doing long division in 
Roman numberals!) (Actually, the symbols known as Arabic numerals 
were derived from India, but Muslim scholars added the crucial 
concept of zero and transmitted this very useful knowledge to 
Europeans.) This module also included plans for teaching about 
Jewish life and thought in Europe during the Middle Ages. Students 
were required to read a selection from the writings of j Jewish 
philosopher Maimonides, who provides an interesting contrast with 
Aquinas or Abelard. Giving students biographical background on 
Maimonides provided an appropriate basis for informing students 
about the development of anti-Semitism in the Western world. As 
part of this module, I also prepared a set of slides to picture 
some of the oldest remaining European synogogues and visuals which 
depict evidence of anti-Semitism in medieval society. 

In the second year of our grant, I developed two intercultural 
modules for our Introduction to Humanities course. This is a high 
enrollment course which introduces students to the various 
disciplines in the Humanities; many students take this course 
before going on to the other higher level Humanities courses. The 
course is taught with a textbook written by some of the veterans 
in my department. I had felt for some time that the course ought 



to include more representation of minority contributions to the 
Humanities for two reasons. First of ail, the Introduction to 
Humanities course generally includes more minority and 
international students than our other humanities courses. Wouldn't 
they, I reasoned, be more convinced of the value of college study 
if they saw that the contributions of their ethnic groups were 
valued as important? secondly, I was personally convinced that 
majority students ought also to be better informed about the 
valuable achievements of nonwestern societies and artists or 
writers from minority ethnic backgrounds. 

Thus, I developed for the Introduction to Humanities course 
two modules, titled "Afro-American Contributions to Liter ture" and 
"Native and Afro-American Contributions to Art, Architecture, and 
Music." Though these module titles may sound very comprehensive, 
please keep in mind that I was simply designing materials that 
could be incorporated into a pre-existing, successful course. 
Thus, in the literature module, I continued to use selections tha'- 
were included in our textbook, but added some additional selections 
and emphasized connections to Americans of African or nonwestern 
descent. For instance, I continued to teach the Greek tragedy 
Antigone wluch our textbook included. But in discussing the themes 
of the play, I spent a day explaining the similarity of Antigone's 
stand to that taken by modern practictioners of civil disobedience. 
I tell the story of Rosa parks in considerable detail; I elicit 
from students what they may know about the civil rights movement. 
This discussion also covers acts of civil disobedience by Ghandl, 
and majority Americans such as Thoreau and the Vietnam protestors 



of the '60's. 

The Literature Unit of our Introduction to Humanities textbook 
includes just one literary work by a Black author: the poem "Theme 
for English B" by Langston Hughes. I customarily reproduce a few 
more poems of Hughes and spend an entire class period, eliciting 
the concerns and themes of Hughes in his poems, in explaining his 
poetry, I am given an opportunity to explain some lesser known 
aspects of American history, such as the Hariem Renaissance. 
Almost always, I can conclude this class with a profitable 
discussion of racism as students have evidenced it in their own 
lifetimes. 

In rethinking this course, i felt strongly that more 
representation from Afro-American writers was desirable. I decided 
to field test a short story of Zora Neale Hurston, having chosen 
Hurston because she is the most famous writer to have originated 
in the Orlando area. I selected the story, "Isis," which is 
typical of Hurston 's writings in that it relies heavily upon her 
accurate representation of the Black dialect. The story is about 
a delightfully mischieivous girl and is set in Eatonville, the all- 
Black city just north of Orlando, where Hurston grew up. This 
story paired very successfully with Frank O'Connor's "First 
Confession," which is included in our textbook. Both stories have 
child protagonists; both rely heavily upon dialect and setting for 
their effectiveness. In fact, Hurston 's use of dialect is so 
extensive that students found it difficult to understand— until 
they heard it read aloud. My colleagues have asked me for my 
suggestions for their next revision of the textbook, i hope that 



they will include this story or another by Hurston, as well as more 
poems by Hughes or other Afro-American writert?. 

My module on "Native and Afro-American Contributions to Art, 
Architecture and Music" included many easy-to-incorporate, minor 
additions. In the Architecture Unit, for instance, I simply 
included slides of Meso-American pyramids whereas the textbook had 
pictured only an Egyptian pyramid when discussing interior and 
exterior space. Though I continue to teach about the significance 
of the Roman arch and its architectural derivations, I also include 
slides of the corbelled arch as it was used in Mayan 
constructions. In teaching about ancient monolithic constructions 
such as Stonehenge (which our textbook discusses), I also include 
slides of the amazing Inca constructions at cuzco and Machuu Pichu. 

In a similar fashion, I added slides of the art works done by 
Native Americans to the art unit. Our textbook defines five 
purposes for art: education, illustration, decoration, 
entertainment and utility. a Gre^ urn and a vase by a modern 
American artist were depicted as representations of utilitarian 
art. Having a stipend of $600. to spend on materials for this 
module allowed me to purchase a considerable number of slides 
depicting native American pottery, baskets, and other utilitarian 
objects, dating from pre-Columbian times through the 1980 's. I 
also selected a film about Maria Martinez, the well-known twentieth 
century Native American potter who developed the black-on-black 
pottery that is highly regarded and prized. This film demonstrates 
the traditional Indian pottery techniques of working from coils 
rather than a wheel; since many students have taken art classes in 
ERIC 8 



which they made pots by both methods, they easily appreciate the 
skill of modern Indian potters who use the traditional techniques 
with such impressive results. The grant stipend also enabled me 
to purchase slides of art works by such contemporary native 
American artists as R.c. Gorman for inclusion when I teach about 
recent trends in the art world. 

The music unit of our textbook presents a brief overview of 
the elements of music (melody, rhythm, and tonality), along with 
a cursory explanation of musical notation, and some examples of 
music in the Western tradition — from Brahms to the Beatles. 
Colleagues of mine generally built upon this material by placing 
music on a continuum of classical or romantic values, a 
presentation which has proven quite successful for a short unit on 
music. I extended the music unit for this course by adding two 
class sessions on jazz. In this area, in particular, I was able 
to make use of the materials stipend. I ordered a CD collection 
on the history of jazz, and after spending many hours viewing 
educational films and videos on jazz, I recommended the purchase 
of several films about jazz. 

Teaching a brief overview of the history of jazz is 
particularly satisfying for communicating a sense of the 
fortuitious results when two societies merge and build upon each 
other; stated quite simply, jazz is a uniquely American art form 
that resulted from the blending of African rhythms with European 
tonality and musical instruments. What better way to indicate that 
different cultures can benefit from appreciating each other's 
achievements? 

er!c 9 



In conclusion, I am happy to have been involved in developing 
the Valencia international/intercultural modules. The most 
gratifying aspect of the project was having an allocation of money 
to spend on purchasing appropriate materials for teaching topics 
that I felt rightfully belonged in the courses. The module 
materials that I presented to my students have been well received; 
for instance, students are eager to learn about islam, perhaps 
because of its relevance to current world affairs; some of my 
students have expressed astonishment and dismay when learning of 
anti-Semitism in the medieval world. On the other hand, it is a 
pleasure for me to note the expressions of South American students 
when I teach about the architectural wonders in their part of the 
world; and it is also rewarding to note the pride with which Afro- 
American students explain what Rosa Parks or other civil rights 
leaders did. I am also gratified by my colleagues' request for 
intercultural inclusions in their rewriting of the Introduction to 
Humanities textbook. it just goes to show, I think, that 
"doctoring" our courses to include the contributions of nonwestern 
cultures does pay off— for both instructor and students. 



ERIC Clearinghouse for 
Junior Colleges 

JO 



