DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 446 445 



FL 026 460 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Macia, Jose J. 

Transcultural Experiences: A Literature Bridge to English 
for ESOL Students from Cuba. 

1999-08-11 

2 lOp . ; Ed.D. Dissertation, Florida International University. 
Dissertations/Theses - Doctoral Dissertations (041) -- 

Reports - Research (143) 

MF01/PC09 Plus Postage. 

Classroom Techniques; Cross Cultural Studies; *Cubans; 
♦Culturally Relevant Education; *English (Second Language) ; 
High School Students; High Schools; *Hispanic Americans; 
Interviews; *Literature; Second Language Instruction; Second 
Language Learning; Spanish Speaking; *Teaching Methods; Two 
Year College Students; Two Year Colleges 



ABSTRACT 



This qualitative study is concerned with exploring the 
transcultural experiences of ESOL students and connecting their lived 
experiences to literature in the classroom. The purpose of the study was to 
describe and explain the transcultural perspectives of six high school and 
community college students-- four Cuban-born and two American-born but raised 
in the Cuban -American culture. It investigates their lived transcultural 
experiences. The data was collected in the form of student interviews, a 
researcher's journal, and document reviews. The following exploratory 
questions guided this study: (1) From the perspective of four Cuban-born 

non-native English-speaking students (NNS ) , what are the essential structures 
of their transcultural identities? (2) What are the underlying themes that 
account for the Cuban NNS students' transcultural experiences? (3) What are 
the universal structures found among Cuban NNS students 1 transcultural 
experiences and the Cuban -American, native English/Spanish speaking (NESS) 
students' experiences? (4) What are the possible structural meanings of the 
Cuban NNS students' interests in relation to their transcultural experiences? 
(5) What are some of the connections between the structural themes inherent 
in the Cuban NNS students ' transcultural experiences and their teaching 
literature in English as a second or other language (ESOL) ? Results of the 
survey provide a better understanding of these students ' transcultural 
experiences and show the potential of connecting their perspectives to 
literature in the classroom. (Author/KFT) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



FLORIDA INTERNATIONAL UNIVERSITY 



in 

tJ- 

lo 



Q 






Miami, Florida 



TRANSCULTURAL EXPERIENCES: 

A LITERATURE BRIDGE TO ENGLISH FOR ESOL STUDENTS FROM CUBA 



A dissertation submitted in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of 



DOCTOR OF EDUCATION 
in 

HIGHER EDUCATION 



by 

lose I. Macia 
1999 



O 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 

been granted by 








o 1 

-ERIC BEST COPY AVAILABLE c 0 



2 



ii c DEPARTMENT of education 

OlL of Educa?™ Research and Improvemenl 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

tWhis document has been ^pmduced as 
Jfleceived from the person or organization 
/^■/originating it. 

' □ Minor changes have been made to 

improve reproduction quality. 

• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
documeru do no. necessarily represent 
official OERl position or policy. 



To: Dean Linda Blanton 

College of Education 



This dissertation, written by Jose Juan Macia, and entitled TRANSCULTURAL 
EXPERIENCES: A LITERATURE BRIDGE TO ENGLISH FOR ESOL STUDENTS 
FROM CUBA, having been approved in respect to style and intellectual content, is 
referred to you for judgment 

We have read this dissertation and recommend that it be approved 

Dominic A. Mohamed 



C ^ ' / V / / , O / TT, 7 



/ Linda Spears-Bunton 



L // 









Valerie Janesick 




Date of Defense: August 11, 1999 

The dissertation of Jose Juan Macia is approved. 



Dean Linda Blanton 
College of Education 



\jLn a/I ^ XjAAA / 1 

Dean Richard L). Campbell 
Division of Graduate Studies 



Florida International University, 1999 



ERIC 



3 



11 



DEDICATION 



I dedicate this dissertation to Art Barker, for his lifetime devotion to The Seed, a 
place of love and hope, where miracles come true and dreams live on forever. Art, I am 
eternally grateful for your friendship and guidance. You taught me to follow my heart and 
you gave me a life I would have never known. Because of you, I have traveled farther 
than I could ever dream . . . Thank you for teaching me to believe in myself and to love 
others. 

. . . You are the greatest teacher of all 

I Love You 




iii 



W U v_ ,'J 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



Writing this dissertation offered me the opportunity to interact and share ideas 
with many special people in the past three years. I would like to thank each one of them 
for their invaluable contributions to this research project. The realization of this 
dissertation would not have been possible without their efforts. 

I would like to thank my committee members, whose individual and unique 
strengths helped to shape this dissertation from its initial stages. I chose each person on 
my committee for his or her expertise in different fields of education, and I am grateful 
for each member’s role on the committee. I am also fortunate to have had these members 
as professors in graduate school. It was a pleasure to have worked with Dr. Kingsley 
Banya, whose commitment to a “better and better” product is reflected in this 
dissertation. Thank you Dr. Banya for dealing so well with the crisis times. I am grateful 
for your leadership and support during this period of my life. I was able to brainstorm the 
literature chapter in Dr. Spears-Bunton’s graduate seminar last summer and am thankful 
for her background in literature and insight into English education. Dr. Janesick’s 
expertise in the field of qualitative research gave life to the methodology section. I am 
extending a special thanks to Dr. Mohamed for his participation on the committee. I 
appreciate working with Dr. Cheryl Benz, whose knowledge of TESOL served as an 
excellent resource. 

I would also like to thank the following people for their hard work at different 
points of the research process: Elisa Abrams, thank you so much for your wonderful 
friendship and support throughout this journey. It is obvious that you are a wonderful 
teacher, and I learned a lot from your excellent editing skills. Randy Hjelmeir, thank you 



O 

ERIC 



-u, iv 5 



for your innovative ideas, and energy level. I gain so much from your talents. Denise 
Ingram, thank you for sharing your court reporting skills, and listening to the details of 
my project. I appreciate all of your efforts. Diane Arcuri, I am very grateful for your 
talent to jump in and focus at critical times. When I needed your editing skills the most, 
you were right-on target— thank you very much. Also, thanks for listening at the last 
“crazy” moments. Ron Anderson, thank you for the time you dedicated to support this 
project. I am very grateful to you. I would like to include a special thanks to Art, Shelly, 
and Staff for always being there as my very best friends. . .thank you Lybbi, Bob, Cookie, 
and Jean for years of support. I would like to thank the guys at 1509, as well as each and 
every one of my friends, for their encouraging thoughts, sense of humor, and love. 

I would like to dedicate this section to my family, who has supported me in many 
of my decisions in life. Gracias Mami y Papi, por siempre estar a mi lado. Thank you 
Mom and Dad for being there when I needed you most and for your encouragement 
throughout graduate school. Esther and Narci, you have always kept interested in my 
work and are very special to me; I respect you so much for the people you are today, kind 
and loving, and I appreciate our special friendship. I would like to offer a special thanks 
to my grandparents: Abuela Berta, who I know looks after me from above, Abuelo Pepe, 
who has sat in anticipation of this project for a long time, and Abuelo Juan and Abuela 
Enelia, who have always wished for the very best in my life. I Love You All. 




v 6 



ABSTRACT OF THE DISSERTATION 
TRANS CULTURAL EXPERIENCES: 

A LITERATURE BRIDGE TO ENGLISH FOR ESOL STUDENTS FROM CUBA 

by 

Jose Juan Macia 

Florida International University, 1999 
Miami, Florida 

Professor Kingsley Banya, Mayor Professor 

This qualitative study is concerned with exploring the transcultural experiences of 
ESOL students and connecting their lived experiences to literature in the classroom. The 
purpose of this study was to describe and explain the transcultural perspectives of six 
high school and community college students: four Cuban bom students and two 
American bom / raised students of Cuban- American culture. The participants were from 
Barbara Goleman Senior High School and Miami-Dade Community College. The six 
phenomenological portraits were explored in the form of lived experience pieces, 
representing the students’ transcultural experiences. The data was collected in the form of 
student interviews, researcher’s journal, and document reviews. The following 
exploratory questions guided this study: 

1 . From the perspective of four Cuban-born, non-native English-speaking students 
(NNS), what are the essential structures of their transcultural identities? 

2. What are the underlying themes that account for the Cuban NNS students’ 




Uo 



vi 



7 



transcultural experiences? 

3. What are the universal transcultural structures among the Cuban NNS students’ 
transcultural experiences and the Cuban-American, native English / Spanish speaking 
(NESS) students’ experiences? 

4. What are the possible structural meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests in 
relation to their transcultural experiences? 

5. What are some connections between the structural themes inherent in the Cuban NNS 
students’ transcultural experiences and teaching literature in ESOL? 

A phenomenological approach was used to investigate the participants’ 
transcultural experiences, focused on the students’ lived experiences. The study consisted 
of three interview sessions for each of the six participants. The analysis of the data was 
conducted following the principles of qualitative research, which included participant 
interviews, thematic analysis, researcher’s journal, document reviews, and triangulation. 
The researcher created portraits representing students’ transcultural experiences. 
Subsequently, the participants’ transcultural experiences were used to respond to the 
exploratory questions, including comparing and contrasting themes and drawing 
connections among teaching literature in the ESOL classroom. 

The results of this study show some relevant specific statements and themes that 
emerged from the students’ transcultural data. The results serve as a better understanding 
of these students’ transcultural experiences and the potentiality of connecting their 
perspectives to literature in the classroom. In addition, this study shows the need for a 
better understanding of the connection between transcultural experiences and literature in 
ESOL. 




vii 



8 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



CHAPTER PAGE 

I. INTRODUCTION 1 

1 . 1 Statement of the Problem 6 

1 .2 Objectives of the Study 12 

1 .3 Significance of the Study 13 

1 .4 Delimitations of the Study 15 

1.5 Definition of Terms 15 

1 .6 Organization of the Study 1 8 



II. LITERATURE REVIEW 



2.1 Introduction 19 

2.2 ESOL Students of Hispanic Cultures 19 

2.3 ESOL: A Curriculum in Transition 21 

2.4 TESOL: Curriculum Reform 22 

2.5 TESOL: Moving From Basic Communication 24 

2.6 Literature in the ESOL Classroom 26 

2.7 Multicultural Literature: A Bridge 27 

2.8 Conceptual Model: Reader Response Theory 29 

2.9 Critical Review of the Literature 32 



ERiC 



w 



9 



Vlll 



III. Methodology 



3.1 Introduction 35 

3.2 Rationale for a Qualitative Study 35 

3.3 Role of the Researcher 38 

3.4 Experience of the Researcher 39 

3.5 Participants: Rationale and Purposive Sampling 42 

3.6 Data Collection ; 44 

3.7 Research Questions 47 

3.8 Analysis and Interpretation of the Data 48 

3.9 Statement of Ethical Responsibility 5 1 

3.10 Summary 52 



IV. RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 



4.1 Introduction 54 

4.2 The Setting 55 

4.3 Biographical Portraits of NNS Students 57 

4.4 Biographical Portraits of NESS Students 66 

4.5 Cuban NNS Students’ Transcultural Experiences 70 

4.6 Portrait of a Country 72 

4.7 Personal Memories 77 

4.8 Discovering America 80 

4.9 Living in Miami 84 




10 



ix 



4.10 An Education in Cuba 



90 



4.1 1 School in the U.S.A 96 

4.12 Family Ties 107 

4.13 Friends Across the Ocean 112 

4.14 Socio-political Visions 122 

4.15 Development and Description of a Model 137 



V. DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 



5.1 Introduction 158 

5.2 Discussion: Multicultural Textbooks 158 

5.3 Selected Literary Works: Building the Bridge 161 

“Song of the Sky Loom” by Tewa Indian 161 

“What is an American” by Jean de Crevecoeur 164 

The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano 

by Olaudah Equiano 166 

“I, Too” by Langston Hughes 168 

“Martinez’ Treasure” by Manuela Williams Crosno 170 

“Back, But not Home” by Maria Muniz 173 

5.4 Questions for Further Study 176 

5.5 Recommendations 177 

REFERENCES 179 

APPENDICES 184 

VITA 194 



- 11 

ERIC 



X 



LIST OF CHARTS 



CHART PAGE 

1. Cuban NNS Students: Biographical Information 65 

2. Cuban- American NESS Students: Biographical Information 69 

3. Central Exploratory Question 71 

4. Exploratory Subquestion 1 141 

5. Exploratory Subquestion 2 143 



O 

ERIC 



XI 



12 



LIST OF DIAGRAMS 



DIAGRAM PAGE 

Exploratory Subquestion 3 

1 . Portrait of A Country 148 

2. Personal Memories 149 

3. Discovering America 150 

4. Living in Miami 151 

5. An Education in Cuba 152 

6. School in the U.S.A 153 

7. Family Ties 154 

8. Friends Across the Ocean 155 

9. Socio-political Visions 156 

10. Model for NNS Students’ Transcultural Identities 157 








CHAPTER ONE 



INTRODUCTION 




As a result of the growing number of students who have immigrated to South 
Florida in the past ten years, a primary concern shared by administrators, educators, and 
other community leaders has been to design effective language programs that strive to 
engage non-native speaking students (NNS) in academic activities, such as the study of 
literature, compatible to academic skills requirements in mainstream classes. In other 
words, many immigrant students are not just learning English with the goal to survive in 
social speaking situations. More and more, English for speakers of other languages 
(ESOL) students are learning English with a higher goal in mind— to perform 
linguistically at the academic level of native English speakers in mainstream English / 
language arts classes. 

The philosophy underlying ESOL programs in Florida’s public schools and 
community colleges is to provide opportunities for students to learn English as the 
foundation for academic skills in the second language. Miami-Dade Community 
College’s (MDCC, 1992) course competencies for advanced ESOL students encompass 
the following goals for academic skills in reading: 1) determining main ideas from 
supporting details; 2) surveying, previewing, and predicting; 3) specifying explicit and 
implicit main idea; and, 4) scanning for specific information. In the Sunshine State 
Standards the benchmarks for high school, advanced ESOL students include the 
following academic skills in reading: 1) apply a variety of response strategies, including 
rereading, note taking, summarizing, outlining, writing a formal report, and relating what 
is read to his or her own experiences and feelings; 2) describe and evaluate personal 
preferences regarding fiction and nonfiction; and, 3) locate, gather, analyze, and evaluate 
written information for a variety of purposes, including research projects, real-world 
tasks, and self-improvement (Florida Department of Education, 1997). 



VJ0 14 



Many ESOL students come to the U.S. and begin learning English at the 
secondary and community college levels to pursue vocational or academic training at the 
college and university levels. Consequently, in order for students to attain their 
professional and career goals, ESOL administrators and educators work towards 
designing programs that prepare students academically in their second language at the 
secondary and community college levels. The following are several premises highlighted 
in the Secondary ESOL Competency-Based-Curriculum for Miami-Dade County Public 
Schools (MDCPS, 1996): 

• LEP students have the right to access all academic programs offered in DCPS. 

• the learners will be exposed to higher interest and higher motivating experiences by 
raising the standards and expectations of both, the students and their teacher; thus the 
students’ involvement in the total school program is enhanced, as is their interest in 
graduation. 

• the scope of the curriculum, including communicative competency, literacy, and 
academic skills, as well as learning cooperatively in a multilingual, multicultural 
environment, will result in better preparing students to cope with school and 
community demands. 

• Reading and writing in the content area will ensure an integrated curriculum 
providing the students the opportunity to use the second language being acquired to 
succeed in the academic functions. 




In light of this, designing and implementing an effective literature curriculum, 
both in ESL and mainstream English courses, is critical to the academic success of ESOL 

. 2 

•■>0 |5 



ERjt 



secondary and community college students, since one of the primary goals of Florida 
ESOL programs includes mainstreaming NNS students. Once NNS students have been 
exited from ESOL programs mainstream teachers will expect them to perform at the 
same levels of native English speakers. In mainstream English language arts classes, for 
example, NNS students will be expected to read at the same levels as native English 
speaking (NES) students. Once students are placed in regular language arts classrooms, 
mainstream English teachers will expect ESOL students to perform at the same academic 
levels as their peers. The mainstream language arts teachers’ expectations do not take into 
account the research that suggests ESOL students require five to seven years to reach 
academic proficiency at the levels of native speakers (Cummins, 1984). Cummins (1984) 
differentiates between ‘surface fluency’ and ‘conceptual-linguistic knowledge’ using the 
terms of basic interpersonal communicative skills (BICS) and cognitive academic 
language proficiency (CALP). He defines BICS as the manifestation of language 
proficiency in everyday communicative competence, while he defines CALP in terms of 
the manipulation of language in decontextualized academic situations (pp. 16-17). 

Should mainstream English language arts teachers have a better understanding of the 
cognitive academic language proficiency needs of ESOL students, these teachers would 
be empowered to make relevant curriculum decisions to connect ESOL students to 
literature as another academic avenue. 

The problem remains that many ESOL students are exited from ESOL programs 
from two to four years in secondary schools and two years in community colleges, 
depending on the structure of the program. This leaves a gap between the advanced levels 
of ESOL and mainstream English language arts in terms of ESOL students’ exposure to 
the mainstream literature curriculum. By the time they are exited from ESOL, students 
have not necessarily been connected to the mainstream literature curriculum because the 
ESOL curriculum has not traditionally emphasized literature like the mainstream English 
/ language arts courses. In MDCPS the secondary ESOL programs have four levels. 

■A) 16 



Beginning level students receive Level I instruction and progress through Level IV 
instruction, although they are placed in a parallel-to-English program by grade level: 
English 1 through ESOL Strategies = 9 th Grade English for ESOL students 
English 2 through ESOL Strategies = 10 th Grade English for ESOL students 
English 3 through ESOL Strategies = 1 1 th Grade English for ESOL students 
English 4 through ESOL Strategies = 12 th Grade English for ESOL students 
Each subsequent grade represents an annual course and should mirror the curriculum 
content and materials covered in mainstream English classes. In addition, ESOL students 
are enrolled in an ESOL elective, grouped by proficiency levels I - IV, focusing on 
second language developing. In line with the philosophy that the student continue to 
develop his or her cognitive academic language proficiency in both languages, students 
receiving Levels I and II instruction are enrolled in content area courses, Bilingual 
Curriculum Content (BCC), that use native language instruction and English to support 
the transfer of cognitive academic language proficiency skills. However, ESOL Levels I 
and II students remain in BCC courses, and once they have passed to Level 3, they are 
mainstreamed in all content areas, except for English language arts. The reason for 
keeping ESOL 3 and 4 students in English language arts through ESOL is that these 
students need further development in language arts from a teacher trained in using ESOL 
strategies. Students are then placed in mainstream English courses, generally after Levels 
III or IV, after meeting the exit criteria— scoring a level 5 on the Dade County Oral 
Language Proficiency Survey and scoring at the 33 percentile on the reading portion of 
the SAT (MDCPS, 1995). Since ESOL students are mainstreamed in the content areas 
after two years and placed in English language arts after three or four years, it is critical 
that school administrators and teachers provide all ESOL students with a strong literature 
curriculum to fill in the gap between the last levels of ESOL and mainstream language 
arts programs. Enriching ESOL students’ reading experiences will better support their 




u 04 17 



o 

ERIC 



transition to mainstream English classes and other academic areas because students will 
be exposed to a more demanding academic curriculum. 

This is likewise the case at Miami-Dade Community College, where students who 
start from level one in the ESL for Academic Purposes Department, move through six 
levels (one semester per level). The courses span the areas of reading, writing, speech, 
and grammar. The first two preparatory levels provide intensive English language 
instruction for students who have had very little or no previous training in English. These 
initial levels concentrate on speaking, reading, and writing American English. The next 
four levels concentrate on building academic college skills essential to the ESOL 
students’ survival in mainstream courses. Thus, for students to bridge the gap between 
ESOL level six and mainstream courses building academic reading skills is essential for 
success in college courses. An expanding research area in teaching English for speakers 
of other languages (TESOL) analyzes the relationship between reading and high interest 
literature as a way towards better understanding the reading needs of advanced ESOL 
students (Krashen, 1992). High interest literature means literature selected by the student, 
potentially providing a bridge between ESOL textbooks and mainstream literature 
programs. A primary concern for both ESOL and mainstream language arts teachers that 
impacts upon the ESOL and language arts curriculum is how to get students interested in 
reading. As Krashen (1992) points out, “Free voluntary reading (FVR) is one of the most 
powerful tools we have in language education, and, . . . FVR is the missing ingredient in 
first language ‘language arts’ as well as in intermediate second and foreign language 
instruction” (p. 1). The academic TESOL community is interested in techniques which 
move ESOL students towards the same level of academic proficiency as NESS students, 
and a dimension of learning “how” to teach ESOL students has been to better understand 
cultural experiences and these experiences’ connections to language learning. 

In looking for interrelations among reading, literature, and transcultural 
experiences, it is not enough to look at the ESOL student’s background native culture 

5 

■jO 18 



(where he or she was bom) without considering the cultural context within which the 
student is learning the new language. For the purpose of this study, I will speak of the 
simultaneous past, present, and future cultural context as the ESOL student’s 
transcultural identity. In this sense, the ESOL student’s transcultural identity represents 
the student as learner in a new community: identity, family, friends, school, work, 
sociopolitical views, values, and expectations. Once in the U.S., the ESOL student finds 
himself or herself in the process of initially adopting and continuously redefining his or 
her own unique transcultural identity. Often educators overlook the rich cultural 
dimensions that communities such as South Florida provide, where immigrant students 
interact with American bom students of the same cultural origins. By comparing and 
contrasting ESOL students’ cultures and NESS students’ cultures teachers can better 
understand the acculturation process and its relation to second language acquisition. 

1.1 Statement of the Problem 



The statement of the problem is organized around the following focus points: 

1) ESOL students need to be able to make cultural connections with the literature they 
are reading, so they can transfer their reading skills to the literature in mainstream 
English classes. 

2) High school and community college ESOL as well as mainstream teachers need more 
training in making connections between ESOL students’ cultural experiences and 
teaching literature. 

3) ESOL and mainstream teacher training needs to emphasize the concept of ESOL 
transcultural identity, which is knowledge of the ESOL student’s transition as learner 
within the context of his or her ongoing transcultural experiences to include past, 



O 

ERIC 



^ l 19 



present, and potential future experiences. 

Krashen (1992) differentiated between two kinds of free voluntary reading as 
pedagogical approaches in moving advanced ESOL and mainstream language arts 
students towards mainstream academic proficiency skills: 1) sustained silent reading and 
2) self-selected reading. A step towards connecting advanced ESOL students to reading 
high interest literature is teaching students to recognize their own transcultural 
experiences. Through exploring their own transcultural experiences ESOL students will 
be in a better position to self-select reading material. Such high-interest, personally 
relevant material will potentially provide ESOL students with meaningful opportunities 
to academic texts. MDCPS (1996) secondary ESOL Content Based Curriculum (CBC) 
and the MDCC (1992) Course Competencies and Learning Outcomes for ENS Reading 
Levels 1 - 4 do address making connections between literature and an ESOL student’s 
background culture and personal experience. In addition, several of the competencies and 
objectives incorporated in the MDCPS secondary ESOL CBC under the Component 
“Literature” emphasize the implementation of multicultural literature in the ESOL 
classroom. These objectives are meant to guide teachers in teaching their students to 
make connections between literature and the students’ native cultural experiences. For 
example, in one of the competencies incorporated under the Reading / Literature section 
of the MDCPS (1996) CBC for a secondary ESOL III level instruction is the following: 
Objective 6: Relates fictional and nonfiction pieces of literature to student’s own 
experiences; Objective 14: Explores own values in light of those expressed in American 
literature and cites similarities and differences. However, ESOL students need to be 
taught how to make the connections between their transcultural experiences and the text. 



O 

ERLC 



7 



20 



In order to better meet the academic needs of ESOL students, teachers need training that 
considers this dimension of developing academic language proficiency. 

By following the CBC an ESOL teacher may introduce a short story, novel, or 
poem through a pre-reading exercise that invites students to first explore their native 
experiences, subsequently relating their personal experiences to the class reading. Many 
advanced ESOL students are in the “prime” of language development; thus, such an 
exercise would enhance the student’s literary experience and contribute to the student’s 
reading skills in the second language. As Rosenblatt (1995) argues, “An intense response 
to a work (of literature) will have its root in capacities and experiences already present in 
the personality and mind of the reader” (p. 4). Teachers must receive special training, 
however, to relate the literature to student’s transcultural experiences. 

As ESOL and mainstream language arts teachers look for ways to better meet the 
academic needs of students from diverse cultures, there is a growing awareness towards 
implementing pedagogical approaches that consider second language development. In 
Miami-Dade County this is a critical issue due to the large percentage of NNS students in 
the school system. The Office of Educational Planning of MDCPS (1998) reports that in 
1997-98 there were 48,749 students enrolled in ESOL programs in the MDCPS. The 
Office of Institutional Research of MDCC (1998) reports that during the Fall of 1997 
there were 6,027 students college-wide enrolled in ESOL courses, in the lower levels 
English as a second language courses and the higher level English for non-native 
speakers (college track) courses. 

One of the literary approaches considered in both the ESOL and English language 
arts curricula is introducing relevant multicultural literature as a vehicle for engaging 




-5 21 



student interest and developing reading and literary skills. The interconnectedness among 
relevant literature and students’ cultural backgrounds encompasses the development of 
cognitive academic language skills for those NNS students for whom literature can serve 
as a bridge towards academic performance in English. The philosophy of connecting 
students to a culturally relevant literature experience parallels the current ESOL curricula 
at MDCPS and MDCC. In support of a multicultural curriculum the ESOL program at the 
Wolfson Campus of MDCC selects a composition text, A Writer’s Workbook (Smoke, 
1996), that includes several multicultural readings as springboard for prewriting 
discussions. Similarly, MDCPS has adopted a multicultural literature anthology, 
Literature and Language (Bernstein, 1994), to help ESOL students develop reading and 
critical thinking skills. The Literature and Language textbook is also used in mainstream 
English classes. These are the current objectives at MDCPS and MDCC; the shortcoming 
is teacher training in implementing literature, emphasizing an understanding of the ESOL 
student’s transcultural experiences. Educational institutions whose philosophy include 
meeting the academic needs of ESOL students should implement more effective teacher 
training programs to connect students to literature. 

The Multicultural Education, Training, and Advocacy (META) Consent Decree 
was approved in 1990 by the State Board of Education, requiring Florida secondary 
schools with NNS students to provide equitable instruction through ESOL programs to 
meet the special needs of ESOL students (Badia, 1994). As part of the new regulations, 
Florida ESOL public school teachers are required to take three semester hours in cross- 
cultural studies. This requirement is stated under the Personnel — certification 
requirements section of the District Plan for Limited English Proficient Student: Basic 




9 



22 



ESOL endorsement, as approved in State Board of Education Rule 6A-4.0244, requires 
fifteen (15) semester hours in ESOL courses which must include credit in each of the 
areas specified below: 1) Methods of teaching ESOL; 2) ESOL curriculum and materials 
development; 3) Cross-cultural communications and understanding (Badia, 1994). 

The cross-cultural communications and understanding course requirement invites 
teachers to explore issues of students’ background culture and its impact on teaching and 
learning. However, the focus on multicultural sensitivity, as presented in workshop 
packets reflects an emphasis on understanding the native culture of the student and some 
general aspects of acculturation. The cross-cultural training falls significantly short at a 
deeper understanding of the ESOL student’s cross-cultural transition and its impact on 
the student’s concept of self in relation to learning. Theories presented in such courses 
attempt to highlight the importance of choosing appropriate texts relevant to ESOL 
students’ background experiences, so the context houses a meaningful interaction 
between student response and literary texts. However, at the training courses facilitators 
and teachers place little emphasis on analyzing the ESOL student’s present and possible 
future experiences in the U.S. in relation to the student’s new culture as context for his or 
her transformation within a new language. Instead, the facilitators focus the training on 
the student’s past experiences in their native culture. 

Despite current efforts to infuse ESOL methodology even in undergraduate 
teacher preparation courses, there is little concentrated effort to offer a course, 
undergraduate and/or graduate, to focus specifically on the connections between the 
ESOL student’s transcultural identity and the teaching of literature in ESOL courses. 




10 



23 



ESOL instructors implement literature at the intermediate to advanced levels of 
ESOL as a way of moving these students to a higher level of academic proficiency in the 
new language. For many ESOL teachers, the primary goal is to establish a relevant 
connection between literature and the student, engaging the student in the act of reading. 
The pedagogical goal here is to enrich the ESOL student’s “cognitive academic language 
proficiency” skills (CALP) (Cummins, 1984) in English through literature used in 
mainstream English courses. Thus, the MDCPS’ (1996) and MDCC’s (1992) curricula 
incorporate pre-reading activities for students to explore literature in the student’s second 
language. These activities include whole class discussions as well as collaborative 
learning groups and suggest teaching multicultural literature as a way of connecting 
students’ cultural elements to the reading. 

These current approaches in teaching multicultural literature in advanced ESOL 
are limited, however, because the methodology focuses on the student’s past cultural 
experiences, while not fully making use of the transcultural experiences of the 
acculturation process, which will be referred to as ESOL transcultural identity. In South 
Florida, especially, the ESOL student’s acculturation experience encompasses a 
transcultural interaction with American bom students of the same origin. While the 
present curricula emphasize making connections between students’ cultures and the 
multicultural text, there is less emphasis on comparing and contrasting the ESOL 
students’ cultures to the cultures of American bom students of the same origin, such as 
Vietnamese students’ culture versus Vietnamese- American students’ culture, Haitian 
students’ culture versus Haitian-American students’ culture, or Cuban students’ culture 
versus Cuban-American students’ culture. Such dynamic interaction between the ESOL 




ir 



24 



student’s vision of culture and the American bom student’s vision of culture can 



potentially contribute to a redefining of culture, a dialogical exchange where the ESOL 
student ultimately negotiates a new way of learning, thus potentially influencing his or 
her academic performance. 

1.2 Objectives of the Study 

The objectives of this study are: 

1 . to describe and explain the transcultural perspectives of four Cuban bom students and 
two American bom and/or raised students of Cuban-American culture. The students 
will be from Barbara Goleman Senior High School or Miami-Dade Community 
College. Two of the high school students will be students, exited from ESOL. The 
other two high school students will be an American bom student and a Cuban bom 
student raised in the U.S. (both are native English speaking, of Cuban-American 
culture) enrolled in regular English language arts. Both community college students 
will be Cuban bom— one will be enrolled in regular English courses and the other in 
advanced ESOL courses. 

2. to compare and contrast four Cuban students’ cultural experiences in their native 
countries to their experiences in the U.S. 



3. to compare and contrast four Cuban students’ cultural experiences to the experiences 
of two Cuban-American students bom and/or raised in the U.S. 



4. to study four Cuban students’ transcultural experiences in order to make 

connections between transcultural identity and teaching literature in the ESOL 
classroom. 

1.3 Significance of the Study 

Miami-Dade County Public Schools and Miami-Dade Community College house 
one of the largest ESOL populations in the U.S. at the secondary and post-secondary 
levels. Between MDCPS (1997) and MDCC (1998) more than 54, 000 ESOL students 
were reported enrolled in the fall of 1997. The academic success of ESOL students is not 
only relevant to the ESOL students, but the school and community at large. For many of 
the ESOL students studying at the community college and high school levels, succeeding 
in school means getting and maintaining a job to support their family and contributing to 
the community’s growth. 

By providing an autobiographical model for exploring the transcultural 
experiences and interests of one group of students, who make-up a large percentage of 
Miami-Dade County’s community college and public school students, teachers can use 
this model as a way of better understanding the transcultural experiences of diverse 
cultures in their own classrooms. ESOL Teachers can design autobiographical interview 
questions, such as the one that will be implemented in this study to analyze the rich 
transcultural experiences their students bring to the classroom and draw upon emerging 
themes that can be tied using literature in the classroom. 

In light of this, the methodology employed in this study can serve as a theoretical 
foundation for action research in the classroom or further expanded to initiate district- 



wide curriculum research when considering instructional methods and textbook selection 
for ESOL literature based materials designed for ESOL programs. Curriculum writers can 
further research transcultural experiences using the portraits that will be studied here as 
models for better understanding cultural dimensions of teaching literature and their 
implications for advanced TESOL methodology. Furthermore, since the autobiographical 
models incorporate a comparison / contrast to American bom NESS students of Cuban 
culture, the model can be used by teachers in different school districts that encounter the 
classroom as a meeting place for NNS students and American bom students of diverse 
culture. The autobiographical models are designed to edit for the use of other cultures 
beyond the ESOL Cuban students, depending on the particular cultural interests in a 
classroom. The results of this study can also be implemented in South Florida school 
districts and school districts across the nation to widen the lens of transcultural 
understanding. Consequently, the significance of this study is that it addresses a large 
community of students, educators, and administrators. At a time when TESOL studies are 
gaining momentum in academic communities worldwide, this study contributes to the 
body of knowledge for cross-cultural theory and second language acquisition. 

Most importantly, the results of this project are significant to the academic 
performance of advanced ESOL students for whom reading skills are an essential 
dimension of academic success in high school and community colleges. These students 
would benefit from their interaction with teachers whose pedagogical scope encompasses 
cultural elements relevant to student identity as a way of making connections between 
transcultural experiences and reading literature. This study is also significant for the 
personal and professional growth of ESOL, English, and other mainstream high school 




14 

Vy O 



27 



and community college educators by contributing to educational scholarship on the 
relationship between transcultural experiences and literature. 



1.4 Delimitations of the Study 

This dissertation focuses only on the perspectives of six students: therefore, the 
research is limited in its generalization to other ESOL students of Cuban culture or ESOL 
students of other cultures. Furthermore, it specifically concentrates on two NNS high . 
school students and two NNS community college students. Two high school students and 
two community college students are recent Cuban immigrants; the other two high school 
students are Cuban- Americans, bom / raised in Miami. The cultural experiences of these 
six students are not necessarily representative of Cuban culture and cannot be 
generalized; rather, elements of Cuban culture are part of the students’ unique 
transcultural identity. Finally, I am Cuban bom - raised in the U.S. The thematic analysis 
of the students’ transcultural experiences is filtered through my own perspectives. 

1.5 Definition of Terms: 



For the purpose of this study, the following words and phrases have special 
meaning as set out below. Other terms which are not frequently used, but which require 
definitions, are explained as they are introduced. 

BICS (basic interpersonal conwtunicative skills ) 

Cummins (1984) defines BICS as “the manifestation of language proficiency in everyday 
communicative contexts,” and “second language surface fluency” (pp. 16-17). 




■^5 28 



CALP (cognitive academic language proficiency) 

Cummins (1984) defines CALP as “conceptual linguistic knowledge” and “the 
manipulation of language in decontextualized academic situations” (pp. 16-17). 



transcultural experiences : 

experiences a student has as he or she interacts with new cultural dimensions, including 
personal, family, peers, school, community, nationality, race, ethnicity, and language, 
while encompassing the student’s past, present, and potential future experiences. 

culturej 

incorporates diverse dimensions that constitute a student’s identity as a whole- personal, 
family, peers, school, community, nationality, race, ethnicity, and language. A student’s 
real world experiences. 

ESOL (English for Speakers of Other Languages ): 

ESOL is the acronym adopted by Miami-Dade County Public Schools to identify their 
district wide English programs for non-native English speakers. 

ESOL transcultural identity 

The ESOL student’s self-concept informed by the process of cross-cultural transition. A 
student’s concept of self in the context of his or her ongoing transcultural experiences— 
past, present, and potential future experiences— and it’s relation to the student as learner. 

Li (First Lansuase): 

the native language of a non-native English speaker learning English as a second 
language. 



O 

ERiC 



29 



Ly ( Second Language J: 

the second language of a non-native English speaker learning English as a second 
language. 



LEP (Limited English Proficiency) 

A student lacking interpersonal communication or academic proficiency skills in English. 
NESS student (native English /Spanish sneaking, student ): 

A student bom or raised in the U.S., whose native languages are English and Spanish, 
having received academic instruction in English language arts for native speakers. 

NNS students (non-native English speaking}: 

A student bom in a non-English speaking country, for whom English is not his or her 
native language. NNS students can be enrolled in an ESOL program or have completed 
an ESOL program and have been mainstreamed. 

TESOL (Teaching English for Speakers of Other Languages ): 

The acronym adopted by Florida International University to identify the study and 
practice of teaching English for non-native speakers. 



ERJC 



17 




1.6 Organization of the Study 



The remainder of the study is divided into the following chapters, each organized by 
particular sub-topics relate to the dissertation topic: 

Chapter II: Literature Review: The literature review will incorporate the most 
significant research related to South Florida ESOL students and programs, ESOL 
curriculum and instruction, TESOL studies, Reader-response theory, and multicultural 
literature. 

Chapter III: Methodology: The methodology chapter will summarize the design of the 
study to include a description of the role of the researcher, setting, participants, data 
collection techniques, research questions, sample interview questions, and philosophical 
approaches for analyzing the data. 



Chapter IV: Results and Analysis: The result and analysis chapter will present the 
participants’ transcultural experiences interviews, organized within a philosophical 
framework, around major themes emerging from the participants’ perspectives. 




Chapter V: Discussion and Recommendations: The discussion and recommendations 
section will make connections between the students’ transcultural experiences and 
relevant issues related to teaching literature in ESOL. In addition, this chapter will 
propose a literature unit for implementing transcultural experiences as autobiographical 
connections to the literature. The chapter will also include recommendations for further 
research and practice. 



d& 31 



CHAPTER TWO 



LITERATURE REVIEW 



2.1 Introduction 



The review of the literature presented in this section will focus on the following areas: 

• the role of students of Hispanic cultures in South Florida’s schools. 

• ESOL curriculum 

• ESOL academic language proficiency 

• literature in the ESOL classroom 

• multicultural literature 

• reader response theory 

• conceptual framework of the study 

2.2 ESOL Students of Hispanic Cultures: A Community of Learners 

In a report prepared by ASPIRA Association: Institute for Policy Research (1989) 
Hispanic students’ education was studied in ten urban U.S. urban communities. In 
Miami-Dade county, during the 1987-88 school year, 254, 235 were enrolled in MDCPS, 
33% of these students were of Spanish-speaking background. Enrollment in ESOL 
programs increased by 26%. According to a publication by the Cuban American Policy 
Center, the U.S. of the 1990’s reflects a dramatic shift in demographics. The future of the 
U.S. is shaped by a change in migration patterns from European to Asian and Latin 




- -19 32 



American immigrants. This shift has an intense effect on the cultural make up of 
American educational institutions. Minorities now represent the majority of students in 
cities such as New York and Chicago. In California 51% of all students are ethnic 
minorities (Diaz, 1990). The U.S. Department of Education, Office of Bilingual 
Education and Minority Language Affairs (OBEMLA) served 249, 000 LEP students in 
1989 (as cited in Diaz, 1990, p.7). The Cuban American Policy Center estimates an 
approximate 1.7 million LEP students in the U.S. (Diaz, 1990). The ERIC Clearing 
House on Urban Education highlights that students of Hispanic culture numbered four 
million in 1989, or ten percent of all those in the country (as cited in Diaz, 1990, p. 8). 

Badia’s (1994) research situates the academic progress of Hispanic-American 
students and LEP students in Miami-Dade County Public Schools. Her study provides an 
overview of Florida’s ESOL programs and assesses the effectiveness of Florida’s 
educational system by evaluating the academic performance of the state’s ESOL public 
school students. Badia focuses on the achievement levels of Hispanic mainstream 
students and LEP students. Her research highlights that minority students in Florida 
represent 40% of the state’s nearly two million public school students. In Miami-Dade 
County 85 % percent of students are members of a minority group. Moreover, Florida 
faces the challenges of providing second language skills to an increasing number of 
students as they arrive (Badia, 1990). 

In California, LEP students were found to be at a greater retention risk than NESS 
students. (Diaz, 1990). Such challenges invite educators to revisit the present state of 
ESOL programs in Florida public schools, primarily in South Florida with its large 




^v20 33 



number of ESOL programs. Badia’s study (1990) emphasizes the importance of further 
research exploring the needs of ESOL programs and instruction. 

Badia (1994) argues that although the numbers support further concentrated effort 
toward improving ESOL programs, the direction of Florida’s public schools are not 
meeting the needs of most Hispanic and LEP students. The numbers show that during the 
1992-93 school year out of nearly two million Florida students, 201, 758 were classified 
as LEP students, and of these 131,715 were enrolled in ESOL programs. Moreover, 
almost three fourths of Florida’s ESOL students are of Hispanic culture. Badia cites a 
survey by the Florida Department of Education, in which 350 randomly selected teachers 
were asked questions covering nine general areas. A large majority of the teachers 
responded that they needed adequate textbooks for teaching Florida’s culturally diverse 
populations, in particular the teachers felt they needed more multicultural materials in 
school libraries and media centers. Badia further proposes that there should be a Center 
for Multicultural Educational Research at one of Florida’s state universities. Researchers 
at the center would conduct research dealing with multicultural education topics and 
oversee and contribute to the development of curriculum materials. 

2. 3 ESOL: A Curriculum in Transition 



The MDCC (1992) and MDCPS (1996) ESOL curricula have changed in the past 
two decades. These curriculum modifications can be attributed, in part, to growing 
research in the area of TESOL curriculum in order to meet the needs of ESOL students at 
both the secondary and community college levels. The modifications continue to be 




21 . 

34 



essential for students to receive appropriate instruction leading to academic performance 
and not just speaking and listening survival skills 

A significant shift in the ESOL curriculum of Miami-Dade County Public Schools 
took place after The Multicultural Education, Training, and Advocacy (META) team 
initiated a class action complaint against the Florida State Board of Education and 
Department of Education because many of the State’s LEP students were performing 
academically low against national norms. To end the litigation the META Consent 
Decree was approved in 1990 by the State Board of Education, requiring Florida schools 
with NNS students to provide equitable instruction through ESOL programs to meet the 
special needs of ESOL students (Badia, 1994). 

The implementation of the META Consent Decree was a catalyst from a politics 
that did not consider the cultural world-views of ESOL students, to a policy that invited 
educators to address the special learning needs of ESOL students. Indeed, teachers need 
to consider the unique transcultural experiences of ESOL students in the context of 
teaching English to speakers of other languages. The more that educators have an 
understanding of ESOL issues, ESOL students can continue to receive equal access to 
academic opportunities as mainstream students. 

2.4 TESOL Curriculum Reform 



Banya (1993) sees educational reform as moving towards intercultural education. 
As part of intercultural education, schools have an obligation to teach about the cultures 
of immigrant groups who have come to participate in the economy of a nation. In 



ERIC 



addition, schools should permit each group to maintain cultural elements such as 
language. 

The teaching of multicultural literature identifies with another cultural element of 
the immigrant student. Curriculum reform is essential in the ESOL curriculum to 
incorporate the use of multicultural literature, and this revision must reflect improving the 
availability of adequate textbooks for ESOL classrooms. Greenberg from the Miami- 
Dade County Parent Teacher Association believes that there are serious deficiencies in 
textbook selections in addressing cultural dimensions. According to Greenberg, the 
debate on curriculum and teaching reform must include views from outside the traditional 
educational circles (as cited in Diaz, 1990). 

In “The Politics of Official Knowledge: Does a National Curriculum 
Make Sense?” Apple (1993) argues that the curriculum is a particular group’s vision of 
legitimate knowledge. The curriculum is a product of the cultural, political, and economic 
conflicts. The curriculum makes a statement about who has power in a society because it 
represents legitimizing some groups’ knowledge as official knowledge, while other 
groups’ knowledge remains in the dark. There is always what Apple identifies as, “a 
politics of official knowledge” (p. 222). According to Apple (1993), what counts as 
knowledge is integral to how dominance and subordination are reproduced in our society. 

Apple (1993) believes that at risk is denying students of public education a 
curriculum that incorporates the cultural voices of large segments of American 
population. He argues that behind curriculum decisions promoting “a national curriculum 
and national testing is an ideological attack that is very dangerous. Its effects will be truly 
damaging to those who already have the most to lose in this society” (p. 223). 



erJc 



2 iu 36 



2.5 TESOL: Moving From Basic Communication to Academic Skills 



Currently, research related to TESOL curriculum and instruction focuses on both 

language acquisition and the development of academic skills in the second language. 

Contemporary theorists have made connections between second language theory and 

academic skills as they relate to ESOL instruction (Cummins, 1979; Krashen, 1992). As 

Benz (1996) highlights in her qualitative study of eleven ESOL community college 

students, despite that the students’ first language education, for the most part, what 

helped these eleven students cope to the demands of their regular (mainstream) classes. 

However, despite their first language academic foundation, the ESOL students she 

interviewed were in need of second language academic skills: 

The one skill area that seemed universally deficient in their first language 
education was higher level cognitive skills. In their first language 
cognition was, for a large part, memorization. This contrasted with the fact 
that Gordon rule classes required many higher level cognitive skills 
suggest that this is an area that ESOL instructors need help NNS students 
with. 

Cummins (1979) introduces a distinction between second language ‘surface 
fluency’ and ‘conceptual linguistic knowledge’ and formalizes these two distinctions in 
terms of basic interpersonal communicative skills (BICS) and cognitive / academic 
language proficiency (CALP). Cummins defines BICS as ‘the manifestation of language 
proficiency in everyday communicative contexts,’ and he defines CALP as “the 
manipulation of language in decontextualized academic situations” (p. 382). 

Cummins (1984) further advances that ‘language proficiency’ can be 
conceptualized along two intersecting continuums. The horizontal and vertical 




24 






37 



continuums represent the relationship between the range of contextual support and the 
degree of cognitive involvement in communicative activities. First, the horizontal 
continuum represents the range of contextual support for negotiating meaning. The 
extremes of the horizontal continuum are labeled as ‘context-embedded’ and ‘context 
reduced’ communication. In context-embedded communication (horizontal left-end) 
students actively negotiate meaning; language transfer is supported by meaningful 
situational cues. Context-embedded communication is more accessible in the everyday 
world outside the classroom. Context-reduced communication (horizontal right-end) 
relies mainly on linguistic cues to meaning, the academic demands of classroom 
activities, such as negotiating meaning with texts. The vertical continuum represents 
‘cognitively undemanding’ and ‘cognitively demanding’ communicative activities. 
Cognitively undemanding activities (vertical upper-end) consist of tasks that require little 
active cognitive involvement for appropriate linguistic performance. Cognitively 
demanding activities (vertical lower-end) require a high degree of active cognitive 
involvement. Cummins argues that a central reason why language minority students have 
often failed to develop high academic proficiency in the second language is because 
instruction has emphasized context-reduced, “unrelated to their prior out of school 
experience.” Cummins suggests that the language proficiency framework he proposes— 
the context/embedded / context/reduced and cognitively-undemanding / cognitively- 
demanding continuum are not the only dimensions to language proficiency or 
communicative competence (pp. 384 -387). 




25 Ob 38 



2.6 Literature in the ESOL Classroom 



Often it is not until the ESOL student has reached upper level ESOL courses, 
particularly the last level prior to exiting the program, that he or she is exposed to 
literature in the classroom. The MDCPS (1996) secondary ESOL CBC instruction 
incorporates literature as a vehicle towards literacy and culture, although there is only one 
literature anthology — Literature and Language — which was recently adopted by the 
district in April 99, while it is still awaiting state adoption for ESOL classes. 

Stem (1985) argues that the lack of interest in using literature as an integral part 
of ESOL instruction in the U.S. is reflected in three areas: resources, training, and 
curriculum. First, there is a scarcity of resources and materials. Second, there is a need 
for teacher preparation in the U.S. in the area of using literature as part of teaching 
ESOL. Third, there is an absence of objectives for the role of literature in ESOL. In 
addition, Stem conceptualizes the roles of using literature in ESOL programs. Literature 
can be used as a pedagogical tool to develop pronunciation exercises and literature-based 
dramatic activities. According to Stem literature immerses students in contextualized 
dialogues and helps non-native speakers to acquire cultural idioms and colloquial 
expressions, master grammatical structures. 

According to Sage (1987), literature penetrates students’ consciousness and lives 
and correlates usefully and appealingly to the students’ situations. Effective literature has 
communicative power, for the story presents a situation through symbolic gestures and 
acts that students can recognize and envision in their daily lives. Furthermore, Sage 
incorporates identifying and drawing in students’ past experiences as one of the 




39 



principles for teaching fiction in the ESOL setting: “Because the story is universal, 
students from all cultures have surely had some experience with it” (p. 58). Adeyanju 
(1978) suggests that literature for ESOL students should be culturally significant and 
universal. Povey (1979) and Widdowson (1975) agree that literature does not have to be 
classical to be effective in ESOL instruction. 



2.7 Multicultural Literature: A Bridge Towards Academic Proficiency 



Spears-B unton (1998) defines multicultural literature in the context of literature 
that invites the student to explore a multiplicity of cultural perspectives and engages the 
reader “in multiple images and perspectives with which to think, dream, and play.” 
Spears-Bunton’s definition of multicultural literature reflects the idea of multicultural 
texts as a bridge to critical thinking: 

Multicultural-literature experiences instill the disposition in communities 
of readers to weigh new knowledge against old knowledge, taken-for- 
granted assumptions and to question the attitudes and behaviors that 
accompany reified knowledge. 

Spears-Bunton sees multicultural literature as a vehicle for transforming the 

individual’s perspectives as well as his or her world-view. She argues that multicultural 

literature study is “inherently transformative.” Furthermore, Spears-Bunton describes 

multicultural literature as an essential component of a “true” democratic society: 

Multicultural literature speaks with the voices inscribed by the infinite boundaries 
of human possibilities -the stories of humanity as told by itself. It is necessary 
and sufficient if American school children are to be grounded in the principles of 
a democratically organized society. 



O 

ERIC 



27 






40 



In his book The Great Canon Controversy, Casement (1996) outlines the 



philosophical and political tenets of anti-canonical discourse. Although he is a strong 
supporter of the traditional “great books” of Western civilization, Casement attempts to 
situate the canon controversy in light of new space for transcultural universality. He 
defines the contemporary currents of anti-canonical philosophy as a postmodern 
movement. He argues that the postmodern mind vision considers knowledge as context- 
bound, limited by the time, place, and the social context from which it emerges. In this 
sense, a plurality of belief systems constitutes knowledge, as opposed to universal human 
truths. Thus, to a postmodernist, knowledge is plural, varying among human beings, 
relative to the contexts in which it is conceived (Casement, 1996). 

In defense of multicultural literature, Jay (1991) writes: “A commitment to 
multicultural education also belongs to our historical moment as we witness a renewed 
interest in democracy, and as we ask how a democratic culture might be fashioned” 

(p. 266). She further argues that in the United States oppressive ideology categorizes 
certain individuals as marginal to the interests of the country. Thus, responsible 
curriculum practice requires criticism of discrimination in all of its forms. Jay believes it 
is the duty of educators to oppose educational practices which encourage cultural 
chauvinism, and that “Cultural education must aim to re-present historically that ours has 
always been a multicultural society and that the repression of this heterogeneity (usually 
in the service of one group) ultimately threatens the cultural vitality and even survival of 
every group within it” (p. 226). Finally, Jay argues that a cross-cultural education 
initiated a cultural re-vision and everyone involved comes to understand different points 
of views and to see his or her culture as from the outside. 




U 41 



As Morris (1985) highlights, the “American literary canon” is composed of the 
stories we have institutionalized. She makes an analogy to describe the blinding effect the 
literary canon has on teachers and students: “Fish can’t see the water because they are in 
it. Students and teachers frequently fail to see the canon because they are of it” (p. 470). 

In other words, the literary canon is the medium in which we process knowledge. The 
narratives that form the current American literary canon were produced by men of the 
first half of the twentieth century, each imprisoned in his own particular history and 
heritage, each centering his narrative on a master metaphor” (pp. 472- 479). 

Blair (1991) has found that the inability or hesitancy of high school LEP students, 
who have completed an ESOL program, to express themselves in regular English classes 
“diminishes when they are led to read autobiographical narratives, talk about them, and 
write their own autobiographies” (p. 24). She has designed a unit entitled “Voices in 
American Literature” that combines reading, speaking, and writing through narratives by 
non-native English speaking authors. These works are, in part, autobiographical and 
incorporate themes of assimilation, acculturation, and alienation. 

2.8 Conceptual Model: Reader Response Theory 

The conceptual model draws from reader response theory. In this section, I will 
present an overview of reader response theory. This theoretical approach to reading texts 
will later serve as the philosophical foundation for the analysis and discussion developed 
in chapters four and five. A critical question challenging ESOL teachers is how to get 
students to enjoy reading in and outside the classroom. The importance of making 




2SL 42 



reading relevant to the ESOL student’s experiences is one practical application of reader 
response. 

Research in reader response theory highlights the importance of connecting 
literature to a student’s unique experiences as a way to engage the student’s interest. This 
concept invites the student to interact with the text and build academic skills in the 
second language. Reader response theory places the reader as the primary meaning-maker 
in the reading process. As Spears-Bunton argues (1992), “Reader-response theory helps 
us to understand both the reader, the text, and the social context in which response occurs 
by reminding us that response is a holistic performance by the reader” (p. 23). 

Reader response theory arose as a reaction against formalism, which regards the 
literary work as an art object with an existence of its own, not necessarily as related to the 
author, reader, or socio-historical context. From the formalist point of view, the text has 
its own meaning and reveals that meaning to the reader who examines it for the 
interrelation of its formal elements and its potentiality for unity and wholeness, where all 
of the formal elements inform each other as well as the text’s wholeness. Reader response 
theory opposes formalistic theory. Reader response theory argues that the text does not 
exist until it is read by the reader, so to a reader response critic, if a text does not have a 
reader, it does not exist and has no meaning. It is the reader and the experience the reader 
brings to the text that creates meaning. Thus, in reader response theory, the text is not the 
most important element of interpretation, the reader is. The reader’s interpretation of a 
text is not only legitimate, but as legitimate as the author’s interpretation (Guerin, Labor, 
Morgan, Reesman, and Willingham, 1992). Reader response became recognized as a 



O 

ERIC 



30 



43 



distinct critical movement in the 1970’s, emerging as part of a political climate defined 
by growing anti-authoritarianism within the academy (Gorden and Kreiswerth, 1994). 

Rosenblatt is considered one of the key reader response theorists (Gorden and 
Kreiswerth, 1994). In Literature as Exploration, Rosenblatt (1995) argues that a student 
might choose to contemplate the literary work for its aesthetic value, but students can and 
should be taught to read literature for its emotional relevancy to the students’ unique 
experiences. Rosenblatt presents a literary theory that incorporates Aristotle’s views on 
the relationship between the reader and the literary text as a personal aesthetic 
experience. In this sense, reader response theory can be traced as far back as the writings 
of Aristotle, who based his critical theory at least partly on the text’s effect on the reader 
(Gorden and Kreiswerth, 1994). Aristotle defines aesthetics and learning as integral: “to 
be learning something is the greatest of pleasures. . .the reason of the delight in seeing the 
picture is that one is at the same time learning— gathering the meaning of things” 
(Aristotle, trans. 1931, p.227). Thus, Aristotle seems to interpret the aesthetic experience 
between the reader and the text as one in which the reader delights in learning and 
looking for “meaning” or making connections among the elements of the literary work 
because the reader acts as an intimate part of that process. The key word here is 
connection, or “gathering the meaning of things.” 

According to Rosenblatt (1995), students need to be provided with a secure 
environment and the classroom dynamics that promote the student reader’s responses: 
“The classroom situation and the relationship with the teacher should create a feeling of 
security. He should be made to feel that his own response to books, even though it may 
not resemble the standard critical comments, is worth expressing” (p. 64). 




31 

uo 44 



Rosenblatt (1995) creates a place for reader response in the literature classroom, 
while she goes beyond accepting the contemporary, sometimes extreme, approaches that 
promote a reader’s response without asking the student to look at other elements of the 
literary work. She argues that teachers need to connect students to the relevancy of the 
literary experience and highlights that the student’s response is only the vehicle for 
.engaging the student’s mind. Furthermore, Rosenblatt advances that once the student has 
learned to intimately respond to the text, a process of growth can begin. In this way the 
readers come to understand their personal vision of the text and look for other 
perspectives that will further enrich their understanding of the literary work’s wholeness. 

2. 9 Critical Review of the Literature 



Much of the educational research in the area of ESOL students’ cultural 
experiences attempts to answer the question: “What are the connections between native 
cultural experiences and the teaching of English to speakers of other languages?” 
However, more research is needed in the area of ESOL student’s transcultural 
experiences. The ESOL student’s transcultural identity is his or her concept of self as 
learner. It is a continuous journey, where he or she is negotiating the acculturation 
process that redefines the student’s past, present, and future perspectives. Research is 
needed in this area of ESOL culture in transition, or ESOL transcultural identity, as the 
ESOL student re-creates his or her perspectives of what it means to be a new learner 
within a new community of learners. In this sense, the research is inconsistent with the 
needs of the growing number of ESOL students in South Florida, whose goals reflect 

O 

ERIC 



32 , 

O \J 



45 



academic discourse as a vehicle for successfully performing in a new academic 
community. 

Furthermore, research exploring the transcultural experiences of ESOL students 
of diverse Hispanic cultures is needed mainly because of the great number of Spanish 
speaking ESOL students in Florida schools, primarily the South Florida region. In 
Miami-Dade County, 44% of the student population is Spanish speaking (as cited in 
Diaz, 1990). There are a large number of students representing Hispanic cultures who 
attend institutions such as Miami-Dade County Public Schools and Miami-Dade 
Community College. However, there is a need for qualitative research focusing on 
Spanish-speaking students in the Florida public schools and community colleges, 
particularly focusing on the role of Cuban ESOL students. Such research will contribute 
to a better understanding of the special needs of diverse cultural populations within our 
schools so teachers and curriculum specialists can focus instruction on relevant objectives 
that address the special nature of ESOL students and programs. 

More specifically, there is a need for research that explores ESOL transcultural 
identity of Cuban students in connection to teaching literature in the ESOL classroom. 
Such research would offer teachers and curriculum researchers further insight for 
designing and implementing academic language programs that provide Cuban ESOL 
students an academic curriculum compatible with the academic expectations of 
mainstream high school and community college courses in English. As ESOL educators 
continue to revisit TESOL methodology, implementing new approaches to enrich and 
strengthen ESOL programs, means that further research is needed in the areas of ESOL 
transcultural identity, especially in the context of teaching literature as a way to academic 



ERIC 



33 






46 



proficiency. In Miami-Dade County, both at the high school and community college 
levels, a great percentage of the ESOL population is made-up of Cuban ESOL students. 

In order to continue to learn about the transcultural experiences of Cuban ESOL students, 
further qualitative research is needed in this area. 

Likewise, more of the research generated in the field of TESOL should reflect an 
interest in the transcultural experiences of diverse cultures. The nature of ESOL programs 
is to move students toward academic proficiency of English, so the student can perform 
at the level of the native English speakers. In order for educators to make meaningful 
connections between transcultural experiences and ESOL methodology, there needs to be 
more significant qualitative research focusing on the transcultural experiences of ESOL 
from many cultures. Thus, the TESOL curriculum is progressing, revisiting traditional 
ideas and designing innovative approaches, to incorporate new ways of developing 
second language skills. 




34 . 



47 



CHAPTER THREE 



METHODOLOGY 



3.1 Introduction 

This chapter describes the qualitative methodology used in this study and explains 
the rationale for choosing a phenomenological approach. It includes information on the 
following: a) rationale for the study; b) role of the researcher; c) experience of the 
researcher; d) participants: rationale and purposive sampling; e) data collection; f) 
research questions; g) analysis and interpretation of the data; and, h) statement of ethical 
responsibility. The primary purpose of this chapter is to describe the design of this study 
in the context of the philosophical and pragmatic dimensions of a phenomenological 
approach. 

3.2 Rationale for a Qualitative Study 

Phenomenology is a philosophy in which the source of all meaning is the lived 
experiences of human beings. The task of the phenomenologist is to describe the 
structures of experience. Furthermore, the phenomenologist’ s goals are to explore 
consciousness, imagination, and interaction. The modem founder of phenomenology is 
the German philosopher, Edmund Husserl (1859-1938) (Groden and Kreisworth, 1994). 

In this tradition, “To accomplish the analysis of the object as it registers in the 
consciousness, the phenomenologist suspends all presupposition, inferences, or 



O 

ERIC 



35 o 48 



judgments about the object outside the consciousness” (Holman and Harmon, 1986, 
p.371). However, later phenomenologists such as Martin Heidegger (1889-1976) have 
questioned Husserl’s claims that description can occur without presuppositions. 
Heidegger argues that inherent in knowing are the assumptions and beliefs that guide 
interpretation (Groden and Kreisworth, 1994). Similarly, in this study, I will explore the 
students’ lived experiences by applying reader-response techniques to analyze their 
transcultural experiences. Using reader response as a phenomenological approach, I 
framed the participants’ experiences within my own transcultural experiences in order to 
better understand their ESOL transcultural identity. 

A phenomenological approach was used to investigate the transcultural 
experiences of Cuban-bom students studying at Miami-Dade Community College and 
Barbara Goleman Senior High School. This study focused on the transcultural 
experiences of six students; each participant selected contributed his or her unique ESOL 
transcultural experiences. The six participants’ interviewed were recorded in an in- 
person, question/answer format. A phenomenological approach was used in Chapter Four 
to create portraits representing an account of the students’ transcultural experiences. 
Eisner (1991) illustrates the art of recreating peoples’ experiences as the essence of 
creating portraits: 

The creation of such a portrait depends upon the writer’s ability to experience the 
qualities of place, to conceptualize their relationships, to experience the shifting 
pervasive qualities that permeate those relationships, and, not least, to render them 
through the text. The episode as lived has passed; the text as written lives. Thus 
the qualitative is used in two senses. The first is the ability to experience a 
particular state of affairs; to grasp how it was. The second is its representation. . . 
through the text. (pp. 20-21) 




vW 49 



This study describes and explains the transcultural experiences of Cuban students 
and makes connections between the autobiographical portraits of these students and 
TESOL methodology, focusing on the learning of literature and language. The researcher 
drew on the students’ transcultural experiences to compare and contrast the shared, as 
well as unique experiences among the students. In particular, this study is a 
phenomenological case study, “in which human experiences are analyzed through the 
detailed descriptions of the people being interviewed (Creswell, 1994, p. 12). Creswell 
(1998) summarizes the philosophical tenets of the qualitative phenomenological research 
study: 

Researchers search for the essential, invariant structure (or essence) or the central 
underlying meaning of the experience and emphasize the intentionality of 
consciousness where experiences contain both the outward appearance and 
inward consciousness based on memory, image, and meaning. Phenomenological 
data analysis proceeds through the methodology of reduction, the analysis of 
specific statements and themes, and a search for all possible meanings, (p. 52) 

Therefore, in Chapter Four, a phenomenological data analysis was utilized to 
deduce some relevant specific statements and themes that emerged from the students’ 
transcultural data. I then framed the students’ transcultural experiences within my own 
transcultural perspectives, and created an autobiographical data set in the form of a 
researcher’s journal. Also, I used exploratory questions to organize the explicit and 
underlying themes that emerged from the interviews. This thematic analysis served as the 
groundwork for applying a reader response interpretive theory to the students’ 
transcultural interviews. 




37- c 



50 



3.3 Role of the Researcher 



Throughout the analysis (Chapter 4) and discussion (Chapter 5) of this study, I 
used the first person narrative with the purpose of lessening the distance between the 
researcher and the reader. As Creswell (1994) outlines, the personal pronoun “I” conveys 
a personal, informal perspective “that lessens distance between the writer and the reader 
(a qualitative epistemological stance)” (p. 43). This philosophical position does not 
weaken the power of the research; rather, it is strengthened by a concept that reality is 
constructed through subjective and objective perspectives. Thus, qualitative research 
allows the researcher to interact intimately with the participants’ world. Moreover, 

Eisner (1991) refers to the following Deweyian perspective: “Since what we know about 
the world is a product of the transaction of our subjective life and a postulated objective 
world, these worlds cannot be separated” (p. 52). 

In light of this, the subjective element of qualitative research contributed to the 
study’s philosophical scope and paradigm, for it gave the researcher the opportunity to 
situate himself or herself as a participant observer in the research process. As Janesick, 
(1994) highlights, . .the qualitative researcher is very much like an artist at various 
stages in the design process, in terms of situating and recontextualizing the research 
project within the shared experience of the researcher and the participants in the study” 

(p. 210). I am Cuban-born, have lived in the U.S. since I was three years old, and was 
raised in South Florida. My transcultural perspectives gave me the opportunity to interact 
intimately with the research process, participating as an insider, as opposed to observing 
the process from a distant perspective. Thus, my transcultural experiences informed the 




... O 

38 



51 



phenomenological analysis of the students’ experiences, serving as an autobiographical 
window for analyzing the interplay among similarities and differences of each unique 
student portrait. The analytical explications of the students’ transcultural experiences are 
presented within particular themes, emerging from, and, at the same time, contributing 
meaning to the phenomenological portraits of the students’ transcultural experiences. My 
analysis included autobiographical commentary as a vehicle for framing the students’ 
transcultural perspectives and discovering and reconstructing the experiential reality of 
the study’s participants. In addition, my experiences as an ESOL educator, who works 
with literature in the high school and community college settings, contributed to Chapter 
Five, where making connections between transcultural experiences and the teaching of 
literature will be discussed. 

3.4 Experience of the Researcher 

My own transcultural experiences were an important dimension of the 
methodology. I did a phenomenological analysis of the data as viewed through my own 
transcultural perspectives. In other words, I interpreted the participants’ transcultural 
experiences through the eyes of my transcultural experiences. The idea of exploring my 
own experiences as a way of better understanding the student’s perspectives was rooted 
in the philosophy that the researcher’s subjectivity enriches the understanding of analysis. 

As Janesick points out, “. . .the qualitative researcher, as designer of a project, 
recognizes the potential of design. The design serves as a foundation for the 
understanding of the participants’ worlds and the meaning of shared experiences between 




V 

39 



52 



the researcher and participants in a given social context” (p. 210). In my experiences as 
an ESOL educator I have come to see the importance of considering my students’ 
transcultural experiences in the classroom. Thus, interacting with ESOL students for 
more than six years contributed to the design of this study. My interaction with ESOL 
students sparked my interests in the second language learner and his or her transcultural 
experiences. 

I gained further interests in qualitative inquiry as a doctoral student, enrolled in a 
qualitative research methods course at Florida International University. As part of the 
class requirements, I had the opportunity to develop a pilot study on the topic of 
transcultural experiences. The pilot study, completed in Spring 1997, was entitled High 
Interest Literature: A Bridge to Culture. Identity, and Critical Thinking . Maxwell (1996) 
highlights that qualitative researchers use pilot studies to generate concepts held by the 
people being studied. Thus, pilot studies provide researchers with an understanding of the 
meanings that these lived experiences have for the participants (Maxwell, 1996). The 
purpose of the study was to chronicle the life experiences of a recent Cuban immigrant 
and to design a model for connecting high interest literature to the student’s experiences. 
Designing and completing the pilot study gave me a better understanding of some of the 
relevant cross-cultural issues for the ESOL student I interviewed. The results of the pilot 
study helped me to write exploratory questions for this dissertation. 

As a qualitative researcher, both my professional and personal qualities are 
relevant to this dissertation. As Eisner (1991) describes, we recognize researchers as 
people who hear and see more about a particular object or situation, but before they can 
deal with the act of interpretation or evaluation, researchers must be able to notice their 




40 






53 



qualities. Eisner argues, “The inability to experience these qualities leaves no grounds for 
further reflection. We can only appraise and interpret what we have been able to 
experience. At the most sophisticated level we call these people ‘connoisseurs’” . . . 

(p. 17). Therefore, my academic experiences as a researcher are informed by my unique 
experiences as a human being. My own transcultural identity informed the participant 
portraits that I created from analyzing the students’ experiences. 

I was bom in Camaguey, Cuba, and I arrived in Miami at age three. My parents 
left Cuba because they did not agree with the post-1959 Cuban government’s politics. 
They wanted to raise me in a democratic country. As an adult, I value my freedom of 
speech and freedom of expression. I appreciate and admire the struggle that many ESOL 
students and their families have undertaken in pursuit of such freedoms in the U.S. 

Presently, I am pursuing a doctorate in education with concentrations in 
community college teaching, English, and TESOL. My Bachelor’s degree is in English, 
and my Master’s degree is in English and TESOL. I was a full-time faculty member at 
Barbara Goleman Senior High School, where I was an ESOL department chair, teaching 
ESOL classes in grades 9-12. 1 was also the ESOL department chair for three years at 
Miami Coral Park Senior High School. At Coral Park I was one of the writers of the 
revised ESOL CBC (1996) for Miami-Dade high schools. I have been teaching ESOL 
for six years and one half years now, working mainly with advanced ESOL students, who 
are in transition from ESOL to mainstream English classes. I am also an adjunct 
instructor at Miami-Dade Community College, Wolfson Campus, where I teach college 
credit ESOL courses. In addition, I have taught mainstream English students at Ponce de 
Leon Middle School and Miami Coral Park Senior High School. Over the summer I was 



ERIC 



41 



54 



hired as a full-time, tenured-track instructor at Broward Community College, where I will 
I will be teaching teach ESL college prep. 

3.5 Participants: Rationale and Purposive Sampling 

Creswell (1998) outlines the following seven criteria for collecting data in a 
phenomenological study: 

1. Multiple individuals who have experienced the phenomenon are traditionally studied. 

2. Typical access and report issues include finding people who have experienced the 
phenomenon. 

3. A purposeful sampling strategy is to find individuals who have experienced the 
sampling strategy. 

4. The type of information collected includes interviews with up to ten people. 

5. Information is recorded in the form of long interview questions. 

6. Common data collection issues are bracketing one’s experiences and the logistics of 
interviewing. 

7. Information is typically stored in computer files, (pp. 1 12-113) 

In light of this, the framework of the study was to describe and explain six 
phenomenological portraits of high school and community college students: four Cuban 
bom students and two American bom student of Cuban- American culture. The 
participants were from Barbara Goleman Senior High School and Miami-Dade 
Community College. Two Of the high school students were Cuban-bom students, exited 
from ESOL. The third high school student was an American bom student (native English 




42 
o' 0 



55 



speaking, of Cuban- American culture) enrolled in regular English language arts. Both 
community college students were Cuban bom— one was enrolled in regular English 
courses and the other in advanced ESOL courses. 

The six phenomenological portraits were explored in the form of lived experience 
pieces, representing the students’ transcultural experiences. Although the study 
represented only Cuban students, the qualitative methodology, protocol questions, and 
thematic analysis presented was used as a model for other educators who wish to explore 
transcultural experiences of students from diverse cultures. The model can be used in 
both ESOL and mainstream language arts programs, where NNS students continue to 
develop second language skills beyond the ESOL class. 

I have chosen to write about Cuban ESOL students because although their historical 
ties to Miami-Dade County Public Schools can be stretched to the late 1950’s, qualitative 
research on ESOL Cuban students in the MDCPS system is limited. This lack of 
qualitative research, particularly phenomenological, transcultural experience studies, is 
inconsistent with the large number of Cuban students enrolled in the Miami-Dade Public 
Schools. More research is needed in the area of investigating Cuban ESOL students’ 
transcultural experiences with the goal of making connections between their transcultural 
experiences and the teaching of literature in the ESOL classroom. I chose Barbara 
Goleman Senior High School and Miami-Dade Community College (Wolfson Campus) 
because they both service a multicultural community and house extensive ESOL 
programs. Each participant was selected because he or she could contribute unique 
perspectives of the ESOL transcultural experiences for both high school and community 
college students. I chose the participants for their ability to articulate their lived 




43 ~ ° 



56 



transcultural experiences. In other words, they were not timid about expressing their 
opinions. The participants’ names were obtained from faculty members at these 
institutions and the selection criteria included one of the following: 1 ) bom in Cuba and 
lived there for at least ten years or 2 ) bom in Miami of Cuban parents or 3) bom in Cuba, 
but lived in Miami since early childhood. The participants were both male and female. 
Two of the participants were Cuban-bom NNS high school students, one female and one 
male. Two of the participants were Cuban bom NNS community college students, one 
female and one male. Two of the participants were Cuban-American NESS high school 
students, two males. As Creswell (1998) identifies, “the participants in this study need to 
be carefully chosen to be individuals who have experienced the phenomenon” (p. 55). 
Likewise, Maxwell (1996) supports that, “Selecting those times, settings, and individuals 
that can provide you with the information that you need in order to answer your research 
questions is the most important consideration in qualitative sampling decisions” (p. 70). 

3.6 Data Collection 



Eisner (1991) describes an educational connoisseur as someone who talks to people 
and listens to what they have to say. Eisner considers interviewing as a powerful resource 
for learning how people perceive situations. He emphasizes, “We need to listen to what 
people have to say about their activities, their feelings, their lives” (p. 183). Maxwell 
(1996) differentiates between the research questions and the interview questions in 
stating that “Your research questions formulate what you want to understand; your 
interview questions are what you ask people in order to gain the understanding” (p. 74). 




.44 rr >7 

O / 



According to Maxwell, the interview questions are . .judged not by whether they 
resemble the research questions, but by whether they provide the data that will contribute 
to answer these (p. 74). Maxwell further emphasizes that “The development of good 
research questions requires creativity and insight, rather than a mechanical translation of 
the research questions into an interview guide; it depends fundamentally on how the 
interview questions actually work in practice” (p. 74). Finally, Maxwell specifies the 
relationship between the research questions and the interview questions: “However, these 
real questions will generally be far more context-specific and diverse than the broad, 
general research questions that define what you seek to understand in conducting the 
study” (p. 74). 

The data was collected in the form of recorded, in-person student interviews, 
researcher’s journal, and document reviews. These three different methods support 
qualitative principles of triangulation, which is defined by Berg (1995) as a researcher’ 
use of multiple lines of sight for the purpose of validity: 

Each method thus reveals slightly different facets of the same symbolic 
reality. Every method is a different line of sight directed toward the same 
point, observing social and symbolic reality. By combining several lines of 
sight, researchers obtain a better, more substantive picture of reality; a 
richer, more complete array of symbols and theoretical concepts; and a 
means of verifying many of these elements. 

The interviewing procedure was implemented as follows: 

1 . The four Cuban-born students were asked a series of interview questions related to 
their experiences in Cuba and the U.S. The two Cuban- American students were 




& 58 



asked a series of interview questions related to their experiences in the U.S. 

2. Each participant was interviewed three times, and a total of 18 interview sessions 
composed the primary data set for this study. 

3. The interviews were recorded two ways — by the researcher (audiocassette recorder) 
and transcribed by a court reporting student into a computerized aided transcription 
machine (CAT System). The transcriptions were then converted to Microsoft 
Word. 

4. A researcher’s journal was kept during the thematic analysis of the interviews. 

The researcher’s journal composed a second data set for the study. 

5. Document reviews of the interviews and the researchers journals were designed for 
the purpose of thematic analysis. 

The interview questions were designed to incorporate both descriptive and 
contrast questions. Spradley (1979) categorizes descriptive questions as grand tour, mini- 
tour, experience, and native-language questions. Grand-tour questions are broad in scope, 
allowing the participant to describe a great deal. Mini-tour questions are follow-ups to 
responses to grand tour questions. Experience questions are questions which bring out the 
non-routine aspects of life, and native-language questions allow the participant to let the 
researcher know what a particular term means. The contrast questions ask for differences 
or contrasts within or between some. The interview questions that were implemented in 
this study will included grand tour, mini-tour, experience questions, native-language 
questions, and contrast questions. 

For purposes of triangulation, I used these categories of questions to allow for 
diverse levels of answers, contributing to an in-depth thematic analysis of the data. In 




46 

59 



addition, the interview questions focused around essential dimensions of the transcultural 
experiences, such as the participant’s personal perspectives, family life, school 
interactions, social world, and cross-cultural views. 

The estimated time line for data collection was the following: 

Summer 98: Participant Interviews 

Summer 98: Transcribe Interviews 

Summer 98: Transcriptions converted to Microsoft Word 

Fall 98: Edit Transcriptions 

Fall 98: Preliminary Review of Interviews - Develop Researcher’s Journal 
Spring 99: Second Review of Interviews and Researcher’s Journal 
Spring 99: Thematic Analysis of Interviews 

Summer 99: Review of Documents — Interviews, Journal, and Thematic Analysis 

3.7 Research Questions 

Creswell (1998) recommends that the organization of the research questions be 
divided into one central question and several subquestions. He supports the idea that 
qualitative researchers should reduce their entire study to a single, overarching question 
and several subquestions. When generating the central question, a researcher should state 
the broadest question about his or her study (Creswell, 1998). The following exploratory 
questions provided a preliminary framework for the thematic analysis of data in Chapter 
Four and responses to the research in Chapter Five. 



O 

ERIC 



47 



60 



Central Exploratory Question: 

From the perspective of four Cuban-born, non-native English-speaking students (NNS), 
what are the essential structures of their transcultural identities? 

Exploratory Subquestions: 

1. What are the underlying themes that account for the Cuban NNS students’ 
transcultural experiences? 

2. What are the universal transcultural structures among the Cuban NNS students’ 
transcultural experiences and the Cuban-American NESS student’s experiences? 

3. What are the possible structural meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests in 
relation to their transcultural experiences? 

4. What are some connections between the structural themes inherent in the Cuban NNS 
students’ transcultural experiences and teaching literature in ESOL? 

3.8 Analysis and Interpretation of the Data 



A qualitative study draws its strengths from the interaction among the objective 
and subjective processes of data collection, analysis, triangulation, and interpretation. As 
Eisner (1991) proposes, what is essential in qualitative inquiry is rationality. Eisner 
defines rationality as “. . .the exercise of intelligence in the creation or perception of 
elements as they relate to the whole in which they participate. Human rationality is 
displayed whenever relationships among elements are skillfully crafted or insightfully 




48 SI 



k. 



perceived” (p. 51). To Eisner, rationality is an intellect that requires the sophisticated skill 
of perceiving the order of relationships. In this sense, rationality is not as narrowly 
defined as logic. 

From Dewey’s work, Eisner (1991) derives a concept of “transaction,” which he 
defines as the locus of human experience (p. 52). The phenomenon that emerges between 
the interaction of the objective and the subjective is the “transactive” (p. 52). According 
to Eisner, “what we can know about the world is always a result of inquiry, it is mediated 
by the mind” (p. 52). He describes the impossibility of understanding the world solely 
from an objective perspective because human beings come to know the world through 
their minds. Eisner (1991) relates this concept of the “transactive,” or locus of human 
experience, to the nature of qualitative research: 

Since what we know about the world is a product of the transaction of our 
subjective life and a postulated objective world, these worlds cannot be separated. To 
separate them would require the exercise of mind and since mind would need to be 
employed to make the separation, anything ‘separated’ as a result of its use would reflect 
mind as well as what was “separated” from it. Hence what we have is experience — a 
transaction rather than independent subjective and objective entities, (pp. 52-53) 

In this study, the primary strategies used for the data analysis were “categorizing 
strategies,” (Maxwell, 1996, p. 78) such as coding and thematic analysis. The students’ 
transcultural experiences were analyzed for recurring themes to describe the essential 
structures of the students’ experiences. Furthermore, the relevant structures of the 
students’ transcultural experiences were interpreted in the context of ESOL educational 
theory, specifically the teaching of literature. 




49 



62 



Eisner (1991) discusses triangulation as “structural corroboration” (p. 110). He 
highlights that . . structural corroboration is a means through which multiple types of 
data are related to each other to support or contradict the interpretation and evaluation of 
a state of affairs” (p. 110). Also, Denzin (1978) proposes four types of triangulation: data 
triangulation, investigator triangulation, theory triangulation, and methodological 
triangulation. In addition, Janesick contributes another form of triangulation, 
interdisciplinary triangulation. For purposes of triangulation the following approaches 
were used in this study: 

1 . data triangulation — the use of a variety of data sources: Interviews, researcher’s 

journal, and document review notes were used in this study. 

2. investigator triangulation — the use of several different researchers or evaluators: 

An outside reader who is an ESOL educator was used in this study. 

3. theory triangulation - the use of multiple perceptions to interpret a single set 

of data: The perceptions of four different Cuban-bom students and two 
Cuban- American students bom and/or raised in the U.S. were used in this 
study. 

4. methodological triangulation - The use of multiple methods to study a single 

problem: Phenomenological study and case study methods were used in 
this study. 

5. interdisciplinary triangulation - the use of other disciplines to inform the research 

process: TESOL theory and literary criticism were used in this study. 
Language is not the same as the experience it represents. As human beings, what 
we know is our interaction with the world. This is a qualitative study that used interview 




50 



63 



as one of the primary techniques in gathering the transcultural experiences of the 
researcher. The organizational principles that guided the analysis and presentation of the 
students’ experiences emerged through the act of recursive research and analysis and was 
guided by the research questions as well as the relevant themes generated by the 
participants themselves. In other words, the interpretive categories emerged from a 
thorough comparison / contrast of the data sets. Furthermore, the selected topics were 
referred to within the context of a philosophical model that allowed the researcher and the 
reader to analyze and interpret the interview in light of second language issues. 



3.9 Statement of Ethical Responsibility 



Ethical responsibility is an essential aspect of qualitative research, especially 

when engaging in interview sessions and the representation of participant perspectives. 

Creswell (1998) outlines key ethical responsibilities of the qualitative researcher: 

A researcher protects the anonymity of the informants, for example, by assigning 
numbers or aliases to individuals. A researcher develops case studies of 
individuals that represent a composite picture rather than an individual picture. 
Furthermore, to gain support from participants, a qualitative researcher conveys to 
participants that they are participating in a study, explains the purpose of the 
study, and does not engage in deception about the nature of the study. . . A final 
ethical issue is whether the researcher shares experiences with informants in an 
interview setting such as in a case study, phenomenology, or ethnography. 

(pp. 132-133). 

In light of this, there were no risks or benefits involved for the students’ 
volunteer participation in this study. I informed the students that their responses would be 
maintained anonymous, and I identified their names in the dissertation by pseudonyms. 
Also, I explained to the students that they would be part of a research study and the 




o O 64 



purpose of the study. In addition, I informed them that they may withdraw their consent 
and discontinue participation in this research project at any time without any negative 
consequences. I assured them of their rights to ask questions concerning the procedure, 
and I answered any questions to their satisfaction. Prior to the interviews, I obtained their 
informed consent in person. I asked each participant and his or her parents / legal 
guardians (in the case of minors) to read and sign the consent form (See Appendixes A 
and B). The consent forms were written in both English and Spanish for students who 
might have had difficulty understanding any portion of it or whose parents did not speak 
English. 

3.10 Summary 

I chose a qualitative design for my study because of its appropriateness to the 
nature of the exploratory questions. The exploratory questions incorporate highly abstract 
concepts-culture, language, and identity. Thus, a qualitative approach, such as 
phenomenology invites interpretive skills that require the rich complexities of description 
and evaluation to unveil the essence of the phenomena under investigation. In this case, 
the phenomena are the lived experiences of students metaphorically living in two 
cultures, their native experiences and their life in the U.S. These are highly symbolic 
realms of knowledge requiring a method that invites the profound impact of 
interpretation. As Maxwell (1996) expresses, “The strengths of qualitative research 
derive primarily from its inductive approach, its focus on specific situations or people, 
and its emphasis on words rather than numbers” (p. 17). In this study I focused on the 




52b 65 



essential themes of the ESOL students’ transcultural experiences and recreated their 
unique experiences to analyze relevant themes and their connection to the teaching of 
literature. 




66 



CHAPTER FOUR 



RESULTS AND ANALYSIS 



4.1 Introduction 



The purpose of this chapter is to present the data and report the results of the 
research. This chapter is designed to present, describe, and analyze the interview data of 
the six participants. Through phenomenological data analysis, I will proceed through the 
data reduction, analyze the emerging statements and themes, and a search for all possible 
meanings. The thematic analysis is focused and organized around the central and 
secondary exploratory questions introduced in Chapter 3. Exploratory Question 4 will be 
addressed in Chapter Five. 

This chapter also presents a model representing an interpretive construction of the 
participants’ cultural perspectives as they relate to ESOL transcultural identity and 
teaching literature. The interview data is presented as a narrative, both indirect and direct 
quotes. The six participants’ transcultural experiences and my own transcultural 
perspectives were the source for all meaning constructed in this study. From a close 
examination of the interview data, I describe and explain the essential structures of 
experiences, and explore the underlying meaning of the participants’ experiences. Also, I 
drew on the students’ transcultural experiences to compare and contrast the shared, as 
well as unique experiences among the six participants. Next, I framed the students’ 
transcultural experiences within my own transcultural perspectives, creating an 
autobiographical data set in the form of a researcher’s journal. My transcultural 
perspectives are presented in italics and are journal excerpts written during and after data 




ul 4 67 



analysis. The thematic analysis served as the groundwork for a reader response 
interpretive theory to make connections between teaching literature and the students’ 
experiences in Chapter Five. 

4.2 The Setting 

Barbara Goleman High School is situated in Miami Lakes, on a 36.34 acre 10 
building lot, just east of 1-75, in an unincorporated area of Miami. Goleman High can 
accommodate 3,431 students and has fourteen portables to deal with the overcrowding 
problem. The ESOL program includes over 450 students with a total student population 
of 3,741, and mirrors a diverse Hispanic population originating from a number of Latin 
American countries from Central and South America, and the Caribbean. The student 
population is comprised of 88% Hispanic, 7% African-American, 4% Anglo, and 1% 
Asian, Indian, and Multiracial. In 1997, 648 students in grade 1 1 took the 
Communications section of the High School Competency Test and 638 students took the 
mathematics section. 76% of the students passed the communications section and 74% 
passed the math section. The High School Competency Test is administered during the 
1 1 th and/or 12 th grade and is a requirement for graduation. 

The community surrounding Goleman High is primarily Hispanic, bordering the 
City of Hialeah and is considered a bilingual community. In the area there are 
townhouses, apartments, condominiums, and single-family homes. In addition, the 
surrounding community also includes small business and light industry. Approximately 
50 percent of the students are from families that are at or below the poverty level and 



receive free or reduced lunch at school. Many of the students at Goleman were bom 
outside the United States. Therefore, English as a second language presents a definite 
challenge for many of the students. 

Miami-Dade Community College was established in 1959 and opened its doors to 
students in September of 1960. MDCC is a multi-campus, two-year, state-supported 
community college with five campuses and numerous outreach centers. Miami-Dade is 
nationally recognized as the largest community college in the country. It is governed by a 
seven-member District Board of Trustees and a college president. The Mitchell Wolfson 
Campus is located at 300 N.E. 2nd Avenue, in downtown Miami. 

In the Fall of 1996-97 49, 836 credit earning students were enrolled college-wide. 
This number does not include non-credit students. During the same year the Wolfson 
campus served 23,023 students. MDCC awards Associate in Arts and Associate in 
Science degrees, Vocational Credit Certificates in Business, Technical, Allied Health and 
Public Service occupational program areas. In addition, MDCC provides non-credit 
Continuing Education, such as Intensive English, for its students. In 1996 - 97 MDCC 
awarded 6,246 degrees. 90 percent of students with an Associate in Arts degree continue 
their education at a four-year college. MDCC has no dormitories. 31 percent of MDCC’s 
students are between 21-25 years of age and the average age is 26. More than 67 
percent are enrolled as part-time students. The ethnic/racial composition of the college is 
the following: 16% White, non-Hispanic; 21% Black, non-Hispanic; 61% Hispanic; and 
2% Other. Female students makeup 58%f the population, while 42 percent are male. In a 
report entitled “Graduate Profile, 1997-98” (Maytin-Bexon) data shows that about 58% 
of Associate degree graduates began their college careers in ESL, ENS, or college 




56 ■ 



69 



preparatory courses. There are 780 full-time faculty, and 1,345 part-time faculty. Of the 
full-time faculty, 22 percent have earned doctorate. 

4.3 Biographical Portraits of Students Born and Raised in Cuba 

The following section presents the biographical portraits of the Cuban NNS 
students (See Chart 1). 

Yessica 

Yessica is presently an 1 1 th grader at Barbara Goleman Senior High School. She 
is sixteen years old and was bom in Havana, Cuba. In terms of race and ethnicity, 
Yessica describes herself as Hispanic and/or Cuban. She is tall, light olive-toned, has 
dark hair and has intelligent dark eyes. Yessica was bom in Havana, Cuba in a town 
called Lawton. Havana was the only place Yessica had lived before coming to the U.S. 
She came to the U.S. when she was eleven years old and has lived here for over five 
years. She flew over from Cuba with her parents and brother. In Miami, they met her 
mother’s family, who had already been in the U.S. for twelve years. Yessica still has 
family in Cuba, mainly her father’s side of the family. 

Yessica has participated in the MDCPS’ ESOL program, although she has been 
exited from the ESOL program, and is currently enrolled in an Honors English class. 
Before coming to Barbara Goleman Senior High School, Yessica attended Miami Lakes 



Middle School. Yessica enjoys being a teenager. She perceives the expression “Your 
teenage years are the happiest years of your life” as contradictory, however: 






At times, I think so, at other times I don't. And then I criticize everybody 
who says so, because — it's true that we don't have responsibilities and we 
don't have real worries, but still in our own little world we do have worries 
and we do have problems. But disregarding all that, any stage in life has 
problems and things, but I think it is probably the stage you could live, 
because it's the stage when you're young when you can do many things. 
When you're experiencing. . . Most of the things you're experiencing are 
new to you because you're like in the step into the new world. And I think 
it is a very adventurous stage, and I think that's why I like it so much. 

Both her parents were bom in Havana, where they studied in preparation for 
professional jobs. Although her father was a trained engineer, he works as a manager in a 
factory. In Miami, Yessica’s mother works in a neurological clinic. Since 1992, Yessica 
has resided with her family in Miami Lakes. According to Yessica, her parents left Cuba 
because they wanted a better future, with more opportunity and dreams that America 
could offer. 

When I asked her in which language she expresses herself best, Yessica 
responded, “I think in Spanish because I studied it longer.” Despite her insecurity over 
speaking English she is very articulate in both languages. At home she speaks Spanish all 
the time because her parents do not speak English. At school she speaks English in class 
and Spanish with her friends. 

I asked Yessica to elaborate on what she would wish for if she had three 
wishes. Her three wishes were 1) for her family members still in Cuba to be in Miami 
with her, 2) to have a successful life, 3) and to end the plight of homeless children. 



0 

ERIC 



58 



71 



Yessica comments on her second and third wish by clarifying her definition of success 

and why homeless children are so important to her: 

I think that a successful life changes with time. Your perception of it 
changes with time, not only for me, but for basically everybody who 
deserves it. . .what really touches me is homeless children. That's one of 
my weak points, because I love children very much, very much. And for 
me to see homeless children, that's the worst thing. My family, you know, 
those places where you call and you give twenty dollars to take care of 
children, my family does that. I think that everybody should do that, 
because what is twenty dollars to a person who earns three hundred 
weekly, or even more? Just the fact that when you go to sleep, you know 
you are saving a life. A lot of children, who are yours too, deserve to live. 
I think that it is the most important thing that could happen to a human 
being. And I really hate the fact that there are homeless children. I can't 
believe how a person, parents could bring a child into the world and , 

basically throw them away, or I don't know, it's just things that I 

really haven't understood about humanity or society. 

When asked about Yessica’s ideas of a great life, some of her wishes dovetail 
with her ideas for a better society. She explains, “Oh! A great life would be always next 
to my family with a good, good husband. The profession I wish is now a dentist. And 
two of the most healthy children I could ever raise that would be a great life.” 



Alex 

Alex is presently a junior at Barbara Goleman Senior High School. He is sixteen 
years old, white, of medium height, and has dark hair and blue eyes. In terms of ethnicity 
and race, Alex describes himself as Hispanic. He was bom in Havana, Cuba and came to 

the U.S. in 1996. Alex came to the U.S. when he was fourteen years old and has been in 

/ 

the U.S. for three years. His parents attended the university in Cuba and are both 
engineers. His father came to the U.S. in 1994, and his mother came to the U.S. two years 
later with Alex and his younger brother. According to Alex, his parents left Cuba to 



improve their political and economic situations. Alex and his family currently reside in 
Hialeah. 

When I asked Alex how many languages he speaks, Alex humorously replied, “I 
speak three languages, Spanish, bad Spanish, and bad English.” He feels he expresses 
himself best in Spanish, which he identifies as his “home language.” Alex speaks mostly 
Spanish at home with his parents and with his Spanish speaking friends. At school, he 
speaks English in class and with his English-speaking friends. He is motivated to 
continue improving his English because he recognizes that it will help him in the future. 

Alex proudly tells the story of his father coming to the U.S. He says his father 
courageously crossed the Florida straits on a raft. Later his father was able to get 
permission from the Immigration and Naturalization Service to bring his family to the 
U.S. because of political circumstances. After two years, his father was able to bring 
Alex, his younger brother, and his mother to the U.S. 

Alex already had two aunts and an uncle in the U.S. His oldest aunt had lived here 
for about thirty years and his uncle for about seven. “Most of my family is in Cuba,” 

Alex says, “I have my grandparents, most of my cousins, and uncles.” Although Alex has 
visited other states in the U.S., Miami is the only city in which he has lived. 

I asked Alex the question, “If you had three wishes, what would you wish for?” 
and he answered that he would wish for health, love, and money. Alex described his idea 

of a great life as, “A life full of love and health as long as you are healthy you could 

enjoy your life. It all depends on you and your goals.” Although money and wealth are 
important, Alex emphasizes that he does not believe that wealth brings happiness or love. 
To Alex, “The most important things in life are health and love.” 




60 



73 



I asked Alex what he liked doing in his free time while he lived in Cuba. He said 
he enjoyed keeping busy: 

Free time, I never stopped doing something. I always have to do 
something, because that's part of our culture. We always either do 
something to improve our house, or living, or go fishing. That's what I 
like the most, fishing. . . for fun. On weekends, go out with friends, go 
party. And during summer days, what I did the most was fishing. 



In Miami, however, he feels limited, more pressured, because time goes by very 

fast for him. Alex explained that time . .seems like it runs faster here than any other 

place.” During his free time he maintains a busy schedule of activities: 

. . .1 exercise after school to be in shape. I run. I skate. And when I have 
time, I go fishing, but during weekends with my family I don't have here 
the opportunity to go to beaches as I had in Cuba, but I pretty much keep 
my same, how could I say it, the same customs I had in Cuba. 



Liz 

Liz is presently a student at Miami-Dade Community College, Wolfson Campus. 
In terms of race and/or ethnicity, Liz describes herself as Cuban. She is 20 years old, 
white, of medium height, with blue eyes and dark hair. She lived in Havana for sixteen 
years. She has been in the U.S. for four years. Liz was bom in Santa Clara, Cuba and 
came to the U.S. in 1994. She was in 1 1 th grade when she left Cuba and then completed 
high school here in the U.S. She also completed the ESOL program at MDCC and is in 
her second year of community college. 

Liz speaks two languages, English and Spanish. She feels she expresses herself 
best in Spanish. She speaks Spanish at home and English at school. Liz traveled by boat 
from Cuba to the U.S. with her parents and brother. Her father’s cousins were already 
living here in the U.S. Her parents completed high school in Cuba. Her father was a 



O 

ERLC 



74 



mechanic and her mother was a secretary. In the U.S., her father works as a mechanic and 
her mother works in a factory. Liz has a lot of family members who still reside in Cuba, 
including her grandfather, uncles, aunts, and cousins. Miami is the only place she has 
lived in the U.S. She currently resides in Southwest Miami. 

In Cuba, Liz loved going to the park in her spare time. “ I love that,” she recalls, 

“I always went with my friends after school in the afternoon, you know.” Here in Miami, 

Liz loves going to the beach whenever she has time. When Liz contrasts life in Cuba and 

life in the U.S., she reminisces on how in Cuba she had more leisure time, while in the 

U.S. she is very busy with work and school: 

Question: What sports did you play in Cuba? 

Liz: I played basketball; I really liked that one. 

Question: What sports do you play in the U.S.? 

Liz: None. I don't have time. 

Question: Did you work in Cuba? 

Liz: No. Never. 

Question: Describe an afternoon after school in Cuba? 

Liz: Afternoon? You know, after school, with my family we 
watch TV. That's all you can do there in the afternoon. 

If not you can go like walk for a little while, that's basically it. 

Question: Describe an afternoon after school here in the U.S.? 

Liz: Well, an afternoon here, if you don't work, you have a lot of things to 
do, you can go whatever place you want to and enjoy with your friends 
you can go advise it your family, if not you can go to your house relax, 
watch TV or go to the movies. 

Some of Liz’s tastes have changed since she has been in the U.S. She used to 
listen mainly to Latin music. Now she still listens to Latin music, such as merengue and 
romantic love songs, but she also listens to music in English. Although Liz likes 
American music, she does not like rock music. 




62vC 75 



Liz likes talking about the transition of adjusting to life in the U.S. I asked her 
about what she envisions for herself in the future and if she had three wishes what would 



she wish for? Liz responded that she would visit Cuba, bring her family to the U.S., and, 
finally, would like to get a good job. 

Mario 

Mario is presently a student at Miami-Dade Community College, Wolfson 
Campus. He has been a student at MDCC for three semesters. He was bom in Camaguey, 
Cuba, where he lived in the same house for nine years. In terms of race and/or ethnicity, 
Mario describes as Cuban and/or Hispanic. Mario is 21 years old, white, tall and slim, 
with dark eyes and brown hair. He currently resides in Southwest Miami. 

Before coming to the U.S., Mario attended a college preparatory school and later 
enrolled at the university in Cuba. His father was a civil engineer, and his mother 
graduated high school. When he was nineteen years old, he came to the U.S. with his 
parents and younger brother. According to Mario, they left Cuba because life under 
communism was difficult. 

Mario speaks both Spanish and English, although he feels he expresses himself 
best in Spanish. He speaks Spanish most of the time, but he speaks English with his 
girlfriend and on the telephone. At school, he speaks both languages. In class he speaks 
English, but he speaks Spanish with his English-speaking friends. Mario has been in the 
U.S. for two years and two months. 

Mario did not work in Cuba, but in the U.S. he does work. In Cuba, Mario liked 
playing sports and going to the beach. He especially loved to play basketball and 




6 L-0 76 



volleyball. Here in Miami he has also learned how to play soccer. Mario works in a small 
office where they sell wholesale merchandise. Mario emphasized that, more than 
anything else, he wishes to be with his friends that he left behind in Cuba. Mario 
described how his friends in Cuba write to him and ask him to describe the U.S. They 
want to know how it is to be in the U.S. and I say, “Look, if you were over here, there 
wouldn't be a problem. That's it. But since you are not here, it's not the same.” 




64 

ut 77 



w 

S 

j= 

V 




■ 


wo 










ai 




E 


E 


IE 


ro 

i 


-C 

03 

a> 


03 

i 


03 

I 


WJ 

61 

cc 


e 

fO 


ra 

i: 


§ 


Si 




2 




un 


un 








r- 




4U V) 

c 6J 


— < 


— < 


E 

2 -e 




At VI 

n »- 


T§ oi 


r§ & 


E v5 

4— » 


_j 

O 


- 3 
3 O 

u u 


!>8 
iS » 

03 


gS 

iS g> 

03 


wn 03 

c C 

03 UJ 


un 

UJ 




U 








Learned 

English 


m UO 
03 q_ 

^ U 
o o 


un 
03 q. 

u 
o o 


^ °3 
^ un y 
oy a 


03 

OJ un y. 
-i a. y 
O U Q 


1/3 ■*> 

ULi ^ 


un 5 

ULI ^ 


un Q 2 

LXi ^ 


un O 2> 

m s 


-a • 










GJ 1/1 


rsi 


<X> 




wo 


•= 3 


03 

cn 


03 

03 


03 

03 


03 

03 












<y 










ty &0 


_c 


_e 


-C 


-C 


> re 


jn 


wn 


wn 


in 


^ ? 


’E 


’c 


’c 


’c= 




OJ 


03 


03 


ro 


CL 


CL 


CL 


CL 


Z j 


uo 


un 


un 


un 


















wn 










2 £ 


3>* 

fll 


c 

ha 


ra 

C 03 
03 -Q 


03 

c 2 
03 -Q 


J2 *m WO 

n ^ z. 

^ _Q ^ 


amagui 

Cuba 


o 


> 3 


> Z3 


03 =3 03 


CQ 


5 ^ 


5 ^ 


C ^ £ 








03 > 

un 03 


u 








zn 



























C "5-' 


c O 








03 O 


03 O 




■S .S' 




6-5 


E -5 


-s S' 


«■“ 


_2 un 


J2 un 


oj c Si. 


03 E ^ 


o 


9 -c 


9 -c 


9 | S' 
e 1 o 

.2 o u 
2 WJ 


o ”3 03 

E c o 
.2 o u 
S u 


o 

JC 

u 

un 


^ 03 

2 s 

03 w 
-Q O 


O 03 

2 2 
03 w 

-a .2 




fa c 


ra 2 








CQ QJ 

vn 


“ £ 














w 








2r 


03 

4-* 


CJ 

-a 


i j= 

j 4—i 


j= 

4-^ 


03 ’E Pi. 

^ i = 


wn C 

s -j § 

E O ^ 
id m ? 


w 

O 


J T ” 




c E ° 

N O U 


wn UJ O 

t* £ 








u 


03 












u 


WO 


wo 


o 




tuD 






CM 


fNI 


* 












10 




H 


O 




*S 

» 


3 

5 


3 


•c 

m 

2 




* 









05 

i> 



00 




65 



4.4 Biographical Portraits of Students Born / Raised in the U.S. 



The following section presents biographical portraits of the Cuban- American 
NESS students (See Chart 2): 

Romeo 

Romeo is an 18 year old senior at Barbara Goleman Senior High School. He was 
bom in Havana Cuba, although he came to the U.S. with his parents and his brother when 
he was only four months old. Romeo and his parents left Cuba as part of the Mariel 
Exodus. He lived in New Orleans, Louisiana until he was approximately eight years old. 
Presently he resides with his parents in Hialeah Gardens. 

Romeo describes himself as Cuban. He is black, of medium height, stocky and 
strong, and has dark eyes. He is bilingual, proficient in English and Spanish. Romeo feels 
he expresses himself best in English. He speaks Spanish at home and English at school 
Romeo has not returned to Cuba since he left with his parents when he was a child. He 
has, however, expressed interest in visiting Cuba someday: “I would love to see where I 
was bom at, you know, I would love to see it!” Romeo related how some of his friends 
who have returned to Cuba say that Cuba is now “kind of poor, and yet people are still 
surviving . . Romeo commented that he compares the Cuban experience to the African 
experience: “I see it as Africa you know, as people still struggling, but they're still living, 
you know what I am saying, you know, that's how I would describe it.” 



ERIC 



66 



80 



Hermes 



Hermes is presently a 10th grader at Barbara Goleman Senior High School. At the 
time of the interview he was 16 years old. In terms of race and / or ethnicity, he describes 
himself as being Cuban- American. He is white, tall and has dark eyes and dark hair. 
Hermes was bom in Hialeah, Florida and currently resides in Miami Lakes. He has lived 
in South Florida all his life. His parents are from Cuba. His father was bom in Havana 
and his mother in Camaguey. Also, his mother’s side of the family is of Italian ancestry. 
His parents came to the U.S. at the ages of 7 (father) and 5 (mother). According to 
Hermes, his grandparents came to the U.S. because they “did not like communism.” 

Hermes is bilingual, proficient in both English and Spanish. He believes he 
expresses himself best in English. He speaks both languages at home, except with his 
grandmother, who does not speak English. At school, he speaks mainly English, but 
speaks some Spanish, especially in Spanish class. Although he does speak Spanish with 
some of his family members, Hermes speaks English most of the time, “...when I’m with 
my friends at school, regularly with my parents, with my brother.” Hermes has never 
visited Cuba. He would like to visit Cuba someday, although not at the present time. I 
asked why he would not visit Cuba today, and he answered, “Not at the present moment 
because of Fidel Castro, but as soon as he's thrown, overpowered, I would definitely visit 
Cuba.” 

On some afternoons, Hermes spends his after school time involved in drama club 
meetings: “If I have a drama meeting, I'll go and we talk about the musicals we're going 



ERIC 



67 



81 



to perform in the near future.” On other days, he goes home to do his homework, read, 
and watch T.V. Hermes loves going to the movies, especially to see horror movies, and 
admits he “likes to be scared in those movies.” He also enjoys watching classical films, 
reading books, and talking to adults. “I prefer to talk to grown-ups, because they have 
more experience than younger kids, like usually if there is like a group of elderly people 
or a group of young kids, I would usually get along with the older people,” he says. 

Many of the books Hermes likes to read represent a diverse selection: “Usually it's 
science fiction or mystery novels. I love classics, like Dickens. Dickens is one of my 
favorite authors.” In addition, Hermes is eclectic in his musical tastes. He listens to 
alternative rock, gospel, country, some forms of rap, and R & B. He considers himself to 
be a musical person. He does not, however, play sports. During the summer, Hermes had 
the wonderful experience of working at an engineering office. He was the secretary for 
the office manager. I asked Hermes to share his ideas of a great life. This is what he had 
to say: 



Question: If you had three wishes, what would you wish for? 

Hermes: Money of course, but that's not that's like real selfish, so, I 

wouldn't wish that. I would wish for everybody to be happy in the world. 
And everybody to have something to look forward to. No homeless 
people, because that's something that really affects me, that I don't really 
feel comfortable with. For them to have clothing, food, a place to sleep at 
at night. That's two, right? Okay. And also for everybody to have hope 
in life. A lot of people have given up, and they don't care anymore of their 
lives. I would say for everybody to have a reason to live. 

Questions: What is your idea of a great life? 

Hermes: A great life is where you're proud of what you have 
accomplished and work hard, but at the same time enjoy life. 



ERIC 



68 



82 



Chart 2 




TO 

3 : 



to 

c 

OJ 

“O 

k_ 

TO 

_cr 

TO 

OJ 

TO 



lO 

OJ 

TO 



E 

TO 



or 
CiO 
TO 
: 3 
ClO 
■:C-: 
TO 



TO 

CL 

un 



TO 

Q. 

UO 



TO 

> 

V* 

TO 

z 



V/} 

" 5 i 



lO 

“ 5 * 



& 



o 

CD 



to 

5 I 

Z3 E 

TO* Cu 

S 8 

S’« 

□c <-■> 
Z 3 
•E 

"i 



TO 

"O 



TO 

OJ 



o 

o 

JC 

TO 

1/1 



c o 

TO O 

i-5 



<✓1 



gi 

5 "ch 
2 x 
-S o 
«5 {= 



o 

o 



O ^ 

2 ‘i 

-2 2 
TO g 



TO 
Tl ■ 
TO 



CN 



TO 

fcfl 

<C 



00 



VO 



o 

TO 

E 

£ 



VI 

TO 



TO 

X 



oo 



0 

■> 



co 

00 




J 

'i 



69 



4.5 Cuban NNS Students’ Transcultural Experiences 



Nine major themes emerged from the thematic analysis of the participants’ 
transcultural experiences, which was guided by the central question, “From the 
perspective of four Cuban, non-native English-speaking students (NNS), what are 
the essential structures of the students’ transcultural identities?” The nine major 
themes and their essential structures, which emerged from the interview data, are the 
following (See Chart 3): 

I. Portrait of a Country: The students preserve mental pictures of their homeland. 

II. Personal Memories: The students value special moments in Cuba. 

III. Discovering America: The students alter their perceptions of the U.S. 

IV. Living in Miami: The students differentiate between life in Cuba and Miami. 

V. An Education in Cuba: The students hold dual perspectives on Cuba’s schools. 

VI. School in the USA: The students view U.S. education as a road to future 
opportunities. 

VII. Family Ties: The students contrast family life in Cuba and the U.S. 

VIII. Friends Across the Ocean: The students explore friendship in Cuba and the U.S. 

IX. Socio-political Visions: The students focus on freedom of speech. 




70 



85 



Chan 3 



Central Exploratory Question: 

From the perspectives of four Cuban, non-native English-speaking (NNS) 
students, what are essential structures of their transcultural identities? 

The following are essential structures of the 
Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities: 

I. Portrait of a Country: 

The students preserve mental pictures of their homeland. 

II. Personal Memories: 

The students value special moments in Cuba. 

III. Discovering America: 

The students alter their perceptions of the U.S. 

IV. Living in Miami: 

The students differentiate between life in Cuba and Miami. 

V. An Education in Cuba: 

The students hold dual perspectives on Cuba's schools. 

VI. School in the USA: 

The students view U.S. education as a road to future opportunities. 

VII. Family Ties: 

The students contrast family life in Cuba and the U.S. 

VIII. Friends Across the Ocean: 

The students explore friendship in Cuba and the U.S. 

IX. Socio-political Visions: 

The students focus on freedom of speech. 







4.6 Portrait of a Country 



An essential structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is that 
students preserve mental pictures of their homeland. 

Many years before Alex, Yessica, Liz, and Mario arrived in the U.S., Cuba, their 
homeland, served as a rich, fertile landscape that would later shape their roles and 
identities in America. Thus, their transcultural experiences in the U.S. are defined, in 
part, by their cultural context in Cuba — past experiences always shaping the future and 
redefining the present. Their experiences in Cuba and, later, their experiences in the U.S. 
give meaning to the transcultural phenomenon of living in two worlds. An essential 
structure of Cuban NNS student’s transcultural identity is memories of Cuba, the land, 
the city, its people, and its lifestyle. The participants’ memory of their experiences in 
Cuba influences their perspectives in the transcultural journey of self-discovery here in 
the U.S. 

Yessica was eager to describe La Habana (Havana), the capital of Cuba, where 
she was bom. She described Havana as a big city, and compared it to a downtown area, 
such as Miami. Yessica offered a detailed description of a particular neighborhood in 
Havana called “La Habana Vieja, ” which translates as Old Havana. Yessica emphasized 
that from her parents she learned about Old Havana. She described her parents version 
first: “. . .in the 50’s it used to be one of the most elegant places, the biggest stores, 
somehow like downtown Miami.” She contrasted, however, this earlier vision of Old 
Havana with “now it's basically in mins.” Yessica portrayed Havana as a metropolitan 
area, with educational and recreational spots, yet still preserving a hometown air: 

It has un capitolio (a capitol); it has un planetario (a planetarium); it's basically a 

museum, but it has a museum of everything, of animals and plants, of planets, 




72 

87 



everything. Everything there basically that’s the center of La Habana, which 

is where most tourists go. Where I lived, I lived in calle “C” in Lawton. Basically 

it was little; Lawton was little. It wasn't that big. I had my school like two a 

mile away, so I used to go walking. 

Alex was also bom in Havana, the capital of Cuba. He described Havana as the 
most advanced city in Cuba, where most of the commercial centers are located. Alex 
explained that Havana has the greatest population on the island, more than any other 
province in Cuba. According to Alex, Havana houses many cultural centers, such as 
theaters and el Morro Fortress. Alex was very enthusiastic about describing the city of 
Havana. 

What I found intriguing about Alex’s and Yessica’s descriptions was the rich 
detail in which they were able to portray Havana. Both described their place of birth with 
a zestful painting, a colorful landscape of the famous landmarks, and interesting places 
one could visit. Their crystal clear memories for illustrating the city as if they had just 
departed a few days is an essential structure of their present transcultural identities 
because it serves as a reference point for who they are becoming today. In Yessica’s case 
she had just recently been to Cuba, but many of her descriptions were also from her 
childhood. Both participants demonstrated a sense of pride in describing Havana, 
although Yessica did emphasize that Havana’s glamour had tarnished since the days of 
her parents’ youth. Perhaps her recent visit to Cuba influenced her to describe Havana as 
if it were in ruins today compared to the 50’s era, since she had already lived in the U.S. 
for a while and had the American standard of living as a reference point. Four to five 
years have past since Alex and Yessica left Cuba to live, yet they preserve the memories 




73 



88 






of their homeland, able to describe their neighborhoods as if they had both just visited 
their island homeland yesterday. 

I was born in Cuba also, although I have not returned since my parents brought 
me to the U.S. at the age of three. Listening to Alex and Yessica reminisce about Cuba, 
caused me to reflect on my country of birth, contributing to color parts of the 
picture/puzzle that makes me up as a person — my own transcultural identity. I have no 
conscious memories of Cuba, except every once in a while, an image seems to surface 
from my subconscious, a sense for a place I've seen or smelled or touched long ago, but 
then I awake from that momentary " vision ” and am not sure if it was just a picture my 
grandmother showed me once or a story another family member shared with me. As I 
listened to the participants ' stories I realized that, as a participant observer in this study, 
that "momentary vision ” is re-awakened in me through their vivid descriptions and my 
transcultural identity becomes a little more whole as I, in turn, better understand who 
they are. 

Mario was not bom in a metropolitan area like Havana. He was bom in the town 
of Camaguey, the heart of the Camaguey province. Mario described the town in where he 
was bom by making a historical connection between its physical appearances and 
historical elements: 

It’s kind of an old city in the part that I used to live. All the streets, there's 
no straight street. They are like in curves. . .Winding. I think it was 
because the pirates went to rob the city or something like that, and they get 
lost, so they made the idea like that. 

Although this was a brief description of Camaguey, Mario 's description of the 
old, winding roads, and his powerful illustration of the central town, captured my 
curiosity. I was born in this town, but its memory is buried deep in a part of me, waiting 




74 

o v 8 9 



to be reborn if I ever return to Camaguey. I shared with Mario the address of the house 
where I lived for the first three years of my life, and he said he used to pass that house 
frequently. The moment Mario said this, I felt a personal and immediate connection 
between his reality and my own. Mario 's strong desire to describe the town where he was 
born is an underlying theme that accounts for his transcultural experiences because it is 
both part of who he was and part of who he is in his present reality. As he searches in his 
memory to describe his hometown, the images he evokes are further enhanced and 
clarified when he realizes he can act as a reference point for my understanding of where 
he was born as well as where I was born. In this sense, Mario 's transcultural experience 
is manifested in his desire and determination to illustrate his hometown, so I can 
“ experience ” it in the same light. 

Alex portrayed Cuba in the context of a political and economical 
commentary: “Cuba, besides the situation that it's going through right now with all the 
political problems and economic problems, Cuba it's my homeland. I would like to go 
back to Cuba, not to stay, but to visit my friends.” Alex emphasized that Cuba is the place 
where he was bom, his homeland. He described it as “A beautiful island with great 
beaches, where the sand is fine and the water is clear.” What Alex enjoyed most about 
Cuba, besides being with his friends and family, is fishing. In the summertime, he visited 
Varadero Beach, where he went camping. He mentioned that in Cuba there are no 
poisonous animals that could kill someone — “It's all, it's fun, it's a fun island.” 

Yessica’s memories mirror a colorful collage of friends, family, and school 
framed within the landscape of her homeland. What she remembered most of all about 
Cuba were her grandparents: . . . “that's the image I hold the most; I remember going to 




-75 90 



their house, and basically, spending the entire day with them.” Also, she remembered her 
school, which was called Camilo Cienfuegos. Yessica explained that prior to the 
communist era, her school used to be a religious convent, but later “in Cuba religion got 
eliminated — and when that happened, they turned basically all convents into schools and 
my school was one of them.” Yessica illustrated memorable characteristics of attending 
school and interacting with her friends, . . it used to have three floors. It used to be like 
a square around a patio. . . and I remember that a lot. And I remember my friends 
playing in the street . . .that's what I remember the most, and I really miss it. . .1 miss it a 
lot.” 



I asked Mario to describe his impressions of Cuba. He told me that when he 
thinks of Cuba, it’s a place where he had a lot of fun and where a person remembers the 
good times and not the bad times. According to Mario, Cuba has been destroyed for 
almost fifty years. It is not the same Cuba that you had seen in the 50 ,s or 60 ,s . In his 
vision, Cuba is “Nothing how it could be.” Mario explained that his favorite place in 
Cuba was the beach: 

For me, the best beaches are the ones that are in my hometown. I wouldn't 
change the beach that I have at my house; I wouldn't change it for some 
other beach, because that beach was special, because you could find 
everything. If you want to see sharks, you could go to the canal. There 
was an entrance to a bay so that the fish would cut through the coral. For 
sure you could see them, and if you wanted to see tropical fishes, you 
could find them. 

Similar to Mario, but more focused on Cuba’s political and economical problems, 

Liz described Cuba by emphasizing the physical deterioration of her homeland: 

Cuba is not like before. It has a lot of problems. Provinces are really bad, 
you know. I don't know, the streets, the houses, the buildings are 
destroyed, I don't know, it's hard for me to see all that. 




76 

■ v- 



91 



The most alluring aspect of talking to these students about their impressions of 
Cuba was their willingness and motivation to describe Cuba 's attractive characteristics, 
despite their references to Cuba ’s political problems. In an ironic sense, when they 
described Cuba it was like watching a wonderful, complex play, where at times, the 
actors hid behind an always-present curtain. 

Alex said he would like to visit Cuba, not to stay, but simply to visit. In Alex and 
Yessica there was a clear direction towards embracing future challenges here in the U.S. 
Yessica’s and Liz’s memories of Cuba were laced with her description of a country 
physically deteriorating, yet filled with her love for the special people and places she left 
behind. Mario expressed the same bittersweet sentiments of a Cuba that, in spite of its 
“bad times,” must be remembered for its “good times.” These common threads shared by 
the Cuban students of bittersweet nostalgia and highlighting moments in the past are 
underlying themes that account for their transcultural experiences. These are the 
memories that help them to redefine who they are and, thus, constantly reshape their 
transcultural identity. 

4.7 Personal Memories 

An essential structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is that 
the students value special moments in Cuba. 

Although the students were able to share rich, detailed descriptions of their native 
country, I wanted to investigate some of their favorite memories in Cuba. An essential 
structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is favorite memories in 




77 

^ L 



92 



Cuba of belonging with family and friends. I asked the students to describe the most 
important memory while they were in Cuba. Like students in the U.S., the Cuban students 
related special childhood memories, which remind them of life in their native Cuba. 

When I asked Alex to describe one of his favorite memories in Cuba, he 
responded that most of the time living in Cuba was fun. “Being sad in a country like 
Cuba that doesn't belong there, you either have to be happy or laughing or something.” 
Ironically, the experience he related as his favorite memory was both sad and happy. 

Alex told me about the time his mother was pregnant, and Alex wanted his parents to 
name his baby brother Alexis. They didn't want to name him Alexis because they didn't 
think that it was a good name. Alex doesn’t remember where he got the name from, but 
he liked it. He even fought with his parents over the name: “From that day, I understood 
that a brother is more than a friend, it's more than family, it's like the person you grow 

f 

with, and the person that's always there to help you.” Although they decided on another 
name for his brother, Alex considers this a favorite childhood memory because it reminds 
him of how close he has always been to his brother. 

One of the most significant memories of life in Cuba for Yessica was celebrating 
her seventh birthday: “. . . it was my seventh birthday and my parents threw me a 
wonderful party and everybody was there. I had two clowns, one magician. Basically, 
everybody who I could possibly love was there.” Once again, Yessica enthusiastically 
described the details of her special childhood. 

Liz described working in the field in Cuba as one of her favorite memories 
because she associates it with spending quality time around family and friends. She 




78 



93 



explained that she did not like working in the fields, but enjoyed the interaction among 

the people, the feeling of closeness in getting together: 

Yes. You have to go with everybody at the school, you have to go to work 
in the fields, and my memory, it was a great memory for me, because with 
like everybody on Sundays we’d get-together with all the families, and 
that was an experience I wouldn't forget. 

Mario was also eager to share his meaningful experiences in Cuba. During the 

sessions he expressed that among the things he misses most about leaving Cuba are his 

friends. At one point he became very emotional talking about a friend he had a 

disagreement with, but Mario was grateful that they were able to mend their friendship 

before he left Cuba. When 1 asked Mario about his favorite memory of living in Cuba, he 

recreated a very colorful portrait of his high school graduation: 

1 think it was the day we made the party because of the graduation, the 

high school graduation. We made the whole school made a party like 

a special club, and we went there. And there were three guys that were 
communist, but they weren't sure about what they think, and they think 
that communism was right and how they felt. And we were open having 
discussions and stuff like that, but after the discussion was over, and we 
went to play baseball, and we had the strong discussion. And that day the 
party was getting over, one of these guys, because the other two weren't 
there at the moment, they were in the city, they were in their own towns, 
and this guy named Raul, and me and my two other friends that used to 
hang out together, we used to hang out with those communist guys too. 
And he called us and told us that it didn't matter what we think. What 
really mattered was that we love each other and that was what was 
important. 

A common denominator among all the participants’ favorite memories is that 
their experiences mirror a sense of belonging with family and friends. Yessica recalled 
that at her birthday party everyone who she could possibly love was there. Alex 
remembered understanding that his brother would be his lifetime friend. Liz reminisced 
working with people of her community, not because of the work itself, but the feeling of 





interaction. Mario thought of a friend who held very different political views than Mario, 
but ultimately both friends were able to look beyond their differences and recognize the 
value of friendship. 

As the students shared their favorite memories, I thought of one of my favorite 
childhood memories. One difference, of course, is that I was in Miami, and not Cuba, but 
as a young boy, I can identify with the students ’feeling of belonging to family and 
friends. I remember one day when my grandmother announced that she was going to buy 
me a Creepy Crawlers set, which was a hot plate, with metal mold and metal molds to 
make rubbery insects in different colors. The day finally came, and I walked with my 
grandmother, hand-in-hand, from our house all the way to Zayres Department Store. I 
had never been so excited; I was on top of the world! And I remember how loved I felt, 
walking back and forth, speaking in Spanish, yet thinking in English about my new toy. 
These are the thoughts that the sessions awaken in me a redefining of my transcultural 
identity, so I can better understand my students 'journeys. 

4.8 Discovering America 

An essential structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is that 
the students alter their perceptions of the U.S. 

The Cuban NNS students emphasized that after they arrived in the U.S. they 
started reevaluating their perceptions. It was not the way they had pictured it before. This 
is a significant factor of the Cuban students’ transcultural experience that contributes to 
their current idea of who they are presently, who they are becoming, and how they are 
shaping their future transcultural reality. An essential structure of the Cuban NNS 



students’ transcultural identities is the change in perspective once they arrive in the U.S. 
These students enter the U.S., bringing with them their rich cultural experiences of life in 
their native country, ready to experience a new way of life. Because their past 
experiences contribute to their transcultural experiences, in this sense, their prior 
experiences in Cuba are a bridge to their new community. They begin developing their 
transcultural identities long before they arrive in the U.S. 

I asked them to share with me their first impressions of arriving in Miami. I 
wanted to capture the initial transcultural experience, knowing that at that point they were 
not going to be simply tourists, but would be adopting the U.S. as their new home. The 
four Cuban students described the initial transcultural experience in different ways, but 
all shared the feeling of beginning a new journey that continues to embrace the old. 

Alex explained that when he first arrived in Miami, it was a big shock because 
everyone in Cuba idealized this country as a paradise. He also thought of the U.S as a 
paradise before coming here. Alex observes, however, that the U.S. is “good, it's a land of 
prosperity and all that, but you have to work for what you want. You have to work hard, 
it's not that easy.” Conversely, he recognized that in the U.S. “everything is beautiful 
everything is clean,” and emphasized highlights that when people work they have the 
opportunity to get what they want, but they have to work hard. 

Before coming to the U.S., Alex’s vision of the U.S. was influenced by his family, 
peers, and teachers. Once he was here, he realized that it wasn’t the “paradise” that he 
envisioned, yet recognized that the U.S. symbolized opportunities for his future. This re- 
visionary act is part of the process of defining and redefining his transcultural identity. 
Alex’s ideas of the U.S. started changing because he felt the need to redefine who he was 





at the time and who he would become in his new community. To successfully perform in 
his new educational community (or any other arenas), Alex needed to redefine his vision 
of the U.S., see it not for the perception that others had created for him, but for a more 
realistic vision of the U.S. In this sense, an underlying theme of his transcultural 
experiences his confronting a new reality. This realization that the U.S. is not just easy 
street initiates a change in his transcultural identity, and it is this new perspective that will 
allow Alex to redefine his earlier perspectives. 

Similarly, before coming to Miami, Yessica was influenced by her friends to 
dream of he U.S. as the place where the streets are made of gold. Before coming over, 
Yessica pictured the U.S. very differently compared to her ideas of the U.S. today. In 
Cuba, she remembers sitting and talking with her friends, imagining the U.S. as a place 
where money grows on trees, “where you're never going to be needing something, where 
you're going to have everything.” Now, she realized that living in the U.S. involves 
having “to work a lot to get what you want.” I've seen it with my parents, and I never 
imagined it was going to be so much work like it is.” Like Alex’s transformation she was 
changed through watching how hard her parents had to work once they came to the U.S. 

This change in perspectives, ideas of the U.S. before and after, is an underlying 
theme among all four NNS students as a metamorphosis that allows them to revisit all of 
the old ideas they had about the U.S. and redefine their present and future in the U.S. 

New perspectives arise from questioning their old realities as well as their present ways 
of understanding their world. 

One of my students gave me a picture of a beautiful valley in Cuba, El Valle de 
las Vihas, where the land is dark red, and the valley sides are lush green. 1 see a picture 




82 



97 



of Cuba ’s landscape, and I feel as if I have been there before, like I have appreciated the 
island through my own senses. But I can only trace my earliest memories to Mexico City, 
where my parents and I waited for the official papers to come to the U.S. I can best 
identify to Hermes ’ and Romeo ’s experiences because my perspectives of living in the 
U.S. have been influenced by life in the U.S., not outside the U.S. For me the myth has 
been the Cuba I really only know through the stories of my parents, grandparents, my 
students, and the participants of this study. My transformation from just the Cuban- 
American U.S. perspective to a better understanding of the Cuba of today has come as an 
ESOL teacher, primarily from my interaction with students who have recently left Cuba. 
Undoubtedly, I have been transformed from my interaction with the students of this study, 
so I am undoubtedly connected to the Cuban NNS students ’ transcultural experiences 
since I also experience my world through a bicultural reality. 

Mario’s mental picture of the U.S. was different than some of the other students’ 
ideas. Mario said he really didn’t think a lot about what life would be like in the U.S. 
Perhaps it is because Mario lived in a rural town in Camaguey, Cuba, rather than in the 
city of Havana, where he might have been less exposed to perceptions of the U.S. 
Nevertheless, he did experience the cultural transformation of re-defining any previous 
ideas he had of the U.S. Mario highlighted his first impressions of the U.S. by relating a 
story in which he felt that someone treated him as if he had come from an 
underdeveloped country, exposed to very little. Someone had given him a ride home, and 
on the way, tried to impress Mario by emphasizing the highways and supermarkets in 
Miami. Mario felt this man was patronizing him. Mario was offended that he was being 
treated like “somebody who has never seen like a supermarket.” 




83c 98 



Liz’s ideas of the U.S., while she still lived in Cuba, were also different than the 
other three Cuban NNS students. She believed that life in the U.S. would be difficult 
because of the violent crimes in the U.S. she would hear about while she was on the 
island. She was scared of life in the U.S., and she described feeling disoriented when she 
first got to Miami, primarily because she “didn't know anything here. It was my first time 
coming here. I felt really sad you know, because I missed a lot of my family.” Before 
she came to the U.S., Liz described that her ideas of the U.S. were shaped by what she 
heard people describe: 

In Cuba, they said a lot of things about the U.S. that the people rob you, that they 
kill you. And I thought what am I going to do there. And once you're here, you 
realize that it isn't true, you know most of the time. 

An underlying theme in all of the Cuban NNS participants that accounts for the 
Cuban NNS students’ transcultural experiences as the change in perspectives from their 
old ideas of the U.S. to new visions of the U.S. This common denominator of 
transforming their perspectives of life in the U.S. is an essential aspect of shaping their 
transcultural identity. It provides the ESOL students with the foundation to begin 
exploring their transculturalism in a new society. 

4.9 Living in Miami 

An essential structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is that 
the students differentiate between life in Cuba and Miami. 

All four of the NNS participants differentiate between the level of interaction 
among family and friends in Cuba versus interaction among family and friends in Miami. 



O 

ERIC 



84 



99 



Primarily, the participants felt that in Cuba they were able to spend more quality time 
interacting with family and friends, whereas in the U.S. they have less free time, but have 
struggled to preserve quality time for family and friends. An essential structure of Cuban 
NNS students’ transcultural identities is the difference between close interactions in Cuba 
and more distant relationships in the U.S. 

In Yessica’s case Miami is a “fun place” to live because she is able to go out with 
her friends and there are many interesting places to visit. Yessica pointed out, however, 
that Miami is different than Cuba because “the neighborhoods are not the same. . .most of 
the time, you don't know the person who lives in front of you, or the person who lives 
beside you. . .1 used to love that about Cuba.” For Yessica, living in Miami has brought 
the opportunity to share very special moments with her family and friends, yet at the 
same time she always preserves the nostalgia of Cuba. 

In my experience of growing up in South Florida I can relate to Alex’s connection 
to Miami ’s Cuban culture. Miami 's Cuban influence is a constant reminder that we are 
not far from our heritage, an integral part of what defines the uniqueness of 
transculturalism, just as it defines the uniqueness of all six of these students ’ identities. 
From one perspective, I was raised in this Cuban-American, bicultural reality that is 
unique to the South Florida experience, yet there are many aspects of more American 
culture which I have been exposed to all of my life. Two aspects of American culture that 
I have experienced all my life is the urban lifestyle found in New York or Miami, 
including the architecture of these metropolitan cities. The dual reality for the Cuban 
NNS students is that after a few years of living in the U.S. they begin to feel more 
comfortable, yet ironically there is a part of them that continues to miss their homeland. 



85 



100 



One of Yessica’s favorite memories of living in the U.S. was the first time she 

went to Walt Disney World: “I went with my parents, my brother and a friend of ours. It 

was a world of fairies, like a world full of fantasy and magic. . .the three days that I was 

there, I was not in this world . . .1 loved it.” Yessica has also visited Georgia and New 

York. She began by describing her visit to Georgia: “ — it wasn't really a city. We were 

passing and then it was like a hee-haw town; it was like very camp like. It wasn't nothing 

like Miami, little houses, little farms; that's what it was like.” In contrast, she described 

New York as completely different than Georgia: 

Completely different. It's incredible to see what man has created. Such powerful 
buildings, so tall that sometimes you can't see them, sometimes they're... The 
people in New York, they're always doing something. They can't stop. You see 
them. . . most of times they’re dressed in such formal clothes, and they have 
tennis shoes on, and because they can't walk with high heels like women, it's 
really funny. 

Yessica described one of her favorite places in Miami as the movies, since going 
to the movies is something she does a lot. Also, she enjoys spending time at home, “I like 
my house a lot.” She described a Friday in Miami as “movie day.” Her weekends also 
include going out to have dinner: “Saturday is usually a day in which you go out to have 
dinner, and Sunday is a day to stay home.” Although Yessica has visited South Florida’s 
beaches, she emphasized that they are very different than Cuba’s beaches: 

“. . . Varadero, it is such an exquisite beach, and then you come here and the sand is hard 
and thick. . .the water, is everything but clear. . . the water is up to your knees and you 
still can't see your toes.” 

Although Yessica appeared to be excited when talking about the new cities and 
adventurous lifestyles she has experienced in the U.S., she is always reminded of the 
difference between the U.S. and Cuba. In this sense, both countries have their positive 




8 ioi 



and negative sides. For Yessica the differences between her environment and lifestyle in 
Cuba versus the U.S. environment and lifestyle are underlying themes that account for 
her transcultural experiences. 

Alex experienced the same conflict when, from one perspective, he experienced a 
comfort level with life in Miami because he feels a connection between his own 
transcultural experiences and Miami’s Cuban influence. From another perspective, 
however, Alex recognized that despite the similarities in cultures, weekends in Miami are 
crammed with work, both in school and at work. Alex said he feels very comfortable in 
Miami because of its large Cuban population: . .the people that I feel more comfortable 

with, their language, their accents, and their customs. Their culture is pretty much the one 
I have, they share with me, the songs I like. I hang out with my friends; they basically 
have the same attitudes towards school. I feel good in Miami.” Alex described a social 
event here in Miami during an after-school activity where they danced a Cuban dance 
called “La Rueda.” Alex feels comfortable with his friends at school: “Like in Cuba we 
keep the same customs, and we share our experiences during the day and during class.” I 
asked Alex to describe a weekend in Miami, and the first activity that he thought of is 
work: . . .“Well, work, and work, and more work. I work on Saturdays and Sundays too. 

I wake up at 6: 30, and I'm working 'til 6:00 in the afternoon.” For Alex this is the side of 
Miami that represents hard work as well as study in order to take advantage of future 
opportunities in the U.S. His dad is a land surveyor, and on weekends Alex spends all 
day surveying with him. Afterwards, he likes to go home and relax with his friends. 

Mario also expressed a sense of irony when describing his impressions of Miami 
in light of his memories of Cuba. Mario described Miami as a great place to interact with 



O 

ERIC 



87 102 



friends. He said that what he loves most about Miami is that the lifestyle allows him to 
keep busy with making plans with his friends: “If we want to play something we go out 
and play it. That's what I love the most, you can do whatever you want.” Mario 
described a weekend in Miami as an exciting experience, where he and his friends can go 
to the beach to play volleyball or play soccer or basketball. However, despite the exciting 
activities that Miami can offer him, Mario does not particularly like Miami Beach 
compared to the beaches in Cuba because he feels there is too much development. 

During my childhood, adolescence, and adulthood there were several places I 
visited in the U.S., such as New York, New Jersey, Georgia, Louisiana, and North and 
South Carolina. Every time I would visit a different city outside of South Florida, I would 
experience a sense of culture shock. It was very obvious that the rest of the U.S. was very 
different than South Florida, especially Miami. First, I was away from a bicultural city to 
places where most of the residents had not even heard the first word of Spanish. Thus, 
being born or raised within the Cuban-American enclave of Miami, created a 
transcultural perspective for me that has not only influenced my perspective of the world 
as I know it, but has allowed me to use a bicultural perspective to learn from others ’ 
experiences. 

Like my own experience, Romeo and Hermes were also raised in the U.S. They 
shared with me their childhood and teenage experiences of life in South Florida and other 
regions of the U.S. They talked to me about their impressions of Miami and other parts of 
the U.S., and they also explored their ideas on Cuba. Hermes was bom in the U.S. and 
has never visited Cuba. Romeo, like me, was bom in Cuba, but has lived in the U.S. since 
he was an infant. Although Hermes has never visited Cuba, he pictures what Cuba would 




88 



103 



look like. His best reference point was to compare it to one of the other Latin American 
countries, The Dominican Republic: 

I really pictured it when I went on vacation to the Dominican Republic, and I saw 
the mountains and the palm trees. And I saw pictures of Cuba, and it reminded 
me so much of the pictures, and I felt like I was in Cuba, but I really wasn't, and 
that really made me sad. 

Hermes told me his fondest memories of living in Miami have been spending time 

with his family. He also described one of his most precious memories as visiting Disney 

World with his family: “Usually my brother, my mother, my father, and I when we go to 

Disney World, we usually enjoy it very much. . . .we're always happy when we go there. 

It's a place we can all enjoy, even the adults.” 

Hermes described Miami as a very culturally diverse environment. He said that 

Miami is a great place to live, and he emphasized that Miami is probably the only place 

he could ever live in: “It’s wonderful. There are a lot of activities, and lots of jobs, great 

schooling.” He has, however, traveled in the U.S., and he describes the differences 

among Miami, Vermont, and New York City: 

The people were very different. They the people from Vermont, they were 

very kind. They were really they asked about that we were Cuban, because 

my father said we were Cuban- American. Well, they're Cuban, we're Cuban- 

American, me and my brother or my brother and I. And they were very 

interested in our culture. They asked a lot of questions like, why did we leave 
Cuba, how our experiences have changed. . . New York. It’s has a lot of different 
cultures inside, just like Miami. It has more of a variety here. In Miami, it’s 

more of a Hispanic cultural variety. Up there, they have Italian, Jewish it’s I 

think it has a lot more cultures than here in Miami. 



Romeo also described a recent experience in which his Mom rewarded him with a 
trip to Disney World for passing 1 1 th grade. She also mentioned that if he passes the 12 th 
grade, she would reward him with a trip to Cuba. He described his excitement when he got 



89 104 



to visit Disney with his family: . .when I passed grade, my mom rewarded me by going 

to Disney World and that's the best thing that ever happened to me in the whole wide 

world, you know, because I did good in school and I passed, and I'm a senior . . 

Romeo had lived in New Orleans before coming to Miami. He also commented 

on his childhood memory of life in New Orleans. He remembered that it was difficult 

compared to life in Miami because he was young, and he could not speak English: 

. . .1 didn't know how to speak English until the age of six, around there. And 

my parents had always needed a translator and when my brother wasn't there 

and I wasn't there, and so, it was very difficult than here in South Florida. 

Hermes ’ and Romeo ’s Cuban-American transcultural experiences in Miami serve 

as a bridge between their culture and the Cuban NNS students ’ culture. Likewise 

Hermes ’ and Romeo ’s experiences serve as cultural context to analyze the essential 

structures of the Cuban NNS students ’ transcultural identities because now the Miami 

experience is part of the Cuban NNS students ’ reality as well. One of the universal 

structures among the Cuban NNS students ’ transcultural experiences and the Cuban- 

American NESS students ’ transcultural experiences is that both live in a bicultural 

environment in the U.S. 

4.10 An Education in Cuba 

An essential structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is that 
the students hold dual perspectives on Cuba’s schools. 

In general all four of the NNS participants shared positive memories about their 
school experiences in Cuba. However, a few of the participants shared the concern that as 




90 105 



part of their educational experience in Cuba they were forced to or would have had to 
work in the fields and be separated from their family at certain times of the year. 
According to the participants, accepting scholarship opportunities meant attending 
selected boarding schools the government had designed as college preparatory schools. 
All four participants clearly praised the Cuban educational system in terms of its ability 
to deliver educational content, but criticized it in respect to the educational system’s one 
party mentality. This dichotomy in relation to Cuba’s educational system was a recurring 
concern expressed by all four NNS students, as well as the NESS students. An essential 
structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is their dual perspective on 
Cuba’s educational system. 

Liz expressed her respect for the teachers and outlined a few of the differences 
between schools in Cuba and the U.S. Liz, who attended school in Cuba until 1 1 th grade, 
highlighted some of the similarities and differences between going to school in Cuba and 
the United States: “. . it's like they teach almost the same, the same classes but different 
perspectives. Here in the United States a student does whatever they want to do. In Cuba 
it's not like that. It is more respect for the teacher . . .” Liz mentioned that she liked 
school in Cuba because she knew the people, the teachers, and the classes, despite the 
fact she had to study hard. 

Yessica also expressed the pros and cons of her educational experiences in Cuba. 
Yessica enjoyed attending school in Cuba. She has always liked school. She considered 
herself a person who likes studying, but would rather do other things with her time than 
study. However, she enjoys learning, which is what she likes about school. Yessica’s 
favorite subject in Cuba was math, she says it was her favorite subject because she “. . 




91 



106 



.had such great teachers, I had very good teachers. Teachers, who taught me incredible . . 
.” Her least favorite subject in Cuba was history because she does not enjoy memorizing 
dates. She considers herself more of a logical thinker. Yessica describes a day at her 
school in Cuba: 

Enter school at 8 o'clock. I think get out at 4:30 if I'm not mistaken. I 
used to have my periods, which it wasn't like changing at all times. You 
had three classes, the first three classes with the same teacher. For 
example, he taught math, science, and something else. Then the other 
teacher taught history, English, and, sorry Spanish, and something else, 
and you had those three classes, and then go to the next teacher. So 
basically, you only had two teachers. And then during the lunch, while I 
was in fourth, fifth and sixth, I used to teach second and third grade. My 
lunch was with them, because during their lunch, they would come to the 
room, and I would teach them, and then we would go eat lunch together. 

While Yessica was still in Cuba, she longed to get a scholarship to attend a very 
good boarding school in Cuba. However, according to Yessica, in Cuba receiving a 
scholarship meant going to a school where she would have to stay in school five days a 
week, During the weekdays and on weekends she would go home to her family: “I 
wanted it, because it was the best school, but I didn't want it, because it would be five 
days without seeing my parents. . .” Her other option would have been to attend what she 
called “el pre de la calle,” which is a form of public boarding school where you attend in 
the mornings and afternoons and return home on a daily basis: . . .” My parents didn't 
want me to go internship, you know intern, but I also wanted to because it was the best 
school and my friends were going and I wanted to go to the other one.” Yessica described 
the organization of the educational system she attended in Cuba, which went from first 
through fourth, called “primaria,” from fifth to sixth, called “primaria segunda,” from 
seventh to eleventh, called “secundaria,” and after eleventh, called “el pre.” After 
attending “el pre” the student goes to the university. In addition, Yessica described that in 




92 



107 



Cuba she had a very close relationship with her teachers: 

. . . not only were they my teachers, but they had been my mother's teachers. And 
usually, they lived in my same block. We used to visit each other, and it was 
closer than here. Here you only see the teacher in school. . . The principal was 

very nice I remember she was a very nice person. She loved me a lot. And 

she also used to visit my house, because she knew my mother and my father. I 
think it is a lot closer and a lot binding than in this country. 

Alex attended elementary and middle school in Cuba, went to high school up until 

the ninth grade and then came to the U.S. Alex has fond memories of his middle school 

experience in Cuba. He told me how he felt about his education in Cuba: “The curious 

thing about the teaching methods in Cuba, is that you have the same teacher through all 

the grades. The same teacher you have for second grade, you have for third, fourth, sixth 

until you get out.” In high school, Alex had the same situation although there were 

different teachers, but . .the teachers that taught history he taught seventh, eighth and 

ninth.” I asked Alex to describe a day at his school in Cuba. He started by describing a 

day at his middle school. 

A day, well, in middle school, well we started at 7:25 pretty much like here 
everybody gets in class. And then the teacher proceeds to introduce the class, 
good morning, like always, and the periods last for 45 minutes, approximately 
three periods and then a break for 5 minutes. Then three other periods and then 
that's basically it. We finish at 12:30, where we go to eat lunch. It's not like this 
school that we stop third period and we go to the cafeteria; it's just like that. First 
period to sixth period and we go eat. The classes are pretty much like here, a lot 
of work. The teacher explains the subject first, and then he assigns problems. 

In Cuba Alex dreamed of becoming a professional some day. He wanted to study 

engineering. Alex told me, however, that compared to Cuba, there were more career 

opportunities in the U.S.: “Here, I know that I can get whatever I want as long as I study. 

And there, even though I could study, I wouldn't get the same education that I would get 

here.” Alex said that he was still thinking about studying engineering, but he had yet to 




93 108 



decide in which field of engineering he would major. 



Mario attended “el pre” in Cuba. He liked school in Cuba, and he described “el 
pre” as a special high school for boys and girls, “. . .that was like a pre-university. . .” In 
Cuba, Mario liked geometry and history. Mario explains how he had to stay in school for 
two weeks and then go home to spend a weekend with his family. His schedule would 
rotate this way every fifteen days: 

The first days, I used to skip school everyday to go to my house, but after that I 
get accustomed and I like it. I really like it because we spend three years with the 
same people having all those activities and helping each other. . .Well, a day 

would be like we used to they used to wake us up at, I can't remember the 

time, it was 6:00 or 6:30, and then we went to the dining room to get the 
breakfast. After that we had like 1 0 minutes to go to the dormitories to brush our 
teeth or whatever, and then after that, we had this meeting in the center square 
where they used to give the news. And after that, we went to the classrooms. 

And at 12:00, we went to have lunch in the dining room again. And after that, we 
had like 30 minutes to rest or play basketball. And some days it was like Tuesday 
and Thursday, we had to go to work the land and then we came back at 5:00. 

After that, we get a shower and we have to study. We have to do that. We need 
to study or some people study and some people don't. And in the nights, the 
people went to the houses or people went to the school or went to a beer factory 
that was nearby to drink some beer and stuff like that. And on Thursday there 
was a dance like a disco, it was recreation. 

I asked Mario what he thought about the labor aspect of the educational system, 

when the students were asked to work in the fields. Mario said he did not feel it was 

useful to the country because many times when the students were supposed to be 

collecting tomatoes, they would instead be throwing tomatoes at each other. Mario 

commented on how he really felt about this form of land labor through the school system: 

I went there for fun. We really didn't like it to work the land, but once we had to 
go, we just tried to have fun, but the only thing that I didn't like is if you didn't get 
the permission to go home on the weekends, you had to stay at school because 
somebody watch you skipping from school or doing something wrong. On 
Sundays you had to go work on the land, and I didn't like that because they were 
making work like punishment. And I didn't agree with that. Because work is not a 
punishment. 



94 



109 



Despite the land labor program, Mario said he liked studying at “el pre” because 
he was able to spend all the time with the same people, and “helping each other and 
sharing everything from a cigarette to a piece of bread. That's what I liked.” Mario 
emphasized that the unity in Cuban schools seemed to add to the spirit of learning. He 
commented on his relationships with both police officers and teachers in Cuba. He said 

police officers are feared: “. . . the police well was your enemy. And the teacher . . . 

I mean there were some teachers that some of the guys would make jokes and everybody 
liked them, but there were teachers you just didn't like them.” 

Primarily all four NNS students agreed upon having positive memories of school 
in Cuba. In particular, they emphasized a feeling of unity among the students and shared 
interaction for learning. One of the recurring factors significant to these students was the 
bond they felt among their teachers and their peers. A possible cause of establishing a 
close bond with their teachers is that a few of the NNS students described how they had 
the same teachers for several years and, in some cases, for a variety of disciplines. Also, a 
possible cause of sharing a strong bond with their peers is that a few NNS students 
mentioned that even in the upper grades they stayed with the same class of students all 
day and a different teacher would rotate in their classroom after every subject taught. 

This was a very different scenario than the schools in Miami. All of them felt that in 
Cuba studies were more rigorous than in the U.S. For all of these NNS students the 
negative side of Cuba’s school seemed to be the difficulty in taking advantage of 
scholarship and advancement opportunities. Many of these opportunities required 
attending a state run boarding school, where the students were separated from their 
family, and working in sugar cane fields as part the educational process. 




95 



no 



4.11 School in the USA 



An essential structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is that 
the students view U.S. education as a road to future opportunities. 

The next two sections concentrate on the transcultural experiences in high school 
and community college. Throughout the sessions, the participants provided comparative 
information highlighting the differences between their experiences at Goleman High or 
Miami-Dade Community College, and their educational experiences in Cuba. In this 
section, the high school NNS students provided comparative information about their 
transcultural experiences at Goleman High. The Cuban-American students shared their 
experiences of high school in the U.S., which served as cultural context for analyzing the 
NNS students’ transcultural identities. 

Yessica said that schools in the U.S. are good if a student is in Honors classes or 
AP classes, but she had a different opinion about mainstream classes: “I think If you are 
in AP classes and Honors classes, I think they’re good. If you’re not in those classes, I 
don’t think you leam.” Besides Barbara Goleman High School, Yessica also attended 
Miami Lakes Middle school. In middle school she did not speak English, and all her 
friends were ESOL students participating in the ESOL program. In this sense, her 
interaction with students was different because in high school she interacted with more 
students who were not in ESOL classes. Yessica said that her friendships in middle 
school resembled her interaction with students in Cuba. Nevertheless, she likes high 
school more because she claims to have more freedom, and she is learning more. Also, 




96 



111 



she has more friends in high school, and she feels like a teenager now that she is in high 
school. Yessica’s favorite subjects at Goleman High are science and math, especially 
chemistry and algebra. Yessica hopes to become a dentist some day. 

Yessica reiterates that the interaction with teachers at Barbara Goleman is not as 

close as it was in Cuba. Students in Cuba would often interact with teachers outside of 

class, and in many cases the teacher was very close to the family. However, Yessica 

claimed that the student / teacher relationship in the U.S. can become a close friendship, 

Yessica does, however, clarify that in the U.S. students and teachers rarely interact 

outside of school. I asked Yessica to describe her interaction among teachers, police 

officers, counselors or other authority figures at Goleman High: 

Like I said before, it's a lot different than Cuba due to the distance 
between them. But here, overall, I think you can form a friendship with 
your teachers, like I have at times. Not only are they my teachers, but 
they're a person that I could talk to, that I could sit and talk to. It's not like 
we go out together or anything or we talk off the school grounds, but at 
least in school we talk . . . it's not like a teacher who stands and explains, 

but we talk. My counselors? My counselor is Mr. in school. 

I think he’s pretty good. But I only see him when I have a problem. 

When I have a schedule problem or I need something or night school or 
something. That's the only time that I see him. 

Alex shared with me his thoughts on being a student at Barbara Goleman. He 

described Barbara Goleman as being clean and organized. Since it is the only school he 
has attended in the U.S., he feels he would have to compare it to other schools to give his 
impressions of other schools. However, if other schools in the U.S. are like Barbara 
Goleman, “they are very good,” he said. Alex compared Goleman High to the high 
school he had attended in Cuba. An obvious difference is that Goleman High is bigger, 
with a bigger library, which he loves. In addition, Alex commented on differences 
between teachers he has had here, compared to his teachers in Cuba: 



97 



112 



The teachers here, I don't like to say this, but a lot of teachers teach because of the 
money. I'm not trying to offend anyone, but that's how it is. Some teachers teach, 
because they like teaching, because they like working with students. But in my 
country, teachers don't have the benefits that teachers in this country have, so they 
teach because they like to teach, because they like working with kids. For that 
reason, I think, I like it better in Cuba, but I'm not saying (pause). . the teaching 
methods here are very good. I've learned a lot. 

In addition, he alludes to the many possibilities he now has as a student here in 
the U.S. He even believes that his plans of specific engineering fields will probably 
change in the future, after high school. He said, “I haven't evaluated all the fields of 
engineering yet because I don't want to worry about that right now. I'm more focused on 
studying and preparing for university, but I think that, yes, in the future they will 
change.” 



Hermes believes that schools here in the U.S. have a lot of great courses that offer 

students the opportunity to advance if they choose to. Hermes had attended Miami Lakes 

Middle School before coming to Goleman High. He described some key differences 

between his middle school and high school experience: 

My experience tells me that middle school is more of an immature age. Children 

are more materialistic. They carry themselves sorry. They discriminate 

against other people because they are different. I expected it to be a lot stronger 
when I got to high school, but it was actually the opposite. People accepted other 
people for what they were. 

At Goleman High, Hermes is very interested in computers because he really likes 
technology. He plans to study computer programming in the future. He would like to go 
to college and major in business with a minor in computer sciences. Hermes expressed an 
interest in different areas of the school’s curriculum as well: “. . .And lately, I have also 
been getting into acting.” He also enjoys acting, singing, and dancing. When I asked him 



98 . 113 



if he believed his plans would change in the future, he responded, “No, I don't, because I 

already have my whole life set out for me. It's there and I really want it. And I'm 

there right behind it ready to achieve it.” 

Hermes said he has a lot of respect for teachers, counselors, and police officers. 

He has seen other students who don't have respect for the authority. For example, they 

call the police “the pigs”. This is how he responds to this lack of respect: 

We're not in the 70’s anymore. We're not supposed to revolt against them. 
They're here for our protection. Teachers, they're wonderful people. I 
have a lot of respect for them because it takes a lot to have guts to do what 
they do putting up with kids, nowadays, since they're different from 
before. Some kids are less respectful, but I would have to say that 
everybody here recognizes authority. 

When Hermes described his school experiences at Goleman High, one of the 

ideas he focused on is that people accept other people for they who they are. He also 

expresses pride in his involvement with theater and extra-curricular activities. In 

comparison to the two NNS high school students, Hermes said he has his “whole life set 

out already.” This is perhaps a reflection on the competitive U.S. society we live in 

because from the beginning Hermes has been taught in the school system that he must 

reach his goals in order to eventually get the job and lifestyle that he wants. Hermes 

describes a day at Goleman High as a rich experience with lots of student interaction: 

We usually come early. School starts at 8:25. It starts off, usually everybody's 
tired and cranky in the morning, but usually everybody starts getting happier 
around second period after the morning announcements. Third period, everybody 
is waiting for lunch, of course, as in typical high schools. Lunch. Everybody 
loves lunch, even though we are not allowed to leave the campus, everybody 
enjoys each other. We always get along, everybody has school spirit, and when 
we leave everybody's happy and can't wait to come tomorrow. 




I talked to Romeo about his educational outlook. Romeo said he would like to 



become a P.E. teacher because he likes learning about education. He likes interacting 

with his peers at Goleman High, and feels he has a good relationship with his teachers. 

However, he does not like the high school’s policy that does not allow students to leave 

campus for lunch. Ever since he was at Jose Marti Middle School, Romeo had been 

hoping to attend a high school where students were able to go out for lunch. As he 

remembers, “ . . .when we were in junior high school I thought I was going to go to a 

school that had an outdoor campus, you know, that we can go out to eat. That's what 

bothers me sometimes. . .” He adds to this sentiment, however, that “we must all make do 

of our present situation.” Romeo contrasts his middle school experience with his high 

school experience dramatically, almost as if he were a different person: 

Yeah. When I was in middle school, I was skinny. Everybody used to 
take away my money and stuff like that. That was middle school. And 
when I got here to high school, my bigger brother, after I left middle 
school, he was telling me that he was going to work me out. He was going 
to get me bigger and stronger. And I get more respect when I walk around 
high school and everybody knows me and I'm popular and stuff like that. 

At Goleman High, Romeo’s favorite subject is science, yet his least favorite 
subject is math. Like Hermes, he also believes his plans will not change after high school. 
“I don't think so. Because I have a scholarship in track. So, I would like to exceed that, 
and then when I'm done with the scholarship, I would like to become a P.E. teacher. So, I 
don't think it will change.” 

Since Romeo was an Affo-Cuban participant, I asked him how he felt about 
racism at Barbara Goleman High School and in Miami. He answered the question by 
stating that he identifies with being Affo-Cuban and not African-American. In regards to 




l«>115 



racism, he said “I really don't agree with it . . .most people look at me and they think I am 

Black American, you know. . . they look at me as a Black American and I'm a Cuban, 

you know.” I then asked Romeo what some of his thoughts were about racism within the 

Cuban community and how he defines being of Cuban descent: 

Question: Among Cuban friends do you feel there is racism? 

Romeo: I really don't know, honestly. Nobody has nobody has telling 

me you're black, I don't know. 

Question: How do you define being of Cuban descent, what does that 
mean to you? 

Romeo: Of being of Cuban descent? 

Question: Of being bom Cuban and raised in the U.S., but the idea of 
Cuban identity, what does that represent to you? 

Romeo: Being special because being Cuban, you know what I am saying I 
love, I love the attention that Cubans get first of all, you know what I am 
saying. And so, I like it, it's special. It's special. 

Like Hermes, Romeo’s concerns reflect many of the concerns that mainstream 
U.S. students are made aware of in the high school environment. For one, many of these 
issues about peer interaction and regulations for school lunch are issues commonly 
covered in a school newspaper or through the student government. Another significant 
point that Romeo introduces is the initiation phase he experienced from middle school to 
high school. This interaction phase was very similar to the NNS students’ experiences 
when they first attended school in the U.S. — their transcultural initiation. A universal 
structure among Cuban NNS students’ transcultural experiences and Cuban- American 
NESS students is the initiation and transformation encountered in school settings. These 
are phases that are possibly encountered by many U.S. high school students in their 
transition from middle school to high school, possibly associated with a reaction to gang 
or other forms of violent incidents in U.S. schools. For the NNS students, initiation and 




101II6 



transformation are encountered as a transcultural experience from the moment they enter 
the school. Finally, Romeo addresses the racial issue from an Afro-Cuban perspective. 
On one hand he recognizes and is proud of all dimensions of his heritage. Yet he 
expresses who he is within the Cuban cultural context. As he said, other students or 
teachers associate Romeo with being African-American, while he associates himself with 
being a Black Cuban- American. 

Like the participants, I also attended a public elementary, middle and high 
school in the U.S with the exception of the 9th and lCf h grade, where I attended a private- 
Catholic school. During my middle and high school years, I experienced many of the 
emotions the participants shared with me. I could certainly relate to both Yessica ’s and 
Alex ’s comments on encountering some mainstream classes where they felt they were not 
learning a lot. I had some classes like that, but as they also mentioned, I had some 
classes where I had excellent teachers from whom I learned a lot and felt a sense of 
friendship. 

I could also understand how Alex felt when he said that there were many 
opportunities in the U.S. beyond high school; however, when I was in high school I did 
not appreciate or value those opportunities like Alex does. Perhaps, it is because Alex did 
not have those same opportunities to be whatever he wanted to be in Cuba, so when he 
came to the U.S., he truly valued these opportunities. 

I could identify with Romeo and Hermes when they expressed a desire for wanting 
to complete a career after high school. As a young boy, growing up in Miami, my 
parents tried very hard to instill in me a drive to "go to school. ” I lost a lot of the 
motivation by the time I was in high school, but I can understand the sense of 




102 11? 



individualized competition that Romeo and Hermes were raised with in Miami. The 
Cuban NNS students feel this sense of individualized competition in school in Miami as 
compared to Cuba, where they were closer to the other students. A universal structure 
among Cuban NNS students ’ transcultural experiences and the Cuban-American 
students ’ experiences is the students 'perceived need to select a future career. What 
many in their generation and my grandparents ’ generation were quite passionate about 
was that their sons and daughters become successes. This was perhaps a result of their 
future dreams, which were interrupted due to their immigration to the U.S. 

I was very interested when Romeo shared with me his perspectives on color 
within Cuban culture. All of the NNS students interact with students from different 
cultural backgrounds in school. A universal structure among Cuban NNS students 
'transcultural experiences and the Cuban-American students ’ experiences is the exposure 
to a multicultural society in Miami. Romeo identifies with being Cuban. His perception of 
race and ethnicity seems to embrace color as part of a Hispanic culture. There are other 
dimensions of his reality, which shape his identity within a multicultural society, such as 
national heritage and language. Romeo emphasizes his Cuban heritage as one of the 
most influential parts of his identity and identifies with being a Black Cuban that has 
been raised in the U.S. He has also been influenced by his Cuban-American reality in 
Miami. I can relate to Romeo because being Cuban is part of who I am as well as 
everything else that makes up my transcultural experiences, life in South Florida, school 
in Miami. My family and friends, my loyalty to the U.S., my interaction with students from 
other countries, my social and political views, my belief in God, and interacting in two 



ERIC 




languages. 



Before becoming a full-time student at Miami-Dade Community College, Liz was 



a student at Miami High for one year. Liz told me that at Miami High she learned a lot. 
Her favorite subject at the community college is math. Her least favorite subject is 
humanities because she is not interested in studying art, which is one of the areas they 
cover in her humanities class. Liz has a job on campus, which requires a lot of interaction 
with faculty and students. She works in an office, where she helps students who need 
career and college information. She also answers the phones, makes copies, and sends 
and receives faxes. When I asked her how she felt about having to work on campus, she 
answered “Yes, I love it. I love it.” 

Liz really enjoys school in Miami. She feels, however, that the content was more 
difficult in Cuba: “Schools here are so easy, you know, you don't have to talk so much. . . 

" The only thing for me is the language. In Cuba, you have to study so much more; it is so 
like complicated. But here, for me it is so easy, I just have to learn English.” However, 
she believes “. . .the teachers they are really good. They used other methods to teach. 

You know, they are more organized.” 

Liz’s career plans have changed now that she is living in the U.S. During a career 
orientation class at Miami-Dade, she started thinking about becoming an elementary 
teacher because she loves kids. However, as she continued her studies at the community 
college, she started thinking she would like to become a nurse. She is especially thinking 
of working with newborns. 

Mario started at the community college when he came to the U.S., so he has been 
enrolled in the ESL program at MDCC, taking only English classes. Mario is interested in 
studying civil engineering to improve his lifestyle. Mario said he enjoys his reading and 



104 




grammar classes, but his least favorite subject is writing. He attends his college at night 

because he works during the day. Mario described an evening at Miami-Dade and 

emphasized that he enjoyed meeting people of different cultures. 

Well, I came from my job at 5:30. I got to be here. I just go to parking lot and 
park my car. I go to the building right where the classroom is located. . . I walk 
to the classes and try to talk to the people from other cultures. I love to do that 
when the class is all over. We go out of the classroom to talk about the subject or 
whatever. I get out of the school at 10 p.m. and I go to visit some friend or 
whatever. . . Miami you can talk to other people from other cultures. And there is 

no other place, places in the areas I used to go or work that makes, it's only 

here in the school that I can talk to the people from the Ukraine or Haiti or 
wherever. . . 

The community college as a place where Mario experiences meeting people of 
different culture is part of Mario’s transcultural experience. In Cuba, Mario was around 
other Cubans most of the time. Now, in Miami', Mario has the opportunity to interact with 
students from many other cultures. Perhaps these students offer Mario a way of 
understanding his own transcultural experiences since they are also going through a 
similar experience here in Miami. An underlying theme that accounts for the Cuban NNS 
students’ transcultural experiences is the opportunity to meet and interact at school with 
peers from other cultural backgrounds. 

I can relate to Mario ’s sense of excitement about meeting people from different 
countries at the community college. When I was a student at Miami-Dade Community 
College, I met many students from different countries. It was also the first time that I 
started meeting many students from Cuba, who had been raised in Cuba, yet were now 
living and studying in the United States. For me meeting a Cuban from the ‘‘Cuba of 
today” was certainly a transcultural experience. All of the Cubans I had been raised 
among had been in the U.S. since the 60 ’s, so all of my ideas had been formed by the 



ERIC 



105 



120 



Cuban exile population of Miami. This, of course, began to change as I met people in the 
community college who had studied in Cuba but now were revalidating their degrees in 
the U.S. Interacting with Cubans my own age who had lived in Cuba almost all their life 
gave me an opportunity to learn more about a culture I had always been a part of but 
knew only from the Miami perspective. At MDCC, I had the opportunity to spend time 
speaking Spanish around Cubans who had just recently arrived in the U.S. I quickly 
recognized their Spanish was a more fluent expression than mine was. This transcultural 
experience began to influence my cultural awareness of the place where I was born. 

Perhaps this kind of human, transcultural interaction, lets Mario know that other 
students are on the same transcultural journey. Thus, he recognizes in other students, that, 
like him, they are also undergoing changes that shape their transcultural identity. 

Liz feels that language is the primary barrier for her at MDCC. Despite the fact she 
insisted that school in Cuba was harder, and she was relating it to her high school 
experience before she came to the U.S., she expressed that she loves going to school in 
the U.S. To Liz her interactions with students and staff in the classroom and at her job are 
a significant dimension of her transcultural experiences. Perhaps it is the dynamics of 
interacting in a new community and speaking a new language that invites Liz to 
successfully progress in developing her ESL transcultural identity. 




106 

/ C& I 



4.12 Family Ties 

An essential structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is that 



the students contrast family life in Cuba and the U.S. 

Family is an integral part of the culture circle that emerged as a relevant theme 
from my sessions with the NNS students. An essential structure of Cuban NNS students’ 
transcultural identities is the change from more quality interaction with family to a busier 
lifestyle where interaction is less. The participants were enthusiastic about discussing 
their families, and they understand that their families play an important role in shaping 
their transcultural identities. For one, due to changes in work and school schedules, their 
interaction with their family changes. In some cases, the participants expressed that in the 
U.S. they spend less time interacting with their family because of time limitations. In 
other areas, the participants shared that their family represents a strong support system in 
the U.S. in order for them to undergo an easier transition from life in their native country 
to life in the U.S. Whether it is a positive experience or a negative one, the theme of 
family relations in their native country as well as in the U.S. emerges as a relevant factor 
in the participants’ transcultural experiences. 

In Cuba Yessica left behind her father’s side of the family— her grandfather, 
grandmother, aunt, uncle, and cousin. I asked Yessica to describe a family get together in 
Cuba. She began her elaborate description by stating that a family get-together was a 
“house event” in which she would visit her grandmother’s house or her grandmother 
visited her: 

Oh, that used to be a house event. That was very I remember my either I 

visited my grandmother’s house or my grandmother visited us. They used to 




iol22 i 

» 



come if there was a get-together, they used to get together from 1 0 o'clock in 

the morning to cook because everybody would cook together. It wasn't like they 
would come to eat, no. They would come with the things and they would all cook 
it in the house, which was going to be dined at. And they used to stay for time 
and time. And then all the little kids would go off to the streets and would play 
for the entire morning. And then when dinner was ready, we would come back, 
take a bath and then dine and then just spend the night in what is called sobre 
mesa, which is when in the same table where you ate you stayed for hours and 
hours just talking with a table completely full of food. Nobody would pick it up 
and we would just talk and talk and talk, which was a family encounter, which I 
love. 



Similarly Liz describes family reunions in Cuba as a time where all family 

members get together to celebrate. She mentions that music is an essential part of family 

reunions: “When there is a party when someone is, you know, celebrating something, 

they get-together and that's pretty good, I love that. With the music, and it's you know, 

it's great.” Liz believes there is a clear difference, however, between family reunions in 

Cuba and in the U.S. Liz already had some of her father’s cousins living in the U.S. She 

describes a family reunion in Miami, as an event for which there is limited time because 

everyone is so busy with work and school: 

Here? In Miami, you don't have that much time to get-together. You know like 
family. Like in Cuba, for me, it can be different. Sometimes, many people don't 
have time to go any place, they are working, they are busy. And you 
don't see that relationship in Cuba. 

Yessica already had family in the U.S. —her grandparents, aunt, and uncle, from her 
mother’s side of the family. Yessica also supports the idea that there is little time for 
family get-togethers in the Miami. She has noticed that her family does not have many of 
those compared to Cuba: 

We don't have many of those for some reason, it's this is a country 

where time plays such an important role that you usually don't have time 
for anything. For example, I know my parents only see each other when 
they go to bed and on weekends because my mother works in the 



108 



12a 



afternoon and my father works in the morning. So basically, they see each 

other for five minutes. And then when they come when they both 

come from work, I see them, because I'm usually always there, but I know 
that this country is a country that limits the social gathering, especially 
among family, because since they don't live together anymore. Because in 
Cuba you live a block away. Here one lives in Kendall, the other in Ft. 
Lauderdale, me in Miami. It's very distant for everything. You would 
have to get in the car, and it would take half an hour. We still get-together 
mostly on holidays, but it's not as it was in Cuba that we would get- 
together for the simple fact of getting together. It's not the same. 

When it comes to a sense of close family interaction, Yessica and Liz both had 
similar family experiences in Cuba. They expressed a particular feeling of closeness 
among their family members, which was evidenced at family reunions, parties, and 
sitting around the table talking after dinner. Liz and Yessica describe their family 
interactions in Cuba with a sense of timelessness, as if no one was in a hurry and there 
was plenty of time to spend with each other. This, of course, changed for both of them 
once they arrived in Miami. Instead, they were confronted with a very busy lifestyle, 
watching their family running in many different directions as their own schedule started 
moving faster and faster. Between the rush of school and work, Liz and Yessica both 
found they were spending less quality time with their family. 

I often hear that in Cuba, time seems to stand still. It is difficult for me to relate to 
this because I have lived in the U.S. almost all my life. However, I can identify with 
Yessica and Liz ’s perception of life in the U.S. as a fast-paced lifestyle that is very 
difficult to fit in time for meaningful, family interaction. Even though, in my childhood, I 
can remember the feeling of sitting around the dinner table, with my family, there 
certainly came a point, especially during my teenage years, that I felt I was moving at a 
non-stop pace. I can definitely relate to the anxiousness of young adulthood, especially 
being very busy with work and college schedules, and even later when I worked as a 



109 



124 



department chair and teacher at several overcrowded high schools. At times, the work 
was spinning so fast that it was difficult to slow down and focus. I worked with some 
colleagues that had worked as teachers in the Cuba of today, and they expressed that the 
pace was slower and it was easier to focus in Cuba. Listening to Liz and Yessica 
influenced my transcultural identity by improving my understanding of the lifestyle in 
Cuba. It allows me to consider some of the critical life changes these students experience 
when crossing the bridge from Cuba to the U.S. 

For Romeo and Hermes family interaction was very similar to what I experienced 
in Miami because, like me, they have lived here almost all, if not all, of their lives. They 
shared these experiences with me, and these experiences served as a different 
perspective — one that represents the Cuban- American experiences — from which to 
analyze the NNS students’ experiences. 

Romeo does have other family members who were bom in Cuba, everyone except 
his parents and brother. All of his family beyond his parents remain in Cuba to this day,' 
so his family get-togethers sometimes include his nuclear family and his girlfriend’s 
family: “ ... we meet up with my girlfriend's family, who are Colombian. And we have 
a lot of fun. There is a lot of dancing and chitchatting and it's everything going crazy 
there.” Romeo has another family member who was bom here in the U.S. and is married 
to a non-Cuban, American girl. He mentioned that he enjoys spending time with them: “ . 
. .one of their wives is an American girl, and she's funny. I think I went twice with them 
to see the Marlins play, and I had a great time . . .and that's it. We haven't gone out.” 

Many of Hermes’ family members were bom in Cuba; however, now they live in 
the U.S. He does have some distant cousins that recently came to the U.S., but he has not 




125 



no 



really gotten to know them. His parents and grandparents live in the U.S. Hermes said 

his family usually has a family get-together twice a month: 

Usually, we have a family get-together twice a month, there's usually a 
birthday, a holiday that we usually all come together. It's usually rotated 
from house-to-house. It might be at my house one week, my 
grandmother's house the next weekend, my Aunt's or Uncle's house the 
next weekend. It's usually the whole family gets together. It's a big 
portion of my family that come from Cuba. We always stick together. 

It is obvious that Hermes and Romeo do not feel the great sense of division that the other 

NNS students feel when they think of their family in Cuba. The NNS students are closer 

to their family in Cuba because part of their reality is still on the island. They experience 

a process of transition that encompasses both worlds at once, yet at the same time, is in 

the process of change that shape who they are, their transcultural identity. A universal 

structure among the Cuban NNS students ’ transcultural experiences and the Cuban- 

American NESS students ’ experiences is the potentiality for connection between family in 

Cuba and in Miami. 

As I listened to Romeo and Hermes describing their family interactions, it was, 
for me, like looking into a mirror about my own family interaction growing up in a 
Cuban family in Miami. Most importantly, I can connect to the idea that my parents and 
grandparents have been in the U.S. all along. Although I did have family in Cuba, it 
always felt as if they were distant family. Like Romeo and Hermes, my distant family in 
Cuba was not part of my reality. Sharing in the transcultural experiences of the 
participants has influenced my own transcultural identity because I no longer see the 
“ Cuba of today” experience as a distant reality. Instead, it is a reality that I am 




111 






126 



interested in continuing to learn about because I now share a connection with the Cuban 
NNS students ' reality. 



4.13 Friends Across the Ocean 

An essential structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is that 
the students explore friendship in Cuba and the U.S. 

This section focuses on friends at school in Cuba and the U.S. Friends emerged as 
a sub-topic during the sessions with the NNS participants. I decided his theme should be 
explored as a separate section from the section about school in Cuba and the U.S. because 
the participants contributed a large quantity of information focused on their interactions 
with friends at school. This is an important factor in the circle of culture. An essential 
structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural experiences in friendship is the feeling 
of closeness. 

Yessica told me that among her peers in Cuba it was popular to have large study 
groups, more than in this country. Students were accustomed to helping each other with 
assignments. She described a scene at her school in Cuba that portrays a cooperative 
learning method among friends: 

the teacher would stand up for like a half an hour. And the next like in math 

we wouldn’t ever work alone. We would work with a group; we would interact 
and do everything together, like if I don’t understand something you’ll explain it 
to me and if you don’t understand something I’ll explain it to you or something. 

Alex also illustrated how he felt when interacting with other students in Cuba. He 

described it as a nice and friendly feeling. Alex felt very comfortable with the students 




112 



— V*. 



127 



because he was in the same classroom with the same students all periods. He explained, 
“We were the same students. The same class we took history, math, Spanish, geography, 
biology, the same subjects and the same class, not like here with separate and we go to 
different classes. He commented that staying in the same class with students, . .brings a 
very comfortable situation when surrounded by students.” 

I asked Alex to describe a party or social event where friends get-together in 
Cuba. Alex described it as a place where people share their emotions. Alex said there is a 
lot of communication at a party. People share their experiences at a social gathering. 
Although he compares the Cuban scenario with a description of a party or social event 
where friends get-together here in Miami. He emphasized the similarities: “After school, 
my friends and I used to gather and dance, practice dancing La Rueda. I feel comfortable 
with those friends pretty much. Like in Cuba we keep the same, customs, and we share 
our experiences during the day and during class.” 

Mario’s experience among students in Cuba also emphasized this concept of 
togetherness. Mario spoke of his friends in schools as if they were his brothers. When he 
described his friendships I could tell that these were people he felt close to, perhaps even 
most of his life: 

If they were my classmates, I feel like if it were all brothers, because we 
sleep together, we went to the land together, we went to study together, we 
went to dance together, we went everywhere together. They were my 
brothers. And we still write each other. Probably with other people that 
they weren’t from my classroom, it was like “oh, you’re from another 
classroom and mine is the best,” . . . 

Liz’s response also supports this idea that in Cuba you build a feeling of unity 
with students at school because, as she says, “. . . since the first grade you go all the 
years, you know, first, second, and up to high school with the same people.” 

1 L 3 




This quality of feeling close to friends in school becomes an important factor in 
the NNS students’ transcultural experiences. Once they arrive in the U.S., they have 
already established a foundation for close interaction with other students because of their 
previous experiences in Cuba. Their background experience serves as a context for 
interacting with new friends in the U.S. I asked the NNS students to share these 
experiences of interacting with school friends in the U.S. 

Most of Yessica’s friends here in the U.S. are students who came from Cuba as 
teenagers, like she did. She does, however, have one friend who was bom in the U.S., but 
whose parents are Cuban. She described him as a wonderful person. Yessica said he’s a 
likable student, who is very smart, although at times he does not think like the students 
who are bom in Cuba: 

The difference is he’s less into the Cuban humor, that’s basically it. I don’t know 
why. For example, when we make a joke or something, he usually doesn’t get it, 

because and it’s quite obvious why, because we grew in a place where 

Cuban is a person, who is energetic, who is always laughing, always making 
jokes. Humor is a very important thing in our life. We grew among that. We 
grew within that environment, the environment of fun. But he didn’t. And usually 
we’re making continuous jokes or something, and he usually steps out a little bit, 
because at times, I think he can’t keep up, but then I think he can, because he 
does. But you can tell how he struggles, because he doesn’t really at times 
understand or he can come up with the jokes. I don’t know, I see him with a less - 
— the humor that we have is not as abundant in him. And that’s a big difference. 



Yessica highlights some of the differences among her relationships with the students at 
Goleman High School compared to the students in Cuba. It seems to her that in a school 
as large as Goleman, she connects herself to smaller groups within classes instead of 
connecting to the entire class: 

In this school, in my classes at least, there is a little group. Among the classes, in 
the entire classes, within the class there’s a little group a little group of your 
friends, and basically, that’s all you interact. And you don’t really get much out 



114 



129 



of it, and that wasn’t like that in Cuba. In Cuba, it was the entire classroom. . . in 
this country, it’s the little group of friends and from there you interact. It’s only 
your little friends; it’s not the entire class. 



I asked Yessica if she believes she would change if most of her friends were 

students who had lived in the U.S. all of their lives. She described why it would change 

her because it would give her more “American” qualities: 

That would change me greatly, because I would acquire most, not most, but I 
would acquire American qualities. Disregarding the influence of my parents and 
my family, which is always going to be Cuban, Cuban descent, I think that 
because I am influenced so much by my friends, because they are the people that I 
see continuous and daily, I think I will change, because I would acquire their 
interests, because they are the persons who I go out with. They’re the persons who 
I talk to who I share ideas with and sooner or later you’re going to be influenced 
by those ideas or you’re going to influence them. But I think if it’s a majority, 
you’re going to be influenced. And maybe at least that’s why I haven’t changed 
so much by my Cuban ways, because most of my friends are Cuban. I don’t 
really have many American, that have persons that have lived in the U.S. for a 
long time as very close friends. 

Alex agrees with Yessica’ s statement about Cuban sense of humor. He comments 

that even though Cubans on the island “. . .are oppressed and they are controlled, they 

keep this sense of humor, which like it drives them away from their problems and lets 

them live within that dictatorship that they have in Cuba.” Alex also has friends who are 

Cuban bom in the U.S. His best friend is Cuban- American, and she was bom here. Alex 

said the major difference between him and her is that he she speaks English very well. 

According to Alex, their personalities are alike, however. Alex describes her as one of the 

people who helped him to adjust to the U.S.: 

She’s very humoristic, peaceful, and helpful when I need her. And she’s kind of 
like a counselor for me, because she has helped me here. When I arrived, I didn’t 
know anything about this country. She was the one who taught me and 
introduced me to this country. 




115 



130 



I asked Alex if they ever exchange ideas about his childhood in Cuba and her 

childhood here in Miami. He said they often do. He has learned that in Cuba there was a 

safer feeling for children as compared to the U.S. As a young boy in Cuba, he was able to 

safely visit friends on his own, while in the U.S. her parents were fearful of the high 

crime rate in Miami. They talk about their childhood sense of freedom, how he was able 

to “visit any friend without the fear that someone is going to steal us or anything like that, 

which she wasn’t able to do here when she was little.” 

Some of them, they keep that tradition. They say, “No. I’m Cuban.” But others 
are like, “No, I am American, because I was bom here.” But their parents were 
Cuban and they don’t, you know, they don’t care like their parents aren’t Cuban. 
“No. I’m American because I was bom here”. And in reality their parents are 
Cuban and they don’t feel like they are from there. 



Mario emphasizes that one of the most important aspects oh his interactions with 
other students at the community college are that he is interested in learning about their 
background: “I feel interested in knowing, what is their past, where they come from . . . 
and interested in their culture.” Although Mario does have friends in college, he 
considers them “friends from college” because he does not have the same bond with them 
as closer friends. He does, however, know about twenty people at the college who have 
attended school with Mario in Cuba. In this sense, he feels he has a lot of friends at the 
college. I asked Mario to describe his impression of a Cuban- American student here in 
the United States, a person who was bom here, but whose parents are Cuban: 

Question: What’s the difference? 

Mario: They what I see the most is the gangs. When we were in 

Cuba we just tried to, “hay there’s that girl,” let’s try to date that girl or 
something. And here when you go to some club and you see the gangs 



116 



- k 



131 



trying to pressure. That’s nonsense the war we are fighting each other or 
having guns and stuff like that and try to get some girl to have fun and go 
out. That’s it. That’s how we were in Cuba. 

Mario, Alex, and Yessica all emphasize the argument that in Cuban schools 
interaction among friends is close, emphasizing a feeling of trust and lightheartedness 
among their peers. An underlying theme that accounts for the Cuban NNS students’ 
transcultural experiences is a sense of humor and innocent-like quality among other 
Cuban NNS peers. Humor seems to be a characteristic that defines interaction among 
youth in the anecdotes shared by the NNS participants. In particular, when Mario 
compares the interaction among friends in Cuba and friends in the U.S., he clarifies that 
in Cuba peers were more interested in hanging-out with girls and just having innocent 
fun, always humorous joking being part of the activity. Here in the U.S., however, he 
emphasizes that fun for many teenagers means being a part of a gang or using drugs. 
Mario said it is much more common to see young people exposed to these types of social 
problems here in the U.S. than in Cuba. 

Alex shared his thoughts about his transcultural experience of coming in contact 
with a Cuban- American girl in Miami, who became his friend and mentor. This was a 
wonderful experience for him as he gained a better understanding of her childhood in 
Miami. By develop a close relationship with her, this experience broadened his 
perspectives of a reality different from his own. In this sense, Alex’s experience 
represents the quintessential transcultural experience since it shapes his development as a 
person. His relationship with this Cuban- American student enriches his understanding of 
the Cuban- American reality, allowing him to further define his transcultural identity. 




117 



■ V. 



132 



Yessica shares a similar experience to bringing in a Cuban- American student into 
her circle of friends, who are primarily NNS students. Remarkably, she defines the 
difference between the group of Cuban NNS students and the Cuban- American student as 
possessing a more serious nature, while the Cuban NNS students are more open and less 
reserved about laughing, joking, and having a good time as a way of life. She mentions 
that sometimes, she senses the humor is too much for the Cuban American student. 
Perhaps, the Cuban- American student feels uncomfortable because he notices a 
difference in the interaction among the Cuban NNS students and his other more 
“Americanized” friends. 

As a teacher of both ESOL and mainstream students, I have also observed in my 
Cuban NNS students closer interactions as compared to the Cuba-American NESS 
students. I remember, as a teenager, sensing a difference between my grandparents ’ 
generation and my own in terms of this Cuban sense of humor that the participants have 
touched upon during the sessions. My grandparents always seemed to be able to solve 
life ’s problems with a sense of humor, and laugher was a common thread around my 
grandparents ' house. Although I also sensed this sense of humor among my friends, who 
were Cuban-American, there was a clear difference that we had more cynicism in our 
ways of interacting and were less interested in just enjoying our own company and 
innocently having a good time. I can especially relate this to my own transcultural 
experience when I became an ESOL teacher for Miami-Dade County Public schools. 
There I sensed the same sense of humor and light-hearted manner that I had as a child 
witnessed in my grandparents ' generations, but now I was witnessing it in the interaction 
among my Cuban ESOL students as well. 



ERIC 



118 




I have learned a lot about myself as a human being as I interact with a culture 
that was once closed off to me, but is now reawakened in who I am. What have I learned? 
For one, I have seen in myself a desire to connect with my students ’ educational needs. 
Thus, I have been able to become a better teacher for them. I have recognized that for me 
to know what my students need, I must look inside myself and connect myself to their 
ESOL transcultural identity. I must ask myself ‘‘Who are they in relation to where they 
have come from, were they are, and where they are going, all within the context of the 
ESL culture circle? This is the essence of the transcultural experience that changes us 
forever. 

Romeo and Hermes have different perspectives than the Cuban NNS students 
about interaction with students at Goleman High, yet there is a common ground for both 
groups. The sessions with Romeo and Hermes offer a wonderful context of mainstream 
student interaction at Goleman High from the perspectives of Cuban- American students. 
In Romeo’s case he does not have close friends who recently came from Cuba because he 
feels he has not had the opportunity to make friends who have recently come from Cuba. 
Hermes has, however, had the opportunity in some of his Spanish Literature to come in 
contact with students who have recently arrived from Cuba or have been here for several 
years, but would be considered NNS students. His interaction with Cuban NNS students 
has sparked in him a curiosity about the difference between Cuban- American culture and 
the world they left behind in Cuba. 

Romeo does not have friends at Goleman High who recently left Cuba. He does, 
however, have a friend who is Cuban, but raised here in the U.S. like himself. Romeo 
described his friend and their relationship: “He’s cool. He’s Cuban too, you know. He’s 




119 



134 



well, he’s my twin. He is the same thing like me. We are always going out. . . .we 

are always doing jokes. We are always hanging out.” Although Romeo has not had the 
opportunity to become close friends with someone who recently came from Cuba, he says 
he has observed some differences among students, like himself, who were bom or raised 
in the U.S. versus students who were bom and raised in Cuba. Romeo described the 
differences between someone like himself, who was raised here in the U.S. and a student 
who was bom and raised in Cuba: 

The main difference is their way of acting, you know what I’m saying, 
because since me I’ve been here for a long time, and every year there’s — 
-there’s something special that goes on in school. And they come here for 
a certain time and we have, for example, a prom. And they haven’t gone 
to a prom. . . And I know how to act at a prom, but they don’t know how 

to act at a prom. And that’s the that’s the main cool thing about it. 

You know what I’m saying? And not only that, at a pep rally, too. You 
know what I’m saying. They don’t know how to act at a pep rally. You 
know. They think since they are so locked down, you know, they think 
they have a certain way of having fun, but everybody else knows that. We 
can do this and that because we have been here for a longer period of time. 
That’s it. 



Unlike Romeo, Hermes has friends at Goleman High who arrived from Cuba in 

the past five years. He describes his experience with getting to know them at school: 

“A few of my friends who just came very recently, and I’ve gotten very close with them, 

and they talk a lot about Cuba, and I’ve learned a lot from them.” Hermes also has friends 

at Goleman High, such as his best friend, whose mother is Cuban and father is Italian. 

Hermes described his relationship with her: 

My best friend’s, her mother’s Cuban, and her father’s Italian. We get along very 
well. At first, we started dating, but then I found out that she has a child, and I 
told her I wasn’t comfortable with that, so it ended up that we became best 
friends, and we’ve gotten along very well. We’re inseparable. Usually, when she 
has boyfriends, she has to tell them that, you know, I have a best friend and it’s a 




120 



- V 



135 



male. She’s like my sister to me. I can tell her anything, and she can tell me 

anything. We get along very well. 

Both Hermes and Romeo introduced interesting dimensions to the Cuban NNS 
students’ versus the Cub an- American NESS students’ differences. Romeo mentioned an 
interesting point that supports the ESL transcultural identity process as a transition 
process manifested in NNS students’ cultural behavior when they first arrive in the U.S. 
(i.e., are not quite sure how to act in school functions, such as proms and pep rallies). 
Furthermore, Hermes focused on his interaction with the Cuban NNS students as a 
learning experience. This is the reciprocal nature of the transcultural process, where the 
NNS students’ peers also re-evaluate their interpretation of native Cuban culture. In this 
sense, by interacting with the Cuban NNS students, the Cuban- American students also 
experience the transcultural process through their curiosity about the NNS students’ 
reality. A universal structure among the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural experiences 
and the Cuban- American students’ transcultural experiences is the process of learning 
about each other’s culture. 

I have been thinking about my interaction among NNS students in middle school 
and high school. This time period was the mid to late 1970’s and 1980, which was the 
year of the Mariel Exodus. Before Mariel, of course, it was very difficult to interact with 
Cuban NNS students who had just recently left Cuba because there were very few who 
left Cuba throughout the 1970’s. Thus, I really did not know any students who were 
approximately my age and had just recently left Cuba. Like Hermes and Romeo, many of 
my Cuban friends back then were either born in the U.S. or, like me, born in Cuba and 
had lived here all of their lives. My meaningful interaction with Cuban from the island 
culture came in the mid to late 1980’s at the university and then in the 1990’s as a middle 
school and high school teacher. During this time, I not only started interacting with 




121 

- 136 



colleagues that had recently left Cuba and shared with me their experiences of living 
under a communist government. Years ago some had been convinced it was the way, yet 
now, as I listened to them, they seemed to be convinced that the government 's repression 
was a violation of free speech as a basic human right. Here, I could think of the NNS 
participants I interviewed and could understand their balance of on one hand, loving 
their native country, and even missing the people they shared real human bonds with, 
apart from politics, yet hoping in different possibilities for Cuba 's government. My 
contextual framework for analyzing the Cuban experience broadened, and I began to 
recognize my own transcultural experience as integral to my transcultural identity. It was 
not until I began to close on my own cultural circle that I began to gain a deeper, more 
meaningful perspective of my own transcultural identity. For me this gave me a better 
understanding of my students 'past, present, and future vision. 

4.14 Socio-political Visions 

An essential structure of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities is that 
the students focus on freedom of speech. 

As part of a qualitative study, I do not believe that I can isolate one dimension of 
human beings’ lives without considering its integral part to the whole cultural circle. 

Thus, when discussing the emergence of political issues as central to the NNS students’ 
transcultural experience it is significant to note that politics are, in essence, integral and 
inseparable to the transcultural circle and to Cuban society as a whole. In this section, I 
will discuss the sociopolitical topics that emerged from the session with the Cuban NNS 




122 



137 



students and the Cuban- American students. An essential structure of Cuban NNS 
students’ transcultural identities is the issue of freedom of speech. The themes that 
emerge as significant to the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural experiences are the issues 
of freedom of speech in Cuba, freedom of speech in American classrooms, the role of the 
teenager in the U.S., visions of Cuba for the future, and visions of Miami in the future. 
This became a central issue that held their attention for elaboration and discussion. This 
section also incorporates the participants’ future visions of life in Cuba and life in Miami. 

As I interviewed the students, I quickly realized that the topic of Cuba, even 
simply asking the students to describe Cuba, invited political commentary from some of 
them. The topics of Cuba and politics are, it appears, inseparable to the participants 
since these students and their families see politics as one of the central reasons why they 
have left Cuba. This reality is true for earlier immigrant generations, such as Hermes ’ 
parents in the 60 's and Romeo’s parents in the 80 ’s. I find it difficult to discuss the topic 
of Cuba without attempting to explore political dimensions central to my own 
transcultural experiences of why my parents brought me to the U.S. Like the students, 
politics are at the heart of my family ’s immigration from the island. I see the topic of 
Cuban politics as a metaphorical device for continuously redefining my own 
transcultural experience, as well as better understanding my students ’ transcultural 
identity. 

Romeo told me he really did not have too many friends who had recently arrived 
from Cuba. When I asked him the question “Do you feel there is freedom in Cuba?” he 
answered, “No.” I was interested in knowing why he felt that way if he really had not 
talked to students who had lived and studied in Cuba. He responded that he believed there 




> 2 ? 138 



was no freedom in Cuba. I asked him, “Why not?” to get an idea of his perspectives on 

the issue. He answered, “Because Fidel Castro, all this stuff going on with Fidel Castro 

and the United States. It's it's dictatorship, you know, and no freedom there at all.” 

Romeo, who has lived in the U.S. most of his life, agreed that the U.S. is a 

country where students’ opinions should be respected. However, he explores another 

side to this complex issue of freedom — “Do students have a right to exploit “freedom” 

despite their effect on others?” Romeo commented on this topic of freedom from the 

perspective of other students’ rights: 

Questions: In the U.S., many people agree that students should have the 
right to freely express their ideas, like in class, what do you think about 
this? 

Romeo: I really don't know, because it depends if if a student 

expresses his feelings in the wrong way, it might hurt somebody, you 
know what I am saying, it probably wouldn't be a good idea, you know, 
but instead of that, I guess there is no problem with that. 



Nevertheless, Romeo expressed a desire to live in Cuba someday if there were 

political changes, as opposed to just visiting Cuba. I asked him about his future vision of 

life in Miami and in Cuba, and then asked him where he would prefer to live: 

Question: Would you like to live in Miami then, or if you had the • 
opportunity to go back to a free and democratic Cuba, would you go back? 
Romeo: Yes. I would go back. 

Question: Would you like to live there or just visit? 

Romeo: No. I would like to live there and I wouldn't even hesitate. 
Question: Why? 

Romeo: Because like I said before that's, that's where I was bom at. I 
would like to live where I was bom at, you know. I would like to, to 

experience what, what my fathers and my and I mean what my 

father and my mom had been through. I would like to see where they — 
what high school they went through, you know. I want to be there. I 
would love to see that! 



ERIC 



139 



Romeo describes the ways he feels about the future of Cuba with enthusiasm. 
First, he says he hopes Fidel Castro would no longer be the president of Cuba: “I want — 
— I would love for Fidel to leave already.” Romeo’s dream is to go to Cuba, where he 
said, “And we can help, we can all go there and help each other out. You know, help 
each individual family out for it can look like a beautiful, a beautiful place.” 

Hermes, who was bom and raised in the U.S., synchronizes the idea of being 
Cuban and American. He defines what it means to him to be Cuban and what it means to 
him to be American: 

Question: How do you define being an American? 

Hermes: I think it's great being an American. A few weeks ago, I was 
thinking in Spanish class some kids were talking about how things in Cuba 
were different. It was sad that I couldn't enjoy their heritage or my 
heritage like the way they did, but I thought it over and I'm pretty proud to 
be an American citizen, an American. 

Question: How do you define being of Cuban descent? 

Hermes: I would have to say it's kind of sad that you're not considered 
Cuban and you're not considered American, you're thrown in the middle, 
but you have the American culture and you also have the Cuban culture, 
so you have double of what everybody else has. 

Hermes expressed that there are differences among Cubans bom and raised in the 

U.S. and Cuban NNS students. He focused on the difference of lifestyle and the fact that 

many Cuban-American students have had a lot of materialistic comforts all their lives, as 

opposed to the Cuban students, who did not have a lot of these “creature comforts.” 

Question: Do you believe there's a difference or how do you describe the 
difference between a Cuban-American student bom here, and some of the 
people that you know who were raised in Cuba and recently left, and are 
now here as students? 

Hermes: I would say that there is because the Cuban-American students 
have had their whole lives and they don't understand what it is to suffer in 
Cuba, and the Cuban students know what they have gone through, and 
they’ve lived in Cuba. And for here, this is like a heaven for them, because 
they have all these things over here that they have never had before. 




125 






140 



Hermes has a more distant view of Cuba, although he does feel he would like to 



visit someday: He hopes that Cuba will be rebuilt someday, and he points out that this 



might require the help of other countries: . .maybe to go back to what it was, and I 

heard it was a very popular country, very beautiful, maybe restoration of some kind for 
Cuba.” Nevertheless, Hermes would like to spend the rest of his life in the U.S.: 



Question: Would you like to spend the rest of your life in the U.S., or 
would you like to live in another country? 

Hermes: I would prefer to live in the U.S. the rest of my life because it's a 

very because of the freedom here and the liberty to do whatever we 

feel. If I want to move to California, I could if I wanted, if I wanted to 

move to New York I could. And it's very it has a variety of ranges of 

where I could live if I wanted to live in the metropolis, If I wanted to live 
in a little town, I could. So, there is a wide variety of places I could live 
here. 



During the sessions with Romeo and Hermes I thought a lot about the question of 
whether I would ever return to Cuba to visit or live for an extended period of time. It is a 
difficult question, except to say that I would love to visit where I was born someday, and 
in a sense, I guess I am revisiting my own cultural roots as part of the process of this 
research paper. I honestly believe that I am very similar to Hermes and Romeo in the 
sense that I have lived as they have lived. I have always had a strong sense of knowing 
what being Cuban is all about, growing up in South Florida in the midst of the Cuban 
Exodus. Yes, I would like to visit Cuba if the present government ever changed. I do not 
the Cuban government as I trust the democratic system in the U.S., and like, Romeo and 
Hermes, I believe that the Cuban people are repressed in terms of freedom of speech. I 
also recognize that in the U.S. we have our share of problems, prejudices, abuses, crimes, 
and drugs, but above it all is the seed of democracy, and I believe that for all human 



126 




beings, regardless of color, gender, handicap, or sexual orientation, the seed continues to 
grow. My hope is that one day Cuba will experience the same democracy. 

Romeo and Hermes offer a reference point for better understanding the 
transcultural experience of knowing that even though they have lived in this country 
almost all their lives, like all Americans, they have a cultural heritage that can be traced 
to other generations. For them, in particular, their cultural heritage is influenced by life 
for Cuban- Americans, in Miami, which has preserved many of the cultural characteristics 
of Cuban heritage in exile. Both of them have expressed an interest in their cultural 
heritage in various ways beyond their connection and influence of their families. Romeo 
is interested in living in Cuba some day, should Cuba become a democratic society. His 
reasoning for this is to get in touch with his cultural heritage. Hermes explained that he 
only wants to visit Cuba, and of course, only if it is a democratic society. Hoping that 
Cuba changes from its present government to a democratic society like the United States, 
is important to the Cuban NNS students and the Cuban- American NESS students. A 
universal structure among the Cuban NNS students transcultural experiences and the 
Cuban- American NESS students experiences is a hope for a future Cuba that embraces 
free-speech and democracy. . .Another interesting aspect raised by Hermes was how he 
defines being a Cuban- American within sociopolitical context. He has embraced the idea 
of his Cuban culture within the framework of American democratic philosophy. This is 
very important to Hermes because having freedom of speech is part of defining who he is 
as a person. 

Alex has not returned to Cuba, even to visit, since moving to the U.S. Alex is 
clear about the idea that him and his family have come to the U.S. for freedom. When I 



ERIC 



127 




asked him the question, “Do you feel there is freedom in Cuba?” his response was a 
quiet, sincere, “No, sir, I don't.” Alex described how in Cuba people are not allowed to 
express their opinions: “There’s limitations and there's regulations that you have to 
follow, and you can't say nothing that might be interpreted as criticizing the government 
and anything like that.” Then when I asked Alex if he believes there is freedom in the 
U.S., he answered, “Yes, I do totally . . .Because you can expose your decision before 
events and before decisions you can express your ideas without the fear that someone is 
going to tell you, no you can't say that.” 

Alex shared with me his opinion on American classrooms, where students are 
encouraged to express their ideas in the classroom freely. Alex said he totally agrees with 
this educational philosophy because “. . .students are the ones that could propose ideas 
that could benefit them, dealing with education and teaching.” I asked Alex what he 
thought about teachers or students who publicly question and criticize the president, even 
the government, Alex said, “Well, I think that's part of the freedom of speech. I think 
there's nothing wrong with that.” 

Alex describes being a teenager within a Cuban-American community in the U.S. 
Alex says, “Teenagers here, as part of this Cuban-American community, relates to his 
classmates, shares his views of life, and all that's based on my personal experience.” I 
asked Alex to describe some of the ways teenagers feel about religion in Cuba. He 
described that since Castro had banned religion in Cuba, it’s been eliminated from the 
Cuban people’s customs: “Most teenagers refuse to attend churches, and they don't think 
that there's a God, and that there's a greater being.” Then I asked him how feels about 




128 



143 



ERjt 



religion or has it changed since he has been living in the U.S. Alex answered that his 

views have not changed, although he does believe in a higher power: 

No, it hasn’t changed. Actually, I don't attend any churches or visit any churches. 

I am not religious, but I know there has to be something greater than us. We're 
not the only beings in the universe, there has to be something else. And I 
personally believe that if there's a God, I could reach him by myself. I don't think 
it has to be through any church, or any priest, or anyone. 

Then I asked him how he envisions Miami in the future, and he responded that the 
Miami of tomorrow depends on what happens in Cuba. “Why?” I asked him. Alex 
believes that if the situation in Cuba improves, most of the Cubans who live in Miami 
would go back to Cuba: “There's going to be an all-American population again if that 
happens.” Alex thinks that most of the Cubans who came to the U.S. when they were 
younger, would want to go back, . . . “The ones I know, at least the ones I know, they 
want to go back if the situation improves.” 

Alex described his vision of Cuba in the future, although he has decided to live in 
the U.S. and visit Cuba someday: 

If President Castro is not if the country doesn't get a democracy, it doesn't practice 

democracy, it is going to be the same as it is now. . . I would like to go back to Cuba 
some day, but only for visiting reasons. I don't want to live my life there. . .I’d have to 
evaluate how well life in Cuba is going to be. 

Like Alex, Yessica does not feel there is freedom in Cuba. Her reasons also 

mirror that the . .government restricts you too much.” She not only feels that the 

government restricts you on what you say and do, but also what to think. She contrasts 

her views of freedom, which differ between Cuba and the U.S.: 

Not only does he restrict you on what to say and what to do, but what to 
think. He restricts your way of thinking to the point that most of them are 
communist, most of them have turned communist, not because they want 
to, but because it's the most convenient thing. It's the most convenient to 
live good, you know, to give your family what they need. I don't think 
that you're able to express yourself, what you really believe, in Cuba ... I 
feel freedom in the U.S., because you are able to say what you believe and 

129 



144 



do what you wish even if you pay the consequences afterwards. And I 
like the U.S. because of that, because they allow you to do something, you 
just have to pay the consequences. But you're free to do what you 
want and then you do it and then you pay. 

I asked Yessica to define the word freedom: “What does the word ‘freedom’ 
mean to you?” 



When I say freedom, basically, I mean freedom to me is freedom of 
expression and freedom of action because I associate a human being with 
a person who can decide for himself, a person who can make his or her 
own decisions. Actions and freedom means to me to be able to do what I 
think is right and what I believe. 

Yessica supports the idea of freedom of speech in the classroom and views U.S. 

classrooms as an example of that type of freedom: 

Question: In the U.S. many people agree that students should have the 
right to freely express their ideas? What do you think about this? 

Yessica: I think it is completely and entirely right. Because not only 
because we are students, but we are free because the United States is a free 
country, and we must have freedom of expression. And I completely 
agree with that. Not only must you be allowed to freely express your 
feelings by hand and by writing but also by word because if you feel 
something you say it. You pay the consequences, but you say it. 

Question: In the U.S. some students and teachers publicly question and 
criticize the government, even the President. What do you think about 
this? 

Yessica: I agree with it to some extent. I agree with you expressing your 
own beliefs, but I think that if you're in a class with students, students, 
who leam so much not only what they teach, but what they see, I don't 
think you should be that rebellious because you might teach the student 
that this is right, and it's not right. Its right to express your opinions, but it 
is not right to form a revolt or criticize everything. It's okay to express 
your feelings, but it's not okay to teach to all the students, because the 
students, especially the children, and I'm a children, I truly believe so, we 
try to imitate everything, and we see this all the time. Soon enough, we're 
going to start doing it all the time. So basically, I agree with expressing 
all you can see, but I don't know if I would agree with the continuous 
criticizing of the government to the point of students making fun of other 
students. 



O 

ERIC 



130 



k 



145 



Yessica does not believe that students in Cuba have the same rights to express 

their feelings as students here in the U.S.: 

Question: Do you feel the students in Cuba have the same rights to express their 
feelings freely? 

Yessica: No. Because in Cuba most of the teachers not most of them, but an 

amount, a great amount of teachers are communist. At the beginning of the 
school year if they see that you're not with the government they hate you 
completely and they hate you automatically. And they try to sink you so much 
because — — and when they see that you're smart and you're not with the 
government they detest you and they always try to sink you. And there's a big — 
- Cuba in the school, it's a little bit like a prison and all you do is study, but you 
have to study what they tell you. You can't even pick your own career. That's the 
career that comes and they don't let you pick. Everything is so regulated and in 
classes you can't say what you think because you have to say what is allowed. 
You can't ever say what you think. 

I asked Yessica to share her thoughts on religion. She expressed that many years 
ago in Cuba, Fidel Castro eliminated religion. Yessica, likewise, alluded to the “red 
handkerchief’ that separated students from the religious world: 



I never grew into a religion ever. In fact, in my school if they saw me go 
in, because we had una panoleta (scarf) you couldn't go in with that into a 

church, because that would mean you were in Cuba you were un 

pionero, which was like a student . . . And you would have una panoleta, 
you couldn't go like that into a church. If you went like that that would 
mean that you are not a pioneer anymore. You're like a traitor. So, they 
sort of like established that church and school are like completely against 
each other. Of course, the students reject church and that's why I don’t 

think most of my friends which I have here which have grew up 

in Cuba with the same time (tape finished side one) So, that's why 

basically not many students of our age that have come from Cuba share 
religion, because basically, it was prohibited during the time that we grew. 

And usually the time something that you don't grow with is something 

that you don't really get to love ever, and you don't get to really feel. And 

that's why most of us, we don't really we're not inclined towards 

religion . . .1 consider myself who believes in God, but not a person who 
believes in religion. 

Yessica explained her perceptions on the ways teenagers in Miami feel about sex. 

Her impression is that do teenagers view as a priority. This bothers Yessica. Yessica 



131 



146 



considers herself the type of person . . who likes to live a stage, and I'm very for living 
the stage in life that you are entitled to do so. For example, if you're a teenager, you live 
the stage as a teenager. And if you're a child, you live the stage of a child.” Yessica 
believes that many teenagers in this country “do not live their stage” because while they 
are teenagers, they no longer want to be a teenager; instead they are too quick to want to 
move on to another stage: 

They want to be a woman. And then they want to get married and have a 
child, and then they don't want it anymore. Once they have it, they don't 
want it. And I just don't understand why they have to rush into life so 
much. Why don't they just can’t wait? And I do feel that sex in this 
country is a priority. And in the surroundings which I live, I think that it is 
a priority. But not just a priority, but it's incredible. They don't even 
know anybody. You meet a guy, you met him for two days. “ I 
know him already. It's time.” And I just don't understand how that could 
be, how you could do something, which in my opinion is so sacred with 
just anybody. 

Yessica expressed that there are similarities between Cubans in Cuba and Cubans in the 
U.S. Yessica sees some similarity among the way parents raise their children, such as 
“They raised their kids as if they lived in Cuba.” Yessica had the opportunity to visit her 
extended family in Cuba last year. I asked Yessica to share with me her impressions of 
her visit last year: 

Question: What was your impression when you went back last year? 

How did you feel when you first got there? 

Yessica: It was very different in those four years that I hadn't gone to 
Cuba, it changed dramatically. It went from bad, really bad, to worse, 
really, really worse! You see the little kids begging for a dollar in the 
airport. You see them all trying to carry your bags in order for you to give 
them fifty cents. It's incredible what he has done to the country. It's 
incredible to see how many families long to see the ones here, because 
they have separated. It's really sad. 

Yessica describes her vision of Cuba in the future by stating first, that “Hopefully 




132 147 



communism will end.” However, she emphasizes that it is difficult for her to believe it 
anymore because she . .believed it for so long and it hasn't happened, that I don't know 
if I believe communism will end.” She believes that by the time communism does end, 
“Cuba is going to be a catastrophe, complete chaos. . .it's going to take a couple of years 
to settle.” Yessica declares that she doesn’t see “. . .a future for Cuba, not at this point.” 

I asked Yessica if she would like to spend the rest of her life in the U.S. or would 

she like to go back to Cuba some day. She answered, “No, I don't think I'll go back to 

Cuba, because I know I'm going to study in this country.” She envisions herself at forty, 

and the reality of becoming acculturated in an American society: 

And sooner or later, when I'm forty years old and I look back, most of my 
life is going to have been lived in the U.S., and I'm going to have lived 
here for thirty years. I think that I would wish for my family to come from 
Cuba to be with them. But no I don't think I'll go back to Cuba. 

Liz has similar feelings about the intrusion of the Cuban government on people’s 

freedom of expression. On this topic of whether or not there is freedom in Cuba, Liz 

remarked, “Because in Cuba you can't say things about the government, for example, you 

can't do whatever you want to do, you have to do whatever they say.” Like the other, she 

also feels, however, that there is freedom in the U.S: 

Question: In the U.S. many people agree that students have 

the right to freely express their ideas. What do you think about this? 

Liz: I think it is true, it is a good idea to express, you know, our opinion 
about something. 

Liz describes being a teenager here in Miami as a “good” experience that requires 
one “to grow up.” She differentiates between living as a teenager in Cuba and living in 
the U.S. Liz emphasizes that for teenagers coming to the U.S. it is important to adjust: 



133 

1 148 



Question: Adjust? 



Liz: Adjust to the rules here. Even though you can enjoy, but you have to 
work and you have to, you know, other things you have to do. 

Liz remembers that as a young second-grade student in Cuba, she felt pressured to 
never enter a church: “Yes. Sometimes for me, when I was in the second grade, I was 
like with a group of friends and we got inside the church, but we couldn't go. We have 
like red handkerchiefs and if you were a student you could not go.” Now, in Miami, Liz 
chooses to attend church, and she emphasizes, “Me, for example, now I'm going because 
I changed, and you know I can say that.” 

I asked Mario to comment on the freedom with which many people associate 
American education, especially the idea that students and teachers can participate in 
criticizing the U.S. government. He answered this question in the context of the Marxist 
philosophy that permeates the Cuban communist system: 

Question: What do you think about the idea that many people in a class 
might have very different points of view about government? 

Mario: It's fine, because in Cuba they try, I don't know how many Cubans 
were in Cuba, 1 1 million people thinking one way, that's impossible. 

In Cuba, Mario used to go to church on a weekly basis. He started attending 
church from the age of one. He said there was always a church to go to, although many 
families and priests were ordered to leave the island: “There were people who were 
separated at that time because they get fear or they were scared by the several institutions 
that Castro created. And they were coming back in the '90s, a lot of people were coming 
back to the church.” I asked Mario if he ever talked to a priest for any kind of advice or 
counseling. He said that in the church he used to go to there was one priest they used to 
call “Pepe.” Mario described him as someone whose warmth seemed to attract young 




134 



149 



people’s attention: “He was like 63 years old or something like that, but he has like 

charm to attract young people and he was a very nice person to talk to.” Mario 

elaborated on how he believes many young people feel about religion in Cuba: 

Question: What are your impressions of how Cuban teenagers feel about 
religion? 

Mario: Perhaps the only thing they had was their grandmother, who still 
remained with this idea of religion, but a lot of parents, they were young, they got 
scared, so they didn't teach any religion or type of freedom or something, so they 
didn't care about it, but I think they feel attracted to something. Each time that 
there was a Christmas in Cuba, the young people went into the church to see the 
tree. And how do you call those peoples? 

Question: The nativity? 

Mario: The nativity. They feel attracted in some way. 

They feel that something was missing. That something wasn't 
taught to them or something. 

Mario said that in Cuba students also have the right to express their ideas, “as 



long as they don't bend or criticize the government.” He described the secretive way other 
students criticized the government, “Not out loud, only as a comment between students.” 
Alex also emphasized the students did not comment in front of the teacher, just amongst 

the students. Mario shared with me an anecdote about a college friend in Cuba who 

( 

challenged the teacher by using the teacher’s own argument to argue with the teacher 
about a minority social issue: 

Mario: There was this is a friend of mine who was in the university 

and they were in the philosophy class or Marxism class. . . There was a 
teacher saying that the Latinos here in Miami, they weren't treated well. . . 
this teacher when he didn't know the answer he used to say, well we have 
to do an investigation about that. And this friend of mine asked 
permission to talk and she gave it to him and he said not everybody in the 
U.S. is a boxer and the values of a boxer is different from the values of 
other people. A boxer just thinking punching and stuff like that. And there 
are Latinos in the U.S, who are doctors and lawyers. And the teacher said 
not every Latino is a doctor or a lawyer in the U.S. and he said, well, we 
have to make an investigation about that. . .begins laughing and stuff like 
that. We just try in classes in philosophy or Marxism, we just try to have 
fun and laugh about what the teacher was saying. 





At Miami-Dade Community College, Mario comes in contact and interacts with 

Cuban students that were raised in Cuba, as well as students who were raised in the U.S. I 

asked him to describe the difference: 

Question: Do you think there is any cultural difference between Cubans 
in Cuba and Cubans in the U.S. who have lived here all their lives? 
Describe the difference. 

Mario: What do you mean by cultural? 

Question: Do you think that they are different in their ways of thinking, in 
their values, in their behavior, anything that you might think is different? 

Mario: There's a difference. People who I have two uncles and 

they're uncles of my father that came here in the 60s, something like that. 
And there's a lot of people that came in the 60s, but the people who are 
coming now, it was because they were coming with the communist system 
. . .They have different values, because it is not the same way as living 
here as in Cuba . . .Well, perhaps, they feel they had a lot of problems 
when they came here. It wasn't the same to come to the U.S. in the 60s, 
but now it's a lot easier and they have to work a lot and they suffer a lot 
because there wasn't the equal amount of people that speak Spanish. So 
they really had to work hard to get all of what they have today. And they 
(newer immigrants) see people who came just two months ago and they 
have a car and they're going on easier. 

Mario discussed his vision of Cuba in the future. His main concern was that 
someday there might be a civil war, most probably between communists and dissident 
citizens. He believes a civil unrest would be a very negative scenario for the future of 
Cuba. As Mario speaks of it, “Brothers fighting each other,” fighting in the same 
homeland: 



Question: Describe your vision of Cuba in the future. How do you see 
that? In your eyes, what's going to happen there? 

Mario: I just hope that there won't be a civil war because that's the worst 
thing that can happen to that country. Brothers fighting each other. I don't 
know if we stop living under Castro and take him out of Cuba. . . Because 
if you kick him out of Cuba, he already won. It's not my vision, it's the 




136 



151 



way I want it to be, because I can see Cuba in ten years. And I don't see it. 
I guess it's the way I want it to be. And it's people progressing and the 

civil — my friends that are the civil engineers creating an doing their 

the planning that they feel realize themselves. That they are not 

working for nothing or because there's no employment, and they have to 
go agriculture or something like that. 

I have learned a lot from listening to Mario, Yessica, Liz, and Alex. All of them 
seem to have such rich complex perspectives about these sociopolitical issues. Some of 
their views are motifs that string together the essential philosophies underlying their 
views on these issues. Like so many Cubans, it is obvious they want change for Cuba. 

Mario was very expressive about not wanting to see an eventual civil war in Cuba. I 

1 

agree with that. Hopefully, it would be a peaceful transition to a democratic system. 
Yessica mentioned that students should be able to have the freedom to speak their mind in 
class, and I know that is a freedom I always took for granted being educated in the U.S. 
Today I value this freedom more and more, especially when I hear the participant’s 
stories and the intensity in which they value their freedom of speech in a classroom 
where they did not have it before. 

4.15 Development and Description of a Model 

This section presents a model representing an interpretive construction of the 
participants’ cultural perspectives as they relate to ESOL transcultural identity and 
teaching literature. As it has been mentioned earlier in Chapter 3, given the purpose of 
explaining the essential structures of four Cuban, non-native English-speaking students’ 
(NNS) transcultural identities, this study is guided by the philosophical tenets of reader 
response theory. Thus, the development of the model is primarily grounded in reader 



response theory, which includes the following tenets: 1) A text does not have meaning 
until it is read by a reader; 2) The reader, with whatever experience he or she brings to 
the text, creates the text; 3) In literary interpretation, the text is not the most important 
component; the reader is; 4) There is no text unless there is a reader; 5) The reader is the 
only one who can say what the text is; 6) The reader creates the text as much as the 
author does; 7) Critics should concentrate on the reader and the reading process, the 
interaction that takes place between the reader and the text (Guerin, Labor, Morgan, 
Reesman, and Willingham, 1992). 

Each component of the model was designed from major themes that emerged 
from the interview data by using a thematic analysis method rooted in reader response 
theory. The model is formulated and grounded on the participants’ transcultural 
experiences as a whole, including the experiences of the two NESS students, who were 
used to gain further insight into the Miami Cuban-American experience. Furthermore, the 
model serves to give shape to the central theoretical framework that makes up the results 
and pedagogical implications of the study, and it is guided by the exploratory questions 
of this study (See Diagram 10). 



138 

153 



In addition to the nine major themes, secondary themes, guided by the exploratory 
subquestions, emerged from the interview data as well. The nine major categories 
emerging from the central question and the secondary themes are the following: 

Central Exploratory Question: 

From the perspective of four Cuban, non-native English-speaking students (NNS), 
what are the essential structures of their transcultural identities? 

The following are essential structures of the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural identities 
(See Chart 3): 

I. Portrait of a Country: The students preserve mental pictures of their homeland. 

II. Personal Memories: The students value special moments in Cuba. 

III. Discovering America: The students alter their perceptions of the U.S. 

IV. Living in Miami: The students differentiate between life in Cuba and Miami. 

V. An Education in Cuba: The students hold dual perspectives on Cuba’s schools. 

VI. School in the USA: The students view U.S. education as a road to future 
opportunities. 

VII. Family Ties: The students contrast family life in Cuba and the U.S. 

VIII. Friends Across the Ocean: The students explore friendship in Cuba and the U.S. 

IX. Socio-political Visions: The students focus on freedom of speech. 




139 154 



Exploratory Subquestion 1: 

What are the underlying themes that account for the Cuban NNS students’ 

transcultural experiences? 

The following are some underlying themes that account for the Cuban NNS 
students’ transcultural experiences (See Chart 4): 

I. The students expressed a strong desire to describe the cities where they were bom 
to include the people and lifestyles. 

II. The students shared favorite memories in Cuba of belonging with family and 
friends. 

III. The students had to confront a new reality once they arrive in the U.S. 

IV. The students felt at home in Miami, yet nostalgic of places in Cuba. 

V. The students hold education in Cuba is more rigorous, but in the U.S. there is 
more opportunities. 

VI. The students view U.S. believe that U.S. schools provide opportunities for new 
jobs, careers, and peer relations. 

VII. The students experience a change from family relations in Cuba to family 
relations in the U.S. 

VIII. The students see their friendships in Cuba and with other Cuban NNS students 
in the U.S. characterized by a humorous, innocent quality. 

IX. The students believe the U.S. is a country that grants personal, educational, and 
social freedoms. 



3 

ERIC 



140 



155 



Chan 4 



Exploratory Subquestion I : 

What are the underlying themes that account for the Cuban NNS 
students’ transcultural experiences? 



The following are underlying themes that account for the Cuban 
NNS students’ transcultural experiences: 


1. 


Portrait of a Country: 


The students express a strong desire to describe 
the cities where they were born, to include the 
people and lifestyles. 


II. 


Personal Memories: 


The students share favorite memories of 
belonging with family and friends. 


III. 


Discovering America: 


The students confront a new reality once they 
arrive in the U.S. 


IV. 


Living in Miami: 


The students feel at home in Miami, yet . 
nostalgic of places in Cuba. 


V. 


An Education in Cuba: 


The students hold education in Cuba as more 
rigorous, but education in the U.S. as offering 
more opportunities. 


VI. 


School in the USA: 


The students believe that U.S. schools provide 
opportunities for new jobs, careers, and peer 
relations. 


VII. 


Family Ties: 


The students experience a change from family 
relations in Cuba to family relations in the U.S. 


VIII. 


Friends Across the Ocean: 


The students see their friendships in Cuba and 
with other Cuban NNS students in the U.S. as 
characterized by a humorous, innocent-like 
quality. 


IX. 


Socio-political Visions: 


The students believe the U.S. is a country that 
grants personal, educational, and social 
freedoms. 




141 



156 



Exploratory Subquestion 2: 

What are the universal structures among the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural 
experiences and the Cuban-American NESS students’ experiences? 

The following are universal structures among the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural 
experiences and the Cuban-American NESS students’ experiences (See Chart 5): 

IV. Both groups live in bilingual, bicultural communities. 

V. Both groups perceive a need to select and pursue future careers. 

VI. Both groups interact with friends from a variety of cultural backgrounds. 

VII. Both groups possess the potentiality for connection between family in Cuba and 
in Miami. 

VIII. Both groups experience learning about each others’ cultures. 

IX. Both groups preserve hope for a future Cuba that embraces free speech and 
democracy. 



157 

ERIC 



142 



Charts 



Exploratory Subquestion 2: 

What are universal structures among the Cuban NNS students’ 
transcultural experiences and the Cuban-American NESS students’ 
experiences ? 



The following are universal structures among the 1 

Cuban NNS students' transcultural experiences and the 
Cuban American NESS students ’. experiences: 


IV Living in Miami: 


Both groups live in bilingual, bicultural 
communities. 


V. An Education in Cuba: 


Both groups perceive a need to select and 
pursue future careers. 


VI. School in the USA: 


Both groups interact with friends from a 
variety of cultural backgrounds. 


VII. Family Ties: 


Both groups possess the potentiality for 
connection between family in Cuba and in 
Miami. 


VIII. Friends Across the Ocean: 


Both groups experience learning about each 
others’ cultures. 


IX. ✓ Socio-political Visions: 


Both groups preserve hope for a future Cuba 
that embraces free-speech and democracy. 




158 

143 



Exploratory Subquestion 3: 

What are the projected structural meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests 
as represented in his or her transcultural experiences? 

The following are projected structural meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests as 
represented by their transcultural experiences. These projected structural meanings 
serve as potential connections to literature for the Cuban NNS students: 

(See Diagrams 1-9). 

I. Portrait of a Country: The students preserve mental pictures of their homeland. 

1 . Name important landmarks in Cuba. 

2. List some of the significant dates in Cuban history. 

3. Describe the lifestyle in Cuba. Has it changed in the past 10-20 years? From what 
you know of Cuban history, has the lifestyle changed in Cuba in the past 60 Years? 
How? 

4. Examine the changes in Cuban politics since its independence from Spain. 

5. Who have been some of the famous Cuban leaders before and after the Communist 

Revolution? Analyze their positive and/or negative influence on Cuba. 

6. Discuss a typical day of life in Cuba. 

7. Illustrate a Cuban landscape. How would you describe what Cuba looks like to 
someone who has never been there? 

8. Explain how you felt when you were in Cuba? 



II. Personal Memories: The students value special moments in Cuba. 

1 . Tell about a special moment in Cuba. 

2. Describe your favorite childhood memory in Cuba. 

3. Where did you spend your most memorable times in Cuba? 

III. Discovering America: The students alter their perceptions of the U.S. 

1 . Describe how you pictured the U.S. before you arrived. 

2. Examine your ideas of the U.S. while you still lived in Cuba. 

3. Compare and/or Contrast your ideas of the U.S. before you arrived and your ideas 
after you arrived. 

4. Differentiate between the way people talked about the U.S. in Cuba and your 
impressions of the U.S. today. 

5. Analyze your ideas of going to school and making friends in the U.S. while you still 
lived in Cuba and your ideas of going to school and making friends in the U.S. today. 

6. What if you had never come to the U.S.? How would you be picturing the U.S. if you 
still lived in Cuba? 

7. Recommend coming to the U.S. to a friend in Cuba. How would you describe life in 
the U.S. to your friend? 

IV. Living in Miami: The students differentiate between life in Cuba and Miami. 

1 . Show the differences between life in Cuba and life in Miami. 

2. Contrast favorite activities in Cuba and favorite activities in Miami. 

3. Compare life in Cuba to life in Miami. 




i4GG 



4. What if you could choose to have the best of both worlds, Cuba and the U.S.? 



Describe what type of country it would be. 

V. An Education in Cuba: The students hold dual perspectives on Cuba’s schools. 

1. Describe a day in a Cuban school. 

2. What were some of the most important things you learned while attending school in 
Cuba. 

3. Discuss some of the negative aspects, if any, of attending school in Cuba. 

4. Analyze the negative and positive characteristics of attending schools in Cuba. 

VI. School in the USA: The students view U.S. education as a road to future 
opportunities. 

1 . Now that you attend school in Miami, describe a day in school. 

2. Compare and/or Contrast attending school in Cuba and the U.S. 

3. Summarize some of the positive characteristics of attending school in the U.S. 

4. Examine some of the negative aspects of attending school in the U.S. 

5. What can you predict for your future after community college (or high school)? 

VII. Family Ties: The students contrast family life in Cuba and the U.S. 

1 . Describe your family relationships in Cuba. 

2. Describe your family relationships in the U.S. 

3. Contrast the quality time you spent with your family while in Cuba and while in 



the U.S. 



ERIC 




4. Compare / Contrast the kinds of relationships you had with your family in Cuba 
versus the U.S. 

5. Evaluate changes in your relationships with your family since you have been in the 
U.S. 

VIII. Friends Across the Ocean: The students explore friendship in Cuba and the U.S. 

1. Describe your relationships with your friends in Cuba. 

2. Describe your relationships with your friends in the U.S. 

3. Compare / Contrast the kind of relationships you had with your friends in Cuba and the 
U.S. 

4. Evaluate changes in your relationships with your friends since you have been in the 
U.S. 

IX. Socio-political Visions: The students focus on freedom of speech in the U.S. 

1. Define the word “freedom.” What does it mean to you? 

2. Discuss the reasons why you and/or your family came to the U.S. 

3. Compare and/or Contrast freedom of expression in Cuban classrooms to freedom of 
expression in the U.S. 




147 16 2 



Diagram I 



Exploratory Subquestion 3: 



What are the projected structural meanings of the Cuban NNS 
students' interests as represented by their transcultural experiences? 



Explain hew 



Name irrportant 
landmarks in Cuba. 



I you felt uhen \ \ 


/ I List some of the \ 


1 you lived in I 


I significant dates J 


\ Cuba J 


I \ in Cuban history. J 



Illustratea 
dtxjr i landscape' 
Hcwxjuouldyou 
describe ubat Cuba 
looks life to 
someone udho has 
, never been there?/ 



Portrait of a 

Country: 
The students 
preserve mental 
pictures of their 
homeland. 



Describe the lifestyle 
in Cuba. Has it changed 
in the pail 10-20 years, from 
whalyou know of Cuban 
history ? Has the lifestyle 
yi changed in Cuba in the pasl y 
6 0 Years? How? 



Discuss a typical 
day inyour life, 
uhile you lived in 

Cuba 



Name some 
r the famous ( 
leaders before and 
after the Cbnmnist 
Revolution /hatyze J 
their impact on 
Cluba 



Examine the 
changes in Cuban 
politics since 
its independence 
from Spain. 



Cuban NNS students’ projected topics of interests 



o 

ERIC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



148 



163 



Diagram 2 



Exploratory Subquestion 3: 

What are the projected structural meanings of the Cuban NN5 
students' interests as represented by their transcultural experiences? 




ni 6 4 



Diagram 3 



Exploratory Subquestion 3: 

What are the projected structural meanings of the Cuban NNS 
students' interests as represented by their transcultural experiences ? 



Recommend 
'coming to the US. 
to a friend in 
Cuba, Howwould 
you describe life in 
the US. to your 
friend 



if you } 
never come to the 
US.? Hew would 
you be picturing 
/the US. if you still j 
Jived in Cuba?; 



Describe how you 
pictured the US. 
before you arrived 



Discovering 
America: 

The students alter 
their perceptions of 
the U.S. 



Examine your 
ideas of the US. 
while you still 
lived in Cuba. 



Compare 
and/or Contrast 
your ideas of the 
US. before you 
arrived and your 
ideas after you 
arrived 



Inalyze your ideas' 
r of going to school and ’ 
f making friends in the U.S.' 
(while you still lived in 
Cuba) and your ideas of 
going to school and 
^making friends in they 
U.S. today. 



'Differentiate' 
between the way' 
people talked 
about the US. in 
Cuba and your 
Jnpressions of they 
US. today^ 



Cuban NNS students* projected topics of interests 



Diagram 4 



Exploratory Subquestion 3: 

What are the projected structural meanings of the Cuban NNS 
students’ interests as represented by their transcultural experiences? 




Cuban NNS students’ projected topics of interests 




166 

151 



Exploratory Subquestion 3; 

Itudlnt?’ ini* pr0 / ected s,ructural meanings of the Cuban NNS 
students interests as represented by their transcultural experiences ? 




Cuban NNS students' projected topics of interests 




167 



152 



Diagram 6 



Exploratory Subquestion 3: 



ZudlZ "7 P T eted Structural meanin « s °f the Cub ™ NNS 
students interests as represented by their transcultural experiences? 



Now that you 
attend school in 
Miami, describe a 
day in school. 



W hat can you 
predict for your 
future after 
community 
college (or high 
school)? 



School in the 

USA: 

The students view 
U.5. education as a 
road to future 

^opportunities. 



Compare and/or 
Contrast 
attending school 
in Cuba and the 

US. 



Examine some of 
the negative 
aspects of 
attending school 
in the US. 



Summarize some 
of the positive 
characteristics of 
attending school 
in the U.S. 



Cuban NNS students’ projected topics of interests 



3 

ERIC 



168 



153 



Diagram 7 



Exploratory Subquestion 3: 



What are the projected structural meanings of the Cuban NNS 
students’ interests as represented by their transcultural experiences? 



Describe your 
family 

relationships in 

Cuba. 



' Evaluate change 
in your 

relationship with 
your family since 
you have been in 
the l IS. 



Family Ties: 
The students 
contrast family in 
Cuba and the U.S. 



Describe your 

family 

relationships in 
the U.S. 



Compare/ 
Contrast the kind' 
of relationship you 
had uith your family 
in Cuba and the 
kindc f relationship 
you have with your 
family in the US. 



1 Contrast the tine' 
you spent with your 
family while in 
Cuba with the time 
you spend with 
Ahem in the US. 



Cuban NNS students’ projected topics of interests 



o 

ERIC 



154 



Diagram 8 



Exploratory Subquestion 3: 

What are the projected structural meanings of the Cuban NNS 
students' interests as represented by their transcultural experiences? 




Cuban NNS students* projected topics of interests 



Diagram 9 



Exploratory Subquestion 3: 

What are the projected structural meanings of the Cuban NNS 
students’ interests as represented by their transcultural experiences? 



Define the word 
"freedom." What 
does it mean to you? 



Compare' 

and/or Contrast 
f freedom of expression ^ 
in Cuban classrooms 
to freedom of 
expression in l IS. 
.classrooms. 



Socio-political 

Visions: 

The students focus 
on freedom of 
speech in the U.S. 



Discuss the reasons' 
why you and/or 
your family came 
to the US. 



Cuban NNS students’ projected topics of interests 



d 

ERIC 



171 



156 



Diagram 10 




in the Transcultural Journey of the Cuban NNS Students 



CHAPTER FIVE 



DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 

5.1 Introduction 

The purpose of this chapter is to draw conclusions from the data presented in 
Chapter Four and explore the pedagogical implications of the data in the context of 
teaching literature in the advanced ESOL classroom. Conclusions proposed from this 
qualitative study have emerged from a close examination of the unique transcultural 
experiences of four Cuban NNS students and two Cuban- American NESS students. Thus, 
any conclusions drawn can only be applied to these six students’ transcultural 
experiences. I believe, however, that the value of these conclusions can potentially serve 
as a model for TESOL researchers and practitioners in the ESOL classroom. In addition, 
as a practitioner / researcher, I can use this methodology to investigate the transcultural 
experiences of ESOL students from a variety of cultures, and consider each student’s 
unique transcultural identity in making connections to selecting and teaching literature in 
my ESOL classroom. 

5.2 Discussion: Multicultural Textbooks for the ESOL Classroom 



The art of teaching literature provides a stage for tapping into student interests. In 
this sense, the structural meanings identified for the Cuban NNS students can serve as a 
bridge between their unique interests and selected texts. In the next two sections, I will 
present and analyze selected works from the most current American literature anthology, 







Language and Literature by McDougal-Littell (Bernstein, 1994)* adopted by MDCPS’ 
high school ESOL departments for the 1999-2000 school year. In addition, I will present 
and analyze a selected piece from the current reading anthology, A Writer’s Workbook 
(Smoke, 1996.), used in the advanced ESOL composition classes at MDCC. 

The selections include different genre, such as fiction, nonfiction, and poetry. 
Fiction can be described as, “Narrative writing drawn from the imagination of the author 
rather than from history or fact” (Holman and Harmon, 1986, p. 202). Nonfiction can be 
described as writing from history or fact. An example of nonfiction is an autobiographical 
piece, such as The Interesting Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano . Poetry might 
be defined as, “A term applied to the many forms in which human beings have given 
rhythmic expression to their most imaginative and intense perceptions of the world, 
themselves, and the relation of the two” (Holman and Harmon, 1986, p. 384). In this 
chapter, I will present a synopsis of each fiction and non-fiction piece, and the poems will 
be presented in their entirety. Then, I will draw conclusions from the projected structural 
meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests (See Diagrams 1-9) and their potential 
connections to the selected literary texts. 

The next section will addresses exploratory subquestion 4, “What are the 
connections between the structural themes inherent in the Cuban NNS students’ 
transcultural experiences and teaching literature in ESOL?” In order to draw 
conclusions based on the students’ transcultural experiences, I will use the Literature and 
Language (Bernstein, 1994) and A Writer’s Workbook (Smoke, 1996) textbooks to make 
connections between the results of the analysis and the selected literary works. These 
textbooks are appropriate to the purpose of the study because they include an array of 



multicultural selections, so I can make connections between the thematic analysis and the 
diverse voices represented in the selections. Multicultural textbooks incorporate readings 
that mirror the language of diversity, the pluralistic voices of authors and / or characters 
from a variety of cultural backgrounds. In this sense, these pluralistic voices, which have 
been traditionally silenced in the English / American literature canon, can potentially 
serve as touchstones for NNS students’ transcultural experiences. The Cuban NNS 
students’ experiences represent the diverse transcultural experiences, of a small group of 
students, which can potentially serve as bridge to multicultural literature. As Rosenblatt 
argues reading is a transaction between the reader and the text, and it is in this 
transaction, like the NNS students’ transcultural experiences, that meaning emerges: 

“. . .the two-way, reciprocal relation explains why meaning is not ‘in’ the text or ‘in’ the 
reader. Both reader and text are essential to the transactional process of making meaning” 
(p. 27). 

Furthermore, these anthologies have practical pedagogical implications for 
exploring a literature bridge between ESOL and mainstream English because they are the 
textbooks that are used in the adopted by the county and community college. In the case 
of Literature and Language , it will be used at the senior high level in English / language 
arts classes, so many NNS students from MDCPS entering community college will have 
been exposed to the American multicultural selections in the Literature and Language 




176 

160 



textbook. 



5.3 Selected Literary Works: Building the Bridge Towards English 



In this section I present the literary pieces selected for the study. The focus of the 
analysis will not concentrate on the authors’ biographies, but on the literary work as a 
multicultural vision of its own. First, I will present synopses of the literary works. Then, I 
will explore the potential connections between the Cuban NNS students’ transcultural 
experiences and the selected literary works. When I first perused the Table of Contents of 
Literature and Language and A Writer’s Workbook I was impressed by the variety of 
cultural backgrounds that they covered. In Literature and Language, Unit One is divided 
into two Chapters: Unit One is titled “America’s Family Tree,” and is divided into two 
chapters-Chapter One: “The First Americans” and Chapter Two: “The Next Wave.” 
Chapter One incorporates literature that explores the Native- American and Spanish 
experiences in America. Chapter Two includes literary selections that explore the African 
and English heritage of the United States. In A Writer’s Workbook, the editor includes a 
variety of cultural topics and authors covering countries such as Haiti, Puerto Rico, Cuba, 
Japan, Iran, China, and Russia. In addition, many of the essays presented in the textbook 
introduce issues related to students’ experiences learning a new language as well as 
cultural differences among the U.S. and other countries. 

A Reading of “Song of the Skv Loom” 

From Literature and Language Unit One, Chapter One, I will analyze the 

following Native-American poem “Song of the Sky Loom,” by Tewa Indian: 

O our Mother the Earth, O our Father the Sky, 

Your children are we, and with tired backs 




ii 1 



We bring you the gifts you love. 

Then weave for us a garment of brightness; 

May the warp be the white light of morning, 

May the weft be the red light of evening, 

May the fringes be the falling rain, 

May the border be the standing rainbow. 

Thus weave for us a garment of brightness, 

That we may walk fittingly where birds sing, 

That we may walk fittingly where grass is green, 

O our Mother the Earth, O our Father the Sky. (p. 31) 



The poem includes an array of nature references, which represent the close 
relationship between Native- American culture and nature: Earth, sky, morning, evening, 
rain, rainbow, birds, and grass. Each of these nature references is expanded by the author 
to express a metaphor for nature or a condition of nature: Mother the Earth, Father the 
Sky, white light of morning, red light of evening, falling rain, standing rainbow, where 
birds sing, and where grass is green. The speaker offers the Earth and the Sky “the gifts 
they love,” which could represent a song, dance, or other ceremonial symbols used by the 
early Tewa Indians of the Southwest United States. The author employs the use of 
extended metaphor to express what the speaker asks form the Earth and the Sky in return. 
The speaker says, “Then weave for us a garment of brightness,” and develops the 
metaphor of a garment to represent different aspects of nature, which constitute a happy 
life. 

Connections between students’ transcultural interests and “Song of the Sky 
Loom” 

The poem “Song of the Sky Loom,” invites potential points of interest to 
connect the transcultural experiences of the Cuban NNS students. These points of interest 
could be developed within an ESOL class or a regular mainstream English / language arts 



'?78 



class, using the Language and Literature textbook. One of the projected structural 
meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests is that the students demonstrate an 
interest in illustrating a Cuban landscape. This poem uses the sky loom as a metaphor for 
identifying significant aspects of nature in early Native-American reality. Therefore, in 
my ESOL class, I could design a pre-reading activity, where I could guide student 
discussions about significant nature scenes from Cuba’s landscape. I could pose the 
question, “How would you describe what Cuba looks like to someone who has never 
visited the island?” Subsequently, the students could describe the physical beauty of the 
Cuban landscape and its significance to the students’ memories of living in Cuba. The 
students could even generate these pre-reading ideas in groups, where students from 
different cultures could contribute their own nature images. During the reading of “Song 
of the Sky Loom,” as a class, we could make connections to the Native-American 
imagery by using the students’ nature images of their native countries as a bridge to 
better understand the Native-American poem in English. 

There are two other projected structural meanings related to the Cuban NNS 
students’ interests that might be implemented in the classroom to make connections 
between their experiences and the literature. They are to ask students to name important 
landmarks, both man-made and/or natural, and ask students to compare / contrast places 
where they spent their most memorable times in Cuba. These projected structural 
meanings, gathered from the thematic analysis of the data, could potentially be used to 
develop pre / post-reading activities in the ESOL classroom. 



ERIC 




A Reading of “What is an American?” 

In “What is an American?,” Crevecoeur introduces the question about American 
identity. The question, “What is an American?” (p. 67) is appropriate for tapping into the 
interests of Cuban NNS students as they develop their own transcultural identity. 
Crevecoeur lays out a framework that needs to be questioned, since he focuses his 
definition of “American” on the European or descendants of European immigrants in the 
mid to late 18 th Century. He does not address the African heritage of North America as a 
product of the infamous Middle Passage. However, Chapter One includes an excerpt 
from Equiano’s autobiography that addresses the African-American heritage. Within the 
European tradition, Crevecoeur does introduce ideas of America as a “melting pot” from 
different nations. He emphasizes the concept of “transformation” for immigrants who 
coming to America leave behind the old and embrace the new: “He is an American who, 
leaving behind him all his ancient prejudices and manners, receives new ones from the 
new mode of life he has embraced, the new government he obeys, and the new rank he 
holds” (p. 67). Furthermore, Crevecoeur alludes to a sense of democracy as an integral 
part of American identity: “The American is a new man, who acts upon, new principles” 
(p. 68). It is clear that Crevecoeur’s definition of “What is an American?” has been 
revisited and revised by many Americans throughout the ages and was in need of 
including African-Americans, Asian- Americans, Hispanic-Americans, Jewish- 
Americans, and Americans from other races and national backgrounds. Crevecoeur does, 
however, echo the seeds of democracy planted by the Forefathers of the U.S. during his 
era, so his essay is significant to the interests of ESOL students that have come to the 
U.S. with their families in search of democracy. 



ERIC 




Connections between students’ transcultural interests and “What is an 



American?” 

Jean de Crevecoeur’s essay “What is An American?” incorporates several key 
ideas that I could potentially use in class for further connecting students’ transcultural 
experiences to using literature as the bridge to English. A projected structural meaning of 
the Cuban NNS students’ interests that could be used to connect students to the literature 
is to have the students analyze their ideas of going to school and making friends in the 
U.S., while they still lived in Cuba, and making friends in the U.S. today. I would 
implement this type of comparative analysis as part of a pre-reading journal, so that later, 
as a class, we could examine the data collected from students’ observations. This type of 
pre-reading activity could also be extended to a reading journal. Before reading 
Crevecoeur’s essay, the students could work in collaborative groups to brainstorm 
definitions of being American. The students could draw definitions from their own 
observations of American people and culture. Their observations might reflect interaction 
among friends in the U.S., where they emphasize the differences and similarities of their 
friends’ characteristics. Subsequently, they can compare / contrast their definitions to 
Crevecoeur’s definition of “What is an American?” 

Other projected structural meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests that 
could potentially serve as a bridge to Crevecoeur’s essay are the following: Invite the 
students to examine the changes in Cuban politics since its independence from Spain. 

Ask the students to list some of the famous Cuban leaders before and after the 
Communist Revolution and analyze their impact on Cuba; Prompt students to describe a 
day in a Cuban school; Ask students to compare / contrast the kinds of relationships they 




16 i8i 



had with their friends in Cuba versus in the U.S.; Invite students to compare and/or 
contrast freedom of expression. 



A Reading of The Interesting Narmtive ofthe Life of Olaudah Equiano 
Olaudah Equiano ’s autobiography represents a voice that would haunt 
Crevecoeur’s definition of an American for centuries to come. As Americans, we have 
yet to see the dawn of an era where our society has existed longer without slavery than 
with slavery, for slavery constitutes over 200 years of our heritage. The excerpt in 
Literature and Language is entitled “From Africa to America,” and it portrays Equiano’s 
first person narrative of the horrors of the Middle Passage and how he and his people 
were treated as captured slaves: 

I was soon put down under the decks, and there I received such a salutation in my 
nostrils as I had never experienced in my life, so that with the loathsomeness of 
the stench and crying, I became so sick and low that I was not able to eat. I now 
wished for the last friend, death, to relieve me (p. 72). 



Equiano’s accounts bring the reader up close to the repulsive violations of human rights 

committed by the Europeans and North Americans involved in the slave trade. Equiano 

clearly describes the revolting manner in which the Africans were enslaved, only to be 

bought, sold, and separated from family and friends. Equiano’s narrative portrays the 

Africans as people whose human spirit witnessed the torturous crimes against humanity 

committed by the European and North American world: 

On a signal given (as the beat of a drum), the buyers rush at once into the 
yard where the slaves are confined and make choice of that parcel (group) 
they like best. The noise and clamor with which this is attended and the 
eagerness visible in the countenances of the buyers serve not a little to 
increase the apprehension of terrified Africans. In this manner, without 



if>82 



scruple, are relations and friends separated, most of them never to see each 
other again, (p. 74) 

Connections between the students’ transcultural interests and The Interesting 

Narrative of the Life of Olaudah Equiano 

Equiano’s autobiography offers significant points in the literature that I can use to 
connect ESOL students to their transcultural experiences. One of the central issues in 
Equiano’s narrative is freedom. A projected structural meaning of the Cuban NNS 
students’ interests as represented in their transcultural experiences is to have the students 
discuss and define the word “freedom.” A pre-reading question that I can use in 
attempting to understand Equiano’s reality is to ask students to define the word 
“freedom.” Additionally, I might ask students why their families came to the U.S. 
Students could work in pairs, and define what freedom means to each of them. Then, with 
their partners, focus the definition, so they can present their definition of freedom to the 
class. Freedom is an abstract concept, and this kind of activity will allow synthesis 
between both partners in articulating a well-developed definition. 

There are several other structural meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests 
as represented by their transcultural experiences which could potentially be used to better 
connect these students to Equiano’s autobiography: First, ask students to describe their 
favorite childhood memories in Cuba; Invite students to describe how they pictured the 
U.S. before they arrived; Ask students to compare / contrast their ideas of the U.S. before 
they arrived and their ideas after they arrived; Guide students in examining some of the 
negative aspects of attending school in the U.S; Prompt students to contrast the quality 
time they spent with their family while in Cuba and while in the U.S. 



ERIC 



16183 



A Reading of “I. Too” 

From Unit Five, Chapter One, I analyzed the following poem “I, Too” by 

Langston Hughes: 

I, too, sing America. 

I am the darker brother. 

They send me to eat in the kitchen 
When company comes, 

But I laugh, 

And eat well, 

And grow strong. 

Tomorrow, 

I’ll be at the table 
When company comes. 

Nobody’ll dare 
Say to me, 

“Eat in the kitchen,” 

Then. 

Besides, 

They’ll see how beautiful I am 
And be ashamed — 

I, too, am America (p. 487) 



In Hughes’ poem the speaker introduces a central theme in the first stanza, “I, too, 
sing America.” With this declaration, the speaker sets the tone for a powerful statement 
about national and cultural identity that speaks of inclusion. This appears to be a 
reference to the song, “America,” and possibly the participation of diverse voices in the 
national discourse. This declaration alone is so powerful that Hughes expresses it as a 
complete stanza. In the second stanza, the speaker identifies himself as “the darker 
brother,” who is sent to eat in the kitchen, “when company comes. . .” Company is 
possibly an allusion to the power of mainstream discourse as it defers the participation of 



16184 



minority discourse. Hughes’ develops the metaphor for eating at the dinner table as a 
symbol for all voices someday participating in the national discourse. The irony is that 
the speaker says, “But I laugh, / And eat well, / And grow strong.” Then, I ask myself, is 
this perhaps a reference to the strength demonstrated by many African-Americans during 
the repressive era of slavery? The poem is written in the present tense form that invites a 
vision of the future for African-Americans. The speaker points to a post-repression era 
that claims his place at the table, or in a metaphorical sense, claims a voice in American 
discourse, “Tomorrow, / I’ll be at the table / When company comes.” This new era is 
supported by the idea that No one will dare say to the speaker, “Eat in the kitchen, / 
Then.” On the contrary, the speaker portrays a day when majority culture will see how 
beautiful he is, “And be ashamed. . .,” thus, echoing “I, too, am America.” In this last 
line, I hear the speaker’s identification with a national / cultural consciousness that claims 
a place for his voice. 

Connections between students’ transcultural interests and “I, Too” 

A poem that incorporates many of the same issues as Equiano’s autobiography is 
Langston Hughes’ poem “I, Too.” One of the projected structural meanings of the Cuban 
NNS students’ interests as represented in their transcultural experiences which can serve 
as a connection between the students and Hughes’ poem is for to guide students in 
examining their ideas of the U.S. while they still lived in Cuba. Students could design a 
visual presentation of their ideas of the U.S. before they arrived. The project could 
incorporate visual and narrative descriptions of the ways they pictured the U.S. before 
actually coming here. Presenting these ideas to the class can serve as a touchstone to 
Langston Hughes’ poem. The students could give oral presentations expressing their 



O 

ERiC 



16 !85 



perspectives of the U.S., before and after arriving. Then, they could make connections to 
ways the speaker of the poem might possibly view America, illuminating the interrelation 
between their transcultural experiences and their interpretation of Langston Hughes’ 
poem. 

Here are some other structural meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests as 
represented by their transcultural experiences: Prompt students to explain the ways they 
felt when they were in Cuba, Ask students to differentiate between the way people talked 
about the U.S. in Cuba and their impressions of the U.S. today; Ask students to elaborate 
on whether or not they would recommend their friends in Cuba to come to the U.S; How 
would they describe life in the U.S. to their friends; Invite students to define the word 
“freedom.” What does freedom mean to them? 



O 

ERIC 



A Reading of “Martinez’ Treasure” 

From Unit Seven, Chapter Three, which is entitled “Unexpected Gifts” I analyzed 
the parable “Martinez’ Treasure” by Manuela Williams Crosno. The parable is the story 
of a very poor Mexican- American couple, Juan and Rosa, who lived near the mountains. 
Juan had a burro, that he called Jose. They lived in a small home which Juan called his 
“casa.” They raised beans, com, and chili peppers, and they owned a few items of 
clothing, which were used gifts from their relatives. Juan and Rosa worked from morning 
until night in order to provide for their food and poor existence. Juan sold wood in the 
village day after day, and Rosa milked goats and drove them out to eat grass. One day, 
Juan brought home a chest 18 inches deep, 18 inches wide, and 2 feet long, which he had 
tied across Jose’s back to carry home. Juan found the chest in the dry bed of a river. Juan 
and Rosa tried to open the chest, but each night they tried, they discovered they could not 



open it. However, as the days passed, they became more and more convinced that they 
were now rich because the chest had to be loaded with treasures: “Remembering stories 
of hidden gold, they were certain the chest was filled with old Spanish coins.” Despite 
promises of riches, they continued to work hard because each day “. . .habit called them 
to their usual tasks.” Now they were happy, for they were convinced they were rich. 
Eventually, they decided not to concern themselves with opening the chest, for it was 
sufficient to know they were rich. Instead, they decided to hide the treasure chest in their 
house and continue to live their lives happier than ever, now that they already knew they 
were, indeed, very wealthy people. After living happily for many years, Juan and Rosa 
passed away. It was after this that Pancho and Tomas, Juan’s brothers, found the chest in 
Juan’s house. The two brothers tried to open the chest, but they did not succeed; thus, 
convinced that they were now wealthy, they took it home to show Pancho’ s wife. They 
believed the chest was filled with gold. Pancho asked for the help of Dr. Gardea, the 
village doctor and a learned man. The chest had small letters carved into its metal-like 
material, but Juan and Rosa had not been able to read it. Now, Pancho lied to the doctor 
by saying that the chest was a family heirloom, and at one time he even knew what the 
letters said, but it had been so long that he had forgotten. He asked the good doctor for 
help in opening the chest and if he could read the letters on the chest. “Will you read for 
us what the letters say?” Tomas asked the doctor. Dr. Gardea asked the brothers, “Are 
you sure you want to open the chest?” In addition to a message, the letters gave the 
doctor instructions on how to open the chest. The doctor followed the instructions, “With 
a quick jerk, he tore aside one comer of the ornament, and there unfastened the clasp that 




171 



187 



would allow the top to open.” The doctor was a discreet man who chose not to open the 

chest, but simply left the house before the brothers opened the mysterious chest: 

Pancho closed the door and locked it carefully after the doctor had gone. 
Now the three people could not hide their excitement! Soon they would be 
rich! Already they could feel the gold pieces sliding through their fingers! 
They quickly opened the lid. (p. 996). 

The brothers discovered that the chest was filled with wooden figures of saints 
and a cross made of granite rock. Soon they realized there had been no treasure in the 
chest. They all began arguing and felt miserable once they realized there were no riches 
to be found. One day, Pancho ran into the doctor and demanded of him, “You will tell me 
what was carved into the area vieja (chest)?” The doctor responded, “Whoever possesses 
this chest will be happy so long as he opens it not!” (p. 996). 

Connections between students’ transcultural interests and “Martinez’ 
Treasure” 

In the parable “Martinez’ Treasure,” Manuela Williams Crosno, one possible 
moral is that happiness is how each person perceives his or her own reality. In the story 
there are many valuable reference points that could connect to my students’ interests. A 
projected structural meaning of the Cuban NNS students’ interests as represented in their 
transcultural experiences is to have the students explore the question, “What if you had 
never come to the U.S.?” How would you be picturing the U.S. if you were still in 
Cuba?” These questions are appropriate for the students to make connections to 
“Martinez’ Treasure” because it gives students an opportunity to imagine how they would 
be and think of the U.S. if they had never come here. This situation is similar to Juan and 
Rosa’s situation in the story, when they had to imagine what it would be like to have 
money, although they were not able to prove it because they never opened the chest. 



Additionally, the students could empathize with Juan and Rosa’s situation and ask 
themselves how they would react to the insecurity of not always knowing what the future 
holds for them in the U.S. 

Other structural meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests as represented in 
their transcultural experiences can be used to connect the students’ to the parable: Ask the 
students to discuss a typical day of life in Cuba; Invite students to show the differences 
between life in Cuba and life in Miami; Ask students to explore some of the most 
important things they learned while attending school in Cuba; Discuss with students what 
they predict for their future after community college or high school; Ask students to 
compare / contrast the kinds of relationships they had with their family in Cuba and the 
U.S.; Invite students to evaluate changes in their relationships with their family since they 
have been in the U.S. 

A Reading of “Back, but Not Home” 

In the autobiographical essay “Back, but Not Home” Maria Muniz, who left Cuba 
with her family at the age of 5, asks herself the question, “Would I ever go back?” After 
thinking about it long and hard, she realizes that she would like to visit Cuba someday. In 
the narrative, Maria describes her childhood memories of growing up in a middle class 
neighborhood in Brooklyn. There were not many Cuban families in her neighborhood, so 
she did not grow up around Cuban friends. Maria describes her feelings as, “Outside 
American, inside Cuban” (p. 282). When Maria left Cuba with her family, she left behind 
her grandparents, aunts, uncles, and several cousins. Sometimes Maria would visit family 
members in Miami, but she felt strange in Miami because it was such a different world. 



Maria’s family in Miami would accuse her of being too “Americanized.” Maria discusses 

that her struggle of whether to return or not to Cuba was both personal and political, in 

part, watching the separation of family members when they arrived from Cuba: 

I recently had a conversation with a man who generally sympathizes with 
the Castro regime. We talked of Cuban politics and although the 
discussion was very casual, I felt an old anger welling inside. After 16 
years of living an “American” life, I am still unable to view the revolution 
with detachment or objectivity. I cannot interpret its results in social, 
political or economic terms. Too many memories stand in my way. 

(p. 282) 

Maria describes some of her childhood memories. She recall how, as a little girl, 
she would wake up crying because she had dreamed of her aunts and grandmothers and 
remembered how much she missed them: “I remembered my mother’s trembling voice 
and the sad look on her face whenever she spoke to her mother over the phone” (p. 282). 
Maria retells the challenges she faced in school when the teachers realized she had 
difficulty in English. She had been in this country only a few months and although she 
understood a good deal of what was said to her in school, she could not express herself 
very well, so she cried. 

As an adult, she has learned to deal with her childhood memories, so they don’t 

hurt as much. However, Maria believes that there is still something missing in her life. 

She feels she needs to complete the circle by returning to Cuba. She is not ready to take 

the position of forgetting a past filled with memories of sadness and separation, but she is 

beginning to care less and less about politics. Maria claims she is beginning to remember 

and care more about the child who left her grandmother behind. She feels she must return 

to Cuba one day because she wants to know that little girl better: 

When I try to review my life during the past 16 years, I almost feel as if 
I’ve walked into a theater right in the middle of a movie. And I’m afraid I 

ISO 



won’t fully understand or enjoy the rest of the movie unless I can see and 
understand the beginning. And for me, the beginning is Cuba. I don’t want 
to go “home” again; the life and home we all left behind are long gone. 

My home is here and I am happy, (p. 283) 

Maria ends the essay by explaining that, like all immigrants, her family 
and she have had to build a new life from nothing in the U.S., but she believes that this 
struggle has made them strong and. In this sense, most of her memories are good ones. 
Someday, however, she plans to complete the circle: “I want to return because the 
journey back will also mean a journey within. Only then will I see the missing piece” 

(p. 283). 

Connections between students’ transcultural interests and “Back, but Not 

Home” 

In the autobiographical essay “Back, but Not Home” Maria Martinez struggles 
with similar issues raised by the study’s participants. The central question, whether or not 
to return to Cuba, is one shared by all of the participants, including the Cuban- American 
NESS students. From this question, I could have the students in an ESOL class explore 
the connections between their autobiographies and Maria’s experience. There are many 
reference points in the essay that could serve to potentially connect to the students’ 
interests. A projected structural meaning of the Cuban NNS students’ interests as 
represented in their transcultural experiences is to have the students explore why they and 
their families came to the U.S. Students might want to share the information with the 
class, so that the whole class can analyze different reasons why ESOL students have left 
their native countries. In some cases, it might be interesting to differentiate between 
students who, like their parents, wanted to come to the U.S. and others who wanted to 
stay in their native countries, but felt they had to leave because of their parents. Exploring 



the reasons why they came to the U.S. will invite the students, to question if they would 
ever go back to their native countries. From this activity, I would guide students to 
connect their thoughts to whether they would ever return, or not, to their native countries. 
Maria’s reasons for wanting to return to Cuba. If some students believe their situation is 
different than Maria’s, they might want to compare their reality to her reality, and then 
put themselves in Maria’s place: “What would they do if they were Maria?” 

Other structural meanings of the Cuban NNS students’ interests as represented in 
their transcultural experiences can be used to connect the students’ to the essay: Invite 
students to show the differences between life in Cuba and life in Miami; Ask students to 
compare / contrast the kinds of relationships they had with their family in Cuba and the 
U.S.; Examine the changes in Cuban politics since its independence from Spain. Who 
have been some of the famous Cuban leaders before and after the Communist 
Revolution? Analyze their impact on Cuba. Differentiate between the way people talked 
about the U.S. in Cuba and your impressions of the U.S. today. What if you could choose 
to have the best of both worlds, Cuba and the U.S.? Describe what type of country it 
would be. 

5.4 Questions for Further Study 

This study cannot be generalized to Cuban NNS Students in secondary schools or 
community colleges as a whole, but it is focused on the unique transcultural experiences 
of these four NNS students as well as the experiences of the two Cuban-American NESS 
students. The focused results of the study raise questions of the possibilities for 
qualitative research, which administrators and teachers could use in future studies to 



ii92 



better understand the academic needs of Cuban NNS students. A critical dimension of 
qualitative research is that it provides the researcher with meaningful opportunities to 
generate questions beyond the stages of thematic-analysis, and even, the conclusion of 
the study. For one, I was able to generate questions on the nature of students’ 
transcultural experiences from the students’ interests presented in Chapter Four. This is 
due to the recursive nature of qualitative research. Furthermore, this study sets the stage 
for a broad range of qualitative research that can potentially be implemented with NNS 
students of diverse cultural backgrounds. Finally, this study opens the door for research 
that attempts to better understand both the unique and universal essential structures that 
account for the NNS students’ transcultural experiences. From a pedagogical perspective, 
this study also suggests further research in the area of literature in the ESOL classroom 
and its connection to the transcultural experiences of NNS students. 

5.5 Recommendations 



ERIC 



The following recommendations are based on the research findings of this study. 
High school and college teachers, administrators, and curriculum specialists should use 
more qualitative research to investigate the transcultural experiences of ESOL students 
from different cultures, emphasizing the cultural needs of each school and/or college. 
Investigating the transcultural experiences of NNS students might lead educators to a 
better understanding of NNS students’ needs. Furthermore, qualitative research on ESOL 
students could lead to significant connections between NNS students’ interests and 
developing academic skills in English. ESOL curriculum specialists in high schools and 
community colleges could benefit from a qualitative model for better understanding 
transcultural experiences because they could use it in reevaluating and redesigning ESOL 
curriculum at the county and state levels. In MDCPS, for example, curriculum writers 
could use qualitative research on NNS students’ transcultural experiences to re-write the 

177 




MDCPS ESOL CBC. Subsequently, the findings of qualitative research on NNS 
students’ transcultural experiences could be used to help select textbooks for individual 
classrooms or media-centers at the high schools and colleges. In addition, researchers 
interested in using the model presented in this study may do so as a touchstone for taking 
the students’ projected interests and use them to help students select texts and then 
analyze students’ responses to the texts. Further qualitative research in the area of NNS 
students’ transcultural experiences could also help develop teacher preparation at the 
university level as well as developing teacher in-service training. On personal and 
professional levels, the richness of qualitative research has provided me with a 
foundation to pursue many of the questions and recommendations raised by this study in 
my own classroom, so I can learn about my students, while I continue to grow as a 
teacher. 



O 

ERIC 



17 i94 



REFERENCES 

Adeyanju, T.K. (1978). Teaching literature and human values in ESL: 

Objectives and selection. English Language Teaching Journal, 32. 133-138. 

Apple. M. (1993). The politics of official knowledge: does a national curriculum 
make sense? Teacher College Record. 95 (2) 222-241. 

Aristotle. (1954). The rhetoric and the poetics of Aristotle (W.R. Roberts, I. 
Bywater & F. Solmsen, Trans.). New York: Modem Library. 

ASPIRA Association (1989). Facing the facts: Hispanic dropouts in ten urban 
communities. Washington, DC: ASPIRA National Office Publications. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 317 635). 

Badia, A. (1994). The academic performance of Hispanics in Florida public 
schools. Miami, FL: Cuban American National Council. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED 374 204). 

Banya, K. (1993). Multicultural education: An international perspective. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 359 089). 

Benz, C. (1996). Entering an academic discourse community: A case study of the 
coping strategies of eleven English as a second language students. Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 5 7-08 A. 3365, (University Microfilms No. AAG9700487) 

Berg, B. L. (1995). Qualitative research methods for the social sciences (2nd ed.). 
Boston, MA: Allyn and Bacon. 

Bernstein, B. (1994). Literature and Language: American Literature. Evanston, 
IL: McDougal Littell. 



, 7^95 



Blair. L. (1991). Developing student voices with multicultural literature. English 
Journal, Dec. 1991, (24- 28). 

Bogdan, R, & Biklen, S. (1992). Qualitative research for education: An 
introduction to theory and methods. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Casement, William. (1996). The great canon controversy: The battle of the books 
in higher education. New Brunswick and London: Transaction. 

Creswell, J. W., (1994). Research design: Qualitative & quantitative approaches. 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Creswell, J. W., (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing 
among five traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Cummins, J. (1984). Language proficiency, bilingualism, and academic 
achievement. In P. A. Richard-Amato & M. A. Snow (Eds.), The multicultural 
classroom: readings for content-area teachers, (pp. 16-26). White Plains, NY: Longman. 

Denzin, N.K. (1989). The research act: A theoretical introduction to sociological 
methods (2nd ed.). New York: McGraw Hill. 

Diaz, G. M., (Ed.). (1990). The challenge of education: No time to waste; no 
room for failure. Miami: The Cuban American Policy Center. 

Eisner, E. W., (1991). The enlightened eve: Qualitative inquiry and the 
enhancement of educational practice. New York: Macmillan. 

Florida Department of Education. (1997). Sunshine state standards for English 
IV through ESOL: grades 9-12, adult. 

Gregory, J. (1991). The end of “American” literature: toward a multicultural 
practice. College English. 53 (3) . 264-281. 




Groden, M., & Kreisworth M. (1994 ). The John Hopkins guide to literary theory 
and criticism. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins UP. 

Guerin, W., Labor, E., Morgan, L., Reesman, J. C., & Willingham, J.R. 

(1992). A handbook of critical approaches to literature: third edition (Rev. ed.). 

Oxford: Oxford U.P. 

Holmanan, C. H., & Harmon, W. (1986). A handbook to literature (5 th ed.). 
New York: Macmillan. 

Janesick, V. (1991). Forms of curriculum inquiry. Ethnographic inquiry: 
understanding culture and experience. In E. C. Short (Ed.), Forms of curriculum inquiry. 
New York: State University of New York Press. 

Janesick, V. (1994). The dance of qualitative research design: Metaphor, 
methodology, and meaning. In N. R. Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Handbook of 
qualitative research, (pp. 209 - 219). London: Sage. 

Jay, G. S. (1991). The end of ‘American Literature’: Toward a multicultural 
practice. College English 53 (3), 264 -281. 

Krashen, S. (1992). The power of reading: insights from the research. 
Englewood: Libraries Unlimited. 

Maxwell, J. A. (1994). Qualitative research design: An interactive approach. 
Thousand Oaks: Sage. 

Miami-Dade Community College. (1992). Course competencies and learning 
outcomes: ENS Reading Levels 1-4 [Curriculum]. English Language Institute, 
Wolfson Campus: Author. 




197 

181 



Miami-Dade Community College. (1998). ESL and ENS students by home 
campus and term [Report], The Office of Institutional Research, Wolfson Campus: 
Author. 

Miami-Dade County Public Schools. (1997) Enrollment in bilingual programs, 
1997-98 [Report], The Office of Educational Planning: Author. 

Miami-Dade County Public Schools. (1996) Secondary ESOL competency- 
based -curriculum (revised ed.) [Curriculum], Division of Bilingual/Foreign Language 
Skills: Author. 

Miami-Dade County Public Schools. (1995). District plan for limited English 
proficient students: 1995 - 1998 [Program Guide], Division of Bilingual/Foreign 
Language Skills: Author. 

Morris, A. (1985). Dick, Jane, and American literature: fighting with canons. 
College English. 47 (5), 467-48 1 . 

Povey, J.F. (1979). The teaching of literature in advanced ESL classes. In L. 
McIntosh & M. Celce-Murcia (Eds.), Teaching English as a second or foreign language. 
(pp. 162-186). Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 

Rosenblatt, L. M. (1995). Literature as exploration (Rev. ed.). 

New York, NY : ML A. 

Sage, H. (1987). Incorporating literature in ESL instruction. Englewood Cliffs: 
Prentice-Hall. 

Smoke, T. (1996). A Writer’s Workbook (3 rd ed.), New York: St. Martin’s. 




198 

182 



Spears-B unton, L. (1992). Cultural consciousness and response to literary texts 
among African-American and European- American high school juniors. Dissertation 
Abstracts International. 53-12A. 4195, (University Microfilms No. AAG93 12304) 

Spears-Bunton, L. (1998). All the colors of the land: A literacy montage. In A. 
Willis (Ed.), Teaching and using multicultural literature in grades 9 -12: Moving beyond 
the canon, (pp. 17 - 36). Norwood: Christopher-Gordon. 

Spradley, J. P., (1979). The ethnographic interview. New York: Holt, Rinehart 
and Winston. 

Stem, S. (1985). An integrated approach to literature in ESOL/EFL. In M. Celce- 
Murcia (Ed.), Teaching English as a second or foreign language (2nd ed.). (pp. 328-346). 
Boston, Mass.: Heinle and Heinle. 

Widdowson, H. (1975). Stylistics and the teaching of literature. London: 
Longman. 



199 

183 



(APPENDIX A - Consent Form in English) 



INFORMED CONSENT 

TRANSCUL TURAL EXPERIENCES: 

A UTERATURE BRIDGE TO ENGLISH 
FOR ESOL STUDENIS FROM CUBA 

I freely and voluntarily consent to be a participant in the research project entitled 
Transcultural Experiences: A Bridge Towards English Through Literature for ESOL 
Students from Cuba to be conducted at Florida International University during the 1997- 
1998 school year, with Jose Macia as Principal Investigator. I have been told that this 
experiment will require two interview sessions, lasting approximately 90 minutes each. 

I understand that the purpose of this research is to study ESOL students’ 
transcultural experiences in order to make connections between transcultural experiences 
and teaching literature in the ESOL classroom. 

I understand that the research procedures will be as follows: 

1) 1 will be asked a series of interview questions related to my experiences in Cuba. 

2) I will be asked a series of interview questions related to my experiences in the U.S. 

3) The interviews will be recorded two ways— by a court-reporting student (audiocassette 
recorder) and a computerized aided transcription machine (CAT System). 

I understand that there are no risks or benefits involved in my participation in this 
experiment. I have been told that my responses will be anonymous and will be identified 
in the dissertation by a pseudonym. I have been told that there will be approximately six 
respondents in the total sample for this study. 




200 

184 



I understand that I may withdraw my consent and discontinue participation in this 
research project at any time without any negative consequences. I have been given the 
right to ask questions concerning the procedure, and any questions have been answered to 
my satisfaction. 

I understand that if I desire further information about this research I should 
contact Mr. Jose Macia, at (305) 362-0676 or Dr. Kingsley Banya at (305) 348-1921. I 
have been offered a copy of this informed consent form. 

I have read, and I understand the consent form. 



Participant’s signature Date 

I, , am the parent or legal guardian of 

(name of parent or legal guardian of participant) 

. I have read, and I understand the consent 

(participant’s name) 

form, and authorize for my son/daughter to participate in the study. 



Signature of parent or legal guardian of participant Date 

I have explained and defined in detail the research procedure in which the participant has 
agreed to participate, and have offered him/her a copy of this informed consent form. 



201 

185 



Principal investigator’s signature 



Date 



(APPENDIX B - Consent Form in Spanish) 

AUTORIZACION 

EXPERIENCIAS TRANSCUL TU RALES: UN PUENTE UTERARIO HACL4 EL INGLES 
PARA ESTUDIANTES DE INGLES COMO SEGUNDA LENGUA 

Libre y voluntariamente accedo a participar en el proyecto investigativo 
titulado “Experiencias transculturales: un puente hacia el ingles a traves de la literatura 
en estudiantes de ESOL.” Dicha investigacion se conducira en la Universidad 
Intemacional de la Florida por Jose Macia, investigador, durante el ano escolar 1997- 
1998. He sido informado que esta investigacion requerira de dos entrevistas de noventa 
minutos de duracion cada una. 

Entiendo que el objetivo de este estudio es indagar sobre las experiencias 
transculturales de los estudiantes de ingles como segunda lengua (ESOL), para establecer 
conexiones entre dichas experiencias y la ensenanza de la literatura a los estudiantes de 
ESOL. 

Entiendo que los procedimientos a seguir seran los siguientes: 

1 . El investigador me hara una serie de preguntas sobre mi experiencias en Cuba. 

2. El investigador me hara una serie de preguntas sobre mi experiencias en los 
EstadosJJnidos. 

3. Las entrevistas se recogeran de dos maneras: a traves de una grabacion utilizando un 
grabador-reproductor y por ruas de una transcripcion computarizada (Sistema CAT). 

Entiendo que no enfrento riesgos ni beneficios relacionados con mi participacion 
en este proyecto. He sido informado que mis respuestas se mantendran anonimas y se 

202 

186 



identificaran en la disertacion con un seudonimo. He sido informado que habran cuatro 
participantes en el presente estudio. 

Entiendo que puedo retirar mi autorizacion y dejar de participar en esta 
investigacion en cualquier momenta que entienda pertinente sin que esto revierta en 
ningun tipo de consequencia negativa. Tengo el derecho de realizar preguntas sobre el 
procedimiento a seguir en esta investigacion y de recibir respuestas satisfactorias. 

Entiendo que si deseo informacion adicional sobre esta investigacion puedo 
llamar al Sr. Jose Macia (305-362-0676) o al Dr. Kinglsey Banya (305-348-1921). Se me 
ha ofrecido una copia de esta autorizacion. 

He leido y entendido este formulario. 



Firma del participante Fecha 

Yo , soy el padre o guardian legal de 

(padre o guardian legal del participante) 

. He leido y entendido el formulario de 

(participante) 

autorizacion. Otorgo mi consentimiento para que mi hijo(a) participe en la investigacion 
aqui expuesta. 

Firma del padre o guardian legal Fecha 

He explicado en detalles el procedimiento en el cual estara involucrado el participante. Le 

he ofrecido una copia de esta autorizacion. 




Firma del investigador 



Fecha 



(APPENDIX C - Interview Protocol A) 



Interview Questions 

The following questions will be asked in two sessions for a total of ten interviews that 
will compose the primary data set for this study. Interview questions will be edited 
appropriately for Cuban-born or Cuban American bom students. 

Interview Protocol A 

1 . What city, province and town of Cuba (or the U.S.) were you bom in? 

2. Describe the (city) town you were bom in? 

3. How long did you live (have you lived) there? 

4. Did you live in any other towns, provinces, or countries before coming to the U.S.? 

5. How old are you? 

6. When did you leave Cuba? 

7. How did you get from Cuba to the U.S. ? 

8. With whom did you come to the U.S. ? 

9. Did you already have family in the U.S. ? Who? 

10. Do you have family in Cuba? Who? 

1 1 . Describe your impressions of Cuba. 

12. Describe some of your first thoughts when you arrived in Miami. 

13. Is Miami the only place you’ve lived in the U.S.? 

14. Describe your impressions of Miami. 

15. How did you picture the U.S. before you came here? 



16. Is Barbara Goleman (or Miami Dade) the only school you have attended in the U.S.? 

17. Describe a day at Barbara Goleman (or Miami Dade). 

18. Describe what you like and don’t like about school in Miami. 

19. What high school did you attend in Cuba? 

20. Describe a day at school in Cuba. 

21. Describe what you liked and didn’t like about school in Cuba. 

22. Describe your feelings around the other students in Cuba. 

23. Describe your feelings around the other students at Barbara Goleman (or Miami- 
Dade). 

24. What is your favorite subject here at Barbara Goleman (or Miami-Dade)? Why? 

25. What was your favorite subject in Cuba? Why? 

26. What was your least favorite subject in Cuba? Why? 

27. What is your least favorite subject here in the U.S.? Why? 

28. What did you like doing in your spare time in Cuba? 

29. What do you like doing in your spare time here in Miami? 

30. Describe your favorite memory of an experience in Cuba. 

31. Describe your favorite memory of an experience here in the U.S. 

32. Describe a weekend in Cuba. 

33. Describe a weekend in the U.S. 

34. Did you have many friends in Cuba? 

35. Describe one of your best friends in Cuba. 

36. Do you have many friends in the U.S.? 

37. Describe one of your best friends in the U.S. 



205 

189 



38. While you were still in Cuba, what were your plans for the future? 

39. Have your plans changed now that you are in the U.S.? 

40. What did you like to read in Cuba? 

41. What do you like to read in the U.S.? 




206 

190 



(APPENDIX D - Interview Protocol B) 



Interview Protocol B 

42. What kinds of movies did you like to watch in Cuba? 

43. What kinds of movies did you like to watch in the U.S.? 

44. Describe the music you listened to in Cuba. 

45. Describe the music you listened to in the U.S. 

46. What sports did you play in Cuba? 

47. What sports do you play in the U.S.? 

48. Did you work in Cuba? Describe your job. 

49. Do you work here in the U.S.? Describe your job. 

50. Describe an afternoon after school in Cuba. 

51. Describe an afternoon after school in the U.S. 

52. Describe your favorite place in Cuba. 

53. Describe your favorite place in the U.S. 

54. Describe your impressions of the beach in Cuba. 

55. Describe your impressions of the beach in the U.S. 

56. What are some of the foods you ate in Cuba? Describe your eating habits in Cuba, 
and some of the meals you ate on a typical day. 

57. What are some of the foods you eat in Miami? Describe your eating habits now, and 
some of the meals you eat on a typical day. 

58. Describe your relationships and feelings towards teachers, police officers, or other 
authority figures in Cuba. 



207 

191 



59. Describe your relationships and feelings towards teachers, police officers, or other 
authority figures here in Miami. 

60. In the U.S., many people promote the idea of students’ rights to freely express their 
ideas. What do you think about this? 

61. Do you feel that in Cuba students had the same rights to express their ideas freely? 

62. In the U.S., some students and teachers publicly question and criticize the 
government, including the President. What do you think about this? 

63. Do you feel that in Cuba students and teachers have the right to publicly question and 

criticize the government, including the President? 

64. Describe a party or social event, where friends and family gather, in Cuba. 

65. Describe a party or social event, where friends and family gather, here in Miami. 

66. Describe being a teenager in Cuba. 

67. Describe being a teenager in Miami. 

68. How do teenagers feel about religion in Cuba? 

69. What are your impressions of how teenagers feel about religion in Miami? 

70. How do teenagers feel about sex in Cuba? 

7 1 . How do teenagers feel about sex in Miami? 

72. Describe a fun day in Cuba. 

73. Describe a fun day in Miami. 

74. Describe your vision of Cuba in the future. 

75. Describe your vision of Miami in the future. 

76. Would you like to spend the rest of your life in the U.S or would you like to go back 
to Cuba someday? 

208 



192 



77. What is your impression of a Cuban- American student at Barbara Goleman (or Miami 
Dade), someone bom here, whose parents are Cuban? 

78. Do you have friends who were bom here, but of Cuban descent? 

79. Do you have friends in Miami who were bom in Cuba, but recently came to the U.S.? 

80. Do you think there is a cultural difference between Cubans in Cuba and Cubans in the 
U.S.? Describe the difference. 

8 1 . If you had three wishes, what would you wish for? 

82. What is your idea of a great life? 



209 



VITA 





JOSE J. MACIA 

Bom, Camaguey, Cuba 


1992 


B.A., English 
Barry University 
Miami Shores, Florida 


1993 


ESOL Teacher 

Ponce de Leon Middle School 
Coral Gables, Florida 


1993-1994 


ESOL Teacher 

Coral Gables Senior High School 
Coral Gables, Florida 


1994 


M.A., English 
Barry University 
Miami Shores, Florida 


1994- 1998 


ESOL Department Chair / Teacher 
Miami Coral Park Senior High School 
Miami, Florida 


1997 - Present 


ESL Adjunct Instructor 

Miami-Dade Community College, Wolfson 


1998- 1999 


ESOL Department Chair / Teacher 
Barbara Goleman Senior High School 
Miami, Florida 


1 999 - Present 


ESL Professor 

Broward Community College, North 
Coconut Creek, Florida 


1999 


Ed.D., Higher Education 
Florida International University 
Miami, Florida 



210 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 

DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



I L, OL//- oH/t/w 

(iJ-O&'b ^60 9 




ArjoJilK -/hr 1 JVz 


Author(s): ZTo ?o J Zf- /J?CX C fCK . 




Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 

H, 






II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents 



Level 1 

t 



vy 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 2A documents 



The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to alt Level 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

* 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

A® 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

* 


fj rXV* 




=/ 




cjp 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




f' 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Level 2A 

D 



Level 2B 

T 



Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival 
media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 



Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 



ERIC 



/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 



Signature: / 



Organs 



ate 




-t 






nun . - , „ 

ME IMP. 



Printed Name/PosrtkxVTitie: 



Josx JT (Y)a uc< L 



E-Mail Address: , _ l ,! 

J cc TTTUs 



FAX: 



Date: 



n 



UJoE. 



(over) 



/ 




III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM^ NON-ERIC; SOURCE): : 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the.document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document; (ERIC will not announce a document unless : it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EORS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and , 
address; 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse; 

ERIC Clearinghouse on 
• Languages & Linguistics 
464640THST.NW 
WASHINGTON, D.C. 20016*1859 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility^ 

' 1100 West Street, 2 nd Floor,.^ '’ 

Laurel, Maryland 20707-3598 

Telephone: 301^497-4080 
Toll Free: ' 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-953-0263^^. 
e-mail: ericfac@ineted.gov 

y WWW: http://ericfac.piccard.csc.com 

)88 (Rev. 9/97) 

rncVIOUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORM ARE OBSOLETE. 



