DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 390 070 


CS 215 180 


AUTHOR 


Biava, Christina 


TITLE 


Multicultural Texts and the Ital ian-American 
Experi Cure . 


PUB DATE 


[95] 


NOTE 


20p. 


PUB TYPE 


Viewpoints (Opini on/Pos i t i on Papers, Essays, etc.) 
(120) — Historical Materials (060) 


EDRS PRICE 


MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 


DESCRIPTORS 


'Cultural Context; ^Ethnic Bias; Higher Education; 
Immigrants; ’'Italian Americans; Minority Groups; 
Multicultural Education; Textbook Content 


IDENTIFIERS 

ABSTRACT 


Acceptance; *Ethnic Literature; Historical 
Background; ’'Italian American Literature 

Much Ital ian-Amer ican culture and writing, beginning 



with the Italians' migration and settlement in the United States from 
1880 to 1920, is fo'-gotten today. Italians traditionally did not 
value literacy and taucation. I tal ian-Amer i cans , for economical 
reasons that they share with other ethnic and racial minorities as 
well as cultural characteristics that are probably theirs alone, were 
not as successful as other groups in developing a literature, 
especially in the decades before the ethnic revival of the late 
1960s. Other reasons include a biased publishing industry, influenced 
by the personal taste and commercial judgments of editors whose 
reasons for rejection are Ital ian“American author's lack of 
sophi s t i cat ed style, lack of universal themes, or lack of realistic 
characters. Since 1990, the number of multicultural composition 
textbooks and multicultural courses have grown , suggest ing a common 
ground for all cultures, rather than making diversity a barrier among 
cultures. However, Ital ian“American writers still do not enjoy the 
broad audi' nee achieved by other cultural groups. Among the reasons 
why these writers are not being included in the current emphusis on 
mul t icul tural i sm is the absence of sympathy for their ethnic group, 
extant for other cultures such as Native Americans or African 
Americans. However, in the 30 multicultural texts examined recently, 

4 of 13 published between 1991 and 1993 were Itali an“Amer i can 
selections, but of 17 published in 1994 and 1995, there were 9 
selections. This seems to indicate more acceptance of 
Ital ian-Amer icans and their literature as an important piece of the 
American cultural mosaic. (Contains 12 references.) (CR) 



* * Vc * * V? Vf * * * Vf * Vf * Vf Vf */f i: Vc Vr sV Vc Vc * >'c Vr Vc j'c * * * V: Vr it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

from the original document. 

Vc Vc it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it it 











(^'0 ED 390 070 



u L^DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Oti*C0 ol fcducm«or.ai Roscdfch and ln'pfov»)mont 

EDUCATIONAL f^ESOUR^ES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

P* This docunrieni r.as been reproduced as 
received from the person or organt^atron 
originatinp it 

□ Minor Changes have beer mnde to 
improve lep^oduction quality 



•‘PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 






Christina Biava 
Dept . of English 
Southwest Missouri State U. 
Springf ield, MO 65804 



Multicultural Texts and the Italian-American Experience 



Points of view or opinions stated m rh.s 
documenl do not necessarily represent 
oMiCial OERI position or policy. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) * 



o 

ERIC 



In October 1939, the Book-of-the-Month Club, in deciding 
what its selection would be, passed over a novel about 
Depression-era Okies leaving the Dust Bowl to look for work in 
California, in favor of another novel about an Italian immigrant 
family’s struggle to survive in New York after the husband and 
father is buried alive by stone and mortar in a construction 
accident. The first novel? Of course, it was John Steinbeck’s 
The Grapes of Wrath, now an American classic. The chosen book? 
Pietro di Donato’s Christ in Concrete, virtually unheard of today 
outside of Italian-American literary circles (Talese 25). 

Di Donato’s experiences illustrate the fate of much Italian- 
American culture and writing that resulted from the Great 
Migration from Italy in the half century following that country’s 
unification in the 1860s, a migration that cost Italy a quarter 
of its population overall, but a very disproportionate amount 
from the poverty-stricken southern half of the Italian peninsula 
and Sicily, where ancient villages were entirely depopulated 
within two generations. Di Donato, born in 1911 in New Jersey, 
was a grade school drop-out who followed his immigrant father 
into the bricklaying trade. The accident that served as the 
basis of Di Donato’s novel actually happened in 1923, when the 
author was twelve years old. His mother’s death a coux>le of 
years later--having received no financial assistance whatsoever 
after tlie father’s death--f oi'ced the author to drop out of 
seventh grade in order to support his seven brothers and sisters. 

awaii Am i* 



With the rise of racial and ethnic awareness in the late 
1960s and early 1970s, literary and cultural critics began to 
analyze the position of Italian-American writing in the American 
literary mainstream. Two questions emerged from this 
examination. The first was simply, "Why aren’t there more 
Italian-American writers?" to which was added the second, "Why 
aren’t there more Italian-American writers represented in the 
literary canon?" In addition to reviewing the literature in 
regards to this dual question, this paper will also suggest some 
answers to a third question that followed an examination of 
current multicultural texts: "Given the current emphasis on 

multiculturalism, why aren’t Italian-American writers writing 
about Italian-America better represented in current multicultural 
anthologies? " 

How many Italian-American writers are there? The first 
bibliography, collected by Olga Peragallo in 1949, listed only 59 
Italian-American writers representing a population of about 5 
million first and second generation Ital ian-Americans (Green 21). 
Rose Basile Green’s bibliography a generation later, in 1974, 
lists 62 novelists. Looking at two more recent publications, 
Helen Barolini’s 1985 anthology The Dream Book, contains work by 
56 Italian-American women writers, including memoirs and 
nonfiction along with fiction, drama, and poetry, while Tamburri, 
Giordano, and Gardaphe’s From the Margin, an anthology published 
in 1991, includes both creative and critical work by about 40 
mostly recent-born authors. 




3 



3 




Why Not More Italian-American Writers? 

Scholars in literature, history, and sociology, as well as 
writers themselves, have examined the character of Italian- 
Americans as well as the character of the Great Migration and 
settlement in the U.S. from 1880-1920. An overwhelming consensus 
comes from these scholars. 

Similar to problems encountered by other ethnic Americans, 
Italian-Americans first had to acquire the tools for writing. 

This usually included facility in the English language, although 
some early Italian-American writers wrote in Italian or even in 
French. Only a few first generation immigrants acquired enough 
expertise in their second language to write in it (Barolini; 
Greene; Talese). 

Like other immigrants, however, Italians needed not only a 
facility in the language but the time in which to write. This 
was an unheard of commodity among most first and second 
generation Italian-Americans who had fled but not left behind 
abject poverty. Economic necessity forced all immigrants, 
including young children, into lives of endless drudgery in 
factories, sewers, mines, and streets. Second and even third 
generation would-be writers fared little better with their 
families’ emphasis on being pragmatic: both sons and daughters 
were and still are steered into either blue-collar trades or 
white-collar sure-money professions like medicine, business, and 
law, rather than "the uncertain and meager financial rewards that 
too often accompany careers as writers and teachers of 
literature , 



It 



as current writer Gay Talese explains from his own 

4 






early experience as a journalist (29). 

Furthermore, not only was there no time for writing but the 
privacy it required was also hard to come by. Italian-Amer leans 
remain to this day essentially a group-minded group. Talese 
explains, "The writer’s life is a solitary one, and ... solitude 
is a most unnatural condition for the village-dwelling people 
that the Italians essentially are" (29). 

Furthermore, suspicious attitudes toward literacy and 
education had also survived the Atlantic crossing. In contrast 
to the northern half of Italy, Southern Italy especially had been 
a land dominated by corrupt foreign landowners since the 
Thirteenth Century, resulting in an culture of fatalism, destine , 
with a miseria mental ity--that is, utterly inescapable misery 
from the poverty of one’s fate on this earth. This attitude 
resulted in turn in complete distrust of all authority and 
institutions outside the extended family and complete loyalty to 
it. Outside authority included all those connected with the 
government, church, and schools; by extension, education and the 
written word were suspect as ways that children could be lured 
away from total loyalty toward their family and their duties to 
it. Barolini writes: 

There are certain mindsets . . . endemic among the 

Italian immigrants, which are taking generations to 
reshape. Self-denial was the psychological preparation 
among peasants for survival in regions where la miseria 
was the norm of life and there was no chance of a 
better one. Therefore, one denied oneself aspirations 




5 ' 



and one’s children education because both were futile. 
When the poor did leave to better themselves in this 
country, they brought their ways intact, including the 
old miseria mentality. . . . 

In America schools were not always regarded as the 
road to a better future; more often they were seen as a 
threat to the family because they stressed assimilation 
into American ways. Reading was ridiculed as too 
private, too unproductive, too exclusive an enjoyment- 
-free time should be spent with the family group. 
Learning gave one ideas, made one different; all the 
family wanted was cohesion. (8) 

Two more ideas are useful here. First, many critics comment 
on the ultimate way of enforcing family loyalty: omerta, or the 

code of silence which causes Italian-Americans to shy away from 
divulging any family secrets (Talese 23). Barolini writes of 
this in reference to women writers: 

[T]he cultural tradition of omerta--the conspiracy of 
silence . . . sees nothing, hears nothing, tells 

nothing, and thus betrays nothing. Writing is an act of 
assertiveness and Italian American women, with few 
exceptions, have not been reared for public assertion. 

( 23-24 ) 

Second, this survival mindset can further be described by 
reference to the concept of malocchio, the evil eye. Lawrence 
DiStasi describes it: "Beauty and excellence attract the eye, and 

the admiring eye thus attracted, no matter how benign it may 

6 ' 



appear , is wal , is evil j and capable of causing harm” { Barol ini 
24). And Barolini writes of how malocchio works, especially in 
reference to female writers: 



(p 



[ I tal ian-American women writers] are ... susceptible 
to the idea that excelling , drawing attention to 
oneself, is not womanly, not good. . . . One mustn’t 

disconnect from one’s immediate group, as a writer must 
in order to get perspective and unique vision: and, one 
mustn’t try to see too much““either into oneself or into 
others; all such would bring upon oneself the curse of 
separation . 

It is not unlikely that the subtleties of these 
attitudes have helped reinforce the reticence of Italian 
and Italian American women and it is not improbable that 
residues still remain of the very prevalent malocchio 
fear. The taboo is against being seen as excelling in 
anything, or in that close seeing which is self- 
knowledge; for the mysteries must be kept. Those who 
see too f ar--Tiresias , Milton, Galileo--go blind. (24) 
Finally , part of the distrust of education and literacy 
can also be seen in the idea that Italian culture is image-based 
rather than word-based (Paglia 29). This may explain why film is 
perhaps a "truer, more traditional outlet for artistic Italian- 
Americans than books," as Talese writes of the views of critic 
Camille Paglia (29). Talese details the upbringing of the 
filmmaker Martin Scorsese as described by Anthony DeCurtis: 

The director recalled that during his student days at 

O 



7 



New York University he had shocked his parents one day 
by walking into their home carrying a book! "There 
were discussions about whether or not I should bring 
the book into the house," Mr. Scorsese said. His 
American-born parents, who worked in the garment 
center, had failed to complete grammar school. The 
only reading matter in their home was tabloid 
newspapers, and Mr. Scorsese said he grew up "cowed a 
little by the tyranny of art" and particularly 
"the tyranny of the word over the image." (Talese 29) 

Thus, Ital ian-Americans , for both economic reasons that they 
share with other ethnic and racial minorities as well as cultural 
characteristics that are probably theirs alone, were not as 
successful as other groups in developing a literature, especially 
in the decades before the ethnic revival of the late 1960s. 

Why not published? 

The second part of this question needs to be addressed also, 
however. Why isn’t the Italian American writing that did get 
done get published, kept in print, and made more widely known in 
the mainstream? 

Again, the first reason is probably that shared by many 
ethnic and racial groups: until recently, most minority 
literature was simply not welcome due to a biased publishing 
industry (including boo-: reviewers) as well as a biased reading 
public. Many minorities were only allowed to have a public life 
in stereotypical roles of servants, beasts of burden, 

(S 



entertainers . 



A public role that showed one’s intelligence and 



perhaps one’s criticism of the system just wasn’t allowed. 

Italian immigration to this country was preponderantly 
by people who were not wanted or valued in their land 
of origin, then found they were not wanted or valued 
here when they aspired to more than their exploitation 
as raw labor. (Barolini 3-4) 

Fingers are often pointed at the American publishing 
industry for failing to publish I talian-American writers or, once 
published, for failing to advertise them and keep writings in 
print. Talese quotes Fred Gardaphe, Italian-American writer and 
professor of English at Columbia College in Chicago, whose book 
From the Margin was rejected in the late 1980s by every main 
commercial publisher he sent it to; he finally had it published 
by an academic press, Purdue, in 1991. Gardaphe says: 

"The book business is made up of editors and publishers 
whose backgrounds are mostly Anglo-Saxon and Jev?ish. . 

. . The acceptance or rejection of manuscripts is 

influenced by editors’ personal tastes and commercial 
judgments. . . and with so few Italian-American editors 

in the mainstream, it’s not surprising that there are 
so few widely circulated books on Italian themes-- 
except, of course, those dealing with gangsters. 

There are not only few Italian-American editors, but 
just as few book columnists and critics. . . . 



We I talian-Americans as a whole get little support 
from the mainstream. (25) 




1 



Talese points out that Jtalian-Araericans only get published 
when they fit into one of three categories: first, they ignore or 

deride their ethnicity; second, they change or Americanize their 
names; or third, they write about the Mafia. Barolini points out 
further (37) that "the Italian American novel, when written by an 
Italian American author, is all but invisible, while authors of 
other backgrounds, using that material, have received attention" 
such as Household Saints by Francine Prose, just made into a 
movie last year. 

On the other hand, publishers and critics state several 
reasons for their lack of interest in Ital ian-American writing. 
Talese writes, citing DeCurtis, "Too many Italian-Americans . . . 

are nonreaders, and thus fail to form a book-buying market that 
publishers cater to" (25). 

A second cause for publishers’ disinterest is an alleged 
poor quality of the material. Italian-American writing has been 
described as lacking a sophisticated style, lacking universal 
themes, and lacking realistic or well-developed characters. 
Tamburri, Giordano, and Gardaphe give Barolini ’s description of 
this problem. In writing of two important works, Barolini says; 

Both [works] leave the brute strength of experience. . 

. . It is as though style and linguistic daring are 

still being sacrificed to the white heat of telling our 
story .... Only when our history. . . has been 

transcended will we come into our own stylistically and 
be open to some greater experimentation of theme and 



ERIC 



0 



style. (8) 



t 



iO 

At the same time as the stories are felt to be too real, the 
characters themselves are often described as being too unreal, 
too allegorical for American audiences, like characters in opera! 

Multicul tural Texts 

Since 1990, the number of multicultural textbooks to be used 
in composition or multicultural courses, has grown. The point of 
view and intended audience for each text may vary, but in general 
they are aimed at introducing the various cultures of the U.S. to 
the American college student or at least exploring common 
cultural themes from a variety of American ethnic perspectives. 

For example. Celebrating Diversity : A Multicultural Reader^ 
published by Heath in 1995, states, "The multicultural readings 
[in this book] . . . reflect--and celebrate--cul tural diversity 

in its broadest sense. A major criterion in selecting these 
readings was that they have universal application for college 
composition students--that they suggest a common ground for all 
cultures, rather than making diversity a barrier between 
cultures . " 

One would think that with this trend and this philosophy, 
the voices of I talian-Americans would finally be given a broader 
audience alongside other voices previously marginalized from 
American literature: Native American, African American, Asian 
American, Caribbean American, Hispanic American, and women from 
all groups. Sadly this has not been the case. 

In my examination of thirty multicultural texts suitable for 
undergraduate writing courses with copyrights from 1991 to 1995, 



li 



a 



only thirteen contained any selections by an Italian-American 
writer on an Italian-American theme; furthermore, of these 
thirteen, only three carried more than one selection. In all, 
out of about 2250 total selections in the texts, only 17 were 
Italian-American, for a figure well below .1 percent. 

Reasons already reviewed why Italian-American writers have 
found it hard to be or stay published still hold true today in 
this age of multiculturalism . Ital ian-Americans still face much 
bias from the publishing world where they must battle the 
stereotypical Mafia image that has been created for them. 

However, they also must battle unrecognized bias from those who 
assemble these anthologies . 

barolini, writing in 1985 about women writers, gives what I 
think is still the current attitude toward Italian-American 
writers as a whole: 

Non-Wasp writers have come to the fore br illiantly-- 
Jewish women writers. Blacks, Native Americans, 
Chicanas--all have been collected , given critical 
attention , and , thereby , given presence . The Italian 
American woman writer belongs nowhere --not minority , 
not mainstream as Jewish and Black writers now are, she 
remains silent as a group, without champions or 
advocates . (31) 

One basic reason that I feel Italian-American writers are 
not being included in the current emphasis on multicultural ism is 
what I might call the ’’European argument.” That is, Italians, 
unlike most other currently recognized ethnic and racial groups, 



12 




/a. 



are European. In fact, this is perhaps the major reason why many 
people might not consider Italian-American literature as 
deserving of "multicultural" status, especially as moves are made 
to de-Europeanize the canon. Yet one can view this in the 
opposite way. To do so, I’d like to mention the ideas from a 
major Twentieth Century Marxist, Antonio Gramsci, jailed under 
Mussolini for tw’enty years. 

The notion that is important in the current context is his 
theory that some capitalist countries in Europe were "peripheral" 
while other countries had "central" status. The peripheral 
countries had less developed capitalistic economies and thus were 
outside the mainstream in Europe. He listed as peripheral 
Portugal, Spain, the Balkans, Poland--and Italy. Furthermore, 
Gramsci himself was a Sardinian, in fact from the poorest part of 
that island, and was acutely aware of being thricely 
marginalized: from a peripheral area of a peripheral region of a 

peripheral counti'y in Europe {Adamson 87-89). 

Thus, I feel it is wrong to continue to marginalize Italian- 
American writers; their grandparents had no voice a century ago 
in Italy and their status as "Europeans" should not be held 
against them in this country and in this century. 

A second argument for keeping Italian-Americans out of the 
multicultural texts 1 might call the "assimilation argument." 

That is, the argument goes that the Great Migration of 1880-1920 
is over, and many of the third and fourth generation descendants 
have intermarried with people from other groups, lost their 
Italian identity, and found success in mainstream American life. 



O 




To this argument I would counter that the Chinese came over well 
before the Italians and their descendants have often found 
material success in this country, yet they are well represented 
in mult icultural ism and the names Amy Tan and Maxine Hong 
Kingston are household words — as they should be . Furthermore , 
it’s debatable how much success and assimilation have come to 
I tal ian-Americans . Some sociologists have suggested that at this 
time the third and fourth generations are in sad shape, falling 
into two socioeconomic classes (upper middle and working), almost 
paralleling the situation a century ago in Italy between Northern 
and Southern Italians (Mangione & Morreale ) . And Andrew Rolle’s 
magnificent psychological analysis Italian-AiaBricans : Troubled 

Roots speaks volumes to the problems arising from culture clash 
inherited but not yet solved among the millions of Americans of 
Italian heritage, which include the usual litany of minority 
problems: alcoholism, drug addiction, violence, teen pregnancy, 

mental illness, criminality. Thus, the "assimilation" argument 
is only partially true. 

A third argument I might call the "suffering argument"; that 
is, some might argue that Italian-Americans did not suffer much 
compared to African-Americans or Nat ive-Americans . Of course I 
would have to agree with this. Yet I would also ask that people 
remember the lynchings that occurred of 15 Italians in the early 
part of this century in New Orleans; the infamous case of Sacco 
and Vanzetti in the 1920s; the fatal attack by the Colorado 
National Guard on striking coal miners in 1914 in Ludlow, 
Colorado, in which Italian and Chicano women and children were 







shot, burned, or suffocated to death; the deplorable working 
conditions of men, women, and children in the tenements of New 
York City; the prejudice they fa.ced from Anglo-Amer ica . 

In addition to these three arguments, a final reason that 
I tal ian-Americans are not well represented in multicultural ism 
can perhaps be proposed. Given the current view of "appropriate" 
diverse cultures, Italian-Americans are just not quite in vogue. 

In other words, I want to suggest that Italian-Americans are seen 
as not quite politically correct for a number of reasons. 

Basically, this outsider status is tied to several aspects 
of the Italian-American character and persona. Italians and 
Italian-Americans are very pragmatic people; as pointed out 
earlier in this paper, this pragmatism is one of the reasons that 
so few Italian-Americans have had literary aspirations. This 
pragmatism also manifests itself in a people who are not 
idealists or extremists; in short, Italian culture is one that 
accepts violence, fate, death, and the contradictions involved in 
daily life. These are not qualities popular in American culture, 
which is characterized by utopian idealism, both on conservative 
and liberal sides. For example, Italian-Americans have recently 
produced wildly popular public figures in Madonna and Camille 
Paglia that both the right and left either objects to strongly or 
is confused about. This no-man’s land of I talo-Amer icana can be 
summarized by DeCurtis’s characterization of Italian-Americans as 
"’too unpolished and prole for the right wing’ and 'too 
independent and unfashionable for the left’" (Talese 25). 

Italians are also "obsessed with family," in their lives as 



/5 



ERIC 



well as in their literature. Barolini explains: 

Italian Americans, male and female, in their 
literature as in their lives, are obsessed with family. 
It is their theme much more than such "American" ones 
as Didion’s angst, Beattie’s bleakness, personal 
ambition, spiritual struggle, or the hard working out 
cf the clinical sex relationship. (35) 

While both the left and the right are reclaiming the family 
as political territory, neither group does so in the fundamental 
way that characterizes Italian-Americans . The right is too male- 
dominated, whereas Italian culture is very much centered on the 
mother as symbolized by the cult status of the Madonna (Barolini 
9). On the other hand, the left is too anti-male dominated. For 
example, establishment feminism has encouraged women to leave all 
abusive relationships; in contrast, the Italian attitude is to 
battle it out within the family, live with some unpleascmtness , 
without destroying the family. Barolini describes this: 

A film of 1970, Lovers and Other Strangers, [shows] the 
father in an Italian American family coni'ronc [ ing ] a 
son who [is] contemplating divorce: "What do you mean 

you’re not compatible? What do you mean divorce? What 
are you--better than me? Look at me, do I have to be 
happy to be married! What makes you think you got to 
be happy? Why do you think we keep families together? 
--for happiness? Nah! It’s for family]" (8-9) 

Both the left and the right have very different views on 
religion, including how it is seen as functioning in daily life. 

16 



On the one hand, current liberalism espouses an anti- traditional 



religion attitude, while many Italian-Americans of course profess 
allegiance to the Catholic Church, in word if not in deed. Even 
as atheists, Italian-Americans often feel the symbolic value of 
their traditional religion, which is very image-based. This is 
in contrast also with the right’s emphasis on the text-based 
literalness of their religious faiths. 

Finally, Italian-Americans are not simply out of style 
because they’re considered too middle-of-the-road for either left 
or right; in fact, they are considered with prejudice by a biased 
right that considers them violent and overly sexual. By the left 
they are often considered the enemy, along with other "white 
ethnics" such as Poles, Greeks, and other eastern and southern 
Europeans, as holders of racist attitudes against African- 
Americans and other minority groups. The Slovak-Amer ican writer 
Michael Novak describes this anti-working class, white ethnic 
bias clearly: 



I am born of PIGS — those Poles, Italians, Greeks, and 
Slavs, non-English-speaking immigrants, numbered so 
heavily among the workingmen of this nation. Not 
particularly liberal, nor radical, born into a history 
not white Anglo-Saxon and not Jewish. . . , thus privy 

to neither power nor status nor intellectual voice . . 

. . In particular, I have regretted and keenly felt the 

absence of that sympathy for PIGS that the educated 
find so easy to conjure up for black culture, Chicano 
culture , 



Indian culture, and other cultures of the 

iV 



n 



poor* In such cases, one finds, the universalist 
pretensions of liberal culture are suspended : some 
groups , at least , are entitled to be both different and 
respected * 

There are deep secrets here, no doubt, unvoiced 
fantasies and scarcely admitted historical resentments* 
(543, 546) 

Novak wrote this in the early 1970s at the time of the rise 
cf ethnic and racial consciousness in the U*S* I think his 
sentiments still hold true today in trying to explain the absence 
of I tal ian-Amer icans in the recent multicultural trend 

In the thirty multicultural books I examined, I did notice a 
trend toward more I tal ian-Amer ican selections in the books 
published most recently* For example, in the thirteen texts 
published between 1991 and 1993, there were only four Italian- 
American selections* In the seventeen texts published in 1994 
and 1995, there were nine selections* I hope this trend 
indicates more acceptance of the status of I tal ian-Americans and 
their literature as an important piece of the American cultural 



mosaic * 



n 



Works Cited 

Adamson, Walter. Hegemony and Revolution : A Study of Antonio 
Gramsci’s Political and Cultural Theory. Berkeley: U 
California Press, 1980. 

Barolini, Helen (ed.). The Dream Book: An Anthology of Writings 
by Italian American Women. New York: Schocken Books, 1985. 

DeCurtis, Anthony. "What the Streets Mean: An Interview with 

Martin Scorsese." The South Atlantic Quarterly 91 (1992): 
427-58. 

DiStasi, Lawrence. Mai Occhio. San Francisco: North Point 
Press , 1981 . 

Green, Rose Basile. The Italian-American Novel: A Document of 
the Interaction of Two Cultures. Madison NJ : Fairleigh 
Dickinson UP, 1974. 

Mangione, Jerre and Ben Morreale. La Storia: Five Centuries of 
the Italian-American Experience. New York: Harper Collins, 
1992. 

Novak, Michael. "White Ethnic." Speaking for Ourselves. 2nd 
ed. Ed. Lillian Faderman and Barbara Bradshaw. New York: 
Scott Foresman, 1975. 543-50. 

Paglia, Camille. Sex, Art, and American Culture. New York: 
Vintage, 1992. 

Peragallo, Olga. Italian American Authors, New York: Vanni , 
1949. 

Rolle, Andrew. The Italian-Americans : Troubled Roots. New York 




Id 



The Free Press, 1980, 






✓ 



Talese, Gay. "Where Are the Italian-American Novelists?" New 
York Times Book Review 14 Mar. 1993: 1; 23; 25; 29. 

Tamburri , Anthony Julian, Paolo A. Giordano, and Fred L. Gardaphe 
(eds.). From the Margin: Writings in Italian Americana, 

West Lafayette IN: Purdue UP, 1991. 




•J 



