Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


1 


Heritage/ Culture Preservation 
Model Bilingual Instruction 


A Thesis Presented in Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements of the Degree of 
Bachelor of Arts 
in 

Liberal Studies 

Dominican University of California 
by 

Heidi Samayoa 


May 2014 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 2 


This Capstone Thesis has been presented to and approved by the Coordinator of the Liberal 
Studies/Teacher Preparation Program and the LS 4001 Instructor in partial fulfillment of the 
requirements for the degree of Bachelor of Arts, Liberal Studies 


Heidi Samayoa Date 

Student 


Madalienne F. Peters, Ed.D. Date 

Instructor, Liberal Studies 400 1 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


3 


Copyright 2014- Heidi Samayoa 
All Right Reserved 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 4 


Acknowledgments 


Faculty: I would like to thank Madalienne Peters and Suzanne Roybal for all their assistance and 
encouragement throughout this process. Thank you for being so flexible, available and patient. 
Without you this would have not been possible. I would also like to thank Jacqueline Parker and 
Dr. Lyn Webb who have shared and continue to share their wealth of knowledge one this topic. 
They are without doubt outstanding role models both as individuals and educators. 

Family: I would like to acknowledge the family that raised me for installing in me pride and the 
importance of knowing and keeping my heritage. Thanks to my brother Stephen Samayoa, the 
Mahler family, Avila Family, Parker family and Spoerry family. It is because of the support and 
love of all of you that this was possible. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


5 


Table of Contents 


Title Page 1 

Signature Page 2 

Acknowledgments 4 

Table of Contents 5 

Abstract 8 

CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION 10 

Statement of the Problem 10 

Significance of the Study 10 

Purpose of the Study 11 

Background Information 1 1 

Research Questions 12 

Definition of Terms 12 

CHAPTER II REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 14 

Supporting Research 14 

Bilingual Education: Vehicle for Heritage Preservation 14 


Effect of Words and Labels on Identity 


15 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 6 


Culturally Responsive Teacher Education 17 

Summary 19 

CHAPTER III METHOD 20 

Overview 20 

Participants 22 

Procedures 22 

Data Analysis 23 

CHAPTER IV FINDINGS 24 

Summary of Findings 31 

CHAPTER V DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS 33 

Discussion 33 

Limitations 33 

Implications 34 

Practical Implications 34 

Research Implications 34 

Conclusions 34 


About the Author 


35 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


7 


References 


36 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 8 


Abstract 

Our first generation children face a loss of heritage in today’s public schools. 
Unfortunately, the assets that one’s bilingual ability brings into the classroom are difficult for 
educators to fully understand. Often this may happen because professionals in the field of 
education lack the knowledge about the need for children to maintain their culture heritage as a 
first generation or second generation child. 

This study addresses the benefits of the preservation of culture heritage in Latino/ Latina 
children. The problem is that there are very few opportunities for people to see strong bilingual 
education programs with culture heritage preservation as part of the curriculum. 

A review of the literature revealed that there is a need for preservation of culture and 
heritage in the youth of today’s world. Often first generation students, particularly Spanish 
speaking students, lose their heritage language. The literature also indicates that schools that 
offer bilingual education had both native and non-native students engaged in learning and 
participating actively in school and their community. 

There is a need for further investigation on this topic to ensure an increase on academic 
success for this population. The research question for this study addresses how educators instill 
cultural pride and ownership in students related to their heritage. 

This study followed a qualitative research design with a purposeful sample of 
professionals who were selected because of their expertise and experience in working with 
Latino students in school settings. An interview protocol was designed to gather data on the 
research question. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


9 


Results indicated that further research needs to address the impact of cultural preservation 
particularly with the Spanish speaking population and students’ academic success. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 10 


CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION 

During my time completing my fieldwork observation hours I came to the conclusion 
through first -hand experience that many Latino students I observed in the classroom had no 
knowledge of their heritage language. They were somewhat hesitant in wanting to learn more 
about their culture and their language. As a first generation Latina, this realization was not only 
troubling, but I felt required further investigation as the focus of this study. 

Statement of the Problem 

Unfortunately, the assets of bilingualism are difficult for educators to fully understand. 

In the United States the Latino population is growing at a rate that exceeds the demographics of 
any other ethnic group. Acknowledging the reality of an increasing Latino population in the 
United States is necessary. 

It is surprising that educators fail to recognize the importance of developing students as 
fully bilingual and bicultural. It is also important that educators commit to helping students 
obtain the necessary knowledge and tools in order to compete bilingually and bi-culturally at a 
global level. In order for students to compete globally it is essential that educators foster 
bilingualism and embrace the heritage language that students bring to the classroom. 

Significance of the Study 

The significance of this study is to identify and describe the importance of heritage/ 
culture preservation in bilingual education. Understanding the benefits of culture and language 
heritage for Latino students is of great significance for self identity, flourishing academically and 
competing globally. There is a need for model bilingual education and an understanding of the 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


11 


depth of knowledge and overall benefit bilingualism and biculturalism can offer Latino students, 
not only presently but in the future at a global level. 

In order for educators to successfully shape this rapidly growing population embracing 
culture and language heritage is crucial and the beginning of the path in the right direction. The 
United States is one of the only monolingual countries in the world which is a disservice to our 
students. Pride and self-identity can be fostered through the preservation of these students’ 
culture and heritage and can provide the sense of belonging and pride most of these students 
yearn for. 


Purpose of the Study 

The purpose of this study is to identify and describe the importance of heritage/ culture 
preservation in bilingual education, as viewed by select academic leaders in a city school district 
in the northern San Francisco Bay Area. As documented in the literature culture heritage 
preservation within the context of bilingual education is important in preserving student identity, 
building English literacy and maintaining academic competence. 

Background Information 

Bilingual programs and the heritage potential in them are not always clearly understood 
by parents and educators. What children are missing by being excluded from bilingual classes 
and how schools can serve as vehicles of heritage are not expectations many have let alone have 
any knowledge. Farragio (2010) found that children who attended schools with a high Latino 
population and bilingual classes had a high heritage support. This suggested that experiences in 
this particular setting and length of time parents were able to observe their children learning in 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 12 


their native tongue strengthened their overall goal for heritage preservation. The author suggests 
that there is a strong link between bilingual education and heritage. 

The “funds of knowledge,” by Franquiz (2012) brought to light the crucial role cultural 
heritage plays in bilingual education. The “funds of knowledge” in bilingual education is the 
bringing together of every day practices both at home and in the community and their role in the 
socialization to language and construction of knowledge which can then become a resource in 
the classroom. The idea of personal and communal funds of knowledge and examples of 
educators who are contributing to the building of an academics foundation which respects of 
resources brought to the classroom is what led to my selection of questions. 

Research Questions 

How do educators become aware of the importance of being culturally responsible? What 
are the steps needed in order to preserve the culture heritage and language of Latino/ Latina 
students in contemporary teaching practice? 

Definition of Terms 


For the purpose of this study, the terms culture, first generation, and heritage language 
are defined. Culture refers to the characteristics of a particular group of people, defined by 
everything from language, religion, cuisine, social habits, music and arts, (Zimmerman, 2012). 
First Generation is the first generation to be born in a country other than their parent’s native 
country. Heritage language in the United States is a language other than English that is either the 
main language at home or spoken by the family. Hispanic or Latino refers to an ethnic group of a 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


13 


person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American, or other Spanish culture or 
origin, regardless of race. In 1998-99, the title of this ethnic group was modified from Hispanic 
to reflect the new federal standards and more current use, (California Department of Education, 
2014). 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 14 


CHAPTER II REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 
Supporting Research 

Bilingual Education: Vehicle for Heritage Preservation 

Farrugio (2010) interviewed 69 Latino parents of ELLs from a school district that not only 
maintained but expanded their bilingual program after Prop 227 was voted into state law. Of the 
parents who were interviewed about half placed their English learner children in a bilingual class 
and the other half in an English only class. Out of the 69neration immigrants in this study 
expressed a desire to preserve a Hispanic cultural heritage for their children. 

The interviews conducted in this study consisted of research questions which focused on 
factors which might have influenced parents’ thinking about heritage preservation. The 
quantitative analysis compared groups of parents based on background factors and the qualitative 
analysis focused on the experiences with bilingual education of these individuals. The findings 
of the quantitative analysis found that heritage support was high for individuals who had children 
in schools with a high Latino population and bilingual classes suggesting that experiences in this 
type of setting and the length of time parents observed their children learning in their native 
tongue strengthen their goal for heritage preservation. 

The qualitative analyses found that those who had been exposed to the heritage potential 
of additive programs had a clear understanding of what their children were missing by being 
excluded from bilingual classes. Those who had not had the same experience had a lower 
expectation of schools serving as a heritage vehicle. 

There were two implications resulting from this study. First, in order to raise the 
expectations of their children's intellectual growth it is crucial for bilingual programs to 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


15 


continually maintain high standards for teaching in both languages. Second, bilingual educators 
must make an effort to educate parents about the connection between heritage preservation and 
bilingual education and its academic advantages. 

Effect of Words and Labels on Identity 

Franquiz (2012) argues that words and labels have the ability and power to influence the identity 
of individuals. The individuals she is particularly speaking about are students who are not yet 
literate in English. 

United States (US) language policies associated with illiteracy education historically 
include the following labels, Limited English Proficiency (LEP) and English Language Learners 
(ELL) as descriptors for children becoming bilingual. Franquiz points out that these labels/ terms 
focus on what the individual lacks instead of what they possess and therefore argues that we 
begin using the tenn Emerging Bilingual and cultivate it in our teaching. The tenn Emergent 
Bilingual and the term Biliteracy both put focus on the child’s language by putting the word 
bilingual at the center of their growth. 

Franquiz stresses the importance of plugging into all the resources and capabilities the 
Emergent Bilingual students not only possess, but are available to them in order to meet all the 
academic and social challenges of living in today’s world. 

Franquiz continues by theorizing language and identity. She speaks about the elementary 
school literacy settings and how the maintenance of the Spanish language has always been seen 
as a problem. Maintenance of the Spanish language for the purpose of developing an academic 
identity seems to always be overlooked. In addition programs that build on the linguistic and 
cultural strengths students’ possess from home and their communities are very rare. High school 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 16 


educators claim that heritage language development is not related to their work while K-12 
teachers just does not seem to value biliteracy as an important academic identity, and instead are 
more focused on providing an English only education to immigrant students. 

Franquiz concludes that although the importance of inviting linguistic and cultural 
aspects into English language lessons makes sense, many teachers find this daunting. Many lack 
the knowledge and training about how to implement both linguistic and culture into their lessons. 

Despite the unfamiliarity and unknown funds of knowledge teachers may lack from 
inter- racial, cross-cultural, and multilingual communities, it is important that they understand 
that, without opportunity to use family and community knowledge, students face barriers in 
achieving English language acquisition and academic achievement. The “funds of knowledge” is 
crucial in bilingual education and simply means that every day practices at home and in their 
community are all part of the socialization to language and knowledge construction which can be 
used as an important resource in the classroom. 

The research method Franquiz used to conduct her study involved reviewing the 
literature. Franquiz also interviewed and observed educators in the field. 

Two of these educators turned out to be exemplary examples of teachers who are 
fostering the development of cultural citizenship in their classrooms. Franquiz includes examples 
of planned lessons Mr. Ayalas provided students thus providing newcomer students with 
opportunities to leam new content area vocabulary such as discrimination, racism, segregation, 
integration, civil rights, among countless others. These words were not only integrated in their 
identity texts but invited all available linguistics resources including personal and communal 
funds of knowledge. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


17 


Ms. Ayala was successful at building the confidence needed by newcomers to write with 
a voice and a passion. She included examples of how educators are being successful at 
accomplishing the goal of fostering the “funds of knowledge” through providing access to 
culturally relevant oral, visual and written texts, proposing multiple opportunities for children to 
use their cultural assets in producing identity texts, fostering cultural preservation, and engaging 
students in activities with transfonnation. 

Ms. Ayala serves as an example of an educator who is helping build an academic 
foundation that respects all resources brought to the classroom. This approach not only helps 
the newcomers, but also helps every student in becoming engaged with critical literacy skills. 
The author summarizes her extensive background knowledge. She included educators who are 
making a difference in teaching students and included writing examples. This research created 
for me, the researcher, a deeper understanding of the importance of maintaining one’s cultural 
heritage within the public school setting, while learning English. 

Culturally Responsive Teacher Education 

Vomvoridi-Ivanovic (2012) argues that in order for us to see culturally responsive teaching we 
must first provide the adequate culturally responsive teacher education. Vomvoridi-Ivanovic 
begins by introducing a common misconception many make when it comes to Latina/o teachers. 
Often it is assumed that because a Latina/o teacher is able to speak Spanish and at times share 
similar life experiences, they automatically have the necessary aptitude to effectively teach 
Latina/o students. 

Supporting evidence included findings from Aguierre (2007) in which first year Latina/o 
mathematics teachers reported that, despite the strong connections with their students, they still 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 1 8 


encountered several challenges in incorporating students’ cultural experiences in their lessons. 
These challenges included lack of staff support, lack of professional development, and lack of 
resources/ curriculum. In addition these same teachers also reported a strong concern with the 
high stakes accountability policies which they felt constrained their ability in attempting and 
producing any type of culturally relevant mathematics lesson. 

In an attempt to gain a better understanding of how Latina/o teachers use culture as an 
instructional resource Vomvoridi- Ivanovic conducted a study. The goal of this study was to 
describe how four Mexican American PSTs participants in a non-traditional field experience 
used culture, that is, shared experiences and social practices, as an instructional resource in 
teaching mathematics. The setting of her study took place in an after school mathematics 
program Los Reyos de CEMELA, and her participants include working class student of Mexican 
descent and four Mexican American prospective teachers. 

The duration of this study was divided into two parts. During the first half of this study in 
Los Rayos the mathematical activities consisted of “binder work” which focused on fractions, 
logic, problem solving etc. These tasks did not build on one another and did not provide a 
connection to students’ interest and experience. The few times that the PSTs did make a 
connection the focus was not on the mathematical content. 

For the second duration of the study the mathematical activities consisted of the “recipe 
project” which was build around the students’ life, interest and activities. For the “recipe 
activities” tasks involved team work, research of family recipes, going to the local market and 
shopping for ingredients, and knowledge of the best deals. This activity offered a cultural 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


19 


connection, building on one another, providing the PSTs and students a chance to share 
experiences which helped students understand the objective of the mathematical activity. 

The second portion of this study clearly was more successful than the first in its use of 
culture as a resource in teaching mathematics. Despite the connections made during the first 
portion between the PSTs and the students the focus was on the success of keeping it relevant to 
mathematics. 

A qualitative analysis of Vomvoridi Ivanovics study revealed that the nature of 
mathematical activities affected how culture is used. Her study also supports the suggestions 
found in literature covering this topic, which state that sharing cultural background does not 
mean the teacher will effectively be able to use their cultural knowledge as an instructional 
resource, and also suggests that further work needs to be done in addition to preparation for 
Latina/o PSTs. Connecting with the students experiences and interest when teaching 
mathematics makes the concept learned and practiced using meaningful cultural connections. 

Summary 

Key findings from the literature included the following; heritage preservation is strengthened 
when children learn in their native tongue. The potential of additive programs is not something 
everyone is aware of. As a result of this parents often have lower expectation of schools serving 
as a heritage vehicle. Model bilingual instruction is crucial in order to fully use every day 
practices as resources in the classroom and in students’ culture and heritage preservation and 
learning. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 20 


CHAPTER III METHOD 

This study followed a qualitative research design using interview protocol, purposive and 
open-ended question to a select group of individuals. This study followed a qualitative research 
design through observation and interview of participants who were purposely selected and 
included; bilingual teachers, bilingual leaders, 

The review of the literature showed that the need for the preservation of heritage is 
crucial in today education system. A link between language and heritage was also found to be 
key as well as the need for more model bilingual educators. 

Ethical Standards 

This study at hears to the ethical standards established by the American Psychological 
Association (2010) that safeguards participation of human subjects and research. Additionally, 
this study was reviewed by the Dominican University of California Institutional Review Board 
for the Protection of Human Rights approved and assigned number 10222. 

Overview 

Following review and approval of IRB I contacted my interviewee Mrs. P and explained the 
purpose of the study and obtained her consent to participate in an interview. The duration of the 
interview did not exceed an hour and occurred at a mutually convenient time and place. 

The researcher contacted Mrs. P who works at a local school district and whom she has a 
personal connection with via email and included a serious of questions which would be part of 


the research. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


21 


The questions were open-ended and benign in nature, and there was minimal risk involved in this 
interview. However, some questions might make the subject uncomfortable. There is also the 
risk of running over on time, causing some concern. 

The researcher made sure they made accommodations based on my subject’s schedule. 
Information collected will be used in summary fonn only. Researcher used pseudonym when 
referring to their subject’s responses in the final paper. This is to make sure that confidentiality is 
maintained. 


The interview subject will have the opportunity to offer personal insight on preservation of 
culture through model bilingual instruction. If they agree, the participants can offer their views 
relating to improving the preservation of heritage/ culture in elementary school bilingual 
programs. 


1) What are your personal experiences with model bilingual instruction in elementary 
schools in the district? How prepared do you feel teachers are in heritage cultural 
preservation? 

2) Please describe how you either have seen or personally incorporated heritage/ culture in a 
classroom. 

3) Describe any changes you see in those students who have had model bilingual instruction 
in regards to their self identity? 

4) Currently, the fastest growing population in the United States continues to be the Latino 
population. A great deal of attention is being paid to the importance of nurturing the 
preservation of heritage for this fast growing demographic. What are the benefits of 
model bilingual instruction with the focus among Latino/a students? 

5) What are some of the benefits that model bilingual instruction approaches offer teachers 
and how does it connect to heritage/ preservation of culture? 

6) How prepared are first year teachers in regards to the importance of heritage/ culture 
preservation and bilingual instruction. 

7) Please share with me any information you feel is important in regards to heritage/ culture 
preservation. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 22 


Participants 

The researcher interviewed a leader in a public education system at the elementary level in the 
San Francisco Bay area. Because of the nature of the topic the researcher purposely selected a 
professional with the knowledge to best inform the research questions. The participant is a first 
generation Latina native Spanish speaker and is trained as a bicultural educator. The interviewee 
has served as dean, instructional program manager, bi-literacy program coordinator, summer 
school principal, and teacher in pre- kindergarten through eighth grade. In addition the 
interviewee has also worked with schools on curriculum and instruction development, data 
analysis, program design, professional learning communities (PLC), common core 
implementations, and outreach to community partners, participation in Harvard Institute’s 
Making It Work: Implementing a Comprehensive PreK-3 Approach; the National Equity Project 
Leading for Equity; and Latino Literacy Project. 


Procedures 

Following her agreement researcher emailed the interviewee a series of questions. Questions are 
as followed: 

1) What are your personal experiences with model bilingual instruction in elementary 
schools in the district? How prepared do you feel teachers are in heritage cultural 
preservation? 

2) Please describe how you either have seen or personally incorporated heritage/ culture in a 
classroom. 

3) Describe any changes you see in those students who have had model bilingual instruction 
in regards to their self identity? 

4) Currently, the fastest growing population in the United States continues to be the Latino 
population. A great deal of attention is being paid to the importance of nurturing the 
preservation of heritage for this fast growing demographic. What are the benefits of 
model bilingual instruction with the focus among Latino/a students? 

5) What are some of the benefits that model bilingual instruction approaches offer teachers 
and how does it connect to heritage/ preservation of culture? 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


23 


6) How prepared are first year teachers in regards to the importance of heritage/ culture 
preservation and bilingual instruction. 

7) Please share with me any information you feel is important in regards to heritage/ culture 
preservation. 

Data Analysis 

Once the participant returned her responses to the questions the researcher examined 
them for overall themes. These themes were then identified an explained. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 24 


CHAPTER IV FINDINGS 

1 . What are your personal experiences with model bilingual instruction in elementary schools in 
the district? How prepared do you feel teachers are in heritage cultural preservation? 

VV K - 8 School is currently piloting a PreK - Kindergarten biliteracy model. The biliteracy 
model has been developed to serve English Language Learners. Currently, students in the 
Kindergarten classrooms are taught 80% in Spanish, and as they move into the upper grades the 
percentage decreases (K-80%, 1st grade-7 0%, 2nd grade-60%, and 3rd grade 50% taught in 
Spanish). Last year, as we prepared to launch the model we looked for ways to preserve the 
home language and culture through parent education classes. One of our programs focused on 
literacy in which parents were taught how to read to their children regardless of their home 
language, level of education or if they were literate. The books selected for the 9 week parent 
education workshop were based on Spanish literature and culture. 

Teachers have been receiving coaching/professional development in heritage cultural 
preservation, but it is definitely a work in progress. Cultural proficiency has been the focus for 
the past 4 years. This has been done through book clubs, workshops, and Professional Learning 
Communities have selected focal students to strategic target throughout the year. 

2. Please describe how you either have seen or personally incorporated heritage/ culture in a 
classroom. 

“I have seen and personally incorporated heritage/culture in a classroom through literature, 
curriculum, and school events. I have observed a particular school learn a specific continent in 
depth throughout the school year. The students are taught about the continent ’s countries, 
people, religion, food, history, literature, and heritage. Each grade-level focuses on a different 
continent, and at the end of the school year the students have a big evening presentation in which 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


25 


they share what they have learned about their continent. This is done through stations where 
students do a mini presentation on what they have learned. ” 

3. Describe any changes you see in those students who have had model bilingual instruction in 
regards to their self identity? 

Currently, parents are reporting how well their students are learning their home language, and 
the high academic vocabulary they are utilizing on a daily basis. Many of the Kindergarten 
students are teaching their older siblings how to speak their home language. Some parents have 
shared the pride their children have in becoming bilingual. These students have a high interest 
in sharing what they learn on daily basis. 

4. Currently, the fastest growing population in the United States continues to be the Latino 
population. A great deal of attention is being paid to the importance of nurturing the preservation 
of heritage for this fast growing demographic. What are the benefits of model bilingual 
instruction with the focus among Latino/a students? 

Bilingual instruction allows students to preserve their home language, and to easily transfer 
those skills into English. We are currently facing the issue in which many students are reaching 
high school, and they are not able to dominate English or Spanish. In many cases, students have 
lost their home language once they begin to reach the upper grades. Sometimes students are not 
able to communicate with their parents or family members. Parents need to be informed about 
the benefits of preserving the home language and heritage. The community needs to be aware of 
the benefits of being bilingual, and how it impacts the opportunity of finding a job. 

5. What are some of the benefits that model bilingual instruction approaches offer teachers and 
how does it connect to heritage/ preservation of culture? 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 26 


The collaboration time taking place between the PreK and Kindergarten teachers has made them 
a solid team. The vertical and horizontal alignmen t is allowing both grade levels to fine tune 
their curriculum and instruction. Teachers are more strategic about the curriculum they select 
to teach and the strategies they are implementing in their classrooms. The planning is much 
more in ten tional. The team is aware of their studen ts ’ needs, and they are able to differen tiate 
their instruction. It is easier to communicate with parents, and volunteering in the classroom 
becomes easier for many Spanish speaking parents. 

6. How prepared are first year teachers in regards to the importance of heritage/ culture 
preservation and bilingual instruction. 

First year teachers need more exposure to the benefits of bilingual instruction and the 
importance of heritage/cultural preservation. Bilingual instruction takes work and effort to 
successfully implement. At VV we have done a lot work to support our PreK and Kindergarten 
teachers to move the work forward. Teachers need collaboration time and ongoing 
coaching. Without the appropriate support system teachers begin to feel alone in the process. It 
took the school a whole year to plan, and it continues to be an ongoing process. 

7. Please share with me any information you feel is important in regards to heritage/ culture 
preservation. 

The school’s community needs to have heritage/culture preservation as one of their goals as they 
restructure their curriculum and programs. Teachers, parents, students and community partners 
need to be part of the process. The vision of the school must promote diversity and bilingualism 
to move the work forward. The appreciation of different cultures and languages should be 
intentional as the school year is planned. School events promoting diversity and bilingualism 
such as inviting a bilingual author to present at the school site, a travel around the world event, a 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


27 


Martin Luther King’s birthday celebration, a Cesar Chavez’s birthday celebration, invite parents 
to share their own traditions/culture in their child’s classroom, etc. 

1 . What are your personal experiences with model bilingual instruction in elementary schools in 
the district? How prepared do you feel teachers are in heritage cultural preservation? 

In South Africa our teachers are not well prepared for teaching bilingual instruction. It is 
accepted that the teachers will use code switching as they teach in English to students whose for 
first language is not English, but there are few strategies like GLAD taught. 

2. Please describe how you either have seen or personally incorporated heritage/ culture in a 
classroom. 

Mainly this is done through traditional games, like MORABARABA. There are more children ’s 
books being written and illustrated in African languages about the culture and particularly the 
rural ways of living. See the book below: 

Fly, Eagle, Fly 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 28 


Fly, Eagle, Fly is my toddler ’s favorite book at the momen t. A farmer (in the Transkei region of 
South Africa) goes in search of a lost calf Instead, he recues an eagle chick, brings it home to 
his family and proceeds to raise the eagle, “the king of birds ”, as a chicken. A friend of the 
farmer ’s, on seeing the bird among the chickens, remarks that the bird is not a chicken but an 
eagle. To which the farmer replies: 

Of course it ’s a chicken. Look - it walks like a chicken, it talks like a chicken, it eats like a 
chicken. It thinks like a chicken. Of course it ’s a chicken. 

The friend resolves to show the farmer that the bird is still an eagle and has not forgotten how to 
be an eagle. The friend tries twice to get the eagle to fly; first by catching the bird and holding it 
above his head, and then by carrying the eagle up the tallest thatch hut in the village. He tries 
to convince the bird: 

You are not a chicken but an eagle. You belong not to the earth but to the sky. Fly, Eagle, Fly. 

Each time, the eagle finds its way back to the chickens. On the third day, the friend wakes the 
farmer up in the early hours of the morning. He plans to take the eagle to the moun tains where 
the farmer found the bird so that the “eagle may see the sun rise over the mountain and follow it 
into the sky where it belongs ”. When they reach the top of the mountain: the friend talked on, 
telling the bird about the sun, how it gives life to the world, how it reigns in the heavens, giving 
light to each new day. 

“Look at the sun, Eagle. And when it rises, rise with it. You belong to the sky, not to the earth ” 

The story concludes with the fight of the great eagle into the sky to greet the sun as it rises in the 
east. The eagle will never again live among the chickens. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


29 



3. Describe any changes you see in those students who have had model bilingual instruction in 
regards to their self identity? 

Those who are encouraged to use their own language as a resource achieve excellent results. 
They are taught how to use exploratory talk in their first languages and then to translate the 
academic language into English. 


Heritage/ Culture Preservation 30 


4. Currently, the fastest growing population in the United States continues to be the Latino 
population. A great deal of attention is being paid to the importance of nurturing the preservation 
of heritage for this fast growing demographic. What are the benefits of model bilingual 
instruction with the focus among Latino/a students? 

I cannot speak for Latinos but I should imagine it would be the same as for isiXhosa speaking 
students. Here you can add a poem or two from the article from educ as change about “speaking 
your language without shame ” 

My language- isiXhosa 


Oh my beloved language 

Oh my African language 

Respected by the African speaking Nation 

amaXhosa, the sons of the African nation 

I can write, read and speak isiXhosa 
Awu axakekile amaXhosa ngengxoxo yakwaXhosa 
My language, powerful, almighty language 
You rose above whilst you wer 
Brutally murdered, tortures, destroyed 
By those who were in power 

Be strong my language, fear no one 

Now is your time 

The sky is the limit 

IsiXhosa sama Xhosa- AkwaXhosana 


5. What are some of the benefits that model bilingual instruction approaches offer teachers and 
how does it connect to heritage/ preservation of culture? 


Inestimable benefits - a pride in one ’s own culture and language; a sense of belonging; 
community; preservation of folk tales; preservations of idioms and anecdotes See the poem 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


31 


where the word for “ mother tongue” is actually the corn the mother grinds and makes for 
porridge in the morning. The word evokes the smoky safety and smell of warm family 
togetherness 

6. How prepared are first year teachers in regards to the importance of heritage/ culture 
preservation and bilingual instruction. 

As said before - in SA not NEARLY prepared enough 

7. Please share with me any information you feel is important in regards to heritage/ culture 
preservation. 

One CANNOT let a heritage and a culture be subsumed by a bigger, culture because of 
expediency. We need to be forever in touch with our roots 


Summary of Findings 

The main findings indicate that an attitude shift be implicated not only in the classroom but in 
our educators. There is a need for a shift in attitude which carries more than just the Caucasian 
view point of education but instead one that embraces all cultures. Teacher need to continue to 
receive coaching/ professional development in heritage and culture preservation in order for 
there to be continuous progress. A high interest can be seen in students as young as Kindergarten 
in learning about their heritage and culture therefore the need for collaboration between not only 
educators but also family and community is crucial along with the restructuring of curriculum 
and programs which embrace the different heritages and cultures of the world we live in. The 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 32 


necessity and encouragement of maintaining ones roots and embarrassing ones language is 
evident in all cultures around the word. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 


33 


CHAPTER V DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS 
Discussion 

The purpose of this study is to address the benefits of heritage/ culture preservation for 
Latino/ Latina students. Parents, educators and the community need to become aware of the 
benefits of preserving the home language and heritage. The benefits of being bilingual are 
powerful and can open door in the future. In order to embrace heritage and culture in our 
education system there need to be collaboration. The appreciation of different cultures and 
languages should be intentional as the school year is planned. In order to reach this goal 
restructuring of curriculum and programs might in most cases be necessary if the current work in 
process is to be continued. 


Limitations 

Interview consisted of one interviewee which although they had a wealth of knowledge 
and experience this presented a limitation in the study. Relying on the convenience sample of 
one individual rather than several individuals with experience and knowledge on the topic of this 
study presented limitations. Interviewing more individuals would have provided several 
perspectives and could have presented different findings. This study also did not interview 
parents, which would have been important since it would have provided their perspective on 
heritage/culture preservation and the level of importance they believe it to be in their children's 
education. In addition the data presented is specific to the region where the study was perfonned. 
Perfonning research at other districts might have presented different findings. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 34 


Implications 
Practical Implications 

The importance of first year teachers to be exposed to the benefits of bilingual instruction 
and the important role it has to heritage/ cultural preservation seems to be of great necessity 
especially since bilingual instruction takes work and effort to successfully implement. In order 
for the work to continue to move forward support for the teacher is crucial. Collaboration time 
and ongoing coaching is essential for strides to continue to occur. 

Research Implications 

This is an important field that requires further research. Limitations included number of 
schools that implement heritage/ culture preservation as part of the curriculum and educators 
who successfully implement model bilingual instruction. 

Conclusions 

The themes that emerged through the interview of this research suggest that exposure to 
the benefits of bilingual instruction and the importance of heritage/ culture preservation is crucial 
for educators especially first year teachers. It is also important to know that model bilingual 
instruction is difficult to find and requires work and effort to successfully implement. Support is 
needed for educators through coaching/ professional development in heritage cultural 
preservation in order for the work in continue progressing. Cultural proficiency should be a focus 
in our education system and can be done through book clubs, workshops, and professional 
learning communities. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 35 

The United States is a diverse country. California continues to have the fastest growing 
Latino/Latina population but yet many times unfortunately the teaching population does not 
reflect this diversity nor does it embrace the changes of student population. Positive results are 
possible through incorporating heritage/ culture in the classroom. 

About the Author 

Heidi Samayoa is committed to the importance of embracing heritage/ culture 
preservation in the classroom. She envisions and plans on promoting diversity and bilingualism 
through as many possible ways as she can in her future classroom. Installing a sense of 
knowledge and pride about your culture and heritage is of great importance and is part of 
everyone’s identity. Sharing her own traditions and cultures and learning from her students is 
something she looks forward to doing. As a bilingual Latina she hopes to serve as an example to 
her own students and understands bilingual instruction takes work and effort to successfully 
implement and therefore hopes to continue a lifetime of learning in the field of bilingual 


education. 



Heritage/ Culture Preservation 36 


References 

Aguierre, J. (2007). Increasing Latino/a representation in math and science: an insider’s look. 
Journal of Harvard Educational Review, 69-704. Retrieved from http://her.hepg.org 

American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American Psychological 
Association. Washington, D.C: American Psychological Association. 

Farrugio, P. (2010). Latino immigrant parents’ views of bilingual education as a vehicle for 
heritage preservation. Journal of Latinos and Education, 9 (1), 3-21. Retrieved from 
http://eds. a. ebscohost.com 

Franquiz, M. E. (2012). Key concepts in bilingual education: Identity texts, cultural citizenship, 
and humanizing pedagogy. New England Reading Association Journal, 48( 1), 32-42. 
Retrieved from http://eds. a. ebscohost.com 

Student & school data reports. Retrieved May 2, 2014 from 
http://www.cde.cs.gov/ds/sd/cd/glossary.asp 

Vomvoridi- Ivanovic, E. (2012). Using culture as a resource in mathematics: The case of four 
Mexican- American prospective teachers in a bilingual after- school program. Journal of 
Mathematical Teacher Education, 15(1), 53-66. Retrieved from 
http://eds. a. ebscohost.com 

Zimmermann, K.A. (20 12). "What is culture? definition of culture." LiveScience. Retrieved April 
30,2014, from http://www.livescience.com/214 78-what-is-culture-definition-of- 


culture.html 



