DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 356 739 HE 026 395 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



Davis, Wanda J.; And Others 

Cultural Practices of Female International 

Students. 

23 Mar 93 

19p. 

Reports -* Research/Technical (1A3) — Information 
Analyses (070) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

College Students; '^Cultural Differences; Culture 
Conflict; Data Collection; Females; ^Foreign 
Students; Higher Education; Language Attitudes; Sex 
Role; ^Student Attitudes; ^Student Behavior; Student 
Subcultures; Surveys; ^Values 
Materialism; University of Texas Austin 



ABSTRACT 

A study examined cultural practices of female 
international students at the University of Texas at Austin. Data 
were collected from 259 students (representing a 24.7 percent 
response rate) who revealed those aspects of their own culture which 
the students retained or modified as well as which American practices 
they borrowed. A two-page questionnaire elicited responses concerning 
the student's values, norms, language, symbols, and material culture 
differences, as well as their perceptions of the roles of women in 
the United States and in the respondent's native cultures. Among 
findings were that these students* values tended to be conservative, 
that they were critical of Ainerican students' use of English, that 
they held their own cultaral symbols dearly, and that they thought 
>jnerican students too absorbed in materialism and lacking in respect 
for traditional values and religious conviction. While the students 
had positive feelings about the role of women in America, they were 
critical of many American values .id attitudes towards women. The 
study concludes with the observation that, due to the growing 
presence of female international students, a unique opportunity 
ejiists to tap into a source of information vital to cross-cultural 
communication, global awareness, economic opportunity, and women's 
literature. (GLR) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 
^' from the original document. * 



Cultural Practices of Femals International Students 



05 
CO 

CP 

Wanda J. Davis, Ph.D. 
Southwest Texas State University 

CO 

^ Barbara J- Dodds, Ph.D. 

Southwest Texas State University 



Tsahai Thomas, Ph.D. 



March 23, 1993 



ERIO 



U S OEMBTMEN' Of EOOCMION 

,©produclion q u*">Y — 

~* ^ „ Elated in t^lS docu 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

Wanda Davis 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ER\CV" 



BEST COPY AVMUBLI 



Cultural Practices of Female International Students 



Each year the nuiober of international students enrolled 

in American colleges and universities increases steadily. 

According to Armitage (1991), 

Of the estimated one million foreign students world-wide^ 
almost one-half are studying in the United States alone. 
While the majority of these students have been male, 
women are making up an ever increasing proportion of the 
overseas student population, reaching one in three in 
1989-90. 

The present study was undertaken at The University of 
Texas at Austin where the international student population 
more than doubled from 1,533 in 1974-75 to 3,135 in 1989-90. 
Despite a slight decline from 1984-85 to 1987-88 triggered by 
increased tuition costs for these students, the university 
strongly maintained its position as having the third largest 
international student population in the nation, headed by 
Miami-Dade County Community College (5,148) and the University 
of Southern California (3,767). P.y 1990-91, 3,571 
international students at tne University of Texas represented 
104 nations in Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin Amex'ica, Middle 
East, North America, and Oceania (the island nations). 

Female students constitute an expanding segment of the 
total international student population. In 1959-60, women 
comprised 23.2% of the international student population in 
American colleges aiid universities; by 1989-90, the percentage 
had increased to 33.9% of the total. The number of female 
international students varies according to type of college or 
university attended. For example, females represented 44.4% 



of the international student population at two-year colleges 
and 32-5% at four-year colleges in 1989-90. in public 
colleges and universities, 33.2% of these students were women; 
35.5% in private institutions (Zikopoulous , 1990). At The 
University of Texas at Austin, the 1990-91 international 
population numbered 3,571 students of which females composed 
1048, or 29.3%. 

Female international students bring unique cultural 
practices to the American university campus. Dress, language, 
and food habits alert the most casual observer to cultural 
differences. American university students often borrow or 
adapt foreign practices, e.g. nose rings and ear bands, ethnic 
dress, and a variety of foods (Chinese, Egyptian, Indian, 
Vietnamese, etc.). Appreciation for music of other cultures 
has sparked an international music market with selections 
available in American music stores, especially those near 
college campuses. Many of these cultural practices are 
readily observable while others are less visible. 

Knowledge of cultural practices retained, modified, or 
abandoned by female international students will inform the 
host community. The need for global awareness must begin with 
personal perceptions of cultural differences. American 
students who can appreciate cultural diversity on their 
campuses will be empowered to participate in a world economy. 
International students capable of relating their cultural 
attitudes, beliefs, and practices to their American 
counterparts may find campus life less stressful and more 



2 



cultural attitudes, beliefs, and practices to their American 
counterparts may find campus life less stressful and more 
rewarding. The honest and open exchange of cultural 
differences will accommodate the needs of all students. 

The unique position of females in most cultures 
requires a segregation of empirical data by gender 
(Armitage, 1991). This is especially true of studies of 
female international students whose experiences in a foreign 
society vary qualitatively from those of male students. 
However, a review of literature revealed little research on 
these students' practices, the extent to which their 
cultural habits are retained, or the nature of limitations 
exacted by the American academic community. Germane to the 
study are the perceptions and attitudes these students have 
toward the most basic American societal values, e.g. equal 
opportunity^ achievement and success, activity and work, 
efficiency and practicality, progress, material comfort, 
democracy, freedom, racism and group superiority. 

Purpose of the study . This study examines some cultural 
practices of female international students at The University 
of Texas at Austin. Because no model questionnaire or 
survey was available, the study attempted to collect data 
which described in very general terms those aspects of their 
own culture which the students retained or modified as well 
as which American practices they borrowed, A questionnaire 

3 



5 



was devised to elicit responses about values, norms, 
language, syBbolr>, and material culture differences. 

Methodology . A two-page questionnaire was mailed to female 
international students attending The University of Texas at 
Austin in the fall of 1990. The first section collected 
demographic information: age, educational degree sought, 
college/school enrollment, length of residence in the United 
States, perceived level of English proficiency, language 
spoken away from campus, place of work, housing, cultural 
composition of the home, typical pattern of cultural 
interaction, other relatives in the United States, and 
religious preference. 

The second section of the instrument focused on 
cultural practices of these female international students. 
Questions examined six issues: retention of cultural 
practices, modifications of cultural practices, American 
limitations of own cultural practices, conflicts between own 
and American cultural practices, perception of female role 
differences between own and the host culture, and barriers 
to cross-cultural communications. Questions asked were: 

* What aspects of your own society and culture have you 
retained while attending UT? 

* W'nal; aspects of American culture have you modified? 

* How has American culture limited your own cultural 
practices? 



* What aspects of your culture have you abandoned 
because they conflict with the American culture? 

* What aspects of the American culture have you refured 
to practice/observe because they are in conflict with 
your own culture? 

* How is the role of women in the American culture 
different from your own culture? 

* What barriers have you found to cross-cultural 
communication at the university? 

* What suggestions do you have for removing those 
barriers? 

Suggested comments included beliefs, values, customs, 
traditions, religious practices, food, dress, family life, 
entertainment, and the arts. Questions were open-ended. 
Respondents were encouraged to attach additional pages for 
elaboration. 

Sample . Of 1048 female international students at The 
University of Texas at Austin in 1990-91, 261 responded to 
the survey. Two responses were incomplete or unusable 
leaving 259 for the study. The 259 responses represent 
24.7% of the individuals who received the survey ♦ 

Summary of Data . The 259 respondents represent 81 
principalities or countries from nine major geographic 
regions: Africa, Australia, Asian Island Nations, China and 
Southeast Asia, the Indian Sub-continent, Latin America, the 



Middle East, North America ^ and Western Europe. A majority 
(138) of women come from seven countries or principalities: 
Hong Kong (12), India (15), Japan (14), Korea (12), Mexico 
(18), People's Repub?.ic of China (13), and Taiwan (54). The 
remainder of responses (120) were grouped as "other" for 
further study. 

Nearly half (121, or 47.1%) of these students were 20 
to 25 years of age. Fourteen respondents were 19 years old 
and younger; 76 were 26 to 30 years old; 41 were 31 to 40 
years of age, and 5 were 41 and older. 

Eighty-six respondents were seeking undergraduate 
degrees, and 163 were pursuing graduate degrees. (Nine 
individuals did not respond to this question, and it is 
possible they were taking courses but not pursuing a 
degree.) Respondents were enrolled in: Business 
Administration (55), Liberal Arts (42), Natural Science 
(40), Education (23), Engineering (23), Nursing (10), 
Pharmacy (5), and other schools/colleges (61). 

A majority (151) of the women had been in the United 
States from two to five years. Approximately one-third (84) 
were in their first year of residence; 20 had been in the 
U.S» from 6 to 10 years; 3 had lived in the country more 
than 11 years. Most ^respondents (158) indicated other 
relatives live in the United States. Of these, 66 shared a 
home with relatives, 16 had other relatives in the same 
city, and 76 had relatives in other states. The item was 
not answered by 99 (38%) respondents. 

6 

8 



Two-thirds (172) of the women perceived their English 
proficiency as advanced, and another 32% believed their 
English language skills were intermediate. Only one listed 
her English as beginning, and three did not respond to the 
question* Away from the university campus, 68 used mostly 
English, while 84 spoke mostly another language. A mix of 
English and another language was the choice for 103 
respondents. Three persons did not respond to the item. 

A majority (132) of the respondents did not work. Of 
those who worked, 97 were employed on caispus, 15 worked off 
campus, and 14 did not respond. The item on employment was 
included to complement items about language usage and other 
forms of social interaction. 

The females in this survey tended to live with friends 
(89) or family (80). A small number lived alone (57) and 30 
had some other arrangement. More than half (132) of the 
respondents lived with members of their own culture group. 
Some women (45) lived with Americans, and 32 lived with a 
culture group not her own that did not include Americans. 
Forty-seven women did not respond to this item. 

Patterns of social interaction were largely mixed 
(169); that is, mingling with one's own group, another 
culture, and Americans. However, 88 females reported 
restricted socialization: 53 stayed mostly with members of 
her own cultural group? 20 mixed mostly with Americans; 8 
socialized with a variety including her own, but not 

7 



9 



Americans; and 7 preferred other cultures, not her own but 
not American. 

Religious preference was included in the survey for 
further study. Approximately 47% of the respondents checked 
Christianity as their preference, 25% listed none, and the 
remaining 28% were thinly spread over seven other choices. 

Based on the data, this cohort may be described as 
young (76% between 20 and 30 years of age) graduate students 
(63%). Most (58%) have been in the United States 2-5 years 
and believe they have good-to-excellent English language 
skills (98%). Most (61%) have relatives in the United 
States. The respondents tend to live with family and 
friends (65%) of their own culture group (51%). Typically, 
they interact with a mixture of their own, other, and 
American cultures (65%). A majority (51%) do not work. 

Analysis . Data collected in this study could be analyzed in 
a variety of ways. Because of the paucity of prior research 
and a need to establish parameters for further study, 
Williams' (1970) model was selected. According to Williams, 
the five components of cross-cultural communication are 
values, norms, language, symbols, and material culture. 
This paper discusses each of these components as reported by 
female international students living in an American 
university environment. Finally, responses to questions 
about the roles of women in the United States and in the 
respondents' native cultures are reported. 



8 10 



Values > According to Williams, values reflect ideals of 
good and bad, beautiful and ugly, desirable and undesirable. 
Most women in the study claimed to retain basic values 
gained from their own culture. They refused American drug- 
use habits (including cigarettes and alcohol) and liberal 
sexual practices. They described Americans as "dishonest," 
"hypocritical," and "not serious." They disliked displays 
of consumerism and materialism which, they coitimented, 
promote devotion to waste, fast foods, and exploitation of 
resources. Descriptors included "greedy" and "wasteful." 

As a result of these differences in values, many female 
students retained their personal practices, e.g. using 
drugs, alcohol, and cigarettes in moderation or not at all; 
not participating in casual sex; and buying with cash rather 
than credit. They often remarked on their own attention to 
family, an element they found missing in American culture. 
Other values they retained were privacy, modesty, honesty, 
understanding, critical thinking, political awareness, and 
humor. They noted a lack of appreciation for the arts in 
the United States, e.g. music, dance, and the theatre. They 
expressed disappointment that Americans care little for 
reading and prefer social interactions that are passive 
(watching TV and drinking beer, for example) rather than 
active, e.g. dancing at parties. 



Norms . Williams (1970) stated that norms are those rules 
and expectations for behaviors that are both prescriptive 
and prescriptive. Respondents' perceptions of American 
norms varied greatly from native norms. The women noted 
that Americans have a different attitude toward punctuality, 
often arriving late to classes and social events. Further, 
the choice of entertainment for Americans is passive, e.g., 
spectator sports. As one respondent summarized differences 
in social conventions, Americans prefer drugs and sex to 
dating and dancing. Another thought it unsafe for women to 
go out alone at night, because there are no "designated 
areas." Her experience was that American nightclubs (called 
"meat markets" by locals) dominate the singles scene. In 
these places, as throughout all American society, pervasive 
sexism and the double standard permit males to act as macho 
hunters of females. The absence of singles parties which 
exist for socializing rather than for pairing further 
alienates international studentr who find Americans distant 
and superficial in their friendships. Several respondents 
noted that American students refuse to accept foreigners 
into their social circles. 

Language . Williams (1970) observed that language is a 
standard form of communication for the transmission of 
cultural norms. Differences in norms may be exacerbated by 
differences in oral expression. Many female international 
students retain their language and criticize Americans for 

10 

12 



their usage of the English language. Female respondents 
especially disliked American slang, cursing, and informal 
("disrespectful*') language- Many described American 
communication as superficial, condescending, and boastful, 
e.g. displaying an attitude of superiority. They protested 
some questions from strangers as being inappropriately 
personal. For many respondents, one coping mechanism for 
the communication gap was to remain with members of her own 
culture as much as possible. Several students indicated 
membership in a native culture group that met regularly. 
Although language is a natural barrier to cross-cultural 
communication, specific criticisms of American student 
language point to a major obstacle in student interactions. 

Symbols . According to Williams (1970), symbols have a 
particular meaning and acceptance by the culture; for 
example, dress, gestures and posture, ritual meals, and 
holidays. The international students held cultural symbols 
dear, frequently including them in descriptions of "retained 
aspects." Most often cited was native dress. Several noted 
that Americans dress more informally than they do at home. 
Among items most frequently protested were blue jeans, tee 
shirts, tennis shoes, and "fads," One respondent 
characterized American fashion as "casual, cheap K-Mart." 
Other cultural symbols which differed from respondents' 
native symbols included smiling, forms of salutation, 



walking on the left, retaining one's name upon marriage, 
wearing lUakeup, and observing holidays. 

Material culture , Williams' definition of material culture 
designated "things" such as cars, television, and 
telephones- Respondents found Americans addicted to fast 
foods, TV, telephones, and cars. One mentioned the 
frustration of talking to telephone answering machines. 
Americans appear to these international students to rely on 
makeup and "mindgames" rather than religion and philosophy 
to affirm personal worth. Dependence on mass media, 
especially soap operas, lends a superficial patina to the 
American culture. Respondents felt that Americans avoid 
serious deliberation of societal problems such as the 
corruption of capitalism, erosion of the work ethic, 
disintegration of the family, lack of respect for elders, an 
absence of religious convictions, and inequality of the 
sexes. They cited American materialism as a negation of 
traditional values resulting in an absence of the critical 
examination needed to uphold them. 

Roles of women ♦ The survey of female international students 
at The University of Texas at Austin revealed both positive 
and negative aspects of women's roles in the United States • 
Many respondents wrote favorably of opportunities, both 
personal and professional, available to women in this 
country. They viewed the career orientation of Americans in 



12 

14 



general as an asset to women in particular. This was seen 
to have ramifications for greater autonomy among females. 
Respondents observed greater independence, sometimes stated 
as "self-determination," among American women. They noted 
that the broad range of choices available to women was not 
true in their home countries, and that American females are 
more active "outside the home." 

Another positive aspect of roles assumed by American 
women was described as part of liberal societal values 
regarding premarital sex. Americans tolerate emotional and 
sexual independence in both sexes and accept single women as 
a norm. Respondents cheered perceived equality with males 
for the higher status it seems to accord females. American 
women were described as "outspoken on public issues," "more 
emancipated," and more respected. 

Female international students who responded were, 
nevertheless, critical of many American values and attitudes 
toward women. While they appreciated women's improved 
status in the United States, many cited more stress 
resulting from higher expectations. The women observed that 
American females have more alternatives in the workplace, 
but less success and fewer promotions than their male 
counterparts. In addition, working American women usually 
dress within a sexual connotation that is professionally and 
personally limiting. 

The other side of "autonomy" revealed serious flaws. 
Respondents suggested that American working women feel a 



13 15 



need to "prove something" and are driven to "want it all." 
They viewed American females as suffering cr.nflict within 
themselves and among their families and colleagues. Many 
American women seem to be apologetic about their own success 
and ambivalent about their roles, i.e. fiercely protective 
of their independence while remaining highly dependent on 
men for affirmation. 

Values that allow sexual and marital freedom were seen 
as socially destructive. A number of female respondents 
disliked early dating patterns among American youth citing 
problems of poor social aevelopm.ent , premature sexual 
liaisons, and loss of romance in male-female relationships. 
The heavy American emphasis on selection of a mate from the 
proper socioeconomic status appears to override academic 
achievement for American women. Their international peers, 
whose purpose at the university is to obtain an education, 
decry the poor academic standards of these American females. 

Foreign female students were especially harsh in their 
criticisms of "equality" for women in the United States. 
They found women to be "oppressed everywhere." one 
insightful note described American females, "[they] exploit 
each other in very sophisticated ways." American males were 
seen as "appearing" nonsexist while being ^ in fact, "very 
sexist." American women are viewed as sex objects disdained 
on professional and personal levels. A double standard 
exists in a society that divides males and females 
educationally with females being directed toward traditional 



14 

iG 



Aiaerican university students. Respondents referred often to 
"racism," explicated as the American caste system, American 
nationalism, and ethnocentrism* Their need to distance 
themselves from American students in order to observe their 
own cultural practices speaks to a larger need for cross- 
cultural communication at the campus level. 

The growing number of international students in the 
United States argues for programs and courses that address 
cultural differences. American students need to appreciate 
diversity of values, norms, language, symbols, and material 
culture. All students must contribute to shared knowledge. 
Within the international student population, females represent 
an underserved component with gender-based needs. Their place 
in the academic community can be assured by greater 
understanding of culturally-derived feminine practices. 
College campuses can encourage awareness of gender differences 
among international students through improved cross-cultural 
interaction and communication. 

Implications for the research community . This study discloses 
a need for other collections of raw data on female 
international students on college and university canpuses. 
The unique sociological cohort represents an untapped source 
of information vital to cross-cultural communication, global 
awareness, economic opportunity, and women's literature. Data 
gathered in this study provides ample opportunity for research 
in educational anthropology, multicultural education, 



15 i 7 



international education, sociology of women , and social 
psychology. 

Armitage (1991) notes that few existing studies of 
international students "focus on women exclusively," Research 
in this important field will provide useful information for 
universities seeking to recruit and retain foreign students. 
States and federal agencies wishing to expand academic 
opportunities for women can utilize the data. Support groups 
can focus on issues central to women's needs in a foreign 
society. 

The growing presence of female international students on 
American campuses portends greater awareness and appreciation 
of human similarity and diversity. This presence affords new 
avenues for enlightened communication across boundaries marked 
by gender and culture. The door is open to researchers 
ever*ywhere . 




References 

Armitage, D. A. (1991). What it means to be a woman: 
perceptions of gender roles of South American women 
studying in the United .States . Unpublished manuscript. 

Williams, R. M, (1970). American society: a sociological 
interpretation (3rd ed.) [rev]. New York: Knopf. 

Zikopoulos, M. (Ed.). (1990). Open doors ^ 1989-90 report 

on International Educational Exchange . New York: Institute 
of International Education. 



Suggested Reading 

Altbach, P. G. (1985). Research on foreign students and 
international study . New York: Praeger. 

Howard, J. M. and Keele, R. (1991). International students in 
a U.S. graduate business program: cultures, subcultures^ 
and the new student . (Conference Paper No. 150). Ypsilanti, 
MI: Eastern Michigan University. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 346 770) 

Klineberg, O. and Hull. W. F. (1979). At a foreign university; 
an international study of adaptation and coping . New York: 
Praeger - 

Matsui , M. (1988). Comparative study of female overseas 

students from Japan and the Peoples^ Republic of China at 
an American university . (Research Report No. 143). Buffalo, 
NY: State University of New York at Buffalo. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 322 071) 

Namavar, F. (1984). Sex-role orientation of international 
female graduate students and its relationship with 
de pression and anxiety . Unpublished doctoral dissertation, 
Indiana University, Bloomington. 

Parr, G., et al. (1992). Concerns and feelings of 

international students. JournaL of College Student 
DeyglQpiftQnt, 3, 20-25. 

Surdam, J. C. and Collins, J. R. (1984). Adaptation of 

international students: a cause for concern. Journal of 
College St u denn Personnel , 25 , 240-45. 



17 



