DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 404 599 



CG 027 454 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Roland, Catherine B., Ed.; Conneely, Rebecca J., 

Ed. 

Current Issues and Perspectives in Group Work. A 
Counseling Monograph. 

Arkansas Univ. , Fayetteville. Dept, of Educational 
Leadership, Counseling, and Foundations. 

[96] 

Collected Works - General (020) — Information 
Analyses (070) 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

Adolescents; American Indians; Blacks; Bulimia; 
Counseling Psychology; ^Cultural Influences; *Group 
Counseling; Group Dynamics; *Group Therapy; Hispanic 
Americans; Self Disclosure (Individuals); ^Standards; 
Supervision 

Group Facilitation; *Group Leaders 



ABSTRACT 

Group counseling presents counselors with an 
increasing complexity of issues. This collection of papers addresses 
a range of current issues and perspectives for group counselors. The 
first article examines self disclosure, particularly the effects of 
counselor sel f-di sc losur e on the therapeutic relationship in group 
counseling. Clinical supervision of group counselors is outlined 
next, with a discussion of standards of supervisory practice, ethical 
and professional issues, and projections for accountability of group 
counselors. A personal perspective is presented in the following 
article, in which a practitioner's experience as an African-American 
co-facilitator of a predominantly white group is used to identify and 
discuss issues for non-majorities who facilitate such groups. Group 
work in the treatment of bulimia nervosa is explored next, along with 
a review of the literature and an overview of the various approaches 
to the application of group work with bulimics. This is followed by 
an exploration of the use of cultural identity group counseling with 
Native Americans college students, featuring an overview of group 
personality as applied to this population. The final piece examines 
the use of group interventions as an effective way of addressing the 
specific needs of Hispanic youth in cultural transition. (RJM) 



**************** ***************************** *************** *********** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 

*********************************************************************** 



A Counseling Monograph 



Current Issues and Perspectives 
in Group Work 






Editor: 

Catherine B. Roland, Ed.D. 

Assistant Editor: 

Rebecca J. Conneely, M.A. 



THE 

UNIVERSITY 

OF 

ARKANSAS 

AT 

FAYETTEVILLE 



Counselor Education Program 
Department of Educational Leadership, 
Counseling and Foundations 
College of Education 



EST COPY AVAILABLE 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS o**. U 

MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 

CENTER (ERIC) 



received Irom the person or organization 
originating it 

O Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 



• Points ol view or opinions stated in this docu* 



INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC).” 




□ This document has Dean reproduced aa 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCE© 

iMrnoA/iATiniu ncMTCD /coin ” ^ 



ment do not necesaarity represent official 
OERl position or policy 



t 



r 



Current Issues and Perspectives in Group Work 
Table of Contents 



Editor's Preface 1 

Catherine B. Roland 

Self-Disclosure: The Group Counselor's Dilemma 2 

Candace J. Whitfield 

Clinical Supervision of Group Counselors: New Perspectives 10 

Michael D. Loos 

There's More to the Apple than Meets the Eye: Perceptions of an 
African-American Co-Facilitator of a Predominately Majority Group 16 

Aretha Marbley 

Group Work in the Treatment of Bulimia Nervosa: 

An Overview of Approaches and Efficacies 21 

Rebecca J. Conneely 

Cultural Identity Group Work with Native American College Students 29 

Tarrell L. Portman 

Group Interventions with Hispanic Adolescents in Cultural Transition 35 

Silvia N. Ruiz-Balsara 



O 

ERLC 



3 



r r 



From the Editor 



Catherine B. Roland, Ed.D., 

Counselor Educator, University of Arkansas 



The six papers included in this monograph were individually written as an assignment for 
the course Advanced Group Theory and Techniques. All six authors are students in the Ph.D. 
program in Counselor Education at the University of Arkansas. Due to the diversity of topics and 
current literature reviews, it was decided that we would publish this monograph. 

Each author brings a specific expertise and diversity to this piece. Candace Whitfield, 
M.Ed., LPC, is currently writing a dissertation in the general area of survivors of sexual abuse. 

She is a private practitioner in Northwest Arkansas. 

Michael Loos, M.Ed., is a Graduate Assistant and a Certified Substance Abuse Counselor. 
Michael is approaching his final semester of coursework for the Ph.D., and plans on writing his 
dissertation in the general area of loneliness and depravity in addicted persons. 

Aretha Marbley, M.Ed., is a Holmes Scholar Graduate Assistant, and has just completed 
her doctoral comprehensives. Aretha has worked extensively with minority youth and women, 
and plans on writing her dissertation in the general area of multicultural counseling. 

Rebecca Conneely, M.A., is a Graduate Assistant, and the current chapter president of Chi 
Sigma Iota. Becky brings a wealth of experience as a student personnel specialist, and will 
approach her final semester of coursework shortly. Becky's dissertation focus is in the general 
area of eating disorders. 

Tarrell Portman, M.Ed., LPC, holds a national fellowship through the U. S. Department of 
Education Tarrell has been a school counselor, and brings experience with children and 
adolescents to the program. She is currently the president-elect of our chapter of Chi Sigma Iota, 
and plans to write a dissertation in the general area of Native American issues and counseling. 

Silvia Ruiz-Balsara, M.S., LPC, MFC, is a doctoral student and clinician with expertise in 
the marriage and family specialty. Silvia has done much work within the Hispanic community, 
and plans to write a dissertation in the general area of diversity and multicultural counseling. 

It has been a unique pleasure to edit the work of my students. I want to expressly thank 
Rebecca Conneely, who was invaluable as the Assistant Editor of this project. 




4 



Self-Disclosure: The Group Counselor's Dilemma 



Candace J. Whitfield 



This paper reviews pertinent background research in the area of self-disclosure in general with a 
focus on the effects of counselor self-disclosure on the therapeutic relationship. Because little 
research has been conducted in the area of counselor self-disclosure in group work, extrapolations 
will be made from those studies which focused on individual counseling. The research will be 
synthesized in an attempt to conceptualize guidelines for group counselors in making decisions 
about their own disclosure while facilitating groups. 



Much has been researched and written of self-disclosure in general, as well as self- 
disclosure in the counseling process. Less has been examined in the area of group counselor self- 
disclosure. Jourard (1964, 1968, 1971) and Rogers (1961, 1970) have been the most ardent 
supporters of therapist transparency and self-disclosure as a positive influence in facilitating client 
self-disclosure in both individual and group work. This was the prevailing thought in the 60's and 
70's, during a time when the encounter group movement had become popular (Cozby, 1973; 
Watkins, 1990). Since that time, an approach more conservative than that of the encounter group 
has entered the arena of controversy over counselor self-disclosure— an approach reminiscent of the 
caution (in the area of therapist disclosure) of psychoanalytic theory but also moving closer toward 
allowing therapist authenticity and involvement. This paper is an attempt to integrate research 
findings and contemporary thought on group work and counselor self-disclosure into a suggested 
guidelines for group facilitators. 

Self-Disclosure and Healthiness 

Self-disclosure is believed to be positively associated with better physical and emotional 
health (Carpenter, 1987; Derlega, Metts, Petronio & Margulis, 1993; Pennebaker, Kiecolt-Glaser, 
& Glaser, 1988). Jourard (1964) argued that the ability to self-disclose appropriately is a 
prerequisite to the development of a healthy personality as well as healthy relationships. In 
addition, Jourard suggested a curvilinear relationship between self-disclosure and mental health, 
with either too little or too much disclosure indicating maladjustment (Cozby, 1973). 

Derlega et al. (1993) summarized studies which have examined the link between 
disci osure/nondisclosure and health outcome. Results indicated that concealment of information 
that is threatening to the self is related to physical and emotional problems. Trauma victims have 
been studied by Pennebaker, Kiecolt-Glaser, and Glaser (1988), and links between disclosure and 
immune function documented. Survey results indicated that having experienced an early trauma 
and not disclosing it to anyone is associated with the greatest incidence of psychological distress 
and physical illness, as compared with experiencing no trauma or experiencing trauma and 
confiding about it (Pennebaker, Colder, & Sharp, 1988). 

Carpenter ( 1987) proposed an interference/competence model to explain the relationship 
between psychopathology and self-disclosure. The essence of this model posits that 
psychopathology interferes with functioning, including disclosing behavior. In addition, because 
of pathology, the social skills necessary for appropriate disclosing behavior may not have been 
learned (or pathology may have developed because of not having been taught appropriate social 
skills). 



The Literature 



Older, sometimes groundbreaking, studies are included in this review because they have set 
the stage for the study of self-disclosure, which has been under investigation for less than three 
decades. In the past decade, there have been few studies on counselor self-disclosure and even 
fewer which focused on group counselor self-disclosure. 

Client perceptions of counselor self-disclosure have been studied from various angles by 
numerous researchers. Nilsson, Strassberg, and Bannon (1979) conducted an analogue study 
which tested hypotheses about perceptions of disclosing and nondisclosing counselors. In this 
study self-disclosure was separated into categories of interpersonal and intrapersonal. The 
findings supported the notion that disclosing counselors are perceived more favorably than 
nondisclosing ones; further, counselors who disclose information about their lives outside of the 
counseling relationship (intrapersonal disclosure), specifically about ways in which they were 
similar to their clients, were generally evaluated more favorably than counselors who limited their 
disclosures to feelings about the client or the counseling relationship (interpersonal disclosure). 

May and Thompson (1973) found positive relationships among three therapist variables as 
perceived by clients: levels of self-disclosure, mental health, and helpfulness. In this study group 
members also ranked fellow group members on level of disclosure and mental health. There were 
no differences found in therapist ratings between group members ranked higher or lower on 
disclosure and mental health. The findings in this study are at variance with an earlier study by 
Weigel, Dinges, Dyer, and Straumfjord (1972), who found a negative correlation between 
perceived level of self-disclosure and mental health of therapists. These authors (Weigel etal.) 
suggest that self-disclosing therapists may violate clients' expectations of appropriate and 
professional behavior for therapists. 

Reynolds and Fischer (1983) investigated counselor self-disclosure designated as self- 
disclosing or self-involving. This study made an effort to be more definitive about types of 
counselor self-disclosure. Self-disclosing statements were defined as those made by the counselor 
about personal experiences or feelings outside the counseling session. Self-involving statements 
were those personal reactions to the client and the therapeutic relationship shared by the counselor. 
Results supported previous findings (McCarthy & Betz, 1978; McCarthy, 1979) that counselors 
using self-involving statements are perceived as more trustworthy and expert than counselors using 
self-disclosing statements. In addition, Reynolds and Fischer replicated earlier findings (McCarthy 
& Betz, 1978) that self-disclosing counselor statements shift the focus to the counselor, while self- 
involving counselor statements keep the focus appropriately on the client and the client's issues. 

Client preferences for and anticipations of counselor self-disclosure were examined as they 
affect ratings of self-disclosing and nondisclosing counselors (VandeCreek & Angstadt, 1985). 

On all measures, disclosing counselors were rated more positively, regardless of level of 
preference for or anticipation of a self-disclosing counselor. VandeCreek and Angstadt concluded 
that future studies examining client expectations should distinguish between preference and 
anticipation. They surmised that the presence of counselor self-disclosure may produce "pleasant 
surprise", regardless of a client's initial preference or anticipation, suggesting that counselor self- 
disclosure/nondisclosure is a more powerful variable than either preference or anticipation. 

Curtis (1981) conducted a study with actual clients in a mental health agency, in which 
impressions of therapist self-disclosure were evaluated according to ratings of empathy, trust, and 
competence. The client-therapist dialogues (independent variable) were in written form, 
manipulated to vary across three conditions: high, low, and no disclosure. Findings confirmed the 
prediction that the more the therapists self-disclosed, the lower were the ratings received on trust, 
empathy, and competence. Because this was a well-controlled study which utilized real life clients 



rather than college students, the results and indications for clinical practice appear well worth 
further study. 

Watkins (1990) reviewed the literature on the effects of counselor self-disclosure, evaluated 
the research, and made recommendations for future research. Of all the 35 studies evaluated by 
Watkins, only one (Curtis, 1981) used actual clients rather than college students. All of the studies 
were analogue in nature and focused on the initial counseling interview. It is important to note that 
these studies were scrutinized by Watkins according to Strong's (1971, cited in Watkins, 1990) 
five boundary conditions for generalizing laboratory findings to the counseling situation. These 
conditions are: 

(a) counseling is a conversation between or among persons, (b) status differences exist 
between the interactants and constrain the conversation, (c), the duration of contact between 
interactants is considered, (d) the degree of client motivation to change is assessed, and (e) 
the degree of client distress is determined. (Watkins, 1990, p. 480) 

None of the these five conditions were met in the 35 studies that Watkins reviewed and evaluated, 
indicating that generalizing and implementing results to real life clients might be hazardous to both 
counselor and client. 

The characteristics of counselor self-disclosure were surveyed by Edwards and Murdock 
(1994). Respondents were members of the American Psychological Association who were 
practicing psychotherapy, and results indicated that participants were disclosing most often about 
professional credentials and experience and mainly for the purpose of increasing similarity to 
clients. As Edwards and Murdock concluded, the most mentioned motive for disclosure (to 
increase therapist-client similarity) did not appear to fit the content of what was said to be disclosed 
most frequently (professional credentials and experience). In other words, disclosure of 
credentials to clients would appear to increase the power and status differential between counselor 
and client. Edwards and Murdock analyzed their data to look for gender and ethnic group effects 
and found no significant differences. They did find differences relative to theoretical orientation, 
with analytics reporting the least amount of self-disclosure and both humanists and behaviorists 
reporting the greatest, which corroborates Yalom's (1995) belief. 

Hendrick (1990) reported a study which examined client preference for types of counselor 
disclosure. The sample consisted of persons seeking counseling at an outpatient clinic. Those 
who participated filled out a brief questionnaire. The client sample indicated interest in a 
counselor's feelings, relationships, professional issues, failures and successes. Very little interest 
was found for disclosures about a counselor's attitudes, and the least interest was found for sexual 
issues. Hendrick described the study as a pilot effort with the usual limitations, including the small 
sample size (24, half of which were women). She concluded that this does not indicate that 
counselors should disclose just because the client desires it— that the decision to disclose "must be 
made by the counselor on the basis of the particular situation." (p. 185) 

In examining group therapist self-disclosure. Dies ( 1973) found a positive relationship 
between length of time in therapy and more favorable attitudes toward counselor self-disclosure. 
However, even though self-disclosing counselors were rated as more friendly, trusting, intimate, 
and helpful (Factor 1), they were also judged to be less stable, sensitive, relaxed and strong 
(Factor 2). Dies concluded that the results provide no definitive answer about the effect of group 
counselor self-disclosure, except that it is impacted by the length of time in a treatment group as 
well as other treatment variables, such as the experience and competence of the group leader, the 
nature of the self-disclosure itself, and the type, purpose, and composition of the group. 

Robitschek and McCarthy (1991) assessed by survey the frequency of self-referent 
counselor statements, categorized as either self-disclosing ones or self-involving ones, and as 



ERIC 



4 

7 






either positive or negative. Male and female counselors of varying experience and ethnicity 
participated. The hypothesis that counselors use more positive self-referent statements of both 
types than negative ones was confirmed. No differences were found as a function of either gender 
or level of experience, and differences due to ethnic background were not analyzed. 

Therapist self-disclosure was investigated by Hill, Mahalik, and Thompson (1989) with a 
focus on the effects on helpfulness and level of client "experiencing" (self-exploration, depth of 
involvement). Therapist disclosures were rated by both therapists and clients as self-disclosing or 
self-involving and as positive or negative. Results indicated that self-involving/reassuring 
disclosures were rated by clients as more helpful than challenging self-involving statements and 
either reassuring or challenging self-disclosures. 

Morran (1982) proposed that group facilitators limit their disclosures in terms of frequency 
and intimacy in early group sessions. This recommendation concurs with Dies (1973), who stated 
that group leader behavior which may be deemed inappropriate at one stage may become more 
congruent with the intimacy level of the group as it develops and moves into later stages. The 
parameters of amount of self-disclosure (frequency), intimacy level of the disclosure, and duration 
of the disclosure have been identified by Cozby (1973) as important considerations for counselor 
self-revelation. 

Other authors have warned that appropriate therapist self-disclosure is only that which has 
the client's best interest in mind (or at heart), e. g., promotes trust in the counselor, improves the 
therapeutic relationship, and facilitates client self-disclosure and positive outcome (Edwards & 
Murdock, 1994; Miller, 1983; Watkins, 1990). Yalom (1995) stresses that a group leader's 
disclosures must be conducive of group members reaching their goals for group work. Group 
leaders who are willing to share their honest reactions to what is happening within the group are 
more likely to assist the growth of healthy interpersonal relationships (Corey & Corey, 1987). 

The effects of gender, race, and ethnic or cultural background have been examined by very 
few studies on self-disclosure. In some studies reviewed by Watkins (1990), neither counselor 
nor client gender was considered in data analysis. In the studies which included gender of 
counselor as a variable, no significant differences were found in perceptions of counselor 
disclosure (Watkins, 1990). He concluded that no counseling implications can be drawn from the 
results as they now stand. Cherbosque's ( 1987) study indicates that race and cultural variables 
may affect perceptions of counselor disclosures differentially, but that much more research is called 
for before stating implications (Watkins, 1990). 

Wells (1994) has recently offered the only published qualitative study to date examining the 
effects of therapist self-disclosure on clients and the treatment relationship. She interviewed eight 
subjects, who had previously been in individual psychotherapy, about their experiences with 
counselor self-disclosure. Participants were asked to reflect on the context of therapist disclosure, 
their responses to the revelations, their perceptions of therapist disclosures on their therapy and the 
relationship, and their views about the appropriateness of the disclosures. The most significant 
findings were that nearly all participants "described some degree of inhibition around revealing and 
exploring feelings following the therapist's self-disclosure" (p. 37). This finding is most 
significant because counseling/therapy needs to be a supportive relationship where the client is 
provided a safe environment in which to disclose and explore feeling and experience. Whatever 
detracts from this goal would be considered detrimental to the client's best interests. 

Although most of the participants in Wells' (1994) study reported uncomfortable emotional 
reactions to their therapists' self-disclosures, they also reported not discussing these feelings with 
the therapists, thus censoring their own disclosures. Wells recommends that practitioner-training 
programs integrate guidelines for appropriate counselor self-disclosure into existing curricula. 




8 



Limitations of Previous Research 



Methodological problems plague the research on self-disclosure, making it nearly 
impossible to reach conclusions based on solid, nonconflicting evidence. As Hendrick ( 1987) 
states, it is a matter of thematic problems across the literature rather than any one study, since 
limitations can be found within each study. For many years, the lack of a common language base 
and operational definitions of self-disclosure was a problematic issue (Watkins, 1990). As other 
variables began to be examined which impacted counselor self-disclosure, and self-disclosure 
became more specifically operationalized in various studies, the complexity and multidimensional 
character of the construct of self-disclosure became apparent. The analogue nature of nearly every 
study, as well as the use of students rather than actual clients, is also problematic (Hendrick, 1987; 
Watkins, 1990). 

Indications for Future Research 

The study of counselor self-disclosure and its effects on counseling outcome should be 
moved into the field and studied in depth, perhaps with more qualitatively-oriented methods. 
Otherwise, research may continue indefinitely with the same mixed and conflicting results, leaving 
practitioners with the same questions about whether, when, and how to utilize self-disclosure. 

Client expectations are an important variable in the disclosure literature, and Hendrick 
(1990) has attempted to address this issue by asking clients directly about desired disclosure from 
counselors. Peca-Baker and Friedlander (1989) suggest that a "fit" between disclosure by the 
counselor and that desired by the client may enhance counselor attractiveness, while counselor self- 
disclosures unsolicited by clients may add nothing or even detract from the counseling relationship. 

Watkins (1990) recommends studying the effects of counselor self-disclosure beyond the 
initial session, as well as making what is studied congruent with what is taught and practiced. In 
other words, the counseling relationship is believed to develop over time and not in the initial 
interview. The positive relationship found by Dies (1973) between length of time in counseling 
and more favorable attitudes toward counselor disclosure indicates that initial session analogue 
studies need to be forsaken for longitudinal ones, to be done qualitatively. 

A mini-set of guidelines for group counselors have been extrapolated from the research on 
counselor self-disclosure, bearing in mind that to date there has been no longitudinal or qualitative 
research examining group counselor disclosure as it affects the therapeutic relationship and, 
ultimately, counseling outcome. 

Guidelines 

1 . First, do no harm. It is a given that the client's well-being and best interests are the guiding 
principle. 

2. Distinguish between self -disclosing and self-involving statements. Self-involving statements 
share the counselor's here-and-now responses to and experiencing of the client and the therapeutic 
relationship/process. Self-disclosing statements shift the focus from the client/client's issues to the 
counselor— always risky business. 

3. Consider the quality of the relationship, e.g., level of rapport and trust, amount of client 
resistance, client's capacity for insight and self-acceptance. 

4. Consider length of time in counseling. In general, the longer the time, the more relaxed and 
intimate the relationship, making client acceptance and integration of counselor disclosures more 
favorable and helpful. 

5. Consider the expectations of the client about the therapy process and the professional role of 
the counselor. Also consider client expectations grounded in cultural, ethnic, and socioeconomic 
backgrounds. 



0 




6 



6. Refrain from self-disclosure in the presence of serious pathology. For example, those clients 
diagnosed borderline, dependant, and paranoid personality-disordered, may misinterpret counselor 
self- disclosures, derailing the development of healthy boundaries. Self-involving statements 
would seem to be more effective for giving the client feedback on how others may be experiencing 
them as persons. 

7. Consider the purpose and focus of the group. In some focus groups, counselor self-disclosure 
may be more appropriate than in others. Consult with another counseling professional if this is not 
readily apparent. 

8. Consider the length, purpose, frequency, and timing of counselor self-disclosures. In general, 
brief in length, low in frequency, for the purpose of meeting the client's needs rather than the 
counselor's, and in the later stages of the relationship rather than initial stages. 

Wells (1994) found these reasons for clients' increased inhibition after therapist self- 
disclosure: 

clients wanted to protect the therapist and be sensitive to his or her feelings; they did not 
want to elicit a response from the therapist which would stir up unresolved emotional 
material; and/or they felt the therapist was incapable of providing a safe emotional 
environment for exploration, (p. 37) 

These findings indicate that counselor self-disclosure should be used with the utmost caution and 
care, taking into account the guidelines listed above. 

References 

Carpenter, B. N. (1987). The relationship between psychopathology and self-disclosure: 
An interference/competence model. In V. J. Derlega & J. H. Berg (Eds.), Self-disclosure: 

Theory, research, and therapy, (pp.203-227). New York: Plenum Press. 

Cherbosque, J. ( 1987). Differential effects of counselor self-disclosure statements on 
perception of the counselor and willingness to disclose: A cross-cultural study. Psychotherapy, 
24, 434-437. 

Corey, M. S., & Corey, G. (1987). Groups: Process and practice (3rd ed.). Pacific 
Grove, CA: Brooks/Cole. 

Cozby, P. C. ( 1973). Self-disclosure: A literature review. Psychological Bulletin, 79(2), 

73-91. 

Curtis, J. M. (1981). Effect of therapist's self-disclosure on patients' impressions of 
empathy, competence, and trust in an analogue of a psychotherapeutic interaction. Psychological 
Reports, 48, 127-136. 

Derlega, V. J., Metts, S., Petronio, S., & Margulis, S. T. (1993). Self-disclosure . 
Newbury Park, CA: Sage. 

Dies, R. R. (1973). Group therapist self-disclosure: An evaluation by clients. Journal of 
Counseling Psychology, 20 (4), 344-348. 

Edwards, C. E., & Murdock, N. L. (1994). Characteristics of therapist self-disclosure in 
the counseling process. Journal of Counseling & Development, 72(4) .384-389. 

Hendrick, S. S. (1987). Counseling and self-disclosure. In V. J. Derlega & J. H. Berg 
(Eds.). Self-disclosure: Theory, research, and therapy, (pp. 303-327). New York: Plenum 
Press. 



Hendrick, S. S. (1990). A client perspective on counselor disclosure (brief report). 

Journal of Counseling and Development , 69(2), 184-185. 

Hill, C. E., Mahalik, J. R., & Thompson, B. J. (1989). Therapist Self-disclosure. 
Psychotherapy , 26(3), 290-295. 

Jourard, S. M. (1964). The transparent self ( 1st ed.). Princeton, NJ: Van Nostrand 
Reinhold. 

Jourard, S. M. (1968). Disclosing man to himself . New York: Van Nostrand. 

Jourard, S. M. (1971). Self-disclosure: An experimental analysis of the transparent self . 
New York: Wiley. 

May, O. P., & Thompson, C. L. (1973). Perceived levels of self-disclosure, mental 
health, and helpfulness of group leaders. Journal of Counseling Psychology , 20(4), 349-352. 

McCarthy, P. R. (1979). Differential effects of self-disclosure vs. self-involving 
counselor statements across counselor-client gender pairings. Journal of Counseling Psychology , 
26,538-541. 

McCarthy, P. R., & Betz, N. E. (1978). Differential effects of self-disclosing vs. self- 
involving counselor statements. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 25 , 251-256. 

Miller, M. J. (1983). Beyond "mm-hm": The importance of counselor disclosure. 
Counseling and Values, 27, 90-98. 

Morran, D. K. (1982). Leader and member self-disclosing behavior in counseling groups. 
Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 7(4), 218-223. 

Nilsson, D. E., Strassberg, D. S., & Bannon, J. (1979). Perceptions of counselor self- 
disclosure: An analogue study. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 26(5), 399-404. 

Peca-Baker, T. A., & Friedlander, M. L. (1989). Why are self-disclosing counselors 
attractive? Journal of Counseling and Development , 72(4), 279-282. 

Pennebaker, J. W., Kiecolt-Glaser, J. K., & Glaser, R. (1988). Disclosure of traumas 
and immune functions: Health implications of psychotherapy. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 56, 239-245. 

Pennebaker, J. W., Colder, M„ & Sharp, L. K. (1988). Accelerating the coping process. 
Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 58, 528-537. 

Reynolds, C. L., & Fischer, C. H. (1983). Personal versus professional evaluations of 
self-disclosing and self-involving counselors. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 30(3), 451- 
454. 



Robitschek, C. G., & McCarthy, P. R. (1991). Prevalence of counselor self-reference in 
the therapeutic dyad. Journal of Counseling and Development, 69, 218-221. 

Rogers, C. R. (1961). On becoming a person . Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 

Rogers, C. R. ( 1970). Carl Rogers on encounter groups . New Y ork: Harper & Row. 




8 

11 



VandeCreek, L., & Angstadt, L. (1985). Client preferences and anticipations about 
counselor self-disclosure. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 32 (2). 206-214. 

Watkins, C. E., Jr. (1990). The effects of counselor self-disclosure: A research review. 
The Counseling Psychologist . 18(3), 477-500. 

Weigel, R. G., Dinges, N., Dyer, R., & Straumfjord, A. A. (1972). Perceived self- 
disclosure, mental health, and who is liked in group treatment. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology, 19(1), 47-52. 

Wells, T. L. (1994). Therapist self-disclosure: Its effects on clients and the treatment 
relationship. Smith College Studies in Social Work , 65(1), 23-41. 

Yalom, I. D. (1995). The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (4th ed.). New 
York: BasicBooks. 



Clinical Supervision of Group Counselors: New Perspectives 



# 



Michael D. Loos 

Standards of supervisory practice are discussed in this paper. Current and future healthcare 
projections for accountability of group counselors is an area that counselor educators must address, 
in terms of training group counselors. Ethical and professional issues are addressed. 



There is dramatic restructuring occurring within the nation's healthcare industry. The 
impact such renovations will have on the clinical supervisor of counselors in group training is not 
clear. According to a recently released task force report summary (Pew Health Professions 
Commission, 1995), projected fundamental changes will focus on: 1) the development of uniform 
standards within a profession; 2) practitioner education and training; 3) effective continuing 
competency assessments; and 4) practitioner accountability to both the profession and the public 
served. 



Of particular interest is the impact of these projected regulatory guidelines, and the effect 
they might have on the training of group counselors. The clinical supervisor's role then becomes 
more regulated as education, training and practice are held out for public scrutiny. The purpose of 
this article is to examine each of the four projected areas of change (standards, preparation, 
competency and accountability) in light of the current status of clinical supervision in the training of 
group counselors. 



Current Standards 

The Association for Specialists in Group Work (ASGW) revised standards ( 1992) outlines 
the core competencies in general group work. The ASGW has identified specific tasks, knowledge 
and skills that provide the foundation upon which effective training is constructed. Although 
addressing the minimum competencies for training, replete with clock-hour minimums, the 
standards appear not to regulate the practitioners who provide the mentoring and monitor a 
trainee's progress toward skill acquisition. 

The core competencies for clinical supervisors of the Association for Counselor Education 
and Supervision (ACES) might provide a basis in formulating an appropriate nomenclature 
(Borders & Leddick, 1987). Although supervisory knowledge and skills are not typically 
different, the venue in which they are exercised may be quite distinct. Because group counseling is 
significantly different than individual counseling, the public may be left with questions about the 
quality of training of the practitioner delivering those services, thus expecting that the cadre of 
clinical supervisors be expert in terms of their ability to adequately prepare the group practitioner. 
There are differences in conceptual skills, knowledge base, interventions and management 
requiring specific group supervisor training prior to overseeing the development and training of 
other group practitioners. 

According to the American Counseling Association (ACA) Code of Ethics and Standards of 
Practice, Section F.l.f. and Section F (SP-38)(1995), the preparation of clinical supervisors is 
addressed in less than specific language, particularly for the group training supervisor. The 
content of these standards would require amendment to include a statement of minimum 
competencies relative to philosophical foundations, practice dimensions and level of academic and 
experiential training. A composite definition clearly delineating the core competencies required of 




10 



13 



# 



the effective clinical supervisor in training group counselors is essential for the profession. For 
those in the role of mentor-model, such clarity may be appreciated and well received. Group 
treatment and counseling reflect efficiency and conservancy and, therefore, will be subject to 
increasing public review. 

Both the Association for Specialists in Group Work and the American Counseling 
Association have produced standards that guide the preparation of counselors. Invariably, the 
more general areas of education and training overlap significantly. The ACA promulgates general 
guidelines for the practice of clinical supervision adopted by many preparatory institutions and 
licensing boards. The guidelines are not specific to the preparation and training of the skilled 
group training supervisor. Under the previously cited Code of Ethics and Standards of Practice, a 
general description of the knowledge base is expected of an accomplished instructor. The 
ASGW's revised standards focus on the core curricula standards for knowledge and skill 
competencies of group counselors. Additionally, the ASGW provides descriptive guidelines for 
specialty areas of group practice, that are founded by domain, knowledge and skill development. 
What is missing are detailed guidelines that attend to the preparation of the clinical supervisor who 
plays an irrefutably important role in the development of the group practitioner. 

Exactness, as implied in the Pew Report (1995), is the principle by which practitioners will 
be evaluated in terms of practice preparation, and clinical supervisors will be judged as effective 
mentors. To meet this criterion, counselor education programs will need to offer course-specific 
requirements for group training supervisors that first encompass the acquisition and appreciation of 
the components of theory and technique, then provide the opportunity to carefully monitor 
technical competence in the practice of that body of knowledge and set of skills (Borders & 
Cashwell, 1992; Borders & Fong, 1994). The Council for Accreditation of Counseling and 
Related Education Programs (CACREP) ( 1994) offers standards that address the cogency of these 
issues in the preparation of counselors in general and group counselors as a part of that whole. 

The CACREP standards outline the necessary curricular experiences for marriage and family 
counseling, gerontological and community counseling, school counseling and mental health 
counseling. It would be advantageous to add to this structured format the requirements for clinical 
supervision, especially for the group training supervisor. This would enhance the credibility of the 
practitioners graduating from CACREP-approved programs. 

Many researchers and educators recommend some form of experiential group participation 
as a fundamental component of preparatory training (Berger, 1993; Glickauf-Hughes & Campbell, 
1991; Lenihan & Kirk, 1992; McAuliffe, 1992; Merta, Wolfgang, & McNeil, 1993; Newman & 
Lovell, 1993; Ravets, 1993; Stempler, 1993; Tuttman, 1991; Weber, Costikyan, Fales, & 

Morgan, 1995; White & Russell, 1995; Wilbur, Roberts-Wilbur, Hart, Morris, & Betz, 1994). 
Proctor (1994) and Kibel (1990) specifically refer to supervision as the most significant influence 
in the final phase of professional preparation. A consistent theme embedded in the literature is that 
nothing is more integral in the development of the group counselor than exposure to and guidance 
from an effective clinical group supervisor. As Proctor (1994) so distinctly states, the main criteria 
for selection as a clinical supervisor often has been based on proximity, theoretical orientation, 
acceptance of someone who has been suggested and, more often than not, on who one has been 
appointed. 



Competency 

Establishing and assuring the continuing competency of practitioners looms large. Those 
responsible for training practitioners must document and demonstrate the personal and professional 
preparedness to provide adequate, effective group clinical supervision. The curriculum guidelines 
available through the ACA's professional divisions provide for the adequate preparation of the 
skilled supervisor in general but not specifically the group supervisor. 




11 



Another general subject alluded to in the literature indicates that, historically, the 
competence and experiential success of a mentor was sufficient criteria to judge competence 
(Proctor, 1994). Soon it will require more than academic expertise and longevity of practice to 
establish credibility and competence. Outcome data, defined as measures or documentation of 
some fashion, specific to capability as an educator, counselor, trainer and supervisor will be a 
required benchmark of continuing competence. 

Next, the maintenance of competence will need to be addressed and measured. Attendance 
and participation at supervision workshops may become mandatory for group supervisor 
practitioners. In the counseling marketplace, if proposed and adopted by the ASGW, this precept 
could become the standard by which the group counseling discipline demonstrates a commitment to 
professionalism. Dye and Borders (1990) concluded that as a fundamental goal, to ensure quality 
service for the public served, effective supervisors for competent counselors should not be 
forgotten nor, as stated in a later publication, neglected in post-degree practice (Borders & Usher, 
1992). 



Training Issues 

Demonstrating and documenting effectiveness as a group counselor supervisor is rigorous, 
touching every aspect of counselor development, from preparation to practice, to personal 
introspection. For the group training supervisor, this responsibility extends to the protection of the 
profession from the adverse impact of the ill-prepared practitioner. The protection of the training 
supervisor from the ethical dilemmas and potential sanctions stemming from disgruntled students 
with whom the training supervisor may have worked is another consideration. Ideally, both the 
supervisor and the student share the commitment to promote public and personal well being, to 
develop professionally, and to practice ethically. However, it is the training group supervisor, 
whose credentials will be exposed, who will be challenged to demonstrate that the students whom 
the supervisor has prepared can pass muster. It will be the training group supervisor who must 
help uncover the tacit knowledge of the student and articulate the relationship of knowledge to 
practice (Holloway, 1994). To appreciate the seriousness of this issue, let us consider how we 
train our future group counselors. 

The principle methods of imparting information include both didactic and experiential 
exercises. It is easy enough to document the acquisition of a knowledge base through papers and 
written exams. Accomplishing this goal with the experiential component is quite another story. As 
mentioned earlier, the predominant models of training of group counselors include experiential 
groups (Merta, Wolfgang, & McNeil, 1993). Holloway (1994) contends that the connection 
between ideas and experience allows for greater understanding of an event in a full and passionate 
way, thus emphasizing the importance of experiential groups. Holloway further states that this 
training supervision practice better facilitates professional competence and ability to devise more 
effective strategies in working with clients. Experiential group supervision presents the training 
supervisor with a number of uncomfortable issues with which the supervisor must deal (Ellis & 
Douce, 1994). Some of these focus on control and power issues in supervision (Salvendy, 1993). 
Other researchers cite frequent dilemmas with the issue of dual relationships (Lloyd, 1990; Merta 
et. al., 1993). The complex responsibilities of the group clinical supervisor now become evident. 
Both legal and ethical issues that deal with competent practice and the role of the clinical group 
supervisor in assuring said competency must be considered (Stoltenberg & Delworth, 1987). 

Options 

Much has been written about clinical supervision in the past decade. Some writers suggest 
that supervision is a professional discipline worthy of designation as a distinct field of practice 
(Dye & Borders, 1990). There are guidelines for training supervisors and many models have been 
proposed (Stoltenberg & Delworth, 1987). There is a growing body of literature regarding group 




12 



15 



work published by the Association for Specialists in Group Work. The Association for Counselor 
Education and Supervision offers a distinct curriculum guide for the preparation of counseling 
supervisors (Borders, Bernard, Dye, Fong, Henderson, & Nance, 1991). Currently, the ASGW 
offers no separate guideline for the preparation of group training supervisors. 

It would be helpful for the ASGW to develop and establish a measurement system that 
embraces both the oral and written traditions to ascertain continued competence of the group 
supervisory practitioner. The written component can be based on the acquisition of knowledge 
regarding state-of-the-art techniques; the oral component can be based on a criterion-referenced 
case management presentation defense. 

Attention would be given to the construction of a role delineation study to develop 
standards for the specialty practice of "Group Training Supervisor" within the ASGW. Something 
so germane to the effective clinical preparation of group counselors must require more than the 
casual reference it is given in preparatory guidelines regarding curriculum training of supervisors 
(Borders, Bernard, Dye, Fong, Henderson, & Nance, 1991). This is particularly true in that 
group work and group work training have become, each in its own right, distinct professional 
disciplines. 



With the advent of healthcare workforce regulation reforms, there will be: 1) increased 
emphasis on a system that promotes uniformity of standards of professional practice; 2) focused 
attention on the acquisition of a knowledge base and technical competence with its use; 3) a 
demand for quality care and continued demonstration of competence; and 4) a public concerned 
with accountability as measured by treatment outcome. All of these factors will impact the group 
counseling discipline. We can temper the effects of this transformation by exercising foresight in 
regard to addressing some of the more obvious shortcomings in our group counseling preparatory 
guidelines. The ASGW is encouraged to revisit the standards for the training and development of 
group counselors to include some more specific guidelines and language addressing the 
competencies of the group training supervisor. The development of a scope of practice manual to 
augment the standards of practice would facilitate public understanding of the nature of group work 
and group counseling. 

Further discussion on ethical dilemmas could focus on the more prevalent of the 
challenges, including transference, dependency, power and dual relationships issues (Kurpius, 
Gibson, Lewis, & Corbet, 1991). Additional attention must be given to update the newly 
credentialed group practitioner with the most common ethical sanctions and how to protect 
counselors and the public from potential harm (Neukrug, Healy, & Herlihy, 1992). 

Scholar- practitioners responsible for the education and training of group counselors and 
clinical group supervisors should do further research on assessing the components of quality group 
training and professional development of competent group training supervisors. As the demand 
for more and competent group practitioners increases so, too, will the demand increase for 
assurances that these practitioners are adequately prepared. With this will come added 
responsibilities for the clinical group supervisor and a need for improved preparation of these 
mentor-models. 



American Counseling Association, Code of ethics and standards of practice ( 1995, June). 
Counseling Today, 37 (12), 33-40. 



Conclusion 



References 



13 



ERIC 




Association for Specialists in Group Work: Professional standards for the training of group 
workers. (1992). The Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 17 (1), 12-19. 

Berger, S. S. (1993). Group supervision of first- year doctoral students in social-skills 
training: A lesson in integration. The Clinical Supervisor, 11 (1), 217-231. 

Borders, L. D., Bernard, J. M., Dye, H. A., Fong, M. L., Henderson, P., & Nance, D. 
W. (1991). Curriculum guide for training counseling supervisors: Rationale, development, and 
implementation. Counselor Education and Supervision, 31, 58-80. 

Borders, L. D., & Cashwell, C.S. (1992). Supervision regulations in Counselor 
Licensure Legislation. Counselor Education and Supervision, 31, 208-218. 

Borders, L. D., & Fong, M. L. (1994). Cognitions of Supervisors-In-Training: An 
Exploratory Study. Counselor Education and Supervision, 33 (4), 280-293. 

Borders, L. D., & Leddick, G. R. (1987). Handbook of clinical supervision. 

Alexandria, VA: American Association for Counseling and Development. 

Borders, L. D., & Usher, C. H. (1992). Post-Degree Supervision: Existing and Preferred 
Practices. Journal of Counseling & Development, 70, 594-595. 

Council for Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs. (1994). 
CACRFP accreditation standards and procedures manual. Alexandria, VA: Council for 
Accreditation of Counseling and Related Educational Programs. 

Crick, P. (1991). Good supervision: On the experience of being supervised. 
Psychoanalytic Psychotherapy. 5 (3), 235-245. 

Dye, A., & Borders, L. D. (1990). Counseling supervisors: Standards for preparation and 
practice. Journal of Counseling & Development, 69 , 27-29. 

Ellis, M. V., & Douce, L. A. (1994). Group supervision of novice clinical supervisors: 
Eight recurring issues. Journal of Counseling & Development. 72 (5), 520-525. 

Glickauf-Hughes, C. (1991). Experiential supervision: Applied techniques for a case 
presentation approach. Psychotherapy, 28 (4), 625-635. 

Holloway, E.L. (1994). A bridge of knowing: the scholar- practitioner of supervision. 
Counseling Psychology Quarterly, 7 (1), 3-15. 

Kibel, H. D. (1990). Discussion: A perspective on the education of a psychotherapist. 
Issues in Ego Psychology, 14 (1 & 2), 80-&4. 

Kurpius, D., Gibson, G., Lewis, J., & Corbet, M. (1991). Ethical Issues in Supervising 
Counseling Practitioners. Counselor Education and Supervision, 31 (1), 48-57. 

Lenihan, G. O., & Kirk, W. G. (1992). Conjoint supervision with beginning trainees: The 
model and its effectiveness. The Clinical Supervisor, 10( 1), 35-50. 

Lloyd, A. P. (1990). Dual relationships in group activities: A counselor 
education/accreditation dilemma. The Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 15( 2), 83-87. 




14 



McAuliffe, G. J. (1992). A case presentation approach to group supervision for 
community college counselors. Counselor Education and Supervision. 31 , 163-174. 

Merta, R. J., Wolfgang, L., & McNeil, K. (1993). Five models for using the experiential 
group in the preparation of group counselors. The Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 18 (4), 
200-207. 

Neukrug, E. S., Healy, M., & Herlihy, B. (1992). Ethical practices of licensed 
professional counselors: An updated survey of state licensing boards. Counselor Education and 
Supervision, 32(2), 130-141. 

Newman, J. A., & Lovell, M. (1993). A description of a supervisory group for group 
counselors. Counselor Education and Supervision, 33, 22-31. 

Pew Health Professions Commission. (1995). Reforming health care workforce regulation: 
Policy considerations for the 21st century. Taskforce Report. San Francisco, CA: Pew Health 
Professions Commission. 

Proctor, B. (1994). Supervision — competence, confidence, accountability. British Journal 
of Guidance and Counselling, 22 (3). 309-318. 

Ravets, P. C. (1993). Group supervision: A multiple case study. Dissertation Abstracts 
International. 54( 5), 2768-B. (Copies available exclusively from Micrographics Dept., Doheny 
Library, Univ. So. Cal., Los Angeles, CA 90089-1082.). 

Salvendy, J. T. (1993). Control and power in supervision. International Journal of Group 
Psychotherapy, 43 (3), 363-376. 

Stempler, B. L. (1993). Supervisory co-leadership: An innovative model for teaching the 
use of social group work in clinical social work training. Social Work with Groups, 16 (3), 97- 
110. 



Stol ten berg, C. D., & Delworth, U. (1987). Supervising counselors and therapists: A 
developmental approach. San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass, 168-175. 

Tuttman, S. (1991). Training for group therapists by means of the supervisory group. 
Issues in Ego Psychology, 14 ( 1 & 2), 65-79. 

Weber, R. L., Costikyan, N., Fales, H., & Morgan, S. (1995). An observation and group 
dynamics model for teaching psychoanalytic psychotherapy. Academic Psychiatry, 19 (1), 12-21. 

White, M. B., & Russell, C. S. (1995). The essential elements of supervisory systems: A 
modified delphi study. Journal of Marital and Family Therapy, 21 (1), 33-53. 

Wilbur, M. P., Roberts-Wilbur, J., Hart, G. M., Morris, J. R., & Betz, R. L. (1994). 
Structured group supervision (SGS): A pilot study. Counselor Education and Supervision, 33 (4), 
262-279. 



There's More to the Apple than Meets the Eye: Perceptions of 
an African-American Co-Facilitator of a Predominantly 

Majority Group 



Aretha Marbley 

The author uses her experience as an African-American co -facilitator of a predominantly white 
group to identify and discuss unique and common issues for non-majorities facilitating majority or 
different race groups. Included in the group dynamics, but often not addressed in counseling 
groups, are feelings and experiences of racism, prejudices, and oppression that are present in both 
practitioners and group members. 



When addressing multicultural issues, most researchers have focused on the diversity of 
the clientele rather than the cultural diversity of the practitioner (Gainer, 1992; Ivey, Ivey & Simek- 
Morgan, 1993; Ponterotto, Casas, Suzuki & Alexander, 1995; Sue & Sue, 1990). 

The purpose of this article is to discuss the issues inherent in a group situation where there 
is a non-dominant group leader. The article chronicles the perceptions and experience of 
facilitating such a group and includes personal reactions about the experience of an ethnic-minority 
co-facilitator of a majority group. The author is an African-American counselor who had the 
opportunity to co-facilitate a culturally diverse group. However, this group was not the traditional 
multicultural group made up of minority members, but one that consisted of mostly majority group 
members. 



Review of the Literature on Diversity and Group Work 

The literature on multicultural and/or diverse groups referred mostly to racially and 
ethnically different groups, which includes important factors for the facilitator of any diverse group 
(including white groups). Underestimating the importance or a lack of awareness of the impact of 
race and/or ethnicity in group work may actually hinder the counseling process and outcome of 
treatment (Greeley, Garcia, Kessler & Gilchrest, 1992; Ivey et al., 1993; Ponterotto et al., 1995; 
Sue & Sue, 1990). 

One prerequisite and essential component of effective counseling with multiracial or 
multiethnic group members is an awareness of one's own culture and cultural values and norms 
(Ivey et al., 1993; Ponterotto et al., 1995). This examination begins with the group facilitator but 
must include the members. Greeley et al. ( 1992) offered that "All counselors and clients exist in a 
multicultural environment that necessitates understanding one's own as well as others' cultures" 

(p. 197). 

In a cross-cultural group setting, Yalom's (1995) therapeutic factors, or view of the group 
as a social microcosm rings true; that is, group members bring with them to the group their values, 
beliefs, prejudices, and racial biases, and will reenact them in the group setting. "Given enough 
time group members. ..will create in the group the same interpersonal universe they have always 
inhabited (p. 28). As a result, the author tuned in to observe the group members' reactions to her 
as an African-American group leader. 

"Our thoughts, feelings and attitudes regarding race differences form the basis of prejudice 
and are believed to act as the foundation of our behavioral responses in intergroup contexts." 




16 



(Allport, 1954 as cited by Johnson, Torres, Coleman & Smith, 1995). Racism and cultural bias 
impede the counseling process (Brown, Lipford-Sanders & Shaw, 1995; Greeley et al., 1992; 
Pope-Davis & Ottavi, 1994; Sodowsky & Plake, 1992; Steward, 1993; Sue & Sue, 1990). 

Racism, prejudice, sexism, and internalized oppression are very emotional issues and may impede 
or prevent goal attainment both of individual and group counseling (Johnson et al., 1995). 

Gainor ( 1992), reflecting on group work with African-American women, says that an 
effective African-American female group leader must confront and deal with her own internalized 
oppression. Reynolds and Pope ( 1991) define oppression as "a system that allows access to the 
services, rewards and benefits, and privileges of society based on membership in a particular 
group" (p. 174). Failure to confront these issues may have identifiably different outcomes for 
African-American women group members. 

Racism, prejudice of many kinds and internalized oppression are real issues in multicultural 
group work and can be viable elements in blocking effective group counseling (Gainor, 1992; 
Johnson et al., 1995; Rollock, Westman & Johnson, 1992; Yu & Gregg, 1993). In fact, Gainor 
(1992) has found that "expressions of internalized oppressions within the group process can 
actually serve as invitations to developing deeper and more meaningful interpersonal relationships 
and greater group cohesiveness" (p. 241). 

The counselor must increase his or her knowledge and information about other cultures, 
especially the culture(s) of the populations that he or she will be working with. In short, the 
counselor must become culturally intentional. According to Ivey et al., ( 1993), the person who 
acts with intentionality is a fully functioning person who has a sense of capability. She or he can 
generate alternative behaviors in a given situation and 'approach' a problem from different vantage 
points. Greeley et al. ( 1992) state that a counselor who is aware of a particular culture's behaviors 
and attitudes may become sensitized to how such values and attitudes may interact and affect the 
dynamics of a group, and decrease the chances of culturally bound behaviors being misrepresented 
as pathological. 

The assessment of racial identity or racial consciousness can be critical in facilitating a 
racially mixed group or culturally diverse group (Bell, Bouie & Baldwin, 1990; Gushue, 1993; 
Hinkle, 1994; Ponterotto, Rieger, Barrett & Sparks, 1994). Pope-Davis and Ottavi (1994) concur 
that contrary to the experiences of most ethnic groups, White Americans are rarely called on to 
assess their own attitudes about their white ethnicity. According to Greeley et al. ( 1992) a starting 
place for this assessment is with instruments created to assess stages of racial identity 
development. Some of the instruments are the White Racial Identity Attitude Scale (WRIAS; 
Helms, 1989 as cited by Greeley et al.); and the White Racial Consciousness Development Scale 
(WRCDS; Claney & Parker, 1989 as cited by Greeley et al.). 

Rollock et al. (1992) feel that white professionals who do not increase their cultural 
knowledge have propensities toward over-pathologizing, and the refusal to take on other roles to 
deal with practical problems tend to undermine the therapeutic effectiveness. Non-white 
professionals working with a white clientele in a counseling situation, who are ignorant of culture 
knowledge, run the same risks of therapeutic ineffectiveness. 

Self-awareness and self-assessment co-exist and are not separate entities. According to 
Greeley et al. (1992), self-awareness starts with self assessment; that is, knowledge of one's racial 
or cultural identity development. With this in mind, for a non-majority group leader to emerge as a 
competent and an effective counselor in this predominantly white group or other groups composed 
of ethnic or racially different members, he or she must be comfortable with their own racial 
identity. To feel this, the practitioner needs to be at an advanced developmental stage of racial 
awareness. 



Johnson et al. (1995) firmly states that "Counseling outcomes in culturally diverse groups 
are dependent, in part, on the match between the group leader's and the client's respective stages of 
racial consciousness" (p. 145). Helm cautions, that "a counselor cannot move the client further 
than the counselor has come in terms of racial identity" (p. 495). 

Based on racial-consciousness developmental stages. Helms (1984 as cited by Gushue, 
1993) proposes a number of different patterns of the counselor and client relationship: 1) The 
correspondence of racial-identity stages can be parallel (counselor and client at equivalent stages); 

2) progressive (counselor at least one stage ahead of client); 3) regressive (client is at least one 
stage ahead of counselor); or 4) crossed (client and counselor at affective opposites in their feelings 
toward Black and white). 



The Group Experience 

The group was an experiential, personal growth group, that was a requirement for a 
masters level introductory group course at a major university. Facilitation of the group was the 
major requirement for an advanced doctoral level group course. The group was composed of all 
women: one African-American, four European Americans; and two co-facilitators, an African- 
American and a European-American. 

While observing a taped interaction with a Caucasian member of the group, the doctoral 
students in the class and the instructor commented that the group member consistently responded to 
the African-American facilitator superficially. Class members did not notice this superficiality 
when the group member responded to the white co-facilitator. The author was surprised and quite 
puzzled, because she had felt the group member was being genuine and profound in her 
interactions with her, and had not sensed what the observers seemed to sense. 

The following questions surfaced: 1) If the class and instructor were accurate in their 
assessment, why was the African-American facilitator unaware of it; 2) if it was true, why; and 3) 
if it wasn't true, then what was being observed? 

Initial thoughts centered around competency as a culturally diverse group facilitator, and 
preparedness for cross-cultural counseling. Research in multicultural counseling asserts that group 
leaders must be aware that racially diverse groups may have issues relating to their cultures that 
warrant considerations (Brown et al., 1995; Pope-Davis & Dings, 1994; Reynolds & Pope, 1991; 
Steenbarger, 1993; Sue & Sue; 1990). Also, to be effective the group leader must have some 
knowledge or familiarity with the culture (Brown et al., 1995; Greeley et al., 1992; Rollock et al., 
1992; Yu & Gregg, 1993). Sue and Sue (1990) maintained that the principle goals for culturally 
skilled counselors are to become aware of their own assumptions about human behavior, to seek 
an understanding of clients' assumptions about human behavior, and to become active in 
developing appropriate intervention strategies. 

White middle class culture still dominates and is the primary culture represented in the 
research and literature in education and mental health (Sue & Sue, 1990; Ivey et al., 1993). This is 
echoed by Ponterotto et al. ( 1995) who stated that 

. . . even the shortest glance of the most notable journals . . . shows a naive Eurocentric 
approach. The growing influence of multiculturalism is recognized, but they are still clearly 
a minority vote. . . . look at the number of people attending multicultural presentations at 
an APA convention to know where the balance of power still lies (p. 56). 

Race issues are prevalent, such as prejudice, racism, and discrimination, and when groups 
of mixed races exist, those issues, feelings or behaviors do not magically disappear. There is truth 
in Yu and Gregg's (1993) remark that "the presence of a culturally different person in a counseling 
group has more implications than a mere difference in birthplace or ethnic origin" (p. 87). 




18 

21 



The quest for answers may have started with the author's class response to a taping of that 
group, but it quickly expanded to included observations of the group responses to her and to her 
co-facilitator. It absorbed the interactions of the group members to group members, group 
members to group facilitators, and the group members reactions to the responses and interactions 
of the various group dyads. 

As an African-American, the author understood that there were more differences within 
groups than between groups, and as a rule, she was aware and committed to acknowledging 
individual differences and above all recognizing and respecting those individual differences in a 
counseling situation. 



Implications and Suggestions 

If the multiculturalism movement is to totally emerge and be recognized fully as a fourth 
force in counseling, then the focus cannot remain on ethnic minorities and other culturally diverse 
groups as different. It must recognize and emphasize the dominant group as having racial, cultural, 
and ethnic differences. 

Clearly, if multicultural group counseling is to be effective, research and training must put 
more focus on the roles of culturally different practitioners in heterogeneous or homogeneous 
groups. There must be more research done in this area, including research based guidelines for the 
training and supervision of multicultural practitioners. More research in multicultural group work, 
training issues and guidelines, and practical applications for non-majority counselors facilitating 
white or different race groups is needed. 

It is hoped that researchers, counselor educators, and practitioners interested in or currently 
working with multicultural groups will continue to publish reports of their experience. It is also 
hoped that more research studies involving group work using a multicultural approach will be 
mounted. 



References 

Bell, Y., Bouie, C., & Baldwin, J. (1990). Afrocentric cultural consciousness and 
African-American male-female relationships. Journal of Black Studies, 21 (2), 213-218. 

Brown, S. P., Lipford-Sanders, J., & Shaw, M. (1995). Kujichagulia: Uncovering the 
secrets of the heart: Group work with African American women on predominantly white 
campuses. The Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 20( 3), 151-158. 

Gainer, K. A. (1992). Internalized oppression as a barrier to effective group work with 
Black women. The Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 17 (4), 235-242). 

Greeley, A. T., Garcia, V. L., Kessler, B. L., & Gilchrest, G. (1992). Training effective 
multicultural group counselors: Issues for a group training course. The Journal for Specialists in 
Group Work. 17( 4). 196-209. 

Gushue, G. V. (1993). Culturally-identity development and family assessment: an 
interaction model. The Counseling Psychologist, 21 (3), 487-513. 

Hinkle, J. S. (1994). Practitioners and cross-cultural assessment: A practical guide to 
information and training. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and Development, 27 (2), 
103-115. 




19 

22 



Ivey, A. E., Ivey, M. B., & Simek-Morgan, L. (1993). Counseling and psychotherapy: A 
multicultural perspective, (3rd ed.). Boston: Allyn and Bacon . 

Johnson, I. H., Torres, J. S., Coleman, V. D. and Smith, M. C. (1995). Issues and 
strategies in leading culturally diverse counseling groups . The Journal for Specialists in Group 
Work. 20( 3), 143-150. 

Ponterotto, J. G., Casas, J. M., Suzuki, L. A., & Alexander, C. M. (1995). Handbook of 
multicultural counseling. Thousand Oaks: Sage. 

Ponterotto, J. G., Rieger, B. P., Barrett, A., & Sparks, R. (1994). Assessing 
multicultural counseling competence: A review of instrumentation. Journal of Counseling and 
Development, 72 (3), 323-328. 

Pope-Davis, D. B. & Dings, J. G. (1994). An empirical comparison of two self-report 
multicultural counseling competency inventories. Measurement and Evaluation in Counseling and 
Development, 27 (2), 93-102) 

Pope-Davis, D. B. & Ottavi, T. M. (1994). The relationship between racism, and racial 
identity among white Americans: A replication and extension. Journal of Counseling and 
Development, 72 (3), 293-297. 

Reynolds, A. L. & Pope, R. L. (1991). The complexities of diversity: Exploring multiple 
oppressions. Journal of Counseling and Development, 70 (2), 174-180. 

Rollock, D. A., Westman, J. S., & Johnson, C. (1992). A black student support group on 
a predominantly white university campus: Issues for Counselors and Therapists. The Journal for 
Specialists in Group Work, 17( 4), 243-252. 

Sodowsky, G. R. & Plake, B. S. (1992). A study of acculturation difference among 
international people and suggestions for sensitivity to within group differences. Journal of 
Counseling and Development, 71( 1), 53-59. 

Steenbarger, B. N. (1993). A multicontextual model of counseling: Bridging brevity and 
diversity. Journal of Counseling and Development, 72( 1), 8-13. 

Steward, R. J. (1993). Black women and white women in groups: Suggestions for 
minority-sensitive group services on university campuses. Journal of Counseling and 
Development. 72 (1), 39-41. 

Sue, D. W. & Sue, D. (1990). Counseling the culturally different: Theory and Practice 
(2nded.) New York: Wiley. 

Yalom, D. C. (1995). The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (4th ed.) New 
York: Basic Books. 

Yu, A. & Gregg, C. H. (1993). Working with groups-Asians in groups: More than a 
matter of cultural awareness. The Journal for Specialists in Group Work, 18( 2), 86-93. 




20 



23 



Group Work in the Treatment of Bulimia Nervosa: 
An Overview of Approaches and Efficacies 



Rebecca J. Conneely 



Group psychotherapy has emerged as the preferred modality in the treatment of bulimia nervosa. 
An examination of the various approaches to the application of group work with bulimics is 
accompanied by a brief discussion of the symptoms and etiology of this eating disorder. A review 
of recent literature will explore the link between the theoretical formulations of the disorder and the 
chosen treatment approach. Considerations for therapists who facilitate groups with bulimics will 
also be presented. 



The use of group therapy has become increasingly recognized as an effective mode of 
treatment for bulimia nervosa. This is likely due to the suitability of group work to a number of the 
traits associated with bulimia. Bulimia nervosa is an eating disorder of behavioral, psychological 
and physiological symptoms, characterized by overwhelming urges to eat large quantities of food, 
followed by guilt-driven efforts to compensate for the calories consumed through purging 
behaviors. The core issues of the disorder are: ( 1) an extreme preoccupation with weight and body 
size or shape; (2) frequent, uncontrollable urges to overeat; and (3) the purging behaviors to 
counteract the effects of binge eating (Harper-Giuffre, 1992). 

Bulimics typically carry out their behaviors in carefully-guarded secrecy, and experience 
hopelessness, shame and confusion over the symptoms of the disorder. Group work provides a 
therapy which offers social support, universality, a safe place to break the secrecy and express 
emotions, and a place where realities and distorted perceptions can be tested and challenged 
(Zimpfer, 1990). Duncan and Kennedy (1992) would add to this list of benefits the opportunity to 
help as well as be helped, a sense of empowerment through participation in the process of 
treatment, and the instillation of hope through seeing others on the way to recovery. 

Treatment of Bulimia Through Group Work 

The interpersonal dynamics that occur within the structure of groups have distinct 
therapeutic benefits. As a group of individuals progresses through the experience of working 
together on a common task, a sense of group identity will gradually emerge. The group becomes a 
social system whose purpose is shared by all members; in the midst of this process, therapeutic 
change can occur for the individuals (MacKenzie & Harper-Giuffre, 1992; Yalom, 1995). 

Critical to the effective functioning of a therapeutic group is the development of group 
cohesion, described by Yalom ( 1995) as a condition in which group members feel comfortable and 
accepted in the group and feel as though they belong. Participation in the group is an attractive 
experience, and one to which the members remain committed. MacKenzie and Harper-Giuffre 
(1992) identify a cohesive group as one which is characterized in part by regular attendance, a 
stability of membership, and high levels of participation, risk-taking and self-disclosure. 

MacKenzie and Harper-Giuffre (1992) summarized a number of other therapeutic factors 
which have been identified as having a positive contribution to effective change in the group 
process. These factors have been grouped into the following four categories: ( 1) supportive 
factors; (2) self revelation factors; (3) learning from others; and (4) psychological work factors. 




21 

24 



The advantages to therapeutic groups result, in part, from the variety of relationships which can 
develop, and the multiple sources of feedback and learning (MacKenzie & Harper-Giuffre). 

In general, the goals of treatment for eating disorders include normalizing weight and eating 
patterns, overcoming pathological attitudes about the body, self-esteem and relationships, and 
increasing personal coping skills, as well as social support resources (Levine, Petrie, Gotthardt & 
Sevig, 1990). There are, however, a variety of different approaches and purposes in using group 
work with this population, ranging from self-help groups to support groups to group therapies 
from different orientations (Levine et al., 1990). The differences in these groups are apparent in 
both their leadership and in their goals. 

Self-help groups are conducted by peers, typically without the involvement of a trained 
professional. The function of self-help groups tends to focus on eliminating the symptoms of 
eating disorders through structured programs and peer influence. Support groups, in contrast, are 
usually facilitated by professionals, but can be conducted by recovered lay-persons. In these 
groups, the focus is on group members serving as support for one anothers’ needs for empathy 
and encouragement. Education can also be a component of support groups (Levine et al., 1990; 
Rice & Faulkner, 1992). 

The more therapeutic purposes of groups can encompass psychoeducation, long-term 
intensive therapeutic interaction and exploration, or strictly the function of bringing serious or 
dangerous eating behaviors under control (MacKenzie & Harper-Giuffre, 1992). Common themes 
which emerge in therapy groups for eating disorders include: ( 1) coming to terms with the 
diagnosis of an eating disorder; (2) understanding that the disordered behaviors must be 
relinquished; (3) identifying ways to replace the function the disorder has served; (4) exploring 
family roles and alliances; (5) acknowledging difficulties with trust, assertiveness and attitudes of 
perfectionism; (6) recognizing the tendency toward all-or-none thinking; and (7) challenging the 
preoccupation with physical appearances (Duncan & Kennedy, 1992). 

Other, less common, group approaches related to eating disorders also appear in the 
literature. Some involve therapeutic focus on specific aspects of eating disorder etiology, including 
the differentiation and articulation of affect (Barth, 1994), family of origin/family relations issues 
(Shekter-Wolfson, Woodside & Lackstrom, 1992), and issues of sexual abuse (Kreidler & 
Fluharty, 1994; Perry, 1992). McNamara (1989) reports a group process used in a preventive 
context by providing information and a focus on positive body image to repeat dieters at risk for 
developing eating disorders. 

Etiology 

In determining appropriate approaches to treatment for any disorder, an understanding of 
causal factors is important. This understanding is somewhat elusive in regard to bulimia, 
however, as the etiology of bulimia nervosa is not conclusive. Theories include a biological model 
which relates bulimia to physiological, neurological or metabolic disturbances, and a psychosocial 
model which attributes the disorder to societal pressures to be thin, starting a cycle of distorted 
eating patterns. A third model, which is a combination of the previous two, asserts that young 
women who are physiologically predisposed to being overweight or having metabolic imbalances 
are more susceptible to binging and purging as a response to the undue pressures to be thin 
(Zimpfer, 1990). Harper-Giuffre ( 1992) subscribes to the psychosocial theory, stating "Women 
face multiple, ambiguous, high-achievement-oriented, and often contradictory role expectations 
that have been precipitated by shifting cultural norms." These role expectations include a "cultural 
obsession with slenderness" that creates pressure regarding diet and exercise, (p. 11). 

Bulimia nervosa has been clearly delineated from the separate, but related, eating disorder 
of anorexia nervosa; however, a close relationship exists between the two. Anderson (1990) 



0 




22 

25 



describes these disorders as existing on a continuum, with bulimia resulting from a failed attempt at 
anorexia. That is, when the restrictive dieting patterns characteristic of anorexia can not be 
maintained, the resultant hunger and deprivation triggers a binging episode. In a subsequent 
continuing cycle of restricting and binging, the binging behavior gradually becomes a response to 
uncomfortable moods, rather than a response to hunger (Anderson). 

Bulimics have been identified as more likely to be identified with narcissistic, histrionic or 
borderline personality disorders (Anderson, 1990; Schmidt, Tiller & Treasure, 1993). Other 
characteristics of bulimics include low self-esteem (Kuntz, Groze & Yates, 1992; Romney & 
Miller, 1988; Zimpfer, 1990) along with feelings of helplessness (Kerr, Skok, & McLaughlin, 
1991), dissatisfaction with body size and a distorted image of body size (Kerr et al. ; Kuntz et al. ; 
Zimpfer), higher than typical levels of anxiety (Kuntz et al.), and depression (Kerr et al. ; Schmidt 
et al.; Zimpfer). Zimpfer (1990) also noted other psychological issues in bulimics, such as 
interpersonal sensitivity and sociopathic traits. 

Certain family characteristics and environments have also been documented as being 
associated with bulimia nervosa. These characteristics include tendencies toward conflict and 
violence, low cohesiveness, emotional distance and detachment, inconsistent displays of emotion 
and situations of childhood adversity such as alcoholism, abuse or abandonment (Blouin et al., 
1994; Harper-Giuffre, 1992; Kerr et al., 1991; Kuntz et al., 1992; Schmidt et al., 1993; Waller, 
1994; Zimpfer, 1990). 

Wolf and Crowther (1992) identify bulimia as a learned behavior that is reinforced through 
the reduction of negative emotions which occurs during the binging and purging episodes. 

Romney and Miller (1988) discuss psychodynamic perspectives of eating disorders which focus 
on negative parent/child interactions, resulting in a woman's desire to exert control or exact 
punishment via her body. They also describe behavioral and family systems perspectives, 
however, and conclude that all positions are involved in forming an effective understanding of 
eating disorders. 

From our perspective, eating disorders can be understood as a contemporary expression of 

women's pain. They are learned behaviors— maladaptive coping mechanisms— that express 

in a culturally syntonic way the intrapsychic pain and dysfunction which arise in the 

individual as a result of family pathology, (p. 128.) 

These theories of causality are important when considering the appropriate approaches to treating 
the symptoms and etiology of bulimia nervosa. 

Theoretical Perspectives in Group Psychotherapy 

Research indicates that the predominant theoretical approaches employed in the group 
treatment of bulimia nervosa are psychodynamic, psychoeducational, behavioral and cognitive- 
behavioral. The goals, processes, and efficacies of each will be explored separately. 

Psychodynamic Psychotherapy 

The purpose of the psychodynamic therapy group in treating eating disorders is to address 
the interpersonal and ego conflicts identified as predisposing factors. In the case of bulimia 
nervosa, as stated earlier, these conflicts are related to family history, parental interactions, and 
possible personality disorders, as well as depression and deficits in self-esteem. Psychodynamic 
groups are long term— sometimes lasting for years— and are typically supplemented by interventions 
of other kinds, including individual therapy, education and behavioral techniques and medication 
(Reiss & Rutan, 1992). 

The nature of these groups is interpersonal interaction, with no structure imposed in the 
facilitation. Group members are provided the freedom of self-exploration in an environment that 



promotes and sustains personal change. The focus is on affect, in a here-and-now context which 
allows members to shed false images that they typically use to cope in the world. Members' 
personalities and ways of interacting in the world are gradually played out in their relationships 
within the group. In the case of eating disordered members, trust and cohesion of the group may 
be slow to develop, before the therapeutic work can begin. For this reason, eating disorder groups 
can take 1 to 2 years to reach termination. 

The long-term result of addressing resistant coping mechanisms and distorted cognitions in 
the group environment is improved self-regulation, and greater autonomy and self-esteem (Harper- 
Giuffre, MacKenzie & Sivitilli, 1992). Because of the long-term nature of these groups, and the 
variety of methods that may be employed during the course of or in conjunction with the group, 
psychodynamic group therapy for eating disorders is difficult to study, and its efficacy has 
received little attention in the literature. 

Psychoeducation 

A predominately psychoeducational group approach in the treatment of eating disorders has 
a major goal of normalizing eating behaviors, which is accomplished by providing extensive 
information related to the disorder and by educating members on self-care strategies designed to 
help them monitor their behaviors. The group meetings, led by professionals, are highly 
structured and more closely resemble a class than a group process. The focus is entirely on the 
reduction of symptoms and the maintenance of more positive behaviors, and is accomplished in a 
relatively short period of time (Davis, Olmsted & Rockert, 1992). In their study of the 
effectiveness of this approach with bulimics, Davis et al. concluded that while the 
psychoeducational approach had many merits, it had a poor outcome for those bulimics who had 
high frequencies of vomiting, who had a history of low body weight, or who suffered from severe 
depression. 

Behavioral and Cognitive-Behavioral Psychotherapy 

Cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy, as defined by Davis and Olmsted (1992), is the 
integration of psychoeducational information into a longer series of group meetings where the 
greater focus is on group processes. In this setting with bulimics, members can serve to examine 
and challenge one another's beliefs from a cognitive perspective. Members learn to monitor their 
own thinking and become aware of the dysfunctional beliefs that lead to their bulimic behaviors. 

In particular, faulty thinking about food, weight, and body shape is exposed and worked through 
in the group meeting until more realistic interpretations are reached. 

Behavioral components of such groups include monitoring of behaviors through regular 
observation and charting, meal planning, the control of stimuli which prompt binging and purging 
responses, and problem-solving skills. Cognitive methods focus on understanding, testing, and 
reframing beliefs about body image, self-worth and appearance, and revealing the relationship 
between beliefs, affect and behavior. Where psychoeducation places the greatest emphasis on the 
bulimic's diet and physical disruptions, cognitive-behavioral psychotherapy emphasizes the 
correction of poor self-concept (Davis & Olmsted, 1992). Thus, control over the intake of food 
and the underlying beliefs that lead to binging and purging receive comparable consideration in this 
approach. Additionally, balance is required of the therapist in terms of providing information and 
facilitating the work of the group on the cognitive issues. 

In two different analyses of group treatments for bulimia nervosa, Zimpfer (1990) and 
Fettes and Peters ( 1992) identified cognitive-behavioral therapy as the most prevalent approach 
with this population. Group treatments in general seem to produce effective results in the treatment 
of bulimia nervosa, when measured in regard to the reduction of or abstinence from binging and 
purging behaviors. Because most of the groups studied have been cognitive-behavioral in nature. 



it would seem logical to conclude that cognitive behavioral therapy is effective. However, it is 
difficult from the available information to separate the effects of the group process from the effects 
of the approach; thus, firm conclusions are difficult to draw. 

Wolf and Crowther ( 1992), in an effort to evaluate the cognitive component separate from 
the behavioral, discovered that each had positive, but different, outcomes in symptom reduction. 
Behavioral therapy alone was most effective in the reduction of binge eating and related symptoms, 
while the addition of the cognitive component had a greater impact on the bulimic's preoccupation 
with dieting and their ability to identify hunger and satiety. An additional outcome of this study 
was the evidence that both approaches, as brief interventions, apparently sacrificed efficacy in 
regard to the long-term maintenance of more positive eating patterns. Two additional studies of 
cognitive-behavioral group therapy (Blouin etal., 1994; Crosby et al., 1993) isolated treatment 
intensity, defined as the number of therapeutic hours per week, as being most closely related to the 
long-term reduction of bulimic symptoms in this approach. 

A Multimodal Approach to the Treatment of Bulimia 

While many of the contributions to the research hold an allegiance to psychoeducational, 
cognitive-behavioral, or psychodynamic group therapy alone, there is some agreement that a 
multimodal approach may be more effective in addressing the diverse components of bulimia. This 
approach would systematically draw from some or all of the theoretical stances in a manner that is 
specific to the needs of the client and the various facets of the presenting disorder. 

A study by Glassman, Rich, Darko and Clarkin (1990) utilized a multi-component 
treatment program consisting of 4 weeks of intensive therapy. Most of the therapy took place in a 
group setting with sessions that were 4 hours in duration, and included components of cognitive, 
behavioral, experiential, and dynamic interventions, as well as once-per-week family support and 
education groups. Some members were also referred to individual therapy when it was deemed 
appropriate. The authors report that more than 75% of their subjects obtained significant results 
from this multi-component psychotherapy. 

Fettes and Peters (1992), in their meta-analysis of research on group treatment for bulimia, 
determined that group therapy combined with additional treatment (which included individual 
therapy and drug treatments) was more effective than the group therapy alone. However, they 
acknowledged that for some bulimics, group treatment alone was effective; therefore, the inclusion 
of additional modes of treatment for bulimic clients should be initiated only after it is apparent that 
group treatment alone is not enough. 

Reiss and Rutan (1992), and Davis and Olmsted (1992) describe similar stepped-care 
models for the treatment of eating disorders which call for time-limited psychoeducational or 
cognitive-behavioral group treatments, to be followed with more extensive psychotherapy 
approaches for non-responders or clients who desired deeper personal exploration. The benefits of 
this sort of approach are reported to be the cost-effectiveness of the brief therapy approaches, the 
more immediate focus on the control of distorted eating patterns, and the ability to more effectively 
match patient needs to treatment options. 

Anderson (1990) also supports the multimodal approach. It is that author's position that 

Effective psychological treatment [of eating disorders] has three principle characteristics: 

(1) it focuses on resolution of a central dynamic formulation; (2) it is multimodal in form; 

(3) it is sequential in its techniques according to the needs of the patient, not the training of 

the therapist, (p. 148) 

Anderson's central dynamic formulation is the result of a therapeutic evaluation of the clients' 
experiences to determine the primary purpose of the eating disorder in their life. The multimodal 
format called for involves an integration of individual, group and family therapies. The sequenced 




25 



I 



characteristic of the therapy, while designed according to the needs of the client, generally follows 
a course of educational psychotherapy, then cognitive-behavioral work, and then psychodynamic 
and existential psychotherapies. The comprehensive nature of this approach is an effort to strike a 
balance between reducing symptoms and addressing personal growth. 

Conclusions 

The literature provides evidence that the therapeutic factors of group work-universality, 
instillation of hope, acceptance, and opportunities for learning and insight— provide a supportive 
environment in which the bulimic client can safely explore and overcome the distorted thinking 
patterns and behaviors inherent with their disorder (MacKenzie & Harper-Giuffre, 1992; Yalom, 
1995). 



Short-term psychoeducational, behavioral and cognitive group approaches are effective in 
the reduction of bulimic symptoms, in helping members take on more responsibility for 
maintaining healthy eating patterns, and in the formation of positive self-worth and body image 
beliefs (Davis & Olmsted, 1992; Davis, Olmsted & Rockert, 1992). While research indicates that 
cognitive-behavioral approaches are utilized most frequently in the treatment of bulimia (Fettes & 
Peters, 1992; Zimpfer, 1990), it would seem that they are most effective in the reduction of 
symptoms, and less proven in the long term maintenance of the new behaviors (Wolf & Crowther, 



1992). 



Psychodynamic group therapy, as a longer term approach, has its focus on the 
psychological and interpersonal conflicts that form the etiology of bulimia nervosa. Over time, 
group members improve in self-esteem, coping skills and autonomy, as well as in their ability to 
maintain healthy patterns. More permanent change seems to be effected with this approach; its 
greatest drawback is the time involved (Harper-Giuffre, MacKenzie & Sivitilli, 1992). 

Thus, this review of group approaches in the treatment of bulimia nervosa indicates that 
psychoeducational, behavioral, cognitive-behavioral and psychodynamic groups are all appropriate 
means through which positive change can occur; however, each would appear to serve different 
functions and provide different outcomes. A logical argument exists, therefore, for combining 
these and other approaches in an effort to address all or many of the psychological, physiological 
and social roots of the disorder. Through the sequenced use of psychoeducation and cognitive- 
behavioral approaches to gain control of disordered eating behaviors and thought patterns, and 
psychodynamics to address etiological factors, both symptoms and psychological issues can be 
impacted with apparent long-term effects. 

The benefit to this multimodal approach is believed to be more comprehensive and lasting 
change for the client who has been caught in a debilitating cycle of binging, purging, and distorted 
beliefs and perceptions. Drawbacks to multimodal treatment would include the potential for 
lengthy and expensive treatment, especially in light of the trend toward brief therapy driven by 
managed care. An additional concern could also be identified in terms of the counselor's skills and 
preparation. Counselors desiring to provide multimodal treatment for bulimia would need to be 
versatile in their ability to approach therapy from this variety of theoretical stances and techniques, 
as well as have a well-developed referral base through which less familiar modes of treatment 
could be accessed. Skillful assessment of the needs and progress of clients would also be essential 
to determine the most appropriate course of treatment for each. 

Recommendations for further research are warranted in regard to the efficacy of multimodal 
approaches, and the specific client characteristics to be considered in planning or progressing 
through a course of treatment. 




26 



References 



Anderson, A. E. (1990). Diagnosis and treatment of males with eating disorders. In A. E. 
Anderson (Ed.), Males with eating disorders (pp. 133-162). New York: Brunner/Mazel, Inc. 

Barth, F. D. (1994). The use of group therapy to help women with eating disorders 
differentiate and articulate affect. Group. 18, 67-77. 

Blouin, J. H., Carter, J., Blouin, A. G., Tener, L., Schnare-Hayes, K., Zuro, C., 

Barlow, J., & Perez, E. (1994). Prognostic indicators in bulimia nervosa treated with cognitive- 
behavioral group therapy. International Journal of Eating Disorders. 15, 113-123. 

Crosby, R. D., Mitchell, J. E., Raymond, N., Specker, S., Nugent, S. M., & Pyle, R. L. 
(1993). Survival analysis of response to group psychotherapy in bulimia nervosa. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders. 13, 359-368. 

Davis, R., & Olmsted, M. P. (1992). Cognitive-behavioral group treatment for bulimia 
nervosa: Integrating psychoeducation and psychotherapy. In H. Harper-Giuffre, & K. R. 
MacKenzie (Eds.), Group psychotherapy for eating disorders (pp. 71-100). Washington, D. C.: 
American Psychiatric Press, Inc. 

Davis, R., Olmsted, M. P., & Rockert, W. (1992). Brief group psychoeducation for 
bulimia nervosa. II: Prediction of clinical outcome. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 11, 
205-211. 

Duncan, J., & Kennedy, S. (1992). Inpatient group treatment. In H. Harper-Giuffre, & K. 
R. MacKenzie (Eds.), Group psychotherapy for eating disorders (pp. 149-160). Washington, D. 
C.: American Psychiatric Press, Inc. 

Fettes, P. A., & Peters, J. M. (1992). A meta-analysis of group treatments for bulimia 
nervosa. International Journal of Eating Disorders, 1 1, 97-110. 

Glassman, J. N., Rich, C. L., Darko, D., & Clarkin, A. (1990). Some correlates of 
treatment response to a multicomponent psychotherapy program in outpatients with eating 
disorders. Annals of Clinical Psychiatry, 2, 33-38. 

Harper-Giuffre, H. (1992). Overview of the eating disorders. In H. Harper-Giuffre, & K. 
R. MacKenzie (Eds.), Group psychotherapy for eating disorders (pp. 3-28). Washington, D. C.: 
American Psychiatric Press, Inc. 

Harper-Giuffre, H., MacKenzie, K. R., & Sivitilli, D. (1992). Interpersonal group 
psychotherapy. In H. Harper-Giuffre, & K. R. MacKenzie (Eds.), Group psychotherapy for 
eating disorders (pp. 105-145). Washington, D. C.: American Psychiatric Press, Inc. 

Kerr, J. K., Skok, R. L., & McLaughlin, T. F. (1991). Characteristics common to 
females who exhibit anorexic or bulimic behavior A review of current literature. Journal of 
Clinical Psychology, 47, 846-853. 

Kreidler, M. C., & Fluharty, L. B. (1994). The "new family" model: The evolution of 
group treatment for adult survivors of childhood sexual abuse. The Journal for Specialists in 
Group Work, 19, 175-180. 

Kuntz, B., Groze, V., & Yates, W. R. (1992). Bulimia: A systemic family history 
perspective. Families in Society, 73, 604-61 1. 




27 



1 



Levine, M. P., Petrie, T. A., Gotthardt, J., & Sevig, T. D. (1990). A professionally led 
support group for males with eating disorders. In A. E. Anderson (Ed.), Males with eating 
disorders (pp. 188-197). New York: Brunner/Mazel, 

MacKenzie, K. R., & Harper-Giuffre, H. (1992). Introduction to group concepts. In H. 
Harper-Giuffre, & K. R. MacKenzie (Eds.), Group psychotherapy for eating disorders ( pp. 29- 
51). Washington, D. C.: American Psychiatric Press, Inc. 

McNamara, K. (1989). A structured group program for repeat dieters. The Journal for 
Specialists in Group Work, 14, 141-150. 

Perry, P. J. (1992). Sexual abuse groups. In H. Harper-Giuffre, & K. R. MacKenzie 
(Eds.), Group psychotherapy for eating disorders (pp. 217-230). Washington, D. C.: American 
Psychiatric Press, Inc. 

Rice, C., & Faulkner, J. (1992). Support and self-help groups. In H. Harper-Giuffre, & 
K. R. MacKenzie (Eds.), Group psychotherapy for eating disorders (pp. 245-258). Washington, 
D. C.: American Psychiatric Press, Inc. 

Reiss, H., & Rutan, J. S. (1992). Group therapy for eating disorders: A step-wise 
approach. Group, 16, 79-83. 

Romney, P., & Miller, D. (1988). The treatment of eating disorders among college 
students. In R. May (Ed.), Psychoanalytic psychotherapy in a college context (pp. 126- 144). New 
York: Praeger Publishers. 

Schmidt, U., Tiller, J., & Treasure, J. (1993). Setting the scene for eating disorders: 
Childhood care, classification and course of illness. Psychological Medicine, 23, 663-672. 

Shekter-Wolfson, L. F., Woodside, D. B., & Lackstrom, J. (1992). Family relations 
groups. In H. Harper-Giuffre, & K. R. MacKenzie (Eds.), Group psychotherapy for eating 
disorders (pp. 201-216). Washington, D. C.: American Psychiatric Press, Inc. 

Waller, G. (1994). Bulimic women's perceptions of interaction within their families. 
Psychological Reports. 74, 27-32. 

Wolf, E. M., & Crowther, J. H. (1992). An evaluation of behavioral and cognitive- 
behavioral group interventions for the treatment of bulimia nervosa in women. International 
Journal of Eating Disorders, 1 1, 3-15. 

Yalom, I. D. (1995). The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (4th ed.). New 
York: Basic Books. 

Zimpfer, D. G. (1990). Group work for bulimia: A review of outcomes. The Journal for 
Specialists in Group Work, 15, 239-251. 




28 



31 



Cultural Identity Group Work with 
Native American College Students 



Tarrell L. Portman 



This article discusses the use of cultural identity group counseling with Native American college 
students. A review of the literature related to counseling Native Americans is presented. Group 
personality as applied to Native American participants is discussed. A model for group work with 
Native American college students is presented. 



The sky looks down on me in aimless blues 

The sun glares at me with a questioning light 

The mountains tower over me with uncertain shadows 

The trees sway in the bewildered breeze 

The deer dance in perplexed rhythms 

The ants crawl around me in untrusting circles 

The birds soar above me with doubtful dips and dives. 

They all, in their own way, ask the question. 

Who are you, who are you? 

I have to admit to them, to myself, 

I am an Indian. 

"Uncertain Admission"-Frances Bazil 

This poem, written by a Coeur d'Alene Indian, won first prize in poetry in the under- 
sixteen category at the 1965 Scottsdale, Arizona, National Indian Arts Exhibition. Native 
American students are often uncertain about admitting and accepting their Indian heritage and 
culture. Counselors can help Native American students to deal with identity development issues. 
This article will explore using a cultural identity group counseling approach when working with 
Native American college students. 

For the purposes of this article, cultural identity groups are defined as a culturally 
homogeneous counseling group with a common goal of working on identity issues related to 
culture. Such groups have experienced success with empowering participants to self-define rather 
than putting up with the definition assigned to them by others (Brown, Lipford-Sanders, & Shaw, 
1995). 



Native American college students will be defined in this article as individuals who are 
enrolled at the undergraduate level in college and define themselves as Native American on 
admission applications. 



Review of Literature 

This review of the literature regarding cultural group work in counseling will focus on two 
areas. Issues relating to the use of group counseling with various homogeneous cultural groups 
will be explored, as well as issues that are specific to counseling Native Americans. 

When members of a counseling group share the same culture, the group is considered to be 
a homogeneous group (Corey & Corey, 1982; Yalom, 1995). When a specific problem exists. 



ERIC 



29 



32 



I 



group cohesion can help, and so homogeneous groups may solidify faster. Thus, when individual 
identity concerns related to culture are confronted in a group counseling format, with members 
from the same cultural group, members bond together sooner because of a shared understanding. 
This solidification allows for more cohesion, provides more 'here-and-now' support to group 
participants, group attendance is better, less conflict develops, and symptoms are relieved more 
rapidly (Corey & Corey, 1982; Yalom, 1995). "Although traditional values permeate the lives of 
many Native Americans, it should be understood that Native Americans are not a homogeneous 
group. Native Americans differ greatly in their commitment to tribal customs and traditional values 
through a variance of customs, language, and type of family structure," (Garrett, 1995, p. 188). 

Levels of acculturation enter into the group counseling process with group members of the 
same culture. Leong, Wagner, and Kim (1995) examined the role of culture-specific factors on the 
expectations of Asian American students to the group counseling process. The results 
demonstrated that "Asian American acculturation status was a significant predictor of positive 
orientations toward group counseling, with integrationist status being the primary significant 
variable," (Leong, Wagner, & Kim, 1995, p. 220). 

The use of same-race therapy groups for African American clients on a university campus 
were conducted with female university students (Steward, 1993). The rationale behind the same- 
race group composition included a same-race group leader. The purpose was to provide the 
African American participants the opportunity to experience the sense of visual sameness that 
Whites do in a mental health setting (Steward, 1993). 

Another culture specific group work experience for African American women was called 
Kujichagulia, which is the Swahili word meaning "self-determination," (Brown, Lipford-Sanders, 
& Shaw, 1995). This group's goal was to self-define. Group members were encouraged to 
perceive themselves from an "Afrocentric perspective of interdependence (I am because my sisters 
exist; my sisters exist, therefore I am)," (Brown et. al., 1995, p. 154). The results were that 
group participants felt a sense of self and sisterhood in an environment of caring and nurturing 
Afrocentrism. 

Native Americans have a history of group decision making, and may be receptive to group 
counseling to deal with their personal issues, needs, and concerns (Dufrene & Coleman, 1992). 
Cultural discontinuity has created difficulties for Native Americans living in the mainstream 
(Garrett, 1995). Native Americans are a diverse group of peoples which can be acknowledged by 
252 languages, 505 federally recognized tribes, and 365 state recognized tribes (Herring, 1990; 
Thomason, 1991). This creates an atmosphere for the differences between mainstream 
expectations and the cultural values of Native Americans to surface and increases the need for 
counseling services that are culturally cognizant to the needs of Native Americans. 

Herring (1990) gives six factors that influence counseling efforts with Native Americans. 
First, the counselor should be aware of world view variances and value differences among Native 
American groups. Second, the counselor should be open to the unique needs and special problems 
of the Native American. Third, deeply grounded values and attitudes exist within Native American 
cultures. Fourth, Native American family structures are different, in that nuclear families are not 
necessarily traditional. The fifth factor relates to the research on Native Americans. Researchers 
have been primarily non-Indian and have looked at Native American cultures as deviant. The final 
area given by Herring was that miscommunication between counselors and Native Americans does 
occur (Herring, 1990). 

Traditional Native American values consist of sharing, cooperation, noninterference, being, 
the group and extended family, harmony with nature, a time orientation toward living in the 
present, preference for explanation of natural phenomena according to the supernatural, and a deep 
respect for elders (Garrett, 1995). 




30 



33 



Traditional Native American healing practices have been used by mental health 
professionals in individual and group counseling; such practices have included: (1) Four Circles - 
concentric circles of relationship between client and Creator, spouse, family, as a culturally based 
structural concept for self-understanding; (2) Talking circle - a forum for expressing thoughts and 
feelings in an environment of total acceptance without time constraints, using sacred objects, the 
pipe, and prayer; and (3) Sweat lodge - a physical and spiritual self-purification ritual emphasizing 
the relationship of the human being to all of creation (Heinrich, Corbine, & Thomas, 1990). 
Counselors should be knowledgable in these practices before attempting to utilize them with 
groups. 

Guidelines for providing group counseling with Native Americans have been presented in 
the literature by Dufrene and Coleman (1992). These guidelines offer a framework for developing 
a foundation of group counseling with Native Americans. Additional recommendations on 
counseling were given by Garrett and Garrett (1994). Respect should be shown to Native 
American clients by asking permission and expressing thankfulness. Allowing moments of silence 
and not interrupting a thought are also important. The use of anecdotes, short stories, metaphors 
and imagery in the counseling session can also be beneficial. The counselor should display 
patience in the counseling process (Garrett & Garrett, 1994). These recommendations are 
compatible with Rogers’ Person-Centered approach to counseling. Empathy, warmth, and respect 
can be used to enhance the counseling process. 

Conceptual Model for Group Work with Native Americans 

The primary difference when working with Native American students in a group is that the 
"focus stays on the group, and change happens for the entire group rather than for individuals 
within the group," (Mitchum, 1989, p. 269). In synthesizing the material on counseling Native 
Americans, group work with Native American college students is explored to help with cultural 
identity issues that may contribute to low retention rates, lower academic achievement, and a level 
of cultural discontinuity. 

Colleges and universities are a social microcosm of a pluralistic American society (Brown, 
Lipford-Sanders, & Shaw, 1995). A consolidation of young adult identities is at its peak in the life 
of a college student (Vinson, 1995). Since the Native American culture credits more value to 
contribution to the group than on individual success and accomplishments, group counseling 
seems a logical method of delivery when providing counseling services to Native American 
students (Mitchum, 1989). A model of counseling Native American college students in a 
homogeneous group follows. 

A Native American cultural identity group is composed of undergraduate students who 
have self-defined as Native American/American Indian or Alaskan, Aleut, on university admission 
forms. It is important to note that Pacific Islanders, and Hawaiians are considered indigenous 
peoples, and should be invited to participate in a separate homogenous group. 

A screening of the level of acculturation should be conducted to attempt to get same level 
participants in the counseling group. This can be accomplished through personal interviews and 
self-reports on individual history and involvement with Native American traditions. This would 
allow an opportunity for more group-oriented work toward the goal of identity development. 

When at all possible the first choice for the group should be a Native American counselor 
(Dufrene & Coleman, 1992). A non-Indian counselor who is culturally skilled could facilitate, but 
should be well trained in the values and world views of the various Native American tribes that will 
be represented. The non-Indian counselor should have participated in and observed many Native 
American ceremonies, rituals, and dances prior to ever accepting a group of Native Americans. 



O 

ERIC 



34 



I ) 



The group setting should be as much in harmony with nature as possible, depending on the 
level of acculturation of each group. A room with windows that provide a connection with natural 
gardens or scenic views would be an appropriate indoor setting. Distractions should be kept to a 
minimum. Noninterference from outsiders who are not participating in the group is important. 
Participants should be arranged in a complete circle with no barriers between them, the circle is 
sacred to most tribes. 

Time limits should not be imposed on the group, but talked through together. Flexibility in 
group time limitations should be considered. Open movement within the group should also be 
allowed. It is not uncommon for a Native American to physically withdraw from the group in 
times of crisis. This would not be questioned by traditional members. The individual would be 
allowed to return to the group and would be welcomed without an explanation of his or her 
absence. This is tied to the noninterference value of most Native Americans (Garrett, 1995). 

Native American healing rituals and Western counseling must be combined. Dufrene and 
Coleman (1992) suggest that the group leader can be connected to the role of an "elder, clan leader, 
or medicine person" leading a Native American group (p. 232). A mirroring of aspects of the 
Native American culture should be attempted, instead of holding fast to traditional Western group 
counseling techniques, such as self-disclosure, challenging, and feedback (Mitchum, 1989). 
Utilization of sacred objects related to the Indian nations represented may be most effective if the 
counselor works closely with a Native American spiritual leader. The group model should follow 
the community practices of the Indian groups represented as closely as possible. 

The transition stage is traditionally a time when group members challenge each other and/or 
the leader. Native American group participants are not likely to challenge the leader of the group 
because of the respect for authority. Medicine people and healers are highly respected within the 
Native American culture. Using Western methods of providing feedback for individuals in the 
group may not be effective. The group unity may be used to provide feedback to the whole group. 
A sense of we-ness is primary. Praise is acceptable when given to the collective group. If the 
group is successful, the individuals see themselves as successful. 

Yalom (1995) points out, "Homogeneous groups jell more quickly, [and] become more 
cohesive," (p. 255). This stage may occur earlier in a Native American group with members at a 
similar acculturation level. It is at this time in the group that structured activities might be 
introduced. The history of Native American ancestry is very important, and storytelling may be 
vital at this stage. Genealogy used as a counseling tool could be used with the group. Humes 
(1994) wrote; "Who you really are, in part, is defined by your origins or roots. In our current 
preoccupation with self-concept and self-worth, an individual might want to make a connection 
with past events and people in order to help with this process of self-identification," (p. 296). In 
the development of cultural identity, a connectedness with the past is sought by the clients. The 
search "leads to a sense of identity, pride, and self-esteem. One of the problems of modem youth 
is that they don't know who they are and from whence they came," (Humes, 1994, p. 297). 

At termination of the group process, members should be reminded that they are going their 
separate ways but are bound together by the blood they share. This is building on the Native 
American spiritual dimension in the group process. A ritual or ceremony could be used to embrace 
the concept of cultural heritage. 



Counseling Implications 

Native American youth are walking in two worlds— the world of mainstream society and the 
world of traditional Native American values. The use of group work with Native American 
students appears to be one of the most compatible methods of counseling this population. When 
Native American students leave their families and natural support systems, they are faced with 




32 



35 ' 



\ 1 



challenges of meeting the expectations of the mainstream culture. Hopefully, these students will 
seek help from counselors instead of dropping out of school and returning to their family groups. 

Counselors should become knowledgeable about Native American values and world views. 
The counselor should get involved with local Native American groups, if possible, by volunteering 
services. This would enrich the life of the counselor while the counselor is learning about the 
everyday life of Native Americans. 

The counselor should never forget that the level of acculturation is paramount in counseling 
Native Americans. Even though Native American clients may report that they are assimilated into 
the White dominant culture, it does not mean that they have come to terms with their Indian 
heritage. An integrated or bicultural level is better when walking in two worlds. 

The group process itself may take the group work format and yet incorporate a lot of the 
Native American traditions within the process. The use of co-facilitators who are traditional 
spiritual leaders or healers may be an effective path to choose. The non-Native American 
counselor should beware of attempting to use Native American sacred ceremonies, rituals, or 
objects if not fully instructed by a traditional Native American as more harm than good could 
occur. 



The use of group work with Native Americans has not been fully researched. To truly 
know the effectiveness of group work with a homogeneous group of Native Americans on college 
campuses, further research is necessary. It is hoped that counselors will be both practitioners and 
researchers in group work which explore cultural identity issues with Native Americans. 

References 

Brown, S. P., Lipford-Sanders, J., & Shaw, M. (1995). Kujicjagulia - Uncovering the 
secrets of the heart: Group work with African American women on predominantly White 
campuses. Journal for Specialists in Group Work 20 (3), 151-158. 

Corey, G., & Corey, M. S. (1982). Groups: Process and practice (2nd ed.). 

Monterey.CA: Brooks/Cole Publishing Company. 

Dufrene, R M, & Coleman, V. D. (1992). Counseling Native Americans: Guidelines for 
group process. Journal for Specialists in Group Work. (17)4 , 229-234. 

Garrett, M. W. (1995). Between two worlds: Cultural discontinuity in the dropout of 
Native American youth. School Counselor, 42 (3), 186-195. 

Garrett, J. T., & Garrett, M. W. (1994). The path of good medicine: Understanding and 
counseling Native American Indians. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development, 22( 3), 
134-144. 

Heinrich, R. K., Corbine, J. L., & Thomas, K. R. (1990). Counseling Native Americans. 
Journal of Counseling and Development 69 (2), 128-133. 

Herring, R. D. (1990). Understanding Native American values: Process and content 
concerns for counselors. Counseling and Values 34( 2), 134-137. 

Herring, R. D. (1995). Developing biracial ethnic identity: A review of the increasing 
dilemma. Journal of Multicultural Counseling and Development 23 ( 1), 29-38. 




33 

36 



) } 



Humes, C. W. (1994). Genealogy: A counseling tool. The School Counselor 41(4), 296- 

299. 

Leong, F. T. L., Wagner, N. S., & Kim, H. H. (1995). Group counseling expectations 
among Asian American students: The role of culture-specific factors. Journal of Counseling 
Psychology 42 (2) 217-222. 

Mitchum, N. T. (1989). Increasing self-esteem in Native American children. Elementary 
School Guidance and Counseling, 23 (4), 266-271. 

Steward, R. J. ( 1993). Black women and White women in groups: Suggestions for 
minority-sensitive group services on university campuses. Journal of Counseling and Development 
72(1), 39-41. 

Thomason, T. C. ( 1991). Counseling Native Americans: An introduction for non-Native 
American counselors. Journal of Counseling and Development, 69 (4), 321-377. 

Vinson, M. L. (1995). Employing family therapy in group counseling with college 
students: Similarities and technique employed in both. Journal for Specialists in Group Work 
20(4), 240-252. 

Yalom, I. D. (1995). The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (4th ed.). New 
York: Basic Books. 




34 



37 






Group Interventions with Hispanic Adolescents 
in Cultural Transition 

Silvia N. Ruiz-Balsara 

This article proposes the use of group interventions as an effective way of addressing the specific 
needs of Hispanic youth in cultural transition. Relevant data on the use of groups with ethnic 
minority adolescents, and the unique issues and tasks of immigrant Hispanic adolescents are 
discussed. A case study of a group of Hispanic adolescents in a ESL program is included as an 
illustration. 



Much of the research with Hispanic adolescents has focused on high-risk groups and 
problem behaviors, including academic failure, substance abuse, delinquency, acting-out, teenage 
pregnancy, and, more recently, HIV-related issues (Lovato, Litrownik, Elder, & Nunez-Liriano, 
1994; Millan & Chan, 1991; Millan & Ivory, 1994; Smith, McGraw, Crawford, & Costa, 1993; 
Smith & Weinman, 1995). The use of group interventions with adolescents has received limited 
research attention. Studies on group applications with Hispanic adolescents are even more scarce. 

Hispanic adolescents, in general, are more likely to experience poverty, violence, substance 
abuse, and teenage pregnancy than non-minority adolescents (Vargas & Willis, 1994). Hispanic 
adolescents who are recent immigrants are faced with a double challenge. Not only must they 
master certain developmental tasks, but they must also meet the demands of an imposed cultural 
transition. They must deal with multiple losses, language difficulties, new roles and conflicting 
choices. They must also deal with the repercussions of being a minority in American society. The 
experience of racism and discrimination may be detrimental to the development of a clear ethnic 
identity and a sense of personal worth. 

Such a multitude of risk factors demands increased attention to the development of 
preventive measures and interventions specifically targeted at Hispanic youth in cultural transition. 
It is believed that group interventions constitute the most appropriate approach to address the needs 
of this population. This article discusses the unique tasks that this population must accomplish, as 
well as relevant data on the use of group interventions with ethnic minority adolescents. A case 
study of a group for Hispanic adolescents in an ESL program is included. 

Hispanic Adolescents in Cultural Transition 

Cultural transition is defined as a process that begins when immigrants arrive in the new 
country and ends when they are comfortable with the new language and cultural values (Baptiste, 
1990). Specific transitional issues for the immigrant adolescent include a differential rate of 
adjustment for family members, isolation from peers, increased parental control and family 
resistance to the adolescent's acculturation. Problems that can be expected, regardless of the 
adolescent's ethnicity and social status, include loyalty binds, role conflicts, anger, and depression 
(Baptiste, 1990). 

Hispanic adolescents in cultural transition find themselves tom between the values of the 
old culture (represented by their parents), and those of the new culture (represented by their peers). 
They struggle in their attempt to assimilate into the new culture, while remaining loyal to their 
families. New roles and expectations are created by the demands of the new situation (Baptiste, 




35 



38 



. i J 



1990). The Hispanic adolescent is faced with conflicting choices. While acceptance of the 
Hispanic heritage may mean having to identify with an oppressed minority, adopting an Anglo 
identity may involve rejecting values inherent in the Hispanic heritage. The experience of poverty 
and discrimination may lead to rejection of the new culture, and "may exacerbate normal difficulties 
in the resolution of identity questions" (Hardy-Fanta & Montana, 1982, p. 352). 

Hispanic adolescents typically suffer multiple losses in the process of emigration, 
including long-term friendships, an established position among their peers, and, often, a loss of 
social status (Baptiste, 1990). Moving to the United States places the adolescent into a minority 
status, which is devalued in American society. In addition, they often have difficulty forming new 
relationships with peers in the new country (Goodenow & Espin, 1993). The experience of racism 
and discrimination, along with feelings of alienation, may lead to a diminished sense of self-worth. 
Group interventions may provide the most effective and efficient means to affirm the self esteem 
and ethnic identity of Hispanic adolescents. 

Group Interventions with Hispanic Adolescents 

In a survey of research on group counseling with Hispanic adults, Hardy-Fanta and 
Montana ( 1982) noted that such groups were often time-limited, and led to improved 
communication and reduced stress. They concluded that, given that "adolescents grow in groups," 
it would be safe to assume that group interventions may also be beneficial for the Hispanic 
adolescent in cultural transition (p. 354). In a study of several short-term therapy groups for 
Hispanic female adolescents in a bilingual education program, Hardy-Fanta and Montana ( 1982) 
found that group participation led to increased ability to tolerate and verbalize conflictual feelings, 
increased use of mutual support, and decreased impulsive acting-out. Milicic and Gazmuri ( 1980) 
discussed a group counseling program for children and adolescents in Chile, designed to increase 
emotional and social development, as well as interaction with the school system. Participants 
reported improved communication and increased self-awareness. The authors concluded that the 
opportunity for interaction and reflection provided by the group increased participants' awareness 
of self and others, ability to interact, and problem solving skills. 

Hispanic adolescents may derive more benefit from group than individual approaches 
because interdependence and cooperation are highly valued in their culture. The group format may 
also be less threatening than the individual or family approach. Many of the issues of Hispanic 
adolescents in cultural transition are most appropriately dealt with in a group setting. The group 
experience can serve many purposes, including mutual support, ethnic identity affirmation, 
acculturation, education, and personality change. Participation in a group can be particularly 
beneficial for those who are feeling isolated, and having problems in the areas of identity, 
acculturation, and bicultural socialization (Ho, 1992). 

Concepts and Expectations of Groups 

Traditional psychotherapy groups, particularly in clinical settings, may alienate Hispanic 
adolescents, who may respond to an invitation to participate with "yo no estoy loco/loca!" (I'm not 
crazy). Acceptance to participate may trigger a sense of failure and shame. In addition, those who 
are new immigrants in the United States may find group interaction intimidating and confusing. 
However, American-born Hispanic adolescents, and those who emigrated during their early 
childhood, may be more responsive to group participation (Ho, 1992). 

The free participation expected in the group may contradict many of the values of Hispanic 
cultures. Because of the hierarchical nature of Hispanic societies group members may have 
difficulty understanding the role of the facilitator. According to Ho ( 1992), Hispanic adolescents 
tend to view the leader as an authority figure, and expect the facilitator to be active and directive. 
They may, therefore, adopt a passive and dependent attitude. A strong sense of family loyalty may 




36 



~ * 1 



make it difficult for these adolescents to talk openly about themselves. Issues of shame and fear 
related to their immigration status may also impede honest self-expression. In addition, because of 
a "being-in-becoming" cultural orientation, Hispanic adolescents may resist setting goals and 
planning for their accomplishment (Ho, 1992). Research (cited in Ho, 1992) on group 
interventions with ethnic minority adolescents indicates that they are more likely to respond to 
short-term, clear, and concrete goals and objectives. 

Yalom's Therapeutic Factors: Implications 

Most research on the presence and manifestation of therapeutic factors has focused on 
groups of adult patients. Minimal attention has been given to the study of curative elements in 
children's and adolescents' groups, and almost no attention has been provided to multicultural 
issues. Yalom (1995) noted that, in multicultural groups that are predominantly Caucasian, 
"therapists must help the group move past a focus on concrete cultural differences to transcultural 
responses to human situations and tragedies that all of us share" (p. 7). Y amaguchi (as cited in 
Ho, 1992) stated that, because of a collectivist orientation, ethnic minority children are better able 
to develop group cohesiveness than majority children. Ho (1992) added that a strong sense of 
loyalty, commonly found in ethnic minority cultures, also encourages the development of group 
cohesiveness. 

Brown ( 1994) discussed the applications of Yalom's therapeutic factors in brief counseling 
groups for children. Several strategies to foster the development of therapeutic factors were 
suggested. For example, helping members recognize similarities is one of the ways facilitators can 
promote a sense of universality in the group. Teaching communication skills, interrupting 
destructive behaviors, and modeling appropriate disclosure are all conducive to the establishment 
of group cohesiveness. Asking members to seek and imitate positive models enhances the 
development of imitative behavior within and outside the group. Group facilitators also need to be 
attuned to members' existential concerns, and facilitate their expression and understanding. 
Facilitators can help members increase their acceptance of existential issues by teaching them that 
these concerns are universal and, to some extent, unresolvable. Ho (1992) added that, asking 
children to help others in the group, even through simple tasks (e.g. preparing drinks), will 
enhance their sense of altruism. 

Many of these suggestions may be applicable for adolescent groups as well. For the most 
part, Yalom's therapeutic factors have been treated in the literature as universal elements, without 
particular regard for gender or cultural differences. Adolescent concerns and issues are generally 
considered to be fairly universal. The need for accurate information about sexuality, for example, 
exists in all adolescents (Hardy-Fanta & Montana, 1982). The need to establish significant 
relationships with peers, and to develop social skills is probably universal. Existential factors and 
those of universality, cohesiveness, socialization, imitation, and the imparting of information may 
be particularly relevant for Hispanic adolescents in cultural transition. 

Culturally Relevant Approaches: A Brief Overview 

A culturally relevant approach is one that is congruent with the individual's values, beliefs, 
and reality. A culturally sensitive approach must include an understanding of the unique 
experiences of Hispanic adolescents in cultural transition, as well as the ability to speak their 
language. The group facilitator must assume an active and directive role, particularly during the 
initial stages of the group. The facilitator should be open to answering personal questions, in order 
to increase trust and rapport. Facilitators should pay close attention to subtle changes in non-verbal 
communication, and to the appropriate pacing of self-disclosure. They must also avoid constant 
direct eye contact, and use confrontation with caution. Educational or task-oriented groups are 
more likely to be beneficial than less structured ones. Goals and objectives need to be short-term, 
clear and concrete. The group facilitator should describe how the group can be used, explain 




37 



40 



- 



his/her role clearly, and discuss the importance of self-expression and honest interaction. As part 
of termination, the facilitator needs to help members review their progress and meaning of their 
group experience (Ho, 1992). 

Case Study 

A 12-week group for Hispanic adolescents was conducted by the author, as a requirement 
for a doctoral course in group counseling. The group consisted of seven (four male and three 
female) Hispanic ESL students attending a high school in Northwest Arkansas, ranging in age 
from 15 to 17 years. They were predominantly Spanish-speaking and recent immigrants, with 
five of the participants living in the United States less than 6 months. Six members were originally 
from Mexico, and one from El Salvador. None of the participants reported previous experience 
with groups. The general purpose of the group was to provide a setting where members could 
address common issues and difficulties related to their experience of immigration, including 
multiple losses, minority group membership, new roles, and conflicting choices. A goal for the 
facilitator was to promote and observe the development of therapeutic factors within the group. 
Goals for members included: (a) increasing coping and social skills in cross-cultural situations; (b) 
reducing sense of isolation; and (c) enhancing ethnic identity. 

Procedure 

An initial orientation session was conducted to inform the students of the purpose of the 
group, and to provide an opportunity for discussion of questions and concerns about the group. A 
written request for parental authorization, in Spanish, was also given at the orientation session, and 
included a brief description of the purpose of the group, the possible benefits that students may 
derive from participation, and some information about the facilitator. Parents were also 
encouraged to contact either the school or the facilitator if they had further questions about the 
group. 

The group met weekly for approximately 50 minutes in the ESL classroom for 12 
consecutive weeks. All meetings were conducted in Spanish by the author, who is bicultural and 
bilingual. Objectives were delineated for each meeting. A psychoeducational model was used 
during the first four weeks, followed by a less structured, growth-oriented approach. Art work 
was occasionally used to encourage self-expression and discussion. The limits of confidentiality 
and expected roles were discussed in the initial meetings. The importance of self-disclosure and 
honest interaction was explained and emphasized several times. Specific ways in which the group 
could be used were described throughout the 12 weeks. Termination issues were openly 
addressed since the 8th session. Participants were encouraged to assess their progress and 
personal meaning of their group experience. 

Observations 

Most group members appeared to readily accept the idea of forming a group. There was 
some initial confusion about the meaning and purpose of the group, as well as about their role as 
group members. It appeared that once the members gave the group a name (Union Juvenil 
Hispana), they were able to identify it as a unique source of support and ethnic identity. This 
seemed to increase their acceptance of the group experience. 

Although the participants had no previous experience with groups, they did not appear to 
find group interaction confusing or intimidating. Initially, some members expressed feeling 
"embarrassed" talking about themselves, and confronting others. The female members in the 
group were more verbal and willing to discuss themselves than the male members. In general, 
group members expected the facilitator to be active and directive, particularly at the beginning of 
the group. Although they tended to adopt a passive attitude, group members were able to 

ERIC 



41 



* -> I 



acknowledge responsibility for group discussion. Reluctance to participate was often manifested 
by physical complaints ("I'm tired;" "I have a headache"), and non-verbal behaviors (e.g. posture; 
yawning). The group appeared to derive as much benefit, if not more, from unstructured sessions 
as they did from the more task-oriented meetings. Group members resisted setting personal goals 
for their group experience, which is consistent with the present orientation typically valued in the 
Hispanic cultures. For the most part, group members appeared interested in one another, and were 
always respectful and polite. Only the more open and assertive members confronted others 
occasionally; confrontation was always done in an appropriate manner. 

Group members seemed comfortable with each other, and a sense of togetherness was 
developed early in the life of the group. The female members were particularly warm toward each 
other, both during and between sessions. The factor of universality appeared especially therapeutic 
for many group members. Many expressed a sense of relief from knowing that they were not 
alone, or that their experiences were not unique. A focus on similarities seemed to encourage the 
development of universality. Other group members also expressed increased hope after learning 
how others had coped and overcome immigration-related experiences. As the group progressed, 
existential concerns were revealed, particularly around issues of responsibility. The group also 
provided members with an opportunity to develop communication skills, particularly in the area of 
self-disclosure and confrontation. In general, the factors of universality, cohesiveness, instillation 
of hope, and socialization appeared to be the most relevant or therapeutic for the group. Several 
group members acknowledged having obtained benefits from the group experience, including 
increased openness and hope, as well as a reduced sense of isolation. 

Typical adolescent issues and concerns were revealed, including dating, teenage pregnancy 
and parenting, as well as future occupation. The most common themes observed revolved around 
issues of loss, responsibility and family unity. The majority of group members expressed grief 
due to separation from family members and friends, as well as over the loss of their previous social 
life. Many group members also reported a desire to return to their native country. Several 
members expressed concern about the financial strain on their parents, as well as a commitment to 
help their families financially. The most common immigration-related difficulties reported included 
having to share their household with non-family members, and living in overcrowded conditions. 

The ability to speak the members' language seemed pivotal in the building of trust and 
rapport with the group. Many group members expressed surprise and satisfaction from the 
opportunity to have discussions or other activities in Spanish. The ability to speak the members' 
first language seemed to have a positive effect on the development of trust and rapport, group 
dynamics, and, possibly, even group members' self-worth and ethnic identity. 

Discussion 

Given appropriate preparation, Hispanic adolescents - even those who are recent 
immigrants, can benefit from group interventions. Prior to the commencement of the group, 
facilitators need to explain the purpose of the group experience, as well as the possible benefits that 
may be derived from participation. Group facilitators must clarify expected roles and behaviors, 
and emphasize the importance of self-disclosure and honest interaction. Group facilitators also 
need to feel comfortable assuming an active and directive role, particularly during the initial stages 
of the group. Given that Hispanic adolescents, particularly those who are new immigrants, are not 
likely to question or confront the facilitator, cueing on non-verbal behaviors and indirect 
communication (e.g. physical complaints) is extremely important. The ability to speak the group 
members' language seems essential in the development of trust and rapport. Having an 
understanding of the unique experiences and common issues of Hispanic adolescents may also be 
extremely helpful in establishing rapport with this population. 




39 42 



m J r- 



t 



Group interventions may provide the most effective and efficient means to address the 
needs of many Hispanic adolescents, particularly those who have common issues and experiences 
Participation in a group may lead to increased use of mutual support, enhanced awareness of self 
and others, as well as improved social and communication skills. Participation in a group can be 
particularly beneficial for those who feel isolated, are still grieving their losses, and question their 
worth and identity. The ability to maintain a sense of self-worth and develop a clear identity will, 
ultimately, allow Hispanic adolescents to overcome prejudice, discrimination, and a multitude of 
risk factors. 



References 

Baptiste, Jr., D. A. (1990). The treatment of adolescents and their families in cultural 
transition: Issues and recommendations. Contemporary Family Therapy, 12 ( 1), 3-22. 

Brown, N. W. (1994). Group counseling for elementary and middle school children. 
Westport, Connecticut: Praeger. 

Goodenow, C., & Espin, O. (1993). Identity choices in immigrant adolescent females. 
Adolescence, 28 ( 109), 173-184. 

Hardy-Fanta, C., & Montana, P. (1982). The Hispanic female adolescent. International 
Journal of Group Psychotherapy, 32( 3), 351-366. 

Ho, M. K. ( 1992). Minority children and adolescents in therapy. Newbury Park, 
California: Sage Publications. 

Lovato, C., Litrownik, A., Elder, J., & Nunez-Liriano, A. (1994). Cigarette and alcohol 
use among migrant Hispanic adolescents [CD-ROM], Family and Community Health. 16 (4), 18- 
31. Abstract from: SilverPlatter File: PsycLIT Item: 81-17026 

Milicic, N., & Gazmuri, V. (1989). Un modelo de trabajo de grupo con ninos y 
adolescentes. Descripcion y analisis [A model of group work with children and adolescents: 
Description and analysis]. Revista Terapia Psicologica, 8 ( 1 1), 48-53. 

Millan, F., & Chan, J. (1991). Group therapy with inner city Hispanic acting-out 
adolescent males: Some theoretical observations [CD-ROM]. Group, 15 (2), 109-115. Abstract 
from: SilverPlatter File: PsycLIT Item: 78-33983 

Millan, F., & Ivory, L. (1994). Group therapy with the multiply oppressed: Treating 
Latino, HIV-infected injecting drug users [CD-ROM]. Group, 18 (3), 154-166. Abstract from: 
SilverPlatter File: PsycLIT Item: 82-22372 

Smith, K., McGraw, S., Crawford, S., & Costa, L. (1993). HIV risk among Latino 
adolescents in two New England cities [CD-ROM]. American Journal of Public Health, 83( 10), 
1398-1399. Abstract from: SilverPlatter File: PsycLIT Item: 81-14135 

Smith, P., & Weinman, M. (1995). Cultural implications for public health policy for 
pregnant Hispanic adolescents [CD- ROOM]. The Journal of Health Behavior, Education and 
Promotion, 19 (1), 3-9. Abstract from: SilverPlatter File: PsycLIT Item: 82-30631 

Vargas, L., & Willis, D. (1994). Introduction to the special section: New directions in the 
treatment and assessment of ethnic minority children and adolescents. Journal of Clinical Child 
Psychology, 23 (1), 2-4. 




40 



Yalom, I. D. (1995). The theory and practice of group psychotherapy (4th cd.). New 
Y ork, NY : Basic Books. 




41 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: 



Current Issues and Perspectives in Group Work 
A Counseling Monograph 



Author(s): w * 1 -’- t f • C., Loos, M. , Marbley, A., 



Conneely, R., Portman, T., & 



Corporate Source: 



Ruiz -Balsara , S 



Roland, C, 



Ed. 



University of Arkansas 



Publication Date: 

10/96 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced 
in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced 
paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is 
given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following two options and sign at 
the bottom of the page. 




Check here 
For Level 1 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4‘ x 6" film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical) 
and paper copy. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to ali Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2 documents 

□ 

Check here 
For Level 2 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4" x 6“ film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical), 
but not in paper copy. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 


DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 




DISSEMINATE THIS 


HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 






COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


A® 






<5$ 

Cy 




Jr 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



Level 1 



Level 2 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission 
to reproduce is granted, but neither box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here^> 

please 




*7 hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate 
this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than 
ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. “ 


Signature: « s~\ 

cH* U yl) 


Printed Name/Position/Title: 

7^ Ytell A. Por^meitA. 


Srganization/Acjdress: 

(Ioumselo^ et>uc477<W 
SfcAP 136) 

uwiu efcs/n; of Arkansas 
R\/£77EU/ufc i ArfL 1216) 


Telephone: ; PAX: 

(set ) VVY- 9 2 sV Xs«!) £'7S'' 


E- Mai 1 Add re ss : j Date : 

Tporfwa /0 J/g- 



(over) 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, 
please provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is 
publicly available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are 
significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and address: 



Name: 



Address: 



V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

ERIC/CASS 
School of Education 
Park 101, UNCG 
Greensboro NC 27412 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 



ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
1301 Piccard Drive, Suite 100 
Rockville, Maryland 20850-4305 

Telephone: 301-258-5500 
FAX: 301-948-3695 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
e-mail: ericfac@inet.ed.gov 



0 



v. 3/96/96) 



