DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 425 881 



RC 021 698 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Stebbins, Susan 

Educational Needs Assessment of St. Regis/Akwesasne Mohawk 
College Students at the State University of New York College 
at Potsdam. 

1998-10-00 

15p . ; Paper presented at the Annual Convention of the 
National Indian Education Association (29th, Nashville, TN, 
October 11-14, 1998) . 

Reports - Research (143) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

♦American Indian Education; American Indians; College 
Environment; *College Students; High Risk Students; Higher 
Education; *Nontraditional Students; Racial Discrimination; 
School Community Relationship; School Holding Power; Student 
Attitudes; *Student College Relationship; *Student 
Experience; Student Recruitment; Telephone Surveys 
♦Akwesasne Mohawk (Tribe); Native Americans; *State 
University of New York Coll at Potsdam 



ABSTRACT 



A telephone survey interviewed 112 present and former 
American Indian students, most of whom were from the St. Regis/Akwesasne 
Mohawk reservation, attending State University of New York College at Potsdam 
(SUNY Potsdam) . The survey was conducted to determine Akwesasne needs and 
wants, to ask what the college could provide, and to promote greater 
collaboration between the college and the reservation. Data are qualitative 
and presented in eight categories: declared or potential majors; previous 
college experience; work experience; what made a good class; what made a bad 
class; obstacles to college success; whether or not to recommend SUNY Potsdam 
to a friend; and recommendations to recruit, retain, and ensure graduation of 
Native students. Professors were what made a good class, and professors with 
narrow or biased attitudes made bad classes. Obstacles included large 
classes, financial problems, and nonrecognition (invisibility) of Native 
students; however, all but two interviewees would recommend SUNY Potsdam to 
friends. Recommendations were: extension classes on the reservation; more 
classes with Native content and integration of Native history, culture, and 
literature into classes; inclusion of Mohawk language classes; specific 
programs such as special education, counseling, or masters programs; Native 
counselors and support services; representatives to high schools; more summer 
classes; workshops for improving research and writing skills; and more state 
funding for Native American Affairs. Bibliography contains 16 references. 



(TD) 



***************************************************************************** 
* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

from the original document. 



* 



tfCoj/ £ 9 ^ 



00 

00 



EDUCATIONAL NEEDS ASSESSMENT OF ST. REGIS/ AKWESASNE MOHAWK 



in 

<N 

^r 




COLLEGE STUDENTS AT THE STATE 



UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK COLLEGE 



AT POTSDAM 



SUSAN A . STEBBINS 



U-S- DEPAR-f-MENT of education 

^c 31 ' 0 " 31 Research and Improvement 
EDUpATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
X CENTER (ERIC) 

urThi s d°cum ent has been reproduced as 

o^n!l V6 t d T the PerSOn or or 9anization 
originating (t. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

S_ 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

J 





2 



EDUCATIONAL NEEDS ASSESSMENT OF 
ST. REGIS/AKWESASNE MOHAWK COLLEGE STUDENTS 
AT THE STATE UNIVERSITY OF NEW YORK COLLEGE AT 

POTSDAM 



so 

cn 

co 



05 

o 



ERIC 



American Indian students seem to receive scant attention in articles 
about college minority recruitment, student retention and successful 
graduation in various publications on these issues, (A Nation at Risk, 1983; 
Catteral and Cota-Robies, 1988; Chronicle of Higher Education Almanc 
Issue, 1998; Coombs, 1970; Jacob and Jordan, 1987) or at conferences 
addressing issues of minority college students. American Indians are a 
minority among minorities (Board of Indian Commissioners Annual 
Report). They (we) are a minority many college administrators overlook. 
“Because after all, there aren’t any Indians around here, are there”? 

Probably, there are American Indian students. The image of the 
“vanishing Indian” is so entrenched in the psyche of Americans it is very 
hard for many of them to recognize the Native peoples among them. Some 
people are dismissed as not “really Indian”. These issues are part of my 
broader investigation of American Indian identity. For the purpose of this 
paper I will concentrate on issues having to do with college recruitment, 
retention and the successful graduation of American Indian students. Every 
state in the United States except Hawaii has at least one federally or state 
recognized reservation. My present home state of New York has the tenth 
largest population of American Indians in the country. About 50% of 
American Indian peoples do not live on reservations. They live in cities, 
suburbs, farms, military bases- places where we find any other student 
(Board of Indian Commissioners Annual Report). 

This invisibility is reflected in the broader experience of American 
Indians within the larger culture of the United States. Invisibility can take 
many forms for American Indians. Collegiate issues such as recruitment, 
retention and successful graduation of American Indian students rest on the 
assumptions that there are no Indians here and the non -recognition of 
Natives who are in the area. The first assumption is based on mistaken 
notions, such as that Native peoples in the eastern part of the United States 
died out long ago or were pushed west. While the populations of Native 
peoples east of the Mississippi tend to be small, they are still there and have 
tenaciously hung on to their identity, their land, their culture and in some 
instances their language. However, an estimated 50% of Native peoples 



3 



across the country do not live on reservations. This is in part due to 
relocation and termination policies of the United States throughout the 20th 
century, and to Native peoples who left reservations for employment. 

Cities that were sites for relocation: such as Rochester and Buffalo NY, 
Milwaukee WI, and Chicago IL, have American Indian populations large 
enough to support cultural centers and social events such as pow-wows. 

The other issue is non-recognition of the Native peoples who live 
around you. One of the factors with this issue are mistaken notions of what 
Indians look like- and how similar we all look. Not all Native peoples look 
like the stereotyped plains peoples popularized in movies and often played 
by Euro-American actors in wigs. The typical American believes s/he will 
recognize an Indian upon seeing one (Price, 1973). Even seventeenth 
century colonists had a hard time recognizing as Native American those 
Christian Indians who dressed in European clothes. That was one of the 
reasons Christian Indians were forced into isolated communities, frequently 
islands, so that there was less of a chance of mistaken identity. (Lepore, 
1998). 



Instead of assuming American Indian students are not there, assume 
they are. The question then is how to get them to your college, provide 
them with the appropriate services to see them successfully graduate. 
American Indians remain the most undeserved and impoverished 
population in the United States, yet despite this, the numbers of Native 
peoples going to college has been steadily increasing (Chronicle of Higher 
Education Annual Almanac; Winds of Change Annual College Guide for 
American Indians, 1998). 

While Native students have experiences similar to other minority 
students, (racist incidents, a feeling of isolation and being cut off from 
family and community, and a very real sense of not being able to go home 
again) there are others that are uniquely their own. It seems to come as a 
surprise to many Euro-Americans that American Indians do experience 
racism. I have spoken to students who had experiences ranging from 
having other students doing mock warhoops and stereotypical dances 
outside their dormroom, to having a coach tell a student he would never 
succeed in college if he maintained connections with the reservation, to a 
student having a job application thrown in his face after being asked about 
his unusual last name. I have a colleague who was chastised by his 
department head for activities he included in a class on American Indian 
music. Instances of racism can take on particular focus for Native peoples 
such as the cutting comment that “you don’t look like an Indian”. 




4 



From these examples, it is clear that instances of racism do not stop 
at college doors. The obstacles Native students encounter do take a 
different tone then those experienced by other students. These obstacles 
can and do effect the success American Indian students experience in 
college. The rest of this paper will focus on the experiences encountered by 
students from the St. Regis/ Akwesasne Mohawk reservation who attended 
the State University of New York College at Potsdam in upstate New York. 
Potsdam is a medium size (4,000 students) liberal arts college in the 
extreme northern part of upstate New York (about 1/2 hour from the 
Canadian border). Akwesasne, which is a 45 minute drive from Potsdam, 
straddles the U.SVCanadian border, and deals with U.S., Ontario and 
Quebec governments. Most of the American Indian students attending 
Potsdam are from Akwesasne, but there are a few from other American 
Indian communities around the state. Until about ten years ago Potsdam 
had no particular programs to attract potential students from Akwesasne, 
or to help them once there. There were some sympathetic and helpful 
professors, and successful Mohawk students, but no college-wide programs. 
The data were obtained from present and former students who attended 
Potsdam over the past eight years. One hundred twelve students were 
interviewed by phone about their experiences at Potsdam. Student names 
were obtained from enrollment lists of self-identified American Indian 
students. I believe data is missing from the most at-risk students, those 
who have moved, didn’t have phones, or were otherwise unreachable. One 
of my research assistants is from Akwesasne, and she work very diligently 
to track everyone down, but many people could not be contacted. 
Confidentiality was maintained by using only numbers on the surveys 
themselves. 

I felt this research was necessary for a number of reasons. SUNY 
Potsdam wanted to expand its programs and services to Akwesasne, but a 
needs assessment had never been done. Potsdam wanted to expand its 
services, but had no idea what the community needed or wanted. Within 
this vacuum some programs were being presented by various people at the 
college. In some instances proposals made by the faculty were duplications 
of long standing and successful programs implemented by people within 
Student Services. Potsdam has a Native American Affairs office, instituted 
in 1987, which provides services for Native students on campus, as well as 
providing programs such as the Potsdam Association of Native Americans, 
the Science and Technology Entry Program (which provides programs, 
tutoring and counseling for middle and high school students, and a summer 
program), College Science and Technology Entry Program, American 
Indian Science and Engineering Society, and the Potsdam- Akwesasne 




5 



Talent Search. Faculty suggesting programs seemed to be unaware of the 
office, or the programs and services it provided. 

Faculty, on the other hand, report that student services resist offers 
of help or input, and don’t understand the difficulty of being in a 
classroom, and make requests of faculty without recognizing the demands 
of teaching, research and service. This illustrates a serious issue in 
providing services to minority youth. The faculty side often doesn’t know 
what the student services side is doing, and student services doesn’t 
recognize the differing demands made on faculty. At Potsdam this gap is 
graphically shown by the academic and student sides of the campus which is 
divided by a road, Barrington Drive. I hoped, that by conducting this 
research, and making the findings available to the Akwesasne and Potsdam 
communities, there would be a better recognition of what Akwesasne needs 
and wants from the closest public college, what the college can provide, 
and greater collaboration between the various constituencies. 

While much, of the data gathered in this study is in line with other 
research I have read (A Nation at Risk, 1983; Catteral and Cota-Robies, 
1988; Chronicle of Higher Education Almanc Issue, 1998; Coombs, 1970; 
Jacob and Jordan, 1987), or heard presented at conferences about 
American Indian education, (such as the National Indian Education 
Association meetings), this study made specific recommendations to SUNY 
Potsdam. Some issues were raised which I have not seen in other studies, 
and I believe the findings and recommendations from this study would be 
helpful to other institutions. 

• I will present the data within eight categories: 

• declared or potential majors, 

• previous college experience, 

• work experience, 

• characteristics of what made a good class, 

• what made a bad class, 

• obstacles encountered in attending college, 

• would you advise a friend to come to Potsdam, why or why 

not, 

• and finally, recommendations to Potsdam to recruit more 

Native students and steps the college could take to ensure 
retention and graduation. 

These topics correspond to the questions asked in the survey. 
Interviewees were also asked if there was anything they wanted to add or 
say. These comments often contributed to one of the above categories. 




6 



Majors chosen by students included; criminal justice, politics (at least 
two students have gone on to law school), education, sociology, biology, 
history, psychology, computer science, English literature, math, physics, 
and music education, and the graduate program in education. At Potsdam 
undergraduates do not major in education. Students major in one of the 
arts and science departments, and take the necessary classes for an 
education certificate. As a result, many of the students indicate arts and 
science majors -particularly history, psychology and English-because these 
classes most easily contribute to the classes needed for the education 
certificate. Like most college students, these Mohawk students are most 
interested in majors that lead to jobs. Additionally, they are interested in 
majors that lead to jobs at Akwesasne. 

Within the last five years, Akwesasne has obtained it own tribal 
police and court system. It has obtained increased control over it’s own 
elementary schools, and a greater say in off reservation schools which 
serve Mohawk students. Environmental concerns, and settlements with 
industries which caused the environmental concerns led Akwesasne to open 
its own environment affairs office and work towards cleaning up 
environmental, particularly river pollution. For perhaps the first time 
since Akwesasne had a self-sufficient economy based on foraging and 
farming, young people with the right skills have the possibility of staying 
home and having employment. Increasingly those skills are acquired at 
college. In the spring of 1998 Potsdam graduated 15 American Indian 
students, in fall of 1998 all of those students were employed. 

The Mohawk students seem to choose a college, in this case Potsdam, 
not just because it is close to the reservation, since there are four colleges 
within a ten mile radius of Potsdam, but also because of the majors it 
offers. One student told me he came to Potsdam despite being heavily 
courted by a private school in the area, specifically because Potsdam had a 
program of study he wanted, criminal justice. 

College faculty and administrators may talk about transferable skills 
for a variety of careers, but these Native students have more immediate 
goals. Further, more then 90% of the students interviewed had previous 
job and college experience. Most of the American Indian students were not 
the average 18-22 year old college student. They were/are parents, 
veterans, heads of families, people bringing with them a wealth of 
experience and very specific goals to the classroom. A number of the men 
were former (and in some instances currently part-time) construction 
workers who wanted less physically dangerous jobs that would keep them 



closer to home. Many women were pursuing careers they recently realized 
were within their grasp. These people are commuting almost two hours a 
day, in north country winters, to pursue their goals. These students don’t 
want to hear about transferable skills of a lifetime of different jobs, they 
have already experienced that. They know what they want and need in 
classes, majors and careers. 

Typically the recommendations made to and by colleges to increase 
American Indian recruitment and retention focus on the needs of 18-22 
year old single, childless students. These are important programs such as 
the bridge programs between high school and college, summer orientation, 
special interest dorms or floors, special activities and programs. But what 
about commuting students whose bridge to high school goes back 5, 10, 15, 
20 years? What about students who must take time off from work to attend 
orientation programs, or must choose between family obligations or 
attending special programs or activities? Previous work experience of the 
students included: construction, social work, school facilitator, work in a 
women’s shelter, hairdresser, instruction in traditional arts, drug & alcohol 
counseling, retail office, bank clerk, work in the Bingo Palace, working 
for the Tribal Council, waitress, secretary, military experience, and being 
a mother and grandmother. Non-traditional or adult students, not just those 
from Akwesasne, have told me they feel like adopted or foster children at 
college. They are obviously older then the other students, and are often 
very engaged in the educational process: they speak up in class, ask 
questions, want to discuss, often to the eye-rolling and groaning of other 
students, and sometimes professors. The additional burden of being 
racially/ethnically different increases the isolation many of these students 
experience. 

Both work experience and previous college experience contributed 
not only to choice of a college major, but also to the good and bad (positive 
or negative) experiences students had at Potsdam. One student stated his 
work experience had shown him the problems of many people, which 
influenced him to get an education so he could help them in their struggles. 
Another found that his age gave him experience and his perspectives were 
appreciated by other students and professors. 

Many students had attended community colleges and were surprised 
to find that making good grades at the community college had not 
adequately prepared them to do well at Potsdam. This situation set up a 
conflict for students who enjoyed their experiences at community colleges. 
Students said the classes were “closer and smaller” and “family oriented”. 
However, some students did recognize a problematic situation. One student 



said of his co mmuni ty college experience, “High school was more like 
college. I didn’t have to work hard at M. D.” (a local church affiliated 
community college with satellite classes at Akwesasne). Another student 
said she felt she was adequately prepared at the same community college 
and was surprised when her Potsdam advisor told her “she would rather 
take D’s from any other SUNY school then A’s from M.D.” The woman 
stated that as an older student she was able to cope with her advisor’s 
attitude but was concerned that a younger student might be hurt by that 
statement. 

Other students reported that having Potsdam relatively close by, and 
an academic experience that prepared them for jobs as plusses. Many 
students reported that smaller classes, and classes in which there was 
interaction between students as positive experiences. Students also thought 
having the same professor for more then one class was important. One 
student stated, “I got to know him and his teaching style. I was able to 
improve.” In fact, by far the most important factor in the students 
positive experiences were the professors themselves. Students found some 
of their professors to be “helpful’, “sensitive to native issues”, “were good 
teachers and knew their stuff’, “a good professor makes the class 
interesting”. 

However, while some professors contributed to the students positive 
experiences, others contributed to negative experiences. One student 
expressed it very succinctly. When asked what contributed to a good 
experience at Potsdam he said “The professors.” When asked what 
contributed to a negative experience, he said, “Other professors.” 
Professors were criticized for not showing understanding about family and 
other obligations, as well as not being sensitive to or knowing about Native 
American history or issues. But I think the main complaint against the 
other professors is best summed up by a student who said, “He thinks 
there’s just one way of looking at the world.” 

I think it is this attitude that most alienates the American Indian 
students. Several students stated that while the Native American studies 
minor was an important plus for the college, American Indian history or 
literature should not only be taught in designated classes, but should be 
incorporated throughout the curriculum. The students reflect an 
important dilemma within the college curriculum. Programs like Native 
American studies, Women’s Studies, Africana studies etc., give visibility, 
attention, and inquiry into areas often ignored in the educational 
curriculum. We should not assume that even the Native students know 
about their history, much less the history, culture or literature of other 



o 

ERIC 



9 



Native American groups. Where/how would they learn this? It is not just 
the Euro-American students who tell me, “I didn’t know the Iroquois had a 
role in the Revolution!” However, there is also a tendency to make some 
assumptions about such programs. First, there is the further avoidance of 
responsibility; “I don’t need to talk about the Iroquois in the history of 
New York, the students can take a Native American studies class if they 
want to know about that”. The issue is not what a student wants to know, 
but what an educated individual should know. The further invisibility of 
minorities, including American Indians, to the history and overall culture 
of the United States perpetuates not only racist attitudes, but the attitude 
that there is one American culture, one thread of American history. Or to 
paraphrase a student quoted earlier, “that there is only one way of looking 
at the world.” 



Second, programs such as Native American studies often 
become ghettoized within the curriculum. Other professors and students 
alike assume that these are “gut” classes, not up to appropriate academic 
standards. Faculty interested in promoting such programs find themselves 
constantly justifying the programs, and assuring others of their academic 
standards. Students often find themselves caught in these arguments. “I’d 
like to minor in Native American studies, but how will it look on my 
transcript” or “What can you do with that minor” are comments I often 
hear from Native and non-Native students. The attitudes of the “Other 
Professors” influence not just the students who are in their classes, but the 
much broader college culture encountered by the students. 

The attitude of professors could also decrease or increase 
discomforted students felt in large classes. Large classes were another 
important issue for the Native students as they felt lost in the crowd, and 
that they never established a relationship with the professor or with other 
students. This is an important issue in establishing a sense of success for 
students early in their college careers. It is often the lower 
division/introductory classes that are the largest. It is these classes, early in 
their college experience students find to be the most intimidating. Further, 
currently within the SUNY system there is increased pressure to increase 
student enrollments to increase or even maintain funding. Increase 
enrollments will mean increased class size, at the very least in the short 
term. Yet these classes are found to be intimidating by at-risk students. 
The impact increased class size will have on the retention and successful 
graduation of all students must be examined. 

The college culture beyond the classroom also has significant impact 
on the students. Advising was a particular problem. Students reported 




10 



being advised to take classes they were obviously not prepared for, not to 
mention classes for which they didn’t have the pre-requisites. Getting into 
required classes, particularly for education students, was a problem that 
may contribute to delayed graduation and drop-out rates of students. Some 
students find aid and finances running out when they need to continue for 
an additional semester to finish required classes. 

Despite these problems, students on the whole felt positive about 
their college experience. Reflecting back on his college experience, one 
student said that despite feeling some classes were a waste of time and that 
he was not well prepared, college was a good experience and was well- 
rounded and that he had learned more then he thought at the time. All but 
two students said they would advise a friend to come to Potsdam 

American Indian students identified problems with finances as the 
biggest obstacle to completing their college degrees. Focusing on finances, 
however, is just the tip of the iceberg in examining obstacles to successful 
graduation. American Indian students (and other minority students) run 
out of money not just because they are more likely to come from poor 
homes and therefore must rely on various state and federal funds. These 
funds often have semester limits. Because American Indian students often 
take longer than four years (eight semesters) to graduate, they run out of 
available state/federal or tribal funding. Poverty makes it less likely the 
students’ families can contribute to tuition and other expenses. Students 
who are already working to help support themselves now need additional 
income to pay for college. For students on reservations or rural areas, 
high rates of unemployment make this difficult. 

Why do American Indian students often take more then four years to 
graduate? Frequently cited problems are money, commuting, and conflicts 
with family, work and other obligations. Another reason may be poor 
academic preparation. In the interviews most students indicated they were 
not prepared in general, or in critical areas such as mathematics, writing, 
and critical thinking and analysis. These comments were made by both 
students who came directly to Potsdam from high school, and those who 
had previous college and/or work experience. A recent article in The 
Chronicle of Higher Education focuses on the academic intensity of a 
student’s high school courses as an important indicator of success in college 
(Adelman, 1998). This is a factor not just for American Indian students. In 
an era of elimination of affirmative action programs and funding for 
minority students and minority programs, there must be attention paid to 
not just getting students to college for a semester or two, but successful 
graduation. For traditional college students this means not just high school 




1 



11 



to college bridge programs, but communities working with the schools 
which educate their children to ensure the children are learning necessary 
skills to succeed in college. Capable American Indian high school students 
must be in academically rigorous classes. There has long been an 
assumption in many schools serving American Indian youth that they are 
not going to college and therefore only need basic skills for blue-collar 
jobs. This is not acceptable, both because of the inherent racist attitudes, 
but also because it condemns students to low wages, limited opportunity, 
and ever decreasing jobs. If colleges are serious about their commitments 
to American Indian or other minority students, they too should be 
working with public high schools to identify academic areas of weakness 
and ways of addressing those weaknesses, to ensure that minority students 
benefit from these programs. 

• Other obstacles to success in college identified by the interviewees 
included: 

• long travel or commuting time, 

• too much freedom, 

• adjustment to being away from home, 

• poor study habits, 

• lack of skills (particularly in conducting research), 

• poor advising and not knowing who to go to for help, 

• isolation from the community, 

• Potsdam was a big campus for a small town girl, 

• classes were huge and felt overwhelming, 

• Potsdam is a party school with a lot of available alcohol, 

• closed classes, 

• discrimination in the dorms. 

With the exception of the last factor, these are situations faced by all 
college students. With declining numbers of potential students, colleges are 
being forced to look into all factors that effect the successful retention and 
graduation of students. The issue of discrimination is an ongoing one that 
colleges can not ignore. If students are not comfortable in a college 
situation they will leave. Colleges can no longer sit back and assume 
students leave because they can’t “cut it”. 

For non-traditional or adult students there is a different set of 
obstacles. Family obligations and work, as well as feelings of isolation are 
cited as problems and obstacles to staying in college. Solutions to these 
problems may be different then those for the more traditionally aged 
students. At Potsdam, non-traditional students formed their own student 
organization. They petitioned the college and received a lounge with study 




12 



carrels. Non-traditional students provide support for each other, not just 
academic help, but also providing rides and child-care. I pass the lounge 
several times everyday, and most of the students I see utilizing it are 
American Indian. As most of Potsdam’s American Indian students are 
working towards education certificates, they have formed a lose association 
of education students (in addition to the Potsdam Native American 
Association). The issue of academic preparation is also a factor for non- 
traditional students. Because so many of the non-traditional students have 
attended community colleges, one solution may be a closer collaboration 
between two year and four year colleges. Within the SUNY system, there 
is a plan underway to address this issue. However, at Potsdam many 
students have attended a private, church affiliated community college. 
Collaboration in instances like this is more problematic and may require 
assistance from the college administrators. 



• To attract and retain more American Indian students interviewees 
suggested: 

• extension classes on the reservation, 

• more classes with Native content and integration of American Indian 

history, culture and literature into classes, 

• inclusion of Mohawk language classes, 

• provide for specific programs such as Special Education, Counseling 

or Masters programs, 

• a Native counselor and support services, 

• send representatives, including students, to the high schools, 

• offer more summer classes, 

• workshops for improving research and writing skills, 

• and more state funding for Native American Affairs. 

A preliminary report about this study’s findings was submitted to the 
previous college administration and the Merwin Institute of Rural Services 
(which helped fund the study). Classes have been taught at the reservation 
or nearby schools. However, professors have had to teach these classes 
above their regular loads at the campus, and classes are canceled if they are 
too small. The private schools in the area, and now Canadian schools, 
offer programs without regard to enrollment. Other colleges have filled in 
the gaps which Potsdam could or would not. This pass summer the college 
initiated a high school to college bridge program. This was in response to 
a shortfall of enrolled freshmen, and was targeted at all area students, not 
just those at Akwesasne. Many of the issues for non-traditional students 
remain, although actions taken by the students themselves have addressed 
some. For example, in the fall of 1998 Potsdam held a Saturday 




13 



orientation excessively for non-traditional and commuting students. In the 
spring of 1998 Potsdam graduated 15 American Indian students. In the fall 
of 1998 ninety-two American Indian students were attending classes at 
Potsdam. However, problems remain, particularly the problems of the 
“other professors”, and working with public schools to ensure well- 
prepared students. 

The problems confronting American Indian students are not always 
what we would expect from a surface examination. Nor are they the same 
for all students. I hope by presenting the results of this study to raise some 
areas of inquiry for others involved in American Indian education. To 
truly understand the needs of Native students, colleges must not make 
assumptions, but rather ask specific questions about the students they may 
potentially serve: who are they, were do they come from, what are their 
backgrounds, and what are their needs and goals. One size fits all 
programs will only meet the needs of some students and therefore are not 
very different from the dominant education system. 

Furthermore, an alliance between those vested in improving the 
educational experiences of American Indian must be forged between 
communities, public schools and institutions of higher education, and 
overseen by the local communities, to ensure that Native students have the 
rigorous academic backgrounds to facilitate their success in college, their 
careers and to their communities. 



14 

ERIC 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 



Adelman, C. (1998, September 4). To help minority students raise their 
graduation rates. The Chroncile of Higher Education . B8. 

Bowker, A. (1993) Sisters in the Blood: The Education of Women . 
in Native America . WEEA Publishing Center: MA. 

Board of Indian Commissioners, Annual Report. Washington, D.C.: 
Government Printing Office. 

Catterall, J.S., and E. Cota-Robies. “The Educationally At Risk: What the 
Numbers Mean.” Accelerating the Education of At-Risk Students. 
Stanford,CA: Stanford University, Center for Education Research 
at Stanford, 1988. 6-7. 

Chronicle of Higher Education Almanac Issue (1993-1998): 

Washington DC. 

Cohen, W.H., and P. Mause. “The Indian: The Forgotten American.” 
Harvard Law Review 81, no. 8 (1968): 1818-58. 

Coombs, L.M. The Indian Is Not Low Man on the Totem Pole.” Journal 
of American Indian Education 9 (1970): 1-9. 

Giago, T. “Blood Quantum Is a Degree of Discrimination.” Notes from 
Indian Country, Vol. 1. Pierre, SD: State Publishing Company, 

1984. 

Hodgkinson, H.L The Demographics of American Indians: One Percent of 
the People-Fifty Percent of the Diversity. Washington, DC: 

Instititue for Educational Leadership, 1990. 

Jacob, E. And C. Jordan. Explaning the School Performance of Minority 
Students. ” Anthropology and Education Quarterly 18, no. 4 
(1987):259-392. 

Lepore, J. (1998) The Name of War: King Philip’s War and the Creation 
of American Identity. New York: Knoff. 

National Commission on Excellence in Education. A Nation at Risk: The 
Imperative for Educational Reform. Washington , DC: National 
Education Association, 1986. 

Ogbu, J.U. “Variability in Minority School Performance: A Problem in 
Search of an Explantion.” Anthropology and Education Quarterly 
18 (1987): 1269-76. 

Price, J.A. “The Stereotyping of North American Indians in Motion 
Pictures.” Ethnohistory 20 (1973): 153-71. 

Selinger, A.D. The American Indian Graduate: After High School, Whatl 
Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory, 1968. 

Wings of Change College Guide for American Indians (1993-1998) 
American Indian Science and Engineering Society: Boulder, CO. 



® 

U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 

National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 



I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



™ e ' Educational Needs Assessment of St. Regis/Akwesasne Mohawk College Students at the 

State University of New York College at Potsdam 


Author(s): cS n&O <SD 1 




Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 





II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 

affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2A documents affixed to all Level 2B documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

JP 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

0 \e 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

_ 










cP 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2A 




•J 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

2@ 



Level 1 

i 


Level 2A 

t 


Level 2B 
1 


□ □ □ 


Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival 
media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 


Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 


Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here.-b. 

D/ease 

ERIC 



I hereby grant to the Educatbnal Resources Informatbn Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permissbn from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 



Signature: 




Or^nization/Address: 






Printed Name^sition/Titte s 

(3u83T\R ^vioi 



\OS 



r 



E-MaKAddress., - _ *V . Date: 






RC021698 



(over) 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price: 



IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 



ERIC/CRESS AT AEL 
1031 QUARRIER STREET - 8TH FLOOR 
P O BOX 1348 
CHARLESTON WV 25325 



phone: 800/624-9120 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
1100 West Street, 2 nd Floor 
Laurel, Maryland 20707-3598 



Telephone: 301-497-4080 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-953-0263 



ERIC 



e-mail: ericfac@inet.ed.gov 
WWW: http://ericfac.piccard.csc.com 



mmiJwSmai (^ ev - 9 ^ 97 ) 

PREVIOUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORM ARE OBSOLETE. 



