DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 478 404 



SO 035 101 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Old Elk, Arlene; Stoklas, Jackie 
After the Rain: Rain. 

Heard Museum, Phoenix, AZ. 

2001 - 00-00 

lip.; For related units, see SO 035 097-102. 

Heard Museum, 2301 North Central Avenue, Phoenix, AZ 85004- 
1323. Tel: 602-252-8344; e-mail : educationOheard. org. For 
full text: http:// www.heard.org/rain/rain/rain.pdf. 

Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

Art Activities; Community Resources; ^Cultural Context; 
Educational Facilities;- *Integrated Curriculum; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; Language Arts ; Mathematics ; 
*Museums; Primary Education; Primary Sources; Sciences; Skill 
Development ; Student Educational Objectives ; ^Thematic 
Approach 

Native Americans; *Rain; United States (Southwest) 



ABSTRACT 

The Heard Museum (Phoenix, Arizona) has developed and updated 
an integrated curriculum for use in grades K-3. The goals for this curriculum 
are to: (1) share museum resources with schools; (2) promote cross-cultural 

understanding. through a focus on rain, a universal requirement for life; (3) 
help students understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modern world; (4) develop an awareness 
of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature, and customs of the 
native people of the greater southwest; and (5) use culturally specific 
materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially as they 
relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. The curriculum may be used 
in any order. This unit contains: (1) art prints of artifacts in the Heard 

Museum collection related to rain; (2) specific cultural information and 
materials relating to a particular Native American tribe or nation featured 
•through the art prints this cultural information is the basis for some of the 
lessons in mathematics,, science, and language skills; (3) mathematics lessons 
with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing; (4) science lessons, 
usually hands-on -or observational units; (5) language skills, ' including 
reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary, and poetry skills; and 
(6) art projects. (BT) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 4 



R 



A 



I 



N 



o 

ERIC 




Heard Museum 
2301 North Central Avenue 
Phoenix, Arizona 85004-1323 



http;//www.heard.org/rain/rain pdf main.html 



Updated 2001 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 



ro 

O 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 






I 



GO 






BEST copy AVAIIABI.E 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION \ 
CENTER (ERIC) 

p This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of vio\w or opinions stated in this 
document do not hecessarilv reoresent 





Introduction 



The Heard Museum has developed this integrated curriculum for use in schools in grades K 
through 3. The overriding goals for this program are to: 

• 1 . Share museum resources with schools; 

• 2. Promote cross-cultural understanding through a focus on rain, a universal requirement 
for life on earth; 

• 3. Help students to understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modem world; 

• 4. Develop an awareness of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature and 
customs of the native peoples of the Greater Southwest; 

• 5. Use culturally specific materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially 
as they relate to the v\rizona Student Assessment Program. 

This curriculum is divided into six units that can be used in any order. 

Each unit contains: 

• 1 . Art Prints of artifacts in the Heard Museum collection related to rain. While these 
prints are used for art history and aesthetics lessons, these artifacts are also used to begin 
lessons in math, science and language skills. 

• 2. Specific cultural information and materials relating to a particular Native American 
tribe or nation featured through the art prints. This information includes a map, text from 
the RAIN exhibit applicable to the people, and other information of special interest to 
children. This cultural information is the basis for some of the lessons in math, science 
and language skills. 

• 3. Math lessons with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing. 

• 4. Science lessons, usually hands-on or observational units. 

• 5. Language skills, including reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary and 
poetry skills. 

• 6. Art projects 



This K-3 curriculum was developed teachers by Arlene Old Elk (Dine') and Jackie Stoklas 
during a year-long residency at the Heard Museum, made possible by the Lila Wallace-Readers 
Digest Museum Accessibility Fund. Additional information was developed by the Heard 
Museum Education Department staff 




3 



Rain 



The Southwest United States and Northwest Mexico exist in a rain shadow cast by mountain 
ranges to the west. Rainfall is light and undependable. There are two rainy seasons: summer and 
winter. Often, summer rains are brief and highly localized, as clouds suddenly boil up from the 
south in the afternoon and early evening. Winter storms come from the Pacific Ocean and may 
arrive in waves, soaking the ground. In higher elevations, the rain becomes snow. In between 
these two seasons are dry periods, when great care must be taken to ensure life and growth until 
the next rain. 

The indigenous people of the Southwest welcome rain into their lives and land, praying for the 
blessing of rain through a variety of ceremonies and creative expressions. Many expressions of 
rain and water focus on rain's connection to making life and growth possible. Expressions may 
be enduring, such as embroidered figures on a ceremonial garment. Some are intended to be 
temporary, such as body paint on a ceremonial participant or the pigments of a sand painting. 
Other expressions take the form of music, song, oratory, poetry, and prayer. 

For all of the cultures in this exhibit, rain has deep meanings that reflect a culture's unique 
experience with the universe. This deep spiritual relationship is far from the stereotype of the 
"Indian Rain Dance", or feeble jokes suggesting a superficial and simplistic magic. 

As you look at specific designs or symbols, please remember that they are part of a whole and 
have meaning as part of that whole. Expressions of rain span centuries. Some of the forms 
change, but the intent of people to bring the blessings that come from rain into their lives and the 
world remains unchanged. 




4 



H3D> 






Designing a Blanket 




Activity: Students will select and 
combine individual symbols to design 
a blanket. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print of 
the storm pattern rug, and use it to 
discuss symmetry, balance, repetition 
and individual design elements. 

Outcomes: 

1) The students will learn to 
recognize patterns and their 
repeated use. 

2) The students will understand the 
balanced and symmetrical use of 
design elements. 

3) The students will use some basic 
designs to create their own rugs by 
cutting and pasting. 




Vocabulary: 

• balance, symmetry, repetition, design element, symbol 
Materials: 

• copy of rug background for each student, copies of design elements #1 and #2, 
scissors, glue, markers 

Procedure: 

1) Hand out a copy of the rug backgroimd and of the design sheet to each student. 

2) Instruct the students to decide what backgroimd color they will use for the rug. 
Then they must decide the colors for the design elements and color them in. 
Explain to the students that they are doing this first, just as a Navajo weaver makes 
these decisions before she begins weaving. 



BEST COPY AVAJUBLE 





3) Instruct the students to cut out all of the individual designs first and play with 
them on the page before they begin gluing them down. They may want to try 
different combinations before they design their final rug. 

4) Once they have decided which designs they are using and how they are placing 
them, remind them once again to stand back and notice if the rug is balanced. Ask 
them to pay attention to their use of color as well as the designs. 



Assessment: 

1) Were the students able to make creative yet balanced compositions? 

2) Did the students pay attention to the overall use of space? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



6 





... V : 



7 





•9 






Illustrating a Book 

Activity: Students will make 
illustrations for the legend "Wind 
Always Follows Rain". 

Focus Activity: Introduce the concepts 
of medium and style. Look at the prints 
Storm Pattern Rug. Discuss the 
different media used by the artists, 
both two and three dimensional. Then 
bring attention to the different styles 
(e.g., realistic, abstract, stylized, 
representational). 

Outcomes: 

• Students will illustrate "Wind 
Always Follows Rain". 

• Students will experiment with 
working in different media. 




Vocabulary: 

• medium, style 
Materials: 

• paper, markers, paints (acrylic or watercolor), pastels, photocopies of "Wind 
Always Follows Rain" pages for students. Note: see reading version of this 
story for teachers in the Language section. 

Procedure: 

1) After reading "Wind Always Follows Rain", have the students select one of the 
pages for illustration (if done as a group activity). If this is an ongoing art activity, 
each child illustrates each page over a two-week period and makes a book. 

2) Have the students experiment first with the different media and decide which 
would work best for the subject they have chosen. Use this as an opportunity to 
discuss concepts such as line, shape, form, color and texture. 



BEST COPY AVAILAP' 




3) After having done some practice paintings/drawings, ask the students to choose 
a medium to make their final piece. Once they are all done, ask the students to 
hang their illustrations in sequential order (if a group activity) or to share their 
book with the class (if an individual activity). 

Assessment: 

1) Were the students able to understand the major concepts? 

2) Did the students experiment with the media and play with their different 
qualities? 



11 



BEST COPY AVAILAFU F 



Wind Always Follows Rain 



adapted from a Tohono O'odham story 



Every Tohono O'odham child knows that Rain is blind and 
always follows Wind. When they think about the time Wind 
wouldn't come, they know how bad that was. Let me tell you 
about it: 

Wind was out playing by himself when he saw the pretty girl carrying 
water. Rain was asleep and he wanted a friend to play with so he swept 
down and flipped her skirt up. 

When her skirt moved, the girl was startled. She jumped and grabbed at it. 
When she jumped, she dropped her water pot and it broke. 

She ran home crying and told her father what had happened. He was so 
angry, he ran out shaking his fist. He yelled: "Wind, go away and never 
come back!". Other people, remembering times when Wind embarrassed 
them or made them uncomfortable, joined in with angry shouts. 

Wind's feelings were hurt and he blew away in an angry rush, pulling 
sand and grass with him. 

For four years the people watched and hoped that Wind would come back 
and bring his good friend Rain. For four years they looked at the sky, 
watching and watching, but Wind did not come and so, of course, Rain 
did not come either. 

With no rain for four years the river was dry and food wouldn't grow. The 
people decided that they needed to find Wind and ask him to come back. 

They wanted to ask Coyote to search for Wind, but first they had to find 
Coyote. As they tried to decide where to look, someone said: "Don't look 
for Coyote. Just have a party and he's sure to find us." So they did. 

The party wasn't much fun. There wasn't much to eat or drink and 
everyone was worried, but at last Coyote came. 



BEST COPY AVAU-AF^* 

12 




Coyote agreed to look for Wind. He looked for four days. He looked in all 
four directions, but he couldn't find Wind or Rain. 



When Coyote returned without seeing Wind, the people got together 
again. "What can we do?" they asked each other. 

They decided to send Bear. Bear looked for four days. He looked through 
the mountains. He went into caves, but he couldn't find Wind or Rain. 

Next they decided to send Buzzard. He flew for four days. He looked and 
looked, but he couldn't find the two friends. 

Then they sent Hummingbird. Hummingbird knew that Coyote, Bear and 
Buzzard had looked hard. He would have to find another way to find 
Wind and Rain. Hummingbird pulled some soft feathers out of his tail and 
tied them to a stick. 

He used this as a Wind indicator. He flew everywhere, stopping from time 
to time on a bush and holding his Wind indicator out, but it didn't tell him 
anything. Finally, he landed on a greasewood bush. He held up the Wind 
indicator and the feathers moved, just a little. 

Hummingbird smiled. He knew where Wind was. He flew on and found a 
pleasant breeze. He continued on and found a small creek and green grass 
by a dark cave. He flew into the cave and found Wind and Rain sleeping 
by a fire. 

He woke them up and told them how the people and animals were 
suffering without them. He asked them to come so that the dry spell 
would not destroy all the people and animals. 

Wind said: "I remember how much it hurt when they told me to go away. 
What do you think Rain?". 

Rain said: "No one wants me. They complain when I come. You are my 
friend and you lead me everywhere I go. You decide and I'll stick with 
you." 



Wind told Hummingbird: "Tell the people if they really want us to come, 
they will hold a ceremony for four days. When it is over, we will come 
and celebrate with them." 



BESTCOPYAVAII ^ 



13 






When Hummingbird returned to the people and told them what Wind had 
said, they were excited. They went out and picked the saguaro fruit from 
high on top of the sturdy cactus. They made juice to drink so they would 
be strong for the four days of singing. 

They sang and danced for four days. On the fifth day, Wind came 
followed by Rain. 

Everyone was glad to see them. No one complained about the 
embarrassment or inconvenience they might cause. The people knew how 
important Wind and Rain were! Everyone welcomed them and had a 
wonderful celebration. 



14 



BESTC0PYAVA1I-AB> E 



A Bird's-Eye View 

Activity: Students will draw 
scenes and objects as seen from 
above. 

Focus Activity: Using the print 
of the Raramuri Sashes, explain 
to the students that the spirals 
represent mountains as seen 
from above. Discuss with them 
the nature of topographic maps 
and explain how this is one way 
of seeing a landscape. Have 
them think about other things 
that a bird might see from the 
sky. 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will understand that how one depicts an object changes depending on 
the angle from which one looks at it. 

2) Students will become familiar with the uses of topographic imagery. 

• Vocabulary: 

o topography, bird's-eye view, relief, texture 




Materials: 

• paper, pencils, topographic map or globe, print of Raramuri Sashes 



Procedure: 

1) Begin by looking at the globe or map. Ask the students if they can see what the 
different images are. Point out how shading and texture can show depth or changes 
in the surface. 

2) Ask the students to choose 3 or 4 objects in the classroom and place them on the 
floor (if they are small enough to be moved). Have the students draw the objects 
while looking down on them. Explain that the drawings should look different than 
if they were done from an eye-level perspective. 



IS 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 






3) Once the students are comfortable with looking from this new perspective, ask 
them to imagine an entire scene from this viewpoint. They can draw either an 
outdoor scene and pretend they are birds or clouds. Or, they can depict an indoor 
scene as if they were spiders looking down from the ceiling. 

Assessment; 

1) Were the students able to identify topographic features? 

2) Were the students able to draw their objects from above? 

3) Could the students then incorporate this idea into a more complex scene? 
Extension: 

• Ask the students to look through old magazines and cut out any photographs or 
illustrations that are from a bird's-eye view. They can then paste them together. 




BEST COPY AVAILABI F 




Rain in Life 

The Rardmuri live in the southwest comer of Chihuahua, Mexico, among the higher 
elevations of the Sierra Madre Mountains. Over half of the annual rainfall of 24 to 30 
inches occurs between mid-June to late August. Another rainy season occurs between 
October and Febmary. The Raramuri plant crops of com, beans, potatoes and squash 
in April and May, prior to the start of the summer rainy season. To protect against 
drought, Raramuri men dip the tips of their plows into ponds or streams before spring 
plowing. 

Rain in Ceremony 

Raramuri rain and healing ceremonies begin in June to assure that Onoruame (The 
Creator) will maintain his strength and send rain. Rain and healing are linked in the 
ceremonies because there can be no healing without rain and no rain without healing. 

There are three aspects to the ceremonies: the offering and drinking of batariki (com 
beer) as a sacrament; dances done as a form of prayer; and ritual healing as performed 
by shaman and chanters on behalf of those who are ill and for the farm animals and 
fields. The dances encourage rain, therefore rain is an extension of the ceremony in 
dances. 

Expressions of Rain 

The main expressions of rain in Raramuri culture occur in chants associated with the 
yumari and dutuburi ceremonies. These chants have healing aspects. 

The Raramuri do not place symbols or designs representing rain on objects. They do 
represent water as it flows in rivers between the mountains. According to Raramuri 
etfmobotanist Enrique Salmon, rain is indirectly present through its links to the place 
from which all living things are bom and on which they grow. 

The Raramuri History of Creation 

A long time ago, the Creator made the worlds of plants and animals. It was some time 
later Aat he decided to add humans to this world. In man's original form, he fell to the 
earth as rain and hit the ground running. At first, humans lived for only one day and 
had only a short time to get things done. That is why, the Raramuri say, the first man 
ran. 



1’7 



BEST COPY AVAII API E 



The first people got so much exercise with all this running, that they began to live 
longer. This meant that they had more time to do things. Unfortunately, as they settled, 
the people became corrupt and forgot their obligations to one another and to the 
Creator. The Creator was angered by their behavior so he caused a great flood to 
happen. The waters rose and all the people began to die. Two children, a boy and a 
girl, were the only survivors. They had escaped to the top of a high moimtain. 

The Creator wanted to help the children to start over again. The creator gave them 
com and bean seeds and told them to plant them. The children threw down the seeds 
and watched the com growing. They saw that as the com reached a certain size, people 
began to emerge from the plants. These people repopulated the earth and were the 
ancestors of the Raramuri. 

The Raramuri believe that com is sacred. Com reminds them of where they came from 
and also of their obligations to the Creator. They also remember their origins when 
they run and participate in races, which have always been an important part of their 
life. 

Raramuri History and Environment 

Raramuri is the name the Tarahumara use for themselves; it means "foot 
runners" in their language. 

The Raramuri live in the Sierra Madre Occidental, in Chihuahua, Mexico. This land is 
geographically diverse and quite harsh, ranging from highlands and plateaus to 
canyons and gorges. It is estimated that 40,000 to 50,000 Raramiui live in this region 
today. Scholars are not sure exactly when the Raramiui came into this region, but 
evidence suggests it was at least 2000 years ago. 

When the Spanish Jesuit missionaries arrived in northwest Mexico in the early 16th 
century, they encountered the Raramuri, who lived a semi-agricultural and nomadic 
lifestyle. The Raramuri lived in isolated areas, often in caves or scattered homesteads. 
Their main food sources were com, beans and squash, with fish, small game and 
gathered wild plants supplementing their diets, particularly between harvests. 

By the 17th century, the missionary presence was strong and they had built many 
churches and attempted to bring the Raramuri into settled villages. Besides the 
missionaries, there were others who were settling in the region such as farmers and 
miners who were interested in the recently discovered gold and silver. These various 
pressures caused the Raramuri to begin a slow and gradual migration toward the west 
and south of the Sierra Madre. 



18 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



ito 

Despite the continuing presence of outside influences, Raramuri lifestyle has not 
changed much since the initial contact with the Spanish. The Raramuri adopted cattle 
and other livestock as well as steel tools, but have maintained their traditional 
subsistence patterns of farming, hunting and gathering. There were some Raramuri 
who did not move west during the 17th century and became integrated with the 
Spanish settlers. These people became apart of the many mestizo communities; 
mestizo is the Spanish word for people of mixed Indian and Spanish ancestry. The 
mestizo live in more concentrated settlements with local schools and stores. They use 
cars and trucks and have furnished homes, unlike the Raramuri people. 

Raramuri Life: The Family and the 
Farm 



The Raramuri family is usually made up of the parents and their children. 

Grandparents only live with them once they have reached the point where they cannot 
care for themselves. This is because the Raramuri value independence. For the first 
two years of their lives, Raramuri children remain in constant contact with their 
parents. When a Raramuri boy is three days old, he is visited by a shaman who 
performs a ceremony for the boy's protection; this ceremony is performed two more 
times, several weeks apart. After this the boy is named. The shaman performs the 
same ceremonies for girls, but the first one takes place when the girl is four days old, 
and it is repeated four times. 

After the age of two, Raramuri children are allowed to roam freely. Raramuri children 
are taught to be independent at a young age. By age 5 or 6 they may be left alone all 
day, or sometimes overnight while their parents are away tending the crops of another 
field, or attending a tesgiiinada (a work party). Children's independence is fostered by 
giving them duties from an early age, such as tending the goats. Raramuri children are 
never punished physically. 

Because of the climate in the Sierra Madre, most Raramuri families live in the 
highlands in the summer where it is cool, and in the canyons in the winter, where it is 
warm. Every Raramuri family has two or three plots of land in the highlands. They 
farm com, beans and squash, which are the staples of their diet. The reason they have 
two or three plots is because the soil is poor and the land is too mgged to have tracts of 
land large enough to grow all their crops. 

Each Raramuri family has a house located near each plot, which are often many miles 
apart. Only one of the homes is the main residence. This primary Raramuri homestead 
consists of a house, the field, the granary for storing com, and a clearing for working 
and gathering. The family also usually has a chicken coop and a corral for the goats. 
Some families also own cattle and sheep. Many families keep dogs to help with the 
tending of the animals and to help catch small game. The livestock are very important 
because they provide fertilizer for the crops. The cows help to plow the fields. The 



19 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 






animals are not a major food source, as the Raramuri only eat meat on special 
occasions. Instead, the Raramuri supplement their diet with gathered plants, nuts and 
seeds, and small game and fish. 

These houses tend to be isolated, but five or six of these homesteads make up the basic 
Raramuri community unit, called a rancher*#237 ;a. However, due to seasonal 
migrations, the members of the rancheria is not a permanent grouping. The members 
of a rancheria will gather for both social and economic reasons, to trade or to help one 
another to tend the crops. Raramuri families are almost entirely self-sufficient and 
produce most of their own necessities. Their limited contact with outside communities 
means that they do not often participate in the cash economy. 

The sheep provide the wool with which the Raramuri make most of their clothes. The 
Raramuri are well known for their woven textiles. They also use cotton for their 
clothes, which is obtained through trade. Men wear a breechcloth, held up with a sash, 
with a simple shirt. Women wear a long and loose cotton skirt, also secured with a 
sash, and either a shirt or a poncho. Women will also wear a woven headband. 
Raramuri children wear the same clothing as adults. The Raramuri don't often wear 
shoes, but when they do they are sandals made of cowhide and tied with leather 
thongs. 

Raramuri houses have roofs made of interlocking logs, and the walls are made of 
planks. They have little or no furniture. Their belongings consist of mats and hides for 
bedding, gourds and ceramic jars for food storage and a metate for grinding com. 

In the winter time, after the com has been harvested, the Raramuri family may move 
down to the canyon floor. This is particularly common for families who own goats or 
cattle. In the canyon, the family lives in caves, and the people spend their time 
weaving baskets and blankets and tending to their animals. The Raramuri also grow 
chilies and tobacco in small garden plots. 



Running is very important to the Raramuri for many reasons. Primarily, it is a social 
event that brings people from distant communities together; but, it is also a means for 
them to remember their origins. The Raramuri gather to participate in an informal race 
in which the players have to kick a wooden ball across a marked course. If the players 
are women, they have to kick a hoop and stick across the course. The players make up 
two teams that compete by running a set amount of laps on the course. The course may 
be as short as two miles or as long as 12, and the game may last an afternoon or 
several days. The Raramuri may place bets on the teams. 

The Raramuri are well known internationally as long-distance runners. They have 
competed in international endurance races against professional athletes and have won 
many times. What is most amazing about this fact is that they used sandals with soles 
made out of truck tires, whereas their competitors used specially designed, expensive 
running shoes. 



Raramuri Social Occasions 





The tesguinada, or work party, is another important social occasion for the Raramuri. 
This event is sponsored by a family that needs help with their fields. The sponsoring 
family will ask rancheria members and other neighbors to gather at the sponsor's 
homestead. The tesguinada may last several days, and all the people drink large 
quantities of tesgiiino, which is a beer made of fermented com. Tesgiiino spoils very 
quickly and must be drunk within 48 hours. 

At these parties, the Raramuri forge important relationships with one another through 
joking and trading. These occasions are the only time that the Raramuri act aggressive 
and become outspoken; at all other times, they are very quiet and reserved. Raramuri 
boys and girls are usually 15 or 16 years of age when they attend their first tesguinada. 
This is also the age when they are considered adults. 

Contemporary Issues in Raramuri Life 

The Raramuri are being threatened by severe droughts and deforestation. The drought 
has meant that the crops are failing, and that the Raramuri water sources are getting 
contaminated and depleted. As a result, the Raramuri people are dying from starvation 
and their children are severely malnourished. It is the youngest and the oldest people 
who are the hardest hit. This is a major problem for a community that already has a 
high infant mortality rate. 

The situation for the Raramuri is worsened by the fact that deforestation has been 
proceeding so rapidly in recent years . Deforestation means that the Raramuri 
livestock do not have enough space or food to graze, and also that the people can no 
longer rely on wild plants and small game to supplement their diets. 

Due to their plight, the Rar^uri have received a lot of media attention in recent years. 
This attention has been a positive thing for them because it has brought them 
assistance. Many people and charitable organizations have sent food and supplies to 
the Raramuri. This relief has been an important means of assuring their survival. 

Yaqui History 

For centuries, the Yaqui have lived along the Yaqui River in the Mexican state of 
Sonora. They settled there in small communities. The Yaqui were farmers who grew 
squash, beans, com and cotton. The soil in this region is fertile and they were able to 
plant and harvest crops twice a year. The river overflowed once a year, which was 
important for irrigating their crops but also meant that they had to move their 
settlements. In addition to farming, the Yaqui supplemented their diets with gathered 
foods such as mesquite beans and cactus fruits. The mesquite beans were ground into a 
flour that was used in making many foods. The Y aqui hunted large deer and wood rats 
for food. In villages close to the coast, they also fished and gathered clams and 
oysters. 



21 



BEST COPY AVAII ABi f 




The Yaqui had their first contact with Europeans when the Spanish arrived in 
northwest Mexico in 1533. With the arrival of the Spanish, new crops such as wheat 
and watermelon were introduced, as were cattle. All of these became important 
resources, which further supplemented their diets. In addition, the Yaqui began to 
trade extensively with the Spanish, which meant that they adopted a cash economy. 

By the 1700s, the Yaqui communities had grown in size and were organized into eight 
villages. Each village had 2,000 to 4,000 residents, who relied on both farming and 
trade for their livelihood. By the mid- 1 800s, these towns had become highly organized 
political and social units. Each one had its own governor who was elected annually. 



The Yaqui Today 

The eight villages still exist today but there are only three significant Yaqui 
communities. Three are almost entirely abandoned due to a short water supply. Two 
more have become Mexican-run communities. However, the Yaqui still tell stories of 
their original eight villages and make reference to them. Today, there are Yaqui people 
found throughout Mexico. 

Yaqui economy in Mexico is still based on agriculture. Important crops include: com, 
sorghum, chickpeas, alfalfa, peas, lentils, chili, cotton, tomatoes, limes, oranges and 
vegetables. Because of water shortages, some Yaqui people have had to hire 
themselves out as agricultural laborers or rent their land to people who can afford to 
irrigate it. 

Historically, the traditional Yaqui house in Mexico was either one or two rooms. Their 
houses were made of either adobe or cane and mud. Each household usually consisted 
of several nuclear families.These families could be related by blood or by ritual 
kinship. Ritual kin were people who took on the role of sponsor or godparent for an 
occasion such as a birth, baptism, confirmation or marriage. Besides having 
ceremonial obligations, ritual kin formed a network of support and assistance for one 
another. They helped one another to take care of both the farm and the family. These 
ritual relationships are still very important to the Yaqui today, in both Mexico and 
Arizona. 

There are also Yaqui communities in the United States. Starting in 1887, some Yaquis 
began to leave Mexico to come to southern Arizona. They left Mexico to escape 
political unrest and continuing warfare. They settled in several communities outside of 
Tucson and in Guadalupe near Phoenix. Many of them went to work on citms and 
cotton farms. 

In 1964, the Yaqui were given a reservation outside of Tucson. But it was not until 
1978 that the Pascua Yaqui Tribe of Arizona became federally recognized. There are 
now approximately 6,000 Yaqui in Arizona, and they retain their strong ethnic 
identity. Unfortunately, poverty, underemployment, and unemployment are major 
problems for these Yaqui communities. 



22 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 






Yaqui Dances 

Dances are an important part of Yaqui arts and tradition, and have helped them to 
maintain a strong sense of identity. These ancient dances and songs have been known 
and taught for generations, being passed down through trained individuals. Two of the 
main types of dances are the pascola and deer dances. 

Dances occur on a range of occasions, both religious and secular. Sometimes the 
public and non-Yaquis are allowed to watch the dances. However, the people must 
observe and respect the Yaquis' wishes that no photos be taken and that no drawings 
or recordings be made. These public performances are usually shortened to a half- 
hour. 

Pascola means "old man of the dance." The pascola dancer learns the dances by 
studying as an apprentice under another pascola. The pascola is inspired to dance 
because he has seen a vision in a dream. The pascola dancer performs at all major 
occasions including feasts, weddings and sacred occasions. Sometimes he is the host 
of the event. In addition to dancing, he will pantomime, clown and tell stories to the 
crowds. 

The pascola dancer is accompanied by a harpist, a violinist and a drummer-flutist. The 
dancer wears a large blanket tied around his waist, a belt of metal bells and cocoon 
rattles around his ankles. The pascola will also carry a wooden rattle. The most 
important part of his dress is the mask. The pascola mask is carved of wood and 
usually painted black or brown. The mask is made to resemble either a human or a 
goat face. The masks will also have a beard and eyebrows made of either hair or 
fibers. 

The deer dance is another important dance, and it is widely known in the non-Yaqui 
community. Deer dancers perform at many Yaqui events, but not as often as the 
pascola. However, a pascola is always present when a deer dancer dances. The deer 
dancer wears a breechcloth around his waist, a belt of deer hoof tinklers, and cocoon 
rattles around his legs and ankles. The sounds of the tinklers and the rattles are meant 
to remind one of the rustling leaves and of the wind. The headdress is a stuffed stag's 
head that is tied with a thong (strip of leather) around the dancer's chin. The dancer 
also has a white scarf that covers his forehead and partially covers his eyes. 

If the deer dancer is performing with a pascola dancer, he will be accompanied by 
only the flutist-drummer. If dancing alone, the deer dancer has three musicians who 
accompany him with the sounds of wooden rasps and of a drum made of a gourd 
floating in a dish of water. Some Yaqui say the sound of the water drum is like the 
pounding of the deer's heart, and that the sound of the rasps is the deer's breathing. The 
deer dancer also carries his own gourd rattles. The musicians also sing in Yaqui. Their 
songs are about the beauty of nature and they celebrate the lives of animals, including 
the deer. The songs are not meant to be frightening and make no mention of killing the 
deer. 



23 



BESTCOPYAVAIUBi ^ 




The dancer imitates the movements of a deer. The dancer will appear to be a deer 
running through the woods, searching for other animals and looking out for himters. 
Some Yaqui believe that this dance is important because it honors the soul of the deer. 
This is a way of expressing thanks, to both the deer and the Creator, for providing the 
Yaqui with food. 

The most important occasion for the Yaqui are the Lenten and Easter ceremonies. The 
deer dances and the pascola dances are just two aspects of performance at these 
celebrations. The four major Yaqui communities in Arizona open some parts of these 
events to the public. There is extensive preparation and much excitement at this time 
of the year for the Yaqui commimity, and men and women, boys and girls, all have 
important duties to fulfill on behalf of the entire community during this season. 




BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 





Writing a Letter 

Activity: Students will write a letter to a Raramuri boy who narrates the story. 

Focus Activity: Read "Dream Runner" by Jacklyn M. Stoklas. Discuss with the 
students that although the boy is telling his dreams, it is also a personal narrative. 
Discuss the importance of family and community. 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will gain experience writing a letter. 

2) Students will understand the concept of a personal narrative. 

Materials: 

"Dream Ruimer" by Jacklyn M. Stoklas, pencil, paper 

Vocabulary: personal narrative 

Procedure: 

1 . Read "Dream Runner" to the students. 

2. Discuss with the students that this is a form of personal narrative, and focus on 
the fact that the boy tells about his family, what they are doing and how they are 
important to him. 

3. Tell the students that they are going to write a letter to the Rardmuri boy telling 
him about themselves. Ask them to begin by making a list of the things they want 
to include in the letter. Suggest to them that they include in their lists where they 
come from, who they live with(if not with their parents) and anyone else in their 
family who they feel close to and spend time with like pets and friends. Encourage 
them to include an important lesson that they have learned from a family member 
or close friend. (Remind them of the important lesson the boy's grandfather taught 
him.) 

4. Ask the students to write rough drafts, using the list to write a letter to the boy. 

5. Have the students read their rough drafts to a partner. Have the partners make 
suggestions about what else they would want to know if they were receiving the 
letter. Ask the partners to comment on the clarity of the letter. 

6) Ask the students to rewrite their letters, using their partner's suggestions, on 
good paper. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Assessment: 



• Do the students understand the structure of a letter? 

• Were the students creative in converting their lists into letters? 

• Did the students make helpful suggestions to one another? 

Extension: 



• Have the students write another letter to someone they do not personally know 
but would like to meet. After a brief personal introduction, have them explain 
why they want to meet this person, and ask what else they would like to know 
about him/her. 



26 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 




Dream Runner 



By Jacklyn M. Stoklas 

In a dream, I open my eyes in the mountains of the land of my souls. 

I run through the arroyos and over the streams, finding my way 
without difficulty, as a Rardmuri boy should. 

I run as my people have since we were sent to the earth like raindrops 
so long ago. 

I run to see my grandfather who holds my little brother. He is the one 
who taught me that each part of my body has a soul. 

I run to where the crops grow to help my father pick the sweet corn. 

I run to the fields where my grandmother is looking for plants to feed 
us and keep us well. I know some of the plants and help her look. 

I run to my mother, who is making a chicken stew and corn tortillas 
for the dinner my family will share. 

When I am too tired to run anymore, I lie down by my sisters in my 
home. 

I close my eyes, thinking of tomorrow when we will gather to help our 
neighbors plow their field and plant a new crop. 

We will have a tesqtiinada, and my cousin will be baptized with corn 
drink. 

We, the children of the corn, will laugh together, enjoying each 
other's company. 

Or run, rolling a wooden hoop along a fallen log. 

In my dreams, my souls will always run as Raramuri have run for 
centuries. I will live to care for the earth, to run and enjoy life 
wherever I wake. 



-O-’T 

d i 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





Keeping a Dream Journal 



Activity: Students will keep a dream journal for a few days. 

Focus Activity: Read "Dream Runner" by Jacklyn M. Stoklas. Discuss with the 
students the nature of dreams. Discuss how dreams are interpreted in different ways by 
different cultures. 

Materials: 

• "Dream Rimner" by Jacklyn M. Stoklas, paper, pencil, photocopy of chart for 
each student 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will understand that some people write stories about what they do 
during the day, and others write about what they dream. 

2. Students will learn to use their senses to make what they read and write seem 
more real. 



Procedure: 

1. Explain that "Dream Ruimer" is a personal narrative, told by a boy telling what 
he sees in his dreams. Discuss that it is written in English and Spanish. 

2. Discuss how dreams can relate directly to your daily life, or how they can be 
entirely different. 

3. Read the story to students and tell them to pay close attention to how the boy's 
dream incorporates all of the senses. Be sure to review the five senses! 

4. Read the story a second time, while the students note on their charts at least 
three things the boy smells, hears, sees and touches. 

5. Have the students write down a few sentences everyday about their dreams the 
night before. Tell them to pay extra attention to the things they smelled, heard, saw 
touched and tasted. 

6. Depending on the grade level, the students can keep the journal as just a list of 
images and things, or they can write about their dreams more extensively in a 
narrative. 




BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 




Assessment: 

• Were the students able to pick out the different sensory perceptions in the 
story? 

• How creative were they in filling out the chart? 

• They know that the boy sees a stream, but do they think about the noise it 
makes, or how it may smell? 



Extension: 

• Have the students draw their dreams. 

• If you speak Spanish, read the story in Spanish to the students so they can hear 
how the story sounds in a different language. 



Vocabulary: "Dream Runner" 

• Arroyo 

I run through the arrovos and over the streams... 

• Corral 

I run with my sister and the goats, chasing theni back to the corral by my 
home. 

• Tesquinada 

We will have a tesauimda ...* 

• Baptized 

...and my cousin will be baptized with com drink. 

*Definition: A tesquinada is an important social occasion that is most often given as a 
work party. At a tesquinada, local community members join to assist a family that 
needs help to complete a large agricultural work task. The com beer tesguino (also 
known as batariki) is drunk in large quantities at these gatherings. 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Dream Runner 



Smell 



See 



T_o.ueh 



Hear 



Writing a Poem 

ActivityrStudents will write poetry using the poem "April Rain Song" by Langston 
Hughes, or "August" by Cecilia Nufiez. 

Focus Activity: Read the poems "April Rain Song" and "August". Discuss the 
differences in the structure of the two poems. Discuss the personal nature of poetry. 

Outcomes: 

1. Students will learn that poems are different than narratives. 

2. Students will write their own poem. 

Materials: 

• "April Rain Song" by Langston Hughes, "August" by Cecelia Nufiez, paper, 
pencil 

Procedure: 

1. Read and discuss the two poems. 

2. Discuss the rules of poetry: 

• Poems may not look like narrative. 

• Poems do not need to use complete sentences. 

• Poems may rearrange sentence structure. 

• Poems make pictures with words. 

• Poems share feelings. 

3. Read the two poems again. 

4. Have the students write their own poems using "April Rain Song" as a model: 

• Let the rain... 

• Let the rain... 

• Let the rain... 

• The rain soimds/makes/falls... (action) 

• The rain sounds/makes/falls. ..(action) 

• The rain sounds/makes/falls.. .(action) 

5. Once the students feel comfortable with this format and understand the nature of 
poetry, encourage them to write a poem about rain with a freer structure, such as 
that used in "August". 



BEST COPY AVA II A .R’ 



31 




Assessment: 



• Do the students see the differences in the structures of the two poems? 

• Could the students think creatively, using "April Rain Song" as a model? 

Extension: 



• Encourage the students to play with the placement of the words on the page. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



f 



Comparing Two Legends 

ActivityrStudents will read and compare two legends about rain. 

Focus Activity: Read "Toad Brings Down the Rain" and "Wind Always Follows 
Rain". Discuss with the students the idea of a legend and encourage them to think 
about legends in Am erican culture or any other culture represented by the students. 
Discuss why rain is important to the Yoeme and the Tohono O'odham. Talk about 
what can happen when it doesn't rain for a long time. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will learn how to give a plot summary of a story. 

2. Students will learn to draw parallels between stories. 

Vocabulary: 

• plot, summary, legend 
Materials: 

• "Toad Brings Down the Rain", "Wind Always Follows Rain", photocopy of 
the Legends Charts for each student, pencils 

Procedure: 

1 . Read each legend to the students. 

2. Have the students discuss why the stories are similar and how they are different. 

3. Read the stories a second time and have the students fill in the chart indicating 
the initial problem, the efforts that failed, the plan that worked and the end result, 
for each story. 

4. Working from the charts, have the students discuss in further detail the 
differences and similarities between the two stories, encouraging them to think on 
different levels. Have the students talk about how they think the people in the 
stories felt when there was no rain, and then how they felt when it finally came. 
For second and third graders, have them write out what they thought the characters 
felt. 



33 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 




Assessment: 

1. Were the students able to follow the progression of the plots? Were they able to 
find the plot similarities between the two stories? 

2. Could students identify and elaborate on the differences between the two? 

3. In either discussion or in writing, could the students identify with the emotions 
of the characters in the legends? 

Extension: 

• Students could write a letter to Toad or to Hummingbird, thanking them for 
bringing the rain. 

• Let the students explore the idea of identifying with the rain, and have them 
write a short narrative from the perspective of the rain. 



Vocabulary: "Wind Always Follows Rain" 



• Indicator - He used this as a Wind indicator . 

• Pleasant - He flew on and foimd a pleasant breeze. 

• Sturdy - ...high on the top of the sturdy cactus. 

• Inconvenience - No one complained about the embarrassment or 
inconvenience... 



34 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 





Toad Brings Down the Rain 

A Yoeme Legend 

The dry spell had lasted a very long time. Now the Rio Yaqui was dry. There was no 
water to drink or water the com. There was not even a mud puddle for Toad's home. 

The people were desperate for water so they asked Swallow to go to blind Yuku and 
ask him for rain. 

Swallow flew high into the heavens until he reached Yuku's house. "Yuku," he said, 
"Our land is dry. We are thirsty. Please bring us rain." 

Because Yuku is blind he could not find the eight Yoeme pueblos imless he followed 
Swallow. 

Yuku said, "Don't worry. Go home and I will follow you." 

But Yuku followed with wind and lightning. Swallow was not strong enough to fly in 
the storm and he could not lead Yuku to the Yoeme's home. 

When Swallow did not return, the people asked Sparrow to go to Yuku and ask him to 
bring rain. 

Sparrow flew high into the heavens until she reached Yuku's house. "Yuku," she said. 
"Our land is dry. We are thirsty. Please bring us rain." 

Yuku said, "Don't worry. Go home and I will follow you." 

Sparrow flew quickly toward home. Just as quickly Yuku followed her, but he 
followed with wind and lightning. Sparrow was not strong enough to fly in the storm 
and could not lead Yuku to the Yoeme's home. 

When Sparrow did not return the people asked Toad to go to Yuku and ask him to 
bring rain. 

Toad borrowed wings fi-om Bat. He flew high into the heavens imtil he reached Yuku's 
house. 

"Yuku," he said. "Our land is dry. We are thirsty. Please bring rain." 

Yuku said, "Don't worry. Go home and I will follow you." 

Toad pretended to fly home, but instead he hid in the mud by Yuku's door. Quickly 
clouds formed. Yuku began to rush to earth with wind and lightning. When he could 
not hear Toad he stopped and the sky was calm. 



35 



BESTCX)PY AVAILABLE 




Toad called, "Kowak, kowak, kowak." 

Yuku began to rush to earth with wind and lightning again but he was not as fierce this 
time. 

When Toad stopped singing Yuku stopped rushing to earth. 

Toad jumped down on top of Rain and began singing, "Kowak, kowak, kowak." 

Yuku began moving toward earth again, but even more gently. Toad stayed on Yuku's 
back and sang all the way down to earth. "Kowak, kowak, kowak." 

When Yuku reached the earth he scattered rain about and toads everywhere began to 
sing. "Kowak, kowak, kowak!" 



BEST COPY AVAIUBI r 

3B 



Comparing Legends #1 



Initial Problem: 




Toad Brings Down the Rain; 









Wind Always Follows Rain; 



o 

ERIC 



37 



Comparing Legends #2 

Efforts that Fail: 




Toad Brings Down the Rain: 




Wind Always Follows Rain: 



Comparing Legends #3 

Plan that Succeeds: 




Toad Brings Down the Rain: 




Wind Always Follows Rain: 



Ending: 



Comparing Legends #4 




Toad Brings Down the Rain: 




Wind Always Follows Rain: 





Just Another Way of Seeing It... 

(For Older Students) 

Activity: Students work with 
decimals as numbers and as 
words. 

Focus Activity: Look at the 
Sashes by the Raramuri 
(Tarahumara) artists. Discuss 
how the weavers have shown a 
bird's eye view of their canyon: 
the river is shown by the zigzag 
and the mountains by the swirls. 

How else could we "see" down into the canyon? We could have a photograph, or we 
might fly over the area in a plane. A third way would be for someone to tell us what 
the canyon looks like. All of these methods are ways of "seeing" the same thing. 




Outcomes: 

1 . Students will practice recognizing multiple decimal places in numerical and 
verbal form. 

Materials: Copy of the worksheet for each student, pencils. 

Procedure: 

1 . Review how to verbalize decimal places. 

2. Review the difference between "hundreds" and "hundredths" when reading 
numbers. 

3. Hand out the worksheet and ask each student to work independently. 

4. review the answers together. 



Assessment: 

1 . Could the students match up the numbers and the words correctly? 



41 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 









Name 


Date 



Match the decimals and the words. 



2.7 


forty-three and seventy-seven hundredths 


8.9 


two hundred forty-five and seventy-eight himdredths 


988.79 


one himdred twenty-three and forty-five himdredths 


43.77 


two and seven tenths 


245.78 


eight and nine tenths 


123.45 


six hundred ninety-three and twenty-one hundredths 


7.77 


nine hundred eighty-eight and seventy-nine hundredths 


693.21 


forty-three and seventy-seven hundredths 


0.56 


seven hundred seventy-seven and seventy-seven 
hundredths 


77.77 


seventy-seven and seventy-seven hundredths 


777.77 


fifty-six hundredths 



^2 



BESTCOPYAVAIUBLE 




Finding Triangles 



Activity: Recognizing and counting triangles. 

Focus Activity: Look at "Rainstorm" by Darren 
Yazzie. How does he depict rain? How does he 
paint the mountains? 

Outcomes: 

1. Students will recognize triangles. 

2. Students will understand the concept of 
overlapping. 

3. Students will gain experience coimting. 

Vocabulary: triangle, overlapping 

Materials: Copy of one of the cloud shapes (Terraced cloud, Pueblo cloud, Zimi 
cloud, Hopi cloud) for each student, copy of the worksheet for each student, dried 
beans, cloud shapes in color for display 

Materials: "Rainstorm" print 

Procedure: 

1 . Have students examine the print closely, bringing attention to the moimtains. 

2. Have students count the number of triangles they see. 

3. If they did not notice the smaller ones created by the overlapping lines, ask them 
to look closer and try to find the hidden ones. 

Assessment: 

1 . Did students easily recognize triangular shapes? 

2. Did they imderstand that intersecting lines can create more triangles? 

Extension: 

o 1. Have the students draw squares. Then ask them: "How can you make 
three squares by drawing only two?" 





BEST COPY AVAIUBLE 



Terraced Cloud 





44 



© 

□ 

s 

© 

© 



■o 

3 

O 



Cfl 

3 



<U 

CJ 

3 

5 



CJ T3 

1 ) 

J= 

3 

E- 

3 3 

(U ^ 
^ U5 

c 

D 

CO 

D 

D. 

o _o 

c/5 ^ 

’P 0) 



x: 

CJ 

3 



1/5 





45 



© 




© 

© 




This cloud symbol has the parallel lines that represent rain. 
The band through the middle is the Milky Way. 



© 




a 

o 





The billowing clouds are on top and 
the lines below represent rain falling 





48 




Counting Cups of Water 



Activity: How many glasses of water does it take to fill 
ajar? 

Focus Activity: Look at the Canteen by Zuni artist 
Jean Bratthauer. What do you think is stored in this 
container? Why? Why do you think it is shaped like a 
duck? Discuss why the opening is so small. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will learn to estimate and begin to 
understand the concept of volume. 

Vocabulary: volume, estimate 

Materials: measuring cup, 2 large jars of different sizes, photocopy of chart for each 
student, water 

Procedure: 

1 . Have the students estimate how many measuring cups full of water are needed 
to fill the jar. 

2. Fill the measuring cup with water and pour it into the larger jar. Count how 
many times you do this to fill the jar up. 

3. Have students compare their estimates with the actual amount. 

4. Repeat the activity with the second jar. 




Assessment: 

1. Were students able to make closer estimates with the second jar? 
Extension: 

1 . Repeat the activity using a different sized cup. 



best copy available 



49 



How Many Cups? 





Estimate 


Actual 

Number 


Jar#l 






Jar #2 








Stamping Raindrops 



Activity: Using a raindrops stamp to 
predict, determine difference and 
subtract. 



Focus Activity: Look at the raindrops 
falling in Untitled by Arthur C. Begay. 
Which raindrops are more realistic? 
How are the raindrops the same? How 
are they different? Discuss how the 
drops are falling. 



Outcomes: 



1 . Students will gain experience 
predicting. 

2. Students will calculate difference 
by subtraction. 

Vocabulary: difference, length, width 



Materials: stamps, (2 designs, 3 each), 3 ink pads, "Rainstorm" by Darren Yazzie and 
print by Arthur C. Begay, paper, photocopy of chart for each student. 

Procedure: 

1. First, have the students predict how many stamps it will take to fill up the length 
and width of the paper and write it on the chart. 

2. Then, have students stamp across the width of the paper, coimt and record the 
number of stamps. 

3. Using a fresh piece of paper, have students stamp the length of the paper. Again, 
count and record the number of stamps. 

4. Ask students to compare their estimates with the actual number. 

5. Ask students to subtract the number of times they stamped the width from the 
number of times they stamped the length. What is the difference? 




51 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Assessment: 

1. Were the students able to make good predictions? 

2. Did they know it would take more stamps to fill out the length of the paper? 



Extension: 

1 . Repeat the activity with another stamp, and on differently sized paper. 



:52 



BEST COPY AVAILAR' ^ 



Stamping Raindrops 





Length 


Width 


Estimate 






Actual 

Number 







(Height - Width = Difference) 

It took (this many) more stamps to fill the 

height than the width with the raindrop pattern. 




53 




Counting Spirals 

Activity: How many spirals are 
there? 

Focus Activity: Look at the 
Raramuri Sashes and discuss how 
the Raramuri wear them. These 
spiral designs symbolize 
moimtains seen from a birds-eye 
view. Discuss how topographic 
maps show geography similarly, 
from the same point of view. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will learn to recognize design repetition, and gain experience coimting. 
Materials: Raramuri sashes print 
Procedure: 

1. Have the students coimt the number of spirals in each sash. 

2. Students should write down the number of spirals in each sash. 

3. Discuss why each sash has a different number of spirals, even though the sashes 
are the same length in the print. 

4. Have the students add up the total number of spirals in the sashes. 

Assessment: 

1 . Do the students see the contrast between the two colors making up the spiral? 
Extension: 

1. Have the students count how many sashes use red, use blue and use white. 




54 



BEST COPY AVAILAP* 






Untitled 



P 

R 

I 

N 

T 

S 




Artist: Arthur C. Begay 
Culture: Dine (Navajo) 

Size: Height 14.6"; Width 19.5" 

Media: Oil paint, canvas 
Description: 

Clouds - nimbostratus 

Boys - wearing contemporary clothes 

Plants 

Butte - The mineral material of which the butte is made is harder than the minerals of 
the nearby hill. For this reason, the butte has resisted weathering. The hill is rounded 
because the minerals forming it were more prone to the effects of rain and wind. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - organic, rough, smooth, edge 
Shape - organic, natural 
Color - contrast 




55 



BESTCOPYAVAII.ABI F 




Space - look top-to-bottom, side-to-side 
Texture - slick, wet, rough, sandy, smooth 
Art Principles: 

Concept - Contrast 

Discuss how the artist has contrasted the storm with the sunlight by the use of color 
and the violence of the storm clouds with the gentleness of the boys at play. 

Cultural Context: 

This painting represents the passing of a storm on the Dine (Navajo) reservation. The 
two Navajo boys probably sat quietly inside their home as instructed by a grandparent 
or parent during a rain storm. Dine children are taught not to disturb the rain. Rain is 
special to the Dine because it does not happen often. After the storm, the two boys 
would have been eager to play in the puddles. They would have run down to the fields 
where they usually play to see how much fun they could have. Even the pet dog would 
come to see what the excitement was all about. 

Questions for Logical Interpretation: 

What time of day do you think it is? 

How do you think the boys feel? 

Would you like to be there too? 



BESTCOPYAVAILAr^^ ^ 





Inde’ (Apache) Coil Basket 




Artist; Unknown 
Culture: Inde' (Apache) 

Size: Diameter 18 9/16"; Depth 3 15/16" 

Media: willow, martynia (cat's claw) 

Date: before 1933 

Catalog Number; NA-SW-AP-B-259 
Description: 

Center circle with triangular-shaped lines - These lines made by the rows of triangles 
divide the basket into four parts. The four parts represent the four cardinal directions. 
The four directions are important in the Inde' tradition. 



BEST COPY AVAILABIF 



57 




Zig-zag lines in pairs and in groups of four are lightning - Lightning is considered a 
blessing because it is a focus of power. 

Animal - This animal may be a horse, because horses are often woven into baskets 
with their tails down and dogs with their tails up. 

Person - Inde' basket makers occasionally put people in their designs, but do not give 
details about the people. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Principles: 

Line - broken 

Shape - triangles, pointed, symmetrical, circular 
Color - dull, natural, neutral 

Space - two-dimensional, opening, above, imder, through 

Texture - actual, rough, coarse 

Description of Art Principles: 

Concept - Movement 
Ask: 

"How does your eye move as you look at this basket?" 

Cultural Context: 

This type of basket was originally made to be used for gathering, mixing or serving 
food. It could also have been used in ceremonies. When Roosevelt Dam was built 
between 1905 and 1911, many, many people came from far away to help construct the 
dam. It was built in the Inde' homeland and so brought the Inde' in contact with many 
new people. A lot of these people appreciated the beautiful baskets and bought them 
from the women who made them. 

Images for Comparison: 

"Rainstorm" by Darren Yazzie 
Storm pattern Tapestry by Rose Maloney 



58 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Questions for Comparison: 



Carved lines are easy to make with a pencil, paint or even clay. They are much more 
difficult to make when weaving a curved design on a basket or some cloth. The shape 
and lack of flexibility of the weaving material and the framework on which weaving is 
done makes the curves very hard to do. 

"What kind of line does the weaving create in a basket?" 

"What kind of line does the weaving create in a tapestry?" 

"How does the weaving line effect the figures the basket maker wove into this 
plaque?" 

"How does the weaving line effect the figures the weaver wove into this tapestry?" 

"How would you go about making a curved line if you were weaving a basket or some 
cloth?" 



BEST COPY AVA !! Ar 



50 




Canteen 




Artist: Jean Bratthauer 

Culture: Pueblo of Zuni, New Mexico 

Size: Height 7 1/16"; Length 6 5/16"; Width 6 7/16" 

Media: Clay 
Date: 1983 

Catalog Number: NA-SW-ZU-A6-1 
Description: 

Students should be aware of the texture created by: 

*the small spots of paint on the upper body of the duck; 

*the triangular and half circle spaces on the wing of the duck; 

*and the smooth texture of the unpainted surface 

BESTCOPY available 



60 






in 






Vocabulary for Discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - irregular, curved, straight 

Shape - organic, free-form, hollow, rounded, geometric 

Color - monochromatic 

Space - 3 -dimensional 

Texture - surface, irregular, hard, dull, speckled, shiny 
Art Principles: 

Concept - The artist uses bold detail around the eyes. The contrast of color between 
the eyes and the rest of the frog also draws the viewer's attention. 

Ask: "What do you see repeated?" 

Cultural Context: 

During the dry seasons (winter and summer), the river at Zimi is only a trickle. During 
the rainy seasons (fall and spring), the river is full and water fowl stop on their 
migration to rest and eat. 

Perhaps a Zuni potter first formed the idea for a duck-shaped canteen by watching 
these water fowl. 

In the late 1 800s, the Smithsonian Institution sent an expedition of anthropologists to 
Zuni to learn about the people. An anthropologist with that expedition, Matilda Cox 
Stephenson, reported that duck canteens were common. One was collected by that 
expedition and is still in Washington, D.C., in the Smithsonian Institution's collection. 

In 1983, Zuni potter Jean Bratthauer made a similar duck canteen. Zimi potters have 
had opportunities to learn from their ancestors and to add their own ideas. 



BEST COPY AVAILAB!. F 



61 




Artist: Unknown 
Culture:Rareamurk (Tarahumara) 

Size: Length 63 3/8", Width 2 1/2" 

Media: Woven from natural wool 
Date: 1960s and 1970s 

Catalogue Number: NA-SW-TA-C-8; NA-SW-TA-C-42; Not Available 
Description: 

Focus for literal description: 

Ask students if these pictures make them think of anything in nature. Do a short 
segment of brain storming. 

Art elements to focus on for description: 

What kind of lines do you see in these sashes? 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Eiements: 

Line - continuous, diagonal, curved, horizontal, vertical, even, spiral 

Shape - triangle, roimd, flat 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



62 




WlKMi 

Color - contrast 
Texture - woven 
Description of Art Principles: 

Concept - repetition 

What lines do you see repeated? 

Discuss the effect of using the contrasting colors in two of the sashes, but the red and 
black does not have a contrast. 

Cultural Context: 

The Rareamurk believe they first came to the earth falling from the sky like raindrops. 
They began miming as soon as they hit the groimd because their lives were short. 

Beginning in the spring of each year, the Rareamurk have ceremonies in which they 
dance as a prayer for rain and healing. Both rain and healing are necessary because 
without healing there is not life, and rain is life. 

The Rareamurk do not put rain symbols on objects, but these objects hold symbols 
which remind them of the water in the rivers between the moimtains which give life to 
their land. 

Questions for Comparison: 

"What differences do you see in these sashes?" 

"What do you see in these sashes that are the same?" 

"Which sash do you like best?". "Why?" 

"Which sash shows the most contrast?" 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



63 



"Rainstorm" 




Artist: Darren Yazzie 
Culture: Dine (Navajo) 

Size: Height 9 7/8"; Width 9 7/8" 
Media :pastels, paper 
Date: 1993 

Catalogue Number:3444-2 
Description: 

Clouds 

Rain 

Lightning 

Mountains 

Sky 



BEST COPY available 

64 





Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - curved, diagonal, horizontal, vertical 
Shape - pointed, rounded, flat 
Color - warm, cool, contrast, tint 

Space - overlapping (Students should look at this piece from side-to-side and top-to- 
bottom.) 

Texture - smooth 
Art Principles: 

Concept; Balance/symmetry 
Concept; Emphasis 

Discuss the bright colors and bold detail. 

Cultural Context: 

In 1993, when Darren Yazzie drew this picture. Bill Clinton was President of the 
United States, the Chicago Bulls beat the Phoenix Suns in the NBA Finals and the 
exhibit Rain opened at the Heard Museiun in Phoenix, Arizona. Also in 1993, many 
places in Arizona had twice as much rain as they usually have. Some areas were 
flooded. 

Looking at this picture, Arlene Old Elk, a Dine woman who was raised on the Navajo 
Reservation said, "This picture reminds me of a storm in the mountains near my aunt's 
home in Lukachukai." 

Images for Comparison: 

• Inde' Coil Basket 

• Storm Pattern Rug by Rose Maloney 

Questions for Comparison: 

• Each of these works of art have lightning represented on them. Can you find 
them in all three? 

• Which lightning looks the most like lightning? 

• Which lightning is the most exciting? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Storm Pattern Ru£ 




Artist: Rose Maloney 

Culture: Dine (Navajo) - Gray Mountain 

Size: Height 69"; Width 49" 

Media: wool; aniline-dyed black, red and brown, natural white and gray 
Date: 1961 

Catalogue Number: NA-SW-NA-R-346 
Description: 

Zig-zag lines - The white outline of the zig-zag starts from the middle and goes 
outward and connects to the outer comers. These represent lightning bolts carrying 
blessings between the mountains and the hogan. 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



66 




Four rectangles in each comer - The four rectangles in each comer that are outlined in 
white have six brown designs inside representing the four sacred mountains. 

A center box - A center box is located in the middle of the mg. It represents a hogan, 
storm house or the center of the world. 

Borders - The borders on the top, bottom and sides are black and white. Sometimes 
weavers put borders on weavings. This border is a pattern that is sometimes called sun 
rays. 

Colors - The colors used for this mg are black, white, brown, gray and red. They are 
the natural colors of sheep wool except for red. Sometimes the wool colors are mixed 
together. Dark brown and white make gray-brown. Sometimes dark brown wool is 
dyed black. Dying makes the color even. 

Feathers - Feathers represent clouds. 

Cultural Context: 

In Dine (Navajo) oral tradition it is told how Spider Woman taught weaving to the 
Dine. Spider Woman taught Dine women how to weave. Spider Man taught Dine men 
how to make a loom from simshine, lightning and rain. 

At first Dine people made woven dresses and blankets on their looms. By 1805, they 
were trading their weaving to people in Mexico and to other Native Americans. Until 
about 1875, these weavings were made of natural yam made by the weaver or her 
family. 

In the late 1880s, storekeepers came to the Navajo Reservation. Dine women made 
weavings for storekeepers to sell to tourists and the storekeepers began selling these 
weavings as mgs, pillow covers and table or desk covers. 

In the early 1900s, the storm pattern was developed as a mg pattern sold by mail 
order. Storekeepers and weavers began looking at what kinds of weavings sold well 
and adjusted their weavings to fit sales. The weavers began adding borders to their 
designs and using colorful dyes made especially for them by the DuPont Diamond 
Dye Company. 

The Navajo Arts and Crafts Guild began in 1941 . With the support of this 
organization, weavers began showing their tapestries at state fairs, exhibitions and 
museums. 

This tapestry was entered into the 1961 Arizona State Fair where it won first prize. 
The weaver. Rose Maloney, used aniline dyed black, red and naturally-colored black 
and gray yams. 



€7 



BESTCOPYAVAU Af"' 



Today, Dine weavers are still making woven dresses and producing tapestries for sale 
to the public. A woven dress is a traditional dress worn on special occasions such as 
weddings, coming-of-age ceremonies and other celebrations. Yam is either hand spun 
or bought as commercial yam and dyed with commercial dye or vegetal dye. Vegetal 
dyes are made from plant materials, leaves, flowers, fmits, twigs, bark and roots. 

Some weavers use the natural wool colors of black, white, brown and gray. 

Weaving is usually taught by mothers to their daughters. Designs, styles and patterns 
can be passed on in a family. 

Dr. Ann Hedlund, in her book Reflections of the Weaver's World, recorded 
statements by some contemporary weavers. Several of the weavers who spoke to Dr. 
Hedlund wished to remain anonymous. Some of those statements are recorded below: 

"Weaving is my life. It's something that was given to me by my Mom." 

Anonymous 

"This is how my Mom taught me. She was taught by my great-great-grandmother. It's 
still with me, and I will teach my grandchildren." 

Anonymous 

"Navajos were bom into weaving. It would be a shame if the weaving got lost after all 
our mothers knew so much about it. I'm trying to keep the tradition." 

Anonymous 

"Weaving is part of art. Instead of holding the paintbmsh, you use the yam and wool." 
Larry Yazzie, Tuba City, Arizona 



Images for Comparison: 

Inde Coil Plaque 
"Rainstorm" by Darren Yazzie 
Questions for Comparison: 

Carved lines are easy to make with a pencil, paint or even clay. They are much more 
difficult to make when weaving a curved design on a basket or some cloth. The shape 
and lack of flexibility of the weaving material as well as the framework on which the 
weaving is done, makes the curves very hard to do. 

What kind of line does the weaving create in a basket? 

What kind of line does the weaving create in a tapestry? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



■68 




How does the weaving line affect the figures the basketmaker wove into this plaque? 

How does the weaving line affect the figures the weaver wove into this tapestry? 

How would you go about making a curved line if you were weaving a basket or some 
cloth? 



best copy available 







Evaporation 



Activity: Show relationship between 
surface area and evaporation. 

Focus Activity: Look at Arthur C. 

Begay's Untitled painting and notice the 
puddles. Look closely: how does the artist 
indicate that it has stopped raining? When 
it stops, the puddles begin to evaporate 
slowly. Have the students discuss what 
factors they think affect the rate of 
evaporation 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will imderstand the concept of surface area. 

2) Students will imderstand the process of evaporation. 

3) Students will be able to explain that the more surface area that is exposed to the 
air, the faster evaporation occurs. 

Vocabulary: surface area, evaporation 

Materials: narrow clear container, wide clear container, erasable marker or tape, 
water. 

Procedure: 

1) Have students predict which jar of water will evaporate faster. 

2) Measure two equal amounts of water and pour one into each container. 

3) Draw a line at the top of the water with an erasable marker, or place a piece of 
tape at the waterline. 

4) Place both jars in the sunlight and observe daily. Note the water levels. 
Assessment: 

1) Do students understand where the water is going? 

2) Do the students understand why a greater surface area speeds up the process of 
evaporation? 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



70 





3) Do the students know that other factors, such as humidity and temperature, will 
affect the evaporation rate as well? 



Extension: 

• Discuss with the students that rain and snow are both forms of precipitation, 
another stage in the water cycle. 

• Try the evaporation experiment with the jars in a dark place, or repeat with 
differently shaped containers, such as a shallow pan or a tall glass. 



best copy available 



71 




Measuring Raindrops 



Activity: Students will simulate rain and 
measure the individual drops. 

Focus Activity: Look at Untitled 
painting. Notice how the artists have 
painted the rain, and discuss how their 
techniques are different or the same. 
What are some other ways to paint or 
draw raindrops? 




Outcomes: 

1) Students will capture and observe individual drops of water/rain. 

2) Students will measure some individual drops and see that they form in different 
sizes. 



Materials: watering can, spray bottle, aluminum pan, flour, spoon, water, photocopy 
of the chart for each student 



Procedure: 

1) Fill the bottom of the pan with a half-inch of flour and flatten the surface with 
the spoon. 

2) Pour some water from the watering can into the pan with the flour. Make sure to 
tell the students to pour slowly so that only some drops fall and they don't flood 
the pan. 

3) Have students observe the drops and measure at least two of them, and note it 
on their charts. 

4) Repeat the procedure, but this time have the students use a spray bottle. Once 
again, remind them to spray only once and not too close to the pan, or they won't 
see individual drops. 

5) Repeat a third time, but this time have the students wet their hands and let the 
water droplets fall off their fingertips. 



BESTCOPYAVAIl ~ 

7,2 



I 




Assessment: 



Are students able to isolate and measure the drops accurately? 

Do they know that mist is really fine rain? Can they discuss other forms in which rain 
can fall? 

Extension: 

If it actually rains, try this activity outside with real raindrops! 



BESrCOPY AVAILABLE 



73 



Measuring Raindrops 



Raindrop 

Source 


Drop#l 


Drop #2 


Watering 

Can 






Spray 

Bottle 






Finger 

Tips 







BESTCOPY available 



# 



Repelling and Absorbing Rain 



Activity: A demonstration of the repellent and 
absorbent qualities of different materials. 

Focus Activity: Look at the print of the Canteen by 
Zimi artist Jean Bratthauer. 

• Have students talk about what feature of the 
canteen indicate that it is a duck. Ask students if 
they have noticed how water rolls off raincoats 
and umbrellas. 

• Discuss with them how a duck's feathers work 
in the same way. 

• Use these examples as a starting point for 
discussing how different materials respond to 
water/rain. 




Outcomes: 

1) Students will learn that not all materials respond the same way to water/rain. 

2) Students will understand that absorbing is the opposite of repelling, and that 
there are varying degrees of both. 

Vocabulary: repel, absorb 

Materials: sponge, soil, paper towels, piece of plastic wrap, piece of nylon panty 
hose, sandstone coaster, aluminum pan, watering can, photocopies of the prediction 
sheet for each student, water 



Procedure: 

1) Have students predict which materials will repel water and which will absorb it. 

2) Put the sponge in the bottom of the pan/bowl and pour water over it. What 
happens to the water? 

3) Repeat step two with each material: paper towel; piece of plastic (make sure the 
plastic wrap lies flat in the pan); panty hose; sandstone coaster; and finally the soil 
(leave the soil for last since it will dirty the pan). 

4) Have the students check their predictions against what actually occurred. 



75 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 




Assessment: 

• Do students understand that some materials are more absorbent than others? 

• Did students predict correctly which materials repel and which absorb? 



Extension: 

• Have the students chart all the materials that absorbed water in the order of 
"least absorbent" to "most absorbent". 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

76 



Repelling and Absorbing Rain 



Predictions 

Re p_e 1 A h sorb 



Results 



Repel 



Absonb 




’ . U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 




(Specific Document) 

1. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 


SO I—, 


Title: 




After the Rain: Rain 




Author(s): 


^ Arlene Old hlk and Jackie Stoklas 




Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 




2001 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, and 
electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit Is given to the source of each document, and, rf reproduction 
release Is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



if permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample stidcer shown below wifl be The sample sticker shown below win be The sample sticker shown below will be 

alTix^ to afl Level 1 documents afToced to all Level 2A documents affoced to all Level 28 documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN granted BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE. AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 
FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY. 
HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 
MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 






















TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Level 1 Level 2A Level 28 




Check hera for Level 1 release, permWinQ repro<Axtion Check here for Level 2A release, permittino reproductioo Check here for Level 28 release. permltUng reproduction 

and (Sssemination In micro(iche or other ERIC archival and tfissemination In microfiche arxl in electronic merSa for and dissemlnaUon in microficho or>iy 

me<£a(e.o.,eioctronic) and paper copy. ERIC ardWat collection subscr«)ors only 

Documents wfil be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If pennissian to reproduce Is granted, but no box is checked, documents wffl be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here, 

please 

er|c 



/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this 
document as indicated above. Reproduction fnxn the ERIC microfiche or eiectronk: media by persons other than ERIC employees and 
its system contractors requires permission from the copyright hokier. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other 
service agencies to satis^ information r^eeds of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 




/AddfBM: 

aJ. Ce^^rxyJl 

Pm, 



frinted Wame/PositiofVritle: ^ t is. • /^ j/ ^ 






E4te0 AddroM: ^ . 









Date: . / ✓ 



(Over) 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE); 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless.it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be rriade available through EDRS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 




However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolidted contribution, to ERIC, return this form (and the document beino 
contributed) to; 'a 



ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
4483-A Forbes Boulevard 
Lanham, Maryland -20706 

Telephone: 301-552-4200 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-552-4700 
e-mail: ericfac@ineted.gov 
WWW: http://ericfacility.org 



O 

EKLC 

(Rev. 2/2001) 



