DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 400 144 



RC 020 736 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

REPORT NO 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) . A Teacher's 
Resource Book* 

Manitoba Dept* of Education and Training, 
Winnipeg . 

ISBN-0-7711-1209-2 

95 

122p . 

Guides - Classroom Use - Teaching Guides (For 
Teacher) (052) 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC05 Plus Postage. 

^American Indian Culture; ^American Indian Education; 
American Indian History; Bilingualism; Canada 
Natives; ’^Culturally Relevant Education; Curriculum 
Guides; Elementary Education; Foreign Countries; 
Instructional Materials; ^Learning Activities; Metis 
(People); *Social Studies; Teaching Guides; Units of 
Study; Values 
^Manitoba 



ABSTRACT 

This curriculum guide was developed to give a Native 
American perspective to the social studies curriculum for Native 
students in Manitoba (Canada). The curriculum is appropriate for 
students in grades K-4 and is based on Native values such as respect, 
caring, sharing, honesty, kindness, and faith. The first section of 
the guide outlines three units of study for each grade level that 
focus on the incorporation of Native language, literature, and 
cultural knowledge and activities. Topics include career awareness, 
understanding self and others, seasonal activities, food, clothing, 
shelter, health and safety, communications, transportation, 
recreation, traditional roles of men and women, child rearing, 
survival in the environment, leadership, Native languages, and the 
lifestyles and cultures of other indigenous peoples. Each unit 
includes teacher information, topics, materials needed, and learning 
activities. The second section includes a conceptual framework for 
using the curriculum and identifies learner outcomes for each grade 
level based on First Nations and Metis cultures. The framework is 
intended to assist schools in integrating Native perspectives into 
curricula, enable students to learn the history of Manitoba and 
Canada before European settlement, and give the perspectives of 
Native people since that time. Also includes a bibliography, a 
glossary, and information on assessment of student achievement. 

(LP) 



it * * * * * * ft * ft * ft * * it it ft * it * * it Vc it it * * it it * * it it * it * * * it it it * * * * it * it ~'c Vc it ft * it it it it ft it it it * * ft * * it * * * 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 

* * * * * * * * * * it * * it * * * it * it it * * * * * * * * * * ft ft ft ft it ft * ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft ft 




ED 400 144 



U S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Oltce of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES information 
CENTER (ERIC) 

k.a kAAn rAm/vli irwl as 

O Minor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quatity 

• Points ol view or opinions stated *n th*s doc u- 
ment do not necessarily represent otficia 
OERI position or policy 




Manitoba 
Education 
and Training 

Linda G. McIntosh, 
Minister 



best copy available 



2 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 

A Teacher’s Resource Book 



I99S 



ISBN 0-771 1-1209-2 



Copyright © 1995, the Crown in Right of Manitoba as represented by the Minister of Education and 
Training. Manitoba Education and Training, School Programs Division, Program Development Branch, 
1 970 Ness Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3J 0Y9. 

Every effort has been made to provide proper acknowledgement of original sources and to comply 
with copyright law. If cases are identified where this has not been done, please notify Manitoba 
Education and Training to correct any omissions. 



4 



o 

ERLC 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Acknowledgements 



Manitoba Education and Training gratefully acknowledges the contributions of the following 
individuals in the development of the Native Studies: Early Years (K-4), A Teacher’s Resource Book. 

First Nations Elder 



Ms. Myrtle Thomas Peguis, Manitoba 

Course Writer 



Dan Thomas Consultant 



Members of the Development Team 



Byron Apetagon 
Margaret Fiddler 
Sophie Ledoux 
Marshall Murdock 
Connie Singleterry 
Larry Tait 



Norway House High School 
Peguis Central School 
Winnipegosis Collegiate 



Roland Lauze School 



Humanities Unit 

Manitoba Education and Training 



Frontier S.D. No. 48 
Peguis 

Duck Mountain S.D. No. 34 
Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Garden Hill, Manitoba 
Nelson House, Manitoba 



Pilot Teachers of Winnipeg School Division No. I (1986-89) 



Debbie Beach 
Mary Courcheney 
Rene Desmet 
Gail Gossfeld 
Melanie Hall 
Tom Howard 
Brenda Longclaws 
Leslee Boivin-McKay 
Joe McLelland 
Robert Milan 
Margaret Scott 
Anastasia Sych-Yerniuk 



Hugh John MacDonald School 

R. B. Russell Vocational 

Mulvey School 

David Livingstone School 

R. B. Russell Vocational 

Aberdeen School 

Hugh John MacDonald School 

Mulvey School 

Aberdeen School 

Argyle School 

Aberdeen School 

David Livingstone School 




hi 



5 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




Manitoba Education and Training Staff 



Lee- 1 la Bothe 


Consultant 


Technical Support Unit 
Program Development Branch 


Diane Cooley 


Project Manager 


Curriculum Frameworks 
Program Development Branch 


Lynn Harrison 


Desktop Publisher 


Technical Support Unit 
Program Development Branch 


Joyce MacMartin 


Project Manager 


Humanities Unit 

Program Development Branch 


Juliette Sabot 


Director 


Native Education Branch 


Monty Szakacs 


Consultant 


Technical Support Unit 
Program Development Branch 


Dan Thomas 


Consultant 


Humanities Unit 

Program Development Branch 



6 



hr 



0 

ERIC 




Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Contents 



Introduction I 
Values 3 
Time Allotment 6 
Glossary 7 

Kindergarten 1 1 
UnitOne 13 
Unit Two 22 
Unit Three 23 

Grade One 33 
Unit One 35 
Unit Two 45 
Unit Three 46 



Grade Two 47 
Unit One 49 
Unit Two 53 
Unit Three 58 



Grade Three 6 1 

Unit One 63 

Units Two and Three 65 



Grade Four 67 

Unit One 69 

Units Two and Three 70 

Resources 76 



Bibliography 75 
Resources 83 




V 



7 



w Values 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Respect 





The idea that all things and all people deserve respect is not a uniquely 
Native one. However, Native elders have developed and exhibited this 
concept to a high degree. Self-respect, respect for others, and respect for 
all things are values that are congruent with the theme “exploring my 
world - myself and others” in the Manitoba Social Studies curriculum. 

Native students can be helped to understand themselves and others by 
exploring their world in a safe and comfortable environment in the 
classroom. In many Native families and communities, the use of Indian 
names and clan affiliations is growing. Most of the time their use is limited 
to ceremonies and gatherings at home or among friends. Creating an 
environment in the classroom where students feel safe to use their Indian 
names and clans will help them appreciate this unique and vital part of their 
culture. 

Where students come to school knowing a Native language, they should 
be visibly encouraged to continue the use and enhancement of that 
language. If the teacher shows genuine interest in, and respect for the 
Native language of the child, and helps the other students to achieve the 
same, then the child will feel more comfortable in the continued use of 
that language. When the teacher can learn even a few words in a Native 
language, the students will feel much more comfortable and ready to learn 
in that class. 

It should be stressed that 

• every individual has worth and is equal to all others 

• every family has worth and is equal to all others 

• every nation has worth and is equal to all others 

Respect can be taught through 

• an emphasis on self respect 

Children should be able to identify themselves by their name, surname, 
and national origin or heritage. For instance, “I’m Joe Smith and I’m 
Cree.” Joe should be able to feel good about being Joe, about being a 
Smith, and about being Cree. 



3 




8 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Caring and Sharing 



Honesty 



4 

O 





• example — model respect for self and others 



• legends — many winter legends have the teaching of respect as a theme 

• biographies — many people in the Native community exhibit this quality 
in their lives 



• stories — about people from different times and different places who 
have shown this quality 



• practice — interaction with all people and the environment 



When you visit a Native home, your hosts will usually offer you tea and 
something to eat. They are always willing to share what they have with 
others. 



In the classroom you can help students to learn the teachings about caring 
and sharing by 



example 



• participating in and sponsoring give-aways or gift exchanges, donations in 
time of need 



• participation in feasts, suppers 

• caring for elders 

• encouraging students to support each other 



Traditionally, honesty is represented in the life of a tree. A tree stands 
rooted in this earth, but it always points to the sky where the Creator is 
sitting watching over us. Even if that tree is bent as a sapling, it will grow to 
point towards the sky. The tree reminds us of our Creator. The value of 
honesty is also shown through winter legends such as those that tell about 
Chakapas and his sister. Honesty can be shown through 



• example 




9 



Native Studies: Early Years (Kr4) 



legends 



• biographies of Native leaders 

One should always remember to balance honesty and kindness. Being too 
honest may hurt someone’s feelings — so be kind. Being too kind may 
leave you overextended — be more honest. Always try to balance these 
values in your life. 



Kindness 




Kindness is shown in our daily lives through our interaction with others. It 
has been traditionally symbolized by the grass that we walk upon. Even 
though we may step on it, grass never retaliates and is always soft and 
gentle to our feet. Kindness can be shown through 

• example 

• donating time to help classmates 

• teachings such as the origin of the sweatlodge (Ojibway) 

• avoiding retaliation, talking things out 



Faith Faith is symbolized in the community in many different ways. It may be 

symbolized by a church or a sweatlodge, which shows our faith in a higher 
power. Faith may be symbolized by a handshake. When we agree to do 
something, we shake on it. It is reflected also in expectations of ourselves 
and others (i.e., we have faith in ourselves to do our work). Faith may be 
taught through 

• participation in school prayer, community ceremonies 

• high expectation of the students and community 

• stories and legends of the local area that illustrate this theme 
•. listening to elders 




O 

ERJC 



5 



10 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Time Allotment 



The Native Studies teacher’s resource books have been organized into 
three levels: Early Years, Middle Years, and Senior Years. Each level 
follows the Manitoba Social Studies curriculum, giving a Native perspective 
to each of the units of study. The Native perspective is developed to be 
used within each grade level of the Social Studies curriculum documents. 

The units can be integrated into the 70 per cent (28 weeks) yearly time 
allotment that focuses on the formal curriculum or into the 30 per cent (12 
weeks) of time available for investigating concerns or issues deemed 
relevant by teachers or students. 

Teachers may use information from these units to add Native content to 
their Social Studies classes, or to add Native content and to generate 
interest about Native issues in other subject areas such as Language Arts 
and Science. 

Teachers may combine or delete topics, activities, or units to form the 
course best suited to the local perspective of education and to address 
student and community interests. 

At the Middle Years level, the units for a specific grade could be used as a 
basis for creating optional courses. 

At the Senior Years level where optional credit courses can be initiated by 
the school, a school-initiated credit course could be created to give the 
student a credit at the S I , S2, S3, or S4 levels. 

This document should be used in conjunction with the Social Studies 
curriculum documents. 



6 

O 

ERIC 



11 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Glossary 

The following glossary of terms is included to help teachers who are 
unfamiliar with Native Studies terminology. The terms have been given the 
definitions used by Native people. Using a people’s own term for self- 
definition reinforces feelings of self-worth. Enhancing self-worth is a main 
objective of using Native self-defining terms in this document. 



Aboriginal 


A legal term used in the constitution to describe the 




three recognized Native groups — Indian, Inuit, and 
M6tis. 



Aboriginal Right An inherent and original right possessed individually by 
an Aboriginal person or collectively by Aboriginal 





people. 


Anishinabe 


An Ojibway term used to describe an Ojibway person, 
or any Aboriginal person if their First Nation is 
unknown. 


Band 


A legal term through which Canada recognizes First 
Nations or their member bodies. This term is used 
within the Indian Act. One does not have to live 
among other band members or on a reserve to 
continue band membership. 


Chakapase 


A spiritual being in Cree tradition who embodies the 
spirit of a little boy. 


Chippewa 


In the United States some Ojibway people are called 
“Chippewa.” Whether one is called Chippewa, 
Saulteaux, or Ojibway, in their Native language the 
term of self-identity is “Anishinabe.” 


Clan 


A family of people related through common origin. 
Everyone has a clan as everyone has a family. The 
Ojibway and some other peoples trace the clan lineage 
through the father. Other peoples, such as the 
Mohawk, trace their clans through the mother. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Cree 



Culture 



Dakota 



First Nations 



Indian 



Indian Act 



Indigenous 

Inuit 



M6tis 



O 




The Aboriginal people of Northern and Central 
Manitoba. The term “Cree" comes from the French- 
Canadian term “Christino" meaning “Christians.” The 
self-identifying term used by the Cree is “Ininiwuk" 
meaning “men,” or, generally, “the people." 



The customs, history, values, and language that make 
up the heritage of a person or people and contribute 
to that person’s or people’s identity. 



The Aboriginal people who live in Southwestern 
Manitoba. The term “Dakota" is how they identify 
themselves, while most written sources use the word 
“Sioux." The Dakota are recognized as Indians and are 
“registered" in Ottawa but are not “treaty" Indians as 
they do not have a recognized treaty with the Crown 
of Great Britain. 



Most Indian people refer to themselves as members of 
First Nations, rather than as members of bands or 
tribes. 



A term most often used by the federal government and 
most non-Natives to identify a member of a First 
Nation. 



Federal legislation that encompasses how the federal 
government recognizes, affirms, and delimits its 
responsibilities to First Nations and their rights. 



Having originated in and being produced, growing, or 
living naturally in a particular region or environment. 



The Indigenous people of the far North. The Inuit do 
not have reserves or treaties with the Crown. They 
are not under the Indian Act but have the same status 
as registered Indians in Canada. 



An Aboriginal person or the people of both Aboriginal 
and another heritage. M4tis people in Manitoba were 
not signatories to treaties except as representatives of 
the Crown. The M6tis do not live on reserves and do 
not come under the Indian Act. 



8 



13 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




Nanabush 



Native 



Ojibway 



Pow-wow 



Registered Indian 




Saulteaux 



Self-Government 



Sovereignty 




Elder brother and teacher to the Ojibway people. He 
was part human and part spirit and could do many 
things in a supernatural fashion. 

One born or reared in a particular place — an original 
or indigenous inhabitant. 

The Aboriginal people of Southern and Central 
Manitoba. In Manitoba, the Ojibway people are 
sometimes referred to as “Saulteaux,” while in the 
United States, they are often referred to as 
“Chippewa.” Whatever term others call the Ojibway, 
the self-identifying term is “Anishinabe.” 

A social dance celebration that originated on the 
Plains of North America. 

A member of a First Nation whose name appears on 
the Indian register (list) in Ottawa. This term is used 
interchangeably with the term “status Indian.” 

A term used by the French to identify the Ojibway 
people who originally lived in the area of Sault Ste. 
Marie. Most Ojibway people who called their 
language Saulteaux, today refer to themselves as 
Ojibway. In the United States some Ojibway people 
are called “Chippewa.” Whether one is called 
Saulteaux, Chippewa, or Ojibway, in their Native 
language the term of self-identity is “Anishinabe.” 

The inherent right of First Nations to govern their 
own lives, affairs, lands, and resources with all the 
duties and responsibilities intrinsic to governing 
bodies. 

The power and authority exercised by First Nations 
over all persons, things, territories, and actions within 
the boundaries of their individual nations. 



9 



14 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Status Indian 


A member of a First Nation who is recognized as an 
Aboriginal person by the government of Canada and 
thus has Indian status. 


Tikenagun 


A cradle board designed by Aboriginal people used in 
caring for their infants. 


Traditional 


The handing down of information, beliefs, and customs 
from one generation to another, according to tradition. 


Treaty Rights 


Rights accruing to First Nations as a result of treaties 
negotiated between themselves as sovereign nations 
and the British Crown in right of Canada. 


Tribe 


This term may or may not have a legal meaning in 
regard to Indian people as used in the Royal 
Proclamation of 1 763. This term was originally used 
to describe three divisions of the Roman people. 

Some First Nations or their members have created 
corporations called Tribal Councils which lobby for and 
deliver services to First Nations governments, their 
members, or businesses. 


Wesakejak 


Elder brother and teacher to the Cree people. He 
would be comparable to Nanabush in Ojibway 
tradition. 



Teaching Note: Whenever you see italic type used in this document, it 
signifies teacher information. 



0 

ERIC 



10 



15 



Kindergarten 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Kindergarten 



Unit One 



Valuing and accepting oneself and others is central to Native life. It is an 
individual’s birthright to receive the respect of others for his or her particular 
strengths, interests, temperament, physical abilities, and mental capacities. 

The maturing student will be evaluated by family and community more by the 
capacity to serve, co-operate with, and appreciate others, than by appearance 
and wealth. 

Students raised in this way come to school expecting to listen to advice and to 
make choices about what they will do, neither wanting nor expecting to be 
"first" among their peers. They may be accustomed to considerable freedom to 
explore their physical environment, even at some risk. Many will already be 
taking some responsibility for younger sisters and brothers as well as caring for 
their own needs. 

Classroom activities for Native students should avoid situations in which 
students compete individually, but, at the same time, should supply quiet 
recognition of individual accomplishments. Activities should encourage children 
to help each other. Students should have opportunities to choose among 
activities, the groups they work with, and the ways in which they participate 
within that group. 

When the students’ mother tongue is a Native language, that language is the 
one they will use to formulate ideas and concepts, and to solve problems. Giving 
them a firm knowledge of their first language enables them to express 
themselves better in a second language, English, as the ability to conceptualize 
is already in place. 

TOPICS 

I . All About Myself 

a) Physical Characteristics 
Height and Mass: 

• Together read legends of Chakapase, Nanabush, or Wesakejak 
that discuss size in plants, birds, animals, or in human beings such 
as dwarfs or giants. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of 
being a certain size. 



13 




17 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




Body Parts 



• Learn the names of the parts of the body in one of the Native 
languages of the students in your class. Then draw a simple 
human outline on the board and label the parts as they are 
identified. 



Physical Features 

• Read or tell a story about a child not being accepted because of 
being different. Have the students discuss such things as 

- why the other characters in the story are so unaccepting 

- how the rejected character feels 

- what might be some better ways for the other characters to 
behave 



b) Feelings 



Have the students listen to selections of Native music such as 
pow-wow, flute playing, or fiddling. Have the students discuss 
how the music makes them feel. They might represent their 
responses through drawing or movement. 



• Ask the class to relate similes that associate physical and 

emotional characteristics with animals such as: quiet as a mouse, 
etc. 



• Read animal legends which illustrate such various characteristics. 



c) Competencies 

• Discuss what children can accomplish (e.g., reading, riding a bike, 
and running). The children should come to understand that all 
children can excel at something given the opportunity. 

• Some Native children may have special skills in the area of music, 
language, or dance, including the grass dance, jingle dress dance, 
fancy dance, traditional dance, and square dance. 



14 

O 

ERIC 




18 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



d) Jobs, Careers 

• Show the class the pictures or posters of Native people who are 
engaged in different jobs (e.g., Native Career posters “I want to 
be...”). Ask the students to identify different jobs. Ask students 
about the jobs they like. Find out why these jobs appeal to 
them. Record their responses for future reference. 

• Invite Native people from the community who can be role 
models for all students. 

e) Preference 

• Make a group chart with the children naming things they like 
about Native life. These could be the taste of homemade jam, 
bannock, the sights and sounds at a pow-wow, the smell of 
sweetgrass, beadwork designs, or kindness. 

2: Similarities and Differences 

a) Indian Names — In communities where Indian names are given or 
clan names are used, children learn to identify themselves by name, 
clan, and Native nation. 

Many Native people believe that children are a sacred gift from the 
Creator and must be veiled from earthly influences until their identity 
on earth is established. This is done through a Naming Ceremony, 
shortly after the child is born. 

The parents take a gift of tobacco to an Elder who has the right to give 
names. Only certain ones have this gift. The Elder is asked to name 
the child. If the Elder can do this, she or he accepts the tobacco and 
instructs the parents on when to bring the child and what to prepare. 

The Elder then prays with the tobacco to the Creator asking that a 
messenger with a dream be sent to reveal the name. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Usually in four days time the parents return. At this time, the Elder 
holds the child and calls her or his name. The child is then passed 
around clockwise for each person present to hold and announce her or 
his name. The veils covering the child are lifted at this time and the 
child is gradually introduced to the world. The name is looked upon as 
a sacred gift and will not be spoken of lightly. 



b) Native language (formal greetings) — Learn greetings in the 
Native language and practise their use in role playing. 

c) Use local Native people to show jobs and careers we need to 
survive. 



Invite Native people from the community to be role models to 
students. Have the visitors identify themselves and their jobs. Ask 
the children how these jobs are similar to those of non-Native 
people in the workplace and in what ways these jobs are different. 
Use the adapted activities on pages 1 7-20 from the kindergarten 
section of K-6 Teacher Handbook for Poster Series: 

I want to be .... 



d) 



See page 2 1 . 



16 

O 

tKJC 




20 



Not/ve Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Career Awareness Title: 

Activity 1 

Goal: 


I'M SPECIAL 

The student will develop and appreciate his or her own 
interests, hopes, and dreams. 


Objective: 


The student will recognize and appreciate the uniqueness of 
each individual in the classroom and in the world of work. 


Activity: 


Using an overhead projector or equivalent, cast each 
student’s shadow on a drawing sheet. Draw the profile of the 
student. Print the student’s name, grade level and year at the 
bottom of each profile. 


Activity: 


Using large round stickers print I’m Special on each sticker. 
Have one or more of the students distribute the stickers to 
their classmates. 


Option: 


Attach “I’m Special” stickers to manila paper or cardboard. 
Cut circles out. Using needle and thread, make an “I’m 
Special” necklace for each student. 


Discussion: 


Discuss how each one is different and special. Have students 
explore each student’s uniqueness and emphasize that this 
uniqueness should be appreciated. 


Materials: 


• Overhead projector (or equivalent) 

• drawing sheets 

• pencil or black marker (or both) 

• large round stickers 

• manila paper or cardboard 

• needle or thread 

• scissors 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Career Awareness 
Activity 2 



Title: WORKERS IN OUR SCHOOLS 

AND COMMUNITIES 

Goal: The student will become aware of various career and 

occupational possibilities. 

Objective: The student will become aware of and be able to identify 

different jobs in the school. 

Activity: Organize a tour of the school building. Identify places where 

people work. Ask students to look for as many workers as 
they can find. If possible, invite workers to the classroom to 
talk about their jobs. 

Discussion: Have students discuss 

• proper behaviour on a tour 

• the different types of workers seen on the tour 

• the job titles of people 

• the importance of these jobs 

• part time helpers in schools and what they do 

• the specific tasks performed by these workers 

Activity: Ask students to look through books, magazines, and 

newspapers to find pictures of people at work. 

Homework: Ask students to look through magazines and books at home 
to find pictures of people at work. Have students ask their 
parents’ or guardians’ permission to cut the pictures out and 
bring them to school. 

Display: Create a display on your bulletin board of pictures of people 

working at a variety of occupations. 

Discussion: Discuss the different kinds of work shown in each picture. 



Materials: 



• chalkboard 

• chalk 

• pictures 

• magazines 

• books 

• newspapers 

• bulletin board 




18 



22 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Career Awareness 
Activity 3 



Title: UNDERSTANDING SELF AND OTHERS 

Goal: The student will become aware of, develop, and appreciate 

his or her own personal attitudes, interests, hopes, and 
dreams. 

Objective: The student will recognize and appreciate the different 

interests and abilities he or she has that can be shared with 
others. 



Activities: Ask individual students to identify things they feel they do 

well. Write each students’s name and talent on the 
chalkboard. 



If a student finds it difficult to think of something he or she 
does well, ask the other students in the classroom to tell the 
class what they think this student does well. 

Have students make a booklet titled “THINGS I DO WELL.” 



Have them print “THINGS I DO WELL” on the cover, and 
illustrate something they do well on the first page of their 
booklet. 



Students may add things they do well in their booklet 
throughout the year. 

Discussion: Discuss individual talents and interests and note the 

differences and similarities. Discuss how each can use his or 
her special talents to help others learn and grow, and how 
each individual can learn to do other things well. 



Materials: * chalk 

• chalkboard 

• drawing paper 

• craft paper 

• pencils 

• crayons 

• stapler 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Career Awareness Title: 

Activity 4 

Goal: 


TOOLS WE USE IN THE HOME 

The student will develop an awareness of skills required in 
the home. 


Objective: 


The student will identify household tools and their functions. 


Activity: 


Ask students to bring pictures of household appliances and 
tools to school, e.g. tools, utensils, cleaning equipment, and 
appliances. 

Have students ask their classmates to guess what their tools 
are. 

Have students demonstrate the use of the objects. Allow 
time to examine unfamiliar objects. Have students guess their 
uses. Make a collage using pictures of tools and appliances 
that we use. Post on the bulletin board. 


Activity: 


Have students cut and paste pictures of household appliances 
and tools in their own Tools We Use booklets, made up of 
colourful craft paper tied together with wool. 


Discussion: 


Discuss safe use of tools. Discuss why we need to be careful 
especially with power tools. 


Materials: 


• magazines 

• catalogues 

• scissors 

• pictures 

• craft paper 

• wool 

• crayons 



20 

ERIC 



24 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



d) Plan an activity based on sharing, such as: What do I have in my 
box? 

Prepare a bannock large enough to allow each person in the class 
to have a portion. Keep the bannock covered in a box so the 
students do not know what it is. Have them guess, giving hints 
occasionally, such as, it’s round, brown, delicious . . . When the 
students guess the contents of the box, share the bannock, with 
everyone receiving an equal portion. 

Bannock is traditional food to most Native people in Manitoba. It is 
similar to the unleavened bread of many other ethnic groups. It is 
also delicious. 

Recipe for a Small Bannock 

3 cups flour 
A dash of salt 

1 teaspoon baking powder 

2 tablespoons vegetable oil 

1 .5 cups water or enough to form dough into a ball 

1 . Combine ingredients in a bowl. 

2. Make a little well and pour the water in. 

3. Mix into a dough and knead it. 

4. Flatten it out and put it in the frying pan. 

5. Cook on hot ashes over an open fire or in the oven. Bannock is 
especially good eaten fresh with butter. 



Unit Two 



It is expected that teachers model their approaches to be compatible with 
Native peoples’ traditional education. Traditional education sees learning as a 
lifelong process and as a product of living. Teachers may be elders, parents, or 
other relatives. Learning is seen as the result of participation as contributing 
members of families and communities. Children learn by watching adult role 
models and through creative play as maturity and interests allow. Children are 
included in adult social activities and listen to stories and experiences of 
others. They have time to try out skills alone and then with others when they 
have acquired confidence and understanding. 

For Native children raised with this model, it is threatening and socially 
inappropriate to be asked to perform a task in front of others before they have 
confidence and understanding. Students gain confidence and understanding by 
repeating tasks and observing adults. Their education involves listening to 
advice, making choices about their actions, observing and interacting with their 
environment, and disciplining themselves. It is these experiences which develop 
in children an appreciation for the details that make a job well done. Young 
children can become aware that there is wisdom they can seek at home and in 
the community as much as in school. 

TOPICS AND ACTIVITIES 

1 . Have students discuss and develop picture charts showing people in the 
family and community who help them learn both inside and outside of 
school. In addition, have them discuss some of the things they can learn 
by watching, listening to, and helping these people. 

2. Have students brainstorm and illustrate in book or chart form, things 
they can do and things they know about. 

3. Invite adults into the classroom or visit other areas of the school or 
homes where adults are working at activities that children may watch or 
participate in. Examples occur 

• in a northern community where people often have skills in hide 
tanning, bannock making, and weaving nets 

• in an urban community where people may have skills in beadwork 
and carpentry 

• in a rural community where people may have skills such as re- 
canvasing a canoe and smoking fish 



22 




26 



Native Studies: Early Years ( K-4 ) 



Unit Three 



In traditional Aboriginal communities and homes the cycles of change in lives 
and seasons are an important predictable framework for learning. Young 
children growing up in extended families observe and interact with people at all 
stages of life from birth to old age. They develop an intuitive understanding of 
differences in activities, responsibilities, and knowledge. Children participate 
in celebrations and ceremonies ranging from those for new family members to 
ceremonies such as wakes or funerals. 

Cycles of activities accompany the seasonal changes. In some areas, fishing, 
trapping, berry-picking, story-telling, and visiting may all be part of this cycle. 
Each activity requires preparation and participation. Clothing, needs for heat 
and shelter, food, means of travel, and social interactions all change with this 
cycle. Patience and the ability to anticipate needs, to improvise in emergencies, 
to recognize what is really needed to survive, and to live from the land are all 
learned within this context. Although these needs no longer apply for some 
Native people, the awareness and patterns for activities are still a part of the 
lives of many young Natives. 

In other homes and communities, the activities may relate to the farming cycle 
of planting, growth, and harvest. In fishing communities, it may be tied to 
spring break-up or fall freeze-up. In urban areas, the cycle of growth in plants 
such as trees and in gardens show change. Even the use of different kinds of 
clothing for different types of weather shows the changes that are going on 
around us. At all times, the changes identified should be in accordance with 
the lifestyle of the community and of the child. 

TOPICS 

1 . Story telling — Use picture books or tell stories which are about 
Native people doing seasonal activities such as hunting, berry-picking, or 
attending annual ceremonies. Books such as Big Tree, Little Tree 
illustrate children picking berries. 

2. Story reading — Use the predictable books from the Circle Program 
as a basis for language enrichment and literary experiences. Develop a 
big book based on one of these patterns. 

3. Play and recreational activities — Ask students how these activities 
change on a seasonal basis. 

4. Seasonal changes such as break-up and freeze-up are changes that 
students will perceive in the physical environment. Ask them what type 
of clothing they wear in the different seasons and describe some safety 
precautions they must observe in the different seasons. 



23 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



The following resources can be used to illustrate the idea of changes 

• Circle Program: All around the village. 

• Winston Wuttunee tape, “What do you have in your canoe?” 

FURTHER TOPICS 

I . My home — Students can be given the opportunity to study their 
homes and neighbourhood. They should already be aware of the 
layouts of their homes and of any changes that have recently taken place 
within their homes or neighbourhoods. Students can be asked to 
identify the responsibilities that are involved with living in a home and 
also to identify the responsibilities of different members of the family. 
The unique ways that people and place interact to make a place a home 
should be emphasized in this topic. 

Activities 

Role playing different family members in the home. 

Materials 

Toy furniture, toy appliances, and clothes for dressing up. 

Caution: Teachers should discuss this activity with parents or guardians 
before attempting it. This will ensure there is not a feeling of invasion of 
privacy. Also, some individuals may feel that home life is private and is 
not to be discussed before other members of the community. 

Procedure 

Have the students choose a group to play their family and then 
determine what role each member plays. The students may wish to 
role play an event in or around the home that shows how change 
occurs. It may be fixing doors and windows for winter, banking the 
house with hay or snow, or gathering the winter’s supply of firewood. 
Teachers should be aware that roles and responsibilities in Native 
families may differ from their own. In addition, single parent families or 
extended families may group or distribute responsibilities differently. 
Older children often have adult responsibilities in the home, such as, 
caring for siblings and the home itself. Encourage the students to take 
turns playing the different roles. 




24 



28 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 







2. Local and seasonal birds. Winter is the season when legends are 
told. Tell the students that to many Native people, birds are very 
important. One story tells us that in spring, the birds come from the 
south and spread the seeds of life over our land. From these seeds 
come all the new grass, flowers and leaves. Ask the students how we 
might receive life from the birds in spring. Encourage the students to 
name local and seasonal birds. 

Activities: 

a) Tell the students the legend, How the birds got their colours, in 
which birds are central, by Basil Johnston. In this legend, the birds 
colours are changed because of their acts towards others. 

b) Have the students tell a legend they may have heard at home that 
relates to change. 

c) Have a discussion on local and regional animals. Tell the students 
that many Native people in the past, and many today, depend on 
animals for food. Many of the early settlers also depended on local 
animals for food. Today most hunting is done for sport. This, 
however, is not the case for most Native people. Many Native 
people hunt and trap for food. Food is almost never wasted and 
thanks is given for the food. Since the survival of Native people 
depended on the animals of the area, Native children learn many 
teachings and legends that describe the animals in a number of ways 
to ensure that the animals are remembered. 

d) Ask the students to name local and regional animals. Which ones 
would be used for food? In almost all instances the use of wild 
game as food is a thing of the past for Native students. Many may 
have never tasted wild game in their life and may become offended 
if the subject is not handled tactfully. In the past almost all local 
animals were used by Native people. The faster animals such as 
deer and moose were sought by young and able-bodied hunters. 
Slower animals such as porcupines were taken by older or less able 
hunters. 

e) Have the students describe the animals they name. 

f) Tell the students a legend that has local animals as a central theme 
such as Nanabush and the Wolf, or Nanabush and the Flood. Have 
the students retell the legend. 



25 

29 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Information: CHILD-REARING 

Taken from: Ojibway Oral tradition. 

Oral tradition tells us that the greatest event in the lives of men and women is 
the birth of a child. It is the re-enactment of Creation. We are told that at the 
time of conception a child is given four gifts or laws by the Creator — Strength, 
Truth, Kindness, and Sharing. It is the responsibility of the parents, and then 
the extended family to help the child live in balance with these four gifts. 



Strength 



Kindness 



Balance 



Sharing 



Truth 



In preparation for the coming child, each parent has certain responsibilities. 

The mother, being the carrier of the child, thinks only good thoughts, sings, and 
talks to her child to give her or him a positive outlook on life. 

She prepares the veils and bindings for the cradleboard ( tikenagun ) and 
prepares the mossbag (waspisoyan) that the child is carried in during her or his 
first years on earth. During this time, she talks to her child, telling her or him 
of the beautiful place being prepared for her or him. In this way, it is 
understood that the child will want to live out her or his full length of life on 
earth and not leave before a full life is realized. 

The father’s responsibility lies in preparing the board for the tikenagun. A new 
board is prepared for each child. 

From the time of birth and immediately after, the mother and the female 
members of the family feed, clean, and care for the child. No one else looks at 
her or him and she or he is veiled from the world. 

Many Native people believe that children are a sacred gift from the Creator and 
must be veiled from earthly influences until their identity on earth is 
established. This is done through a Naming Ceremony, shortly after the child is 
born. 




26 



30 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



When the child is wrapped in the mossbag ( waspisoyan ) he or she experiences 
the comfort, warmth, and security that was experienced in the other world 
(before birth). 

The special moss that is used has already been gathered, dried, cleaned and 
softened. This moss has great insulating value and it draws moisture so that 
even when the moss is soiled, the moisture is drawn away from the child and 
the child stays warm and dry. During the winter, loose rabbit fur is added to the 
moss. 

These were qualities our people looked for in the moss so that the child was 
comfortable, especially during the time that the parents were travelling in order 
to make a living. 

The mossbag (waspisoyan) could be used by itself or placed within the 
cradleboard (tikenagun). 

Lacing the waspisoyan or the tikenagun takes away the hand and foot 
movement of the child but leaves her or him with the senses of sight, hearing, 
taste, and smell to use in observing the world and learning about it. The 
tikenagun is carried upright upon the mother’s back to allow the child to see 
the world from an adult perspective. The child is carried looking back, to see 
where she or he comes from. Everything the child observes is stored in his or 
her mind for the time when it will be needed in the future. 

By taking away the hand and foot movement, the child is able to learn 
patience and respect. As he or she cannot grab and touch, the child cannot 
break anything or hurt anyone. Hence, in addition to patience and 
understanding, the child in the tikenagun learns respect for people and 
property. 

The bindings that hold the child also help physical development. In struggling 
against the wrappings, muscles are developed. This type of exercise in which 
force is exerted against an immoveable object is called isometrics. 

The board gives the child proper back support ensuring good posture. In later 
years, posture continues to be important to the child. 

The cradleboard is used until the child outgrows it. Sometimes progressively 
larger boards are used until the time when the child can untie the lacings and 
enter the world on his or her own. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Often the board of a parent is given as a special gift to the eldest child. 

Whether the child is male or female determines which parent's board is 
received. In this way continuity is ensured and family traditions are kept intact. 

When European settlers brought different child-rearing traditions, the tikinagun 
fell into disuse among some Native people. They did, however, continue to wrap 
the children and pin them, often using a hammock within the home. 

In families and communities where the tikenagun or mossbag is not used, the 
child is wrapped with blankets. This wrapping continues much of the function 
of the tikenagun and mossbag without the physical article being present. There 
may be variations by cultural group and even among relatives in a community. 



TOPIC AND ACTIVITY 

The tikenagun — Invite a mother or grandmother to bring a baby in a 
tikenagun to school. Children can watch and discuss the right way to put 
the baby in the tikenagun, why it is a good way to carry a baby, and how it 
must feel to be in a tikenagun. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Traditional Teachings and Stories 

The traditional Teachings or Stories are often called "legends. ” These stories or 
teachings have been told for times longer than anyone can remember. These 
are stories that many people continue to talk about concerning people, places, 
and events that are famous at the present time. 



These traditional stories are considered by many to be Teachings of Life and 
give guidance to all aspects of life among Native people. 

Many of the Teachings are Wintertime Stories which, out of respect, are told 
only during winter from the first permanent snowfall until Mother Earth’s 
blanket of snow is again lifted in the spring. Today Native people ask that the 
laws concerning Native culture be respected and that no Wintertime Teachings 
be given from Spring through Fall of the year. There are other Teachings given 
during these months. 

The traditional Teachings of Life are described as circular, the circle divided into 
four stages of understanding or development. It is shown this way: 



Parent or Adult W 



Grandparent or Elder 

N 




S 



Child E 



These stages are not as clearly defined as in Canadian society where you 
become a teenager at 13, an adult at 18, and an elder at 65. Within Native 
society, the only given is that you start as a child. How and when you progress 
is totally up to you. It depends on how much you are willing to listen and how 
well you solve problems. 



At each stage , the Teachings or Stories grow in complexity; what is inferred at 
the child’s stage of understanding is made complete at a grandparent's. For 
example, at the child’s stage one would hear a teaching involving a medicine, 
whereas, at the final stage, one is told how to make that medicine, or, at the 
Child’s stage the Teaching would involve a ceremony, whereas, at the final 
stage, one would know where everything fits within that ceremony and might 
have the right to conduct that same ceremony. 

Learning depends solely upon one’s own abilities and if someone is a good 
listener, he or she may achieve a grandparent’s stage of knowledge at a young 
age. On the other hand, if one does not have the ability to listen and 
understand what is being told, he or she may be very old chronologically but at 
a child’s stage of understanding. 

According to traditional beliefs, many of the Teachings, especially the 
Wintertime Stories, involve the first Teacher who was sent by the Creator to 
give the instructions of Life to all of creation in this hemisphere. 

He is called Nanabush by the Ojibway, and Wesakejak by the Cree. 

On the surface, each Teaching has a primary moral that is easily grasped. For 
instance, Wesakejak is often greedy and doesn’t want to share his food with 
anyone. Somehow he will be tricked and will end up with nothing. These 
stories are about one of the original laws given to the aboriginal people of this 
land — sharing. Because this behaviour was expected, many teachings were 
given about it. This Native teaching is comparable to similar teachings from 
other cultures which admonish people to love one another, to be kind, to share, 
and to respect each other. For example, 

• Love your neighbour as yourself. . . 

• Do unto others as you would have them do unto you . . . 

In addition to this obvious Teaching, there are one or more other teachings that 
are more subtle. 

These Teachings require the listener to think and to reach an understanding on 
their own. 



O 



30 



34 



Native Studies: Early Years ( K-4 ) 



When the European people came in contact with these Teachings, they 
mistakenly thought these Teachings were stories old people tell children. Many 
of the stories were recorded at this stage and put into print. Others who 
published similar stories changed some aspects to suit their own purposes; 
often unaware that each component of the story had a purpose related to the 
level of understanding people at different stages of knowledge would possess. To 
change any of the components is to intrinsically change the Teaching. As a 
result, many of the written accounts of the Teachings narrated at a child’s stage 
of understanding are not compatible with the richness of meaning passed on by 
recognized Teachers in the oral tradition. 



Grade One 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Grade One 

Unit One 



Physical needs are universal. Native people met and continue to meet these 
physical survival needs in a variety of unique ways. The Elders play an important 
role in providing understanding about survival. The Earth herself is looked upon 
as a great and all-providing mother to Native people. In the past, Native people 
understood they would be provided for by a plentiful, fertile Earth and a kind 
Creator, and they did not feel the need to store large amounts of food and 
material as was the case among some other cultures. 

The practical requirements of life on a trapline helped people to sort out needs 
from wants, especially if goods had to be carried over portages. People always 
showed respect for life that had to be taken through the offering of tobacco and 
a prayer. Animals that were killed were fully used; this reinforced respect for 
life. Because the people believed and practised sharing with others, they knew 
that other family and clan members or friends would share with them, 
especially in an emergency. This was like insurance in Euro-Canadian society. 
When travelling, your host would care for your needs, but you in turn shared 
something of equal value with your host. 

Teaching Note: Have students learn and use words and phrases in a 
Native Language. Have them learn the terms for various body parts. Also 
learn the terms and phrases associated with foods. Learn the terms in the 
local Aboriginal language. Use Native Language Basic Program, Cree 
Grade I , #606 1 1 , or Native Language Basic Program, Ojibway 
Grade I, #60623, available from the Manitoba Text Book Bureau. 

How Needs Are Met in Native Communities 
I. Food 

In northern communities most foods are provided by stores. This is 
supplemented by hunting game such as moose, caribou, ducks, and 
geese. People also get food by fishing. A variety of fish caught by net 
may be cooked fresh or preserved by drying or smoking. While people 
often think trapping is done only to procure furs, Native people use the 
meat from a variety of game that is trapped or snared. Food is also 
provided by gardening. This includes vegetables such as potatoes, 
carrots, etc. Some families or individuals in families are involved in berry 
picking. The berries are usually eaten fresh or preserved in jams and 
jellies. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



In urban communities, almost all foods are provided by the stores. This 
source of food may be augmented by food brought to the urban area 
from rural or northern locations. 



In rural communities, more food may be raised by farming and ranching. 
This is supplemented by hunting such animals as deer and elk. As well, 
wild rice provides a cereal crop for many rural Native communities. 

Special celebrations always include specialty foods, particularly those in 
season. Feasts, community suppers, and other special events usually 
feature a variety of game foods, possibly wild rice and, invariably, 
bannock. 



2. Clothing 



Much of the Native winter clothing is based on designs developed and 
used by Native people (e.g., hooded parkas, mukluks, winter mitts, and 
fur hats). 



Some special clothing is worn for festive occasions (e.g., sashes, shawls), 
and other clothing for ceremonies (e.g., ribbon dress, ribbon shirt, 
shawls, and moccasins). 



As well, there is special clothing that is worn for pow-wows (e.g., ribbon 
shirts, leggings, moccasins, chest plates, chokers, headdresses, feather 
bustles, breechcloths, gauntlets, hair ties, ribbon dresses, shawls, 
breastplates, and beaded belts). 



3. Shelter 



Native people in urban areas have the same type of housing as others: 
single family dwellings, townhouses, apartments, and condos. 

In rural and northern communities, single family dwellings are most 
common. In some areas, water is obtained from wells and sewage is 
disposed by septic fields or hidden tanks. Some communities have water 
systems similar to urban areas while others have water delivered by 
truck. Heating is usually provided by electric heaters or furnaces, oil or 
wood stoves, oil or wood furnaces, or a combination of the above. 



36 





38 



Native Studies: Early Years ( K-4 ) 



4. Health and Safety 

Most Native communities have nursing stations and some have 
hospitals. Others are served by facilities in nearby communities. 
Emergency services for many Native communities involves air- 
ambulance. These types of health care complement the services of 
traditional elders, healers, and medicine people. 

5. Communications 

Most Native communities are served by the following communication 
technology: mail, telephone, satellite, microwave relay television, and 
computer network. Some Native communities have community radio 
broadcasting. Some have both community radio broadcasting and 
community television broadcasting. 

The medium of communication is usually the Native language of the 
community, but it can be in English or French. 

6. Transportation 

Most Native communities in Manitoba are served by at least one or a 
combination of the following: cars, trucks, buses, trains, planes, and 
boats. 

In most rural and northern communities, there may be more use of all 
terrain vehicles (ATVs) and snowmobiles as people adapt to the current 
water, snow, and ice conditions. 

Some use may be made of more traditional forms of transportation 
(e.g., snowshoes, dog team, toboggan, horse and sleigh, and canoe). 

7. Recreation 

Traditionally, recreation is a means of enjoyment as well as a vehicle for 
learning. Children play house, hunt small birds and animals, and camp to 
build skills and gain experience. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Games information gathered from Garry Robson , Native Awareness 
Consultant 

Native people play many different types of games which are meant not only 
for enjoyment but also to teach skills that ensure survival in this world. An 
example is the pinta kway kun (Ojibway) or the "pin and cup" game. Game 
parts are made from natural materials — wood, leather, and bone. 

The object of this game is to hold the wood handle and toss the bone up, 
catching it on the end of the stick. The skill that is being taught is hand-eye 
co-ordination. To a people who practise hunting primarily as a source of 
sustenance, this is an essential skill of survival. 

In hunting, be it with a bow or a firearm, when you see your prey, you aim 
and fire. Your hands and eyes must work together to put food on the table. 
The same type of skill is necessary for spearing fish. So the better you are at 
games like these, the better your chances for survival. There are different 
examples of this game that you can play depending on your skill level. 

Traditionally, the homes built by Native people were not overly large. 

Homes were built to be energy and space efficient. In the centre of the 
home would be a fi replace. Because of the danger this posed to children, the 
indoor games were ones that could be played while sitting. Participants 
could learn skills without danger but still have fun. 

Another type of pin and cup game is a little harder to play. Instead of 
leather, it uses sinew to connect the handle and bone. Also the bone "cup" 
is smaller and so it takes more skill to catch it. This game consists of a 
copper wire handle, bone cups on leather, and a leather end attachment 
with a number of holes cut in it. If you can hook any hole on the leather, you 
get 20 points. The first bone is 40 points, then 60, 80, 100 and 120 points. 
The cup closest to the handle is worth the most because it is the hardest to 
get. While the leather gives the least number of points, it is also very hard 
to hook because the weight of the bones very quickly pulls it away from you. 
This game can be played singly, in pairs, or by teams. You pick a number, 
perhaps 340 points, and try to reach it first. If you miss the bones or leather, 
your opponent tries next. 

At one time, people had such good hand-eye co-ordination they played until 
they missed their target. Today, we have not developed this skill to the same 
degree, and usually continue until we hit the target and then give our 
opponents their turn. 




38 



40 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



The materials used in another more complex pin and cup game are ivory, 
leather, and a bone pin. On the flat end of the ivory are numerous holes. 

The ivory is tossed then caught in one of these holes. Next, it is tossed and 
caught in the hole on the size. The last part of the game is tossing the ivory 
and catching it in the hole on the pointed end. This is perhaps the hardest 
of these games. 

The beaver’s pelvic bone is used as a tool to teach survival skills and also 
for a game. A person holds the bone over his or her head as he or she tells a 
story or sings a song of where he or she will go trapping. As he or she 
finishes, he or she tries to place his or her finger through the centre of the 
bone. If he or she can, he or she will get a beaver or muskrat where he or 
she traps. 

Another way to use this is to get all the children into a large circle. One 
stands in the centre of the circle and holds the bone. Another child is 
brought into the circle with his or her eyes shut. This child then has to 
walk around the inside of the circle five times. During this time he or she 
can call out to the one in the centre, "In which direction are you holding 
the bone?" The child in the centre holding the bone at arm’s length calls 
back, "I’m holding the bone to the East , ’’ or whatever direction he or she is 
holding it in. On completing the number of times he or she must travel 
around the circle, the child must walk into the centre and put his or her 
finger through the hole in the centre of the pelvic bone. If he or she does, 
she gets a point. Then someone else takes a turn. 

What this game is teaching is how to use senses other than direct 
observation to tell your direction while travelling. This is an essential skill 
of a hunter and a trapper. Sometimes the children in the circle will laugh 
and the one with the closed eyes will recognize the voice and remember 
where that person was standing. This will help her or him to get her or his 
bearings. The various sounds, smells, the feel of air blowing, etc., will all 
help the child to get a sense of direction. Sometimes, you can "locate" light 
fixtures if inside or the sun if outside and this also helps. This skill will help 
you if you are travelling in the bush and are not sure of your surroundings. If 
lost, it will stop you from walking in a circle as you use your senses to 
compensate for your lack of observation of directional signs. 

A problem-solving game can be made from a flat piece of wood, string, and 
two buttons made from a section of deer horn. One story about the origin of 
the game explains that there was a boy who wanted to go on the trapline 
with his father. His father thought he was not ready to go on the trapline so 
he gave him this game. 



He told his son, "When you are able to take one button and move it to the 
other side of the string so there are two buttons there and none on this side, 
then move the button back again, you can come on the trapline. The only 
rule is that you don’t untie the string. " 

The boy used four concepts in solving the puzzle of this game. These are 



The boy could see himself going on the trapline with his father. This was 
"vision. " This gave him his "reason" to solve the game. To complete the 
game, it takes a small amount of "motion" but it takes a lot of "patience . " 

One of the things the Elders try to teach children is to overcome "motion. " 
If you are travelling and your boat tips over, you may panic and try to swim 
to shore. If you are too far out, or injured, you may drown. The best thing to 
do is to stay near your boat, move it to the shore, and then get onto dry land. 
Or, you may be cutting wood and your axe slips and cuts your leg or your 
foot. People have been known to panic and run aimlessly or even to bleed to 
death because they were too far away from their camp. The best thing to do 
would be to see how bad the cut is, get materials from the forest that can be 
used to help stop the bleeding, and then return to camp. 

Because the boy used these concepts, he was able to sit down and soon 
finished the game. His father saw that he was now ready to go on the 
trapline and took him along. 

Problem solving is essential to trappers and hunters who do not have the 
resources at hand that society takes for granted, such as hardware stores. If 
a snowmobile breaks down, you have to fix it with the available materials. 
You also have to know where the animals travel, how they react, and the 
best way to trap them. You have to use your own resources and those of the 
world around you to ensure your survival. 



North (motion) 



West 



(reason) 




East 

(vision) 



South (patience) 



40 



ERIC 



42 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Teachers should observe local custom and beliefs in regard to handling 
animal, plant, bird, or fish parts or products. This shows respect for the 
students and the community they come from. For example, they should not 
throw bones in the garbage where dogs could get at them. 

In urban areas where schools often host feasts and pow-wows, the teachers 
can talk to the elders, who are asked to bless the food or those who give the 
invocation about proper protocol for handling the same. 

In urban areas, children also need to know how to survive and what steps to 
take in a given life-threatening situation. This type of game can help 
children understand the problem at hand and how to solve it. 



TOPICS AND ACTIVITIES 

Trapline scenario. Tell the students that a family is about to go to their 
trapline for two weeks where they will stay in a cabin. Everything they need 
will have to be taken with them. There are many portages where they will 
have to carry their belongings. There is no electricity, running water, gas, 
or oil on the trapline. The students are to decide what the family will take 
with them. This can be a whole class group activity. Students should give a 
reason for choosing each item. 

Students can draw or cut out pictures of the items they decide to take. An 
area of the classroom can be designated as the trapline cabin where their 
pictures can be exhibited. 

Discussion should highlight the reasons students chose their items. Reasons 
for eliminating some items should be decided by the students. How to tell 
needs from wants should become apparent here. 

Physical Needs — What we need to be healthy. 

Foods we eat — Have the students recall the trapline scenario. Where do 
you get food from on the trapline? (Some food you take, like flour and tea, 
and some food you get from the land, such as meat.) What foods will you 
take? What foods will the land provide? Students should become aware 
that many of the foods we take for granted are only wants. They should 
also become aware that it is not practical to try and take some foods to a 



Native Studies: Early Years ( K-4 ) 



trapline, such as fresh fruits, vegetables, boxed cereal, baked bread, and 
dairy products. From their discussion, they should come to realize our needs 
are few, but our wants are many. 

Where our food comes from — The students should come to know that 
many of the foods we eat today were grown or gathered by Native people 
before the non-Native people came to live in our country. Some of these 
are corn, beans, squash, potatoes, tomatoes, cucumbers, melons, peppers, 
peanuts, pecans, pumpkins, maple sugar, currants, strawberries, raspberries, 
blueberries, cranberries, and sunflowers. Some foods from the tropics that 
Native people there grew or gathered are pineapples, bananas, persimmons, 
mangoes, avocados, papaws, cassava, vanilla, cocoa, and cashew nuts. An 
understanding of the fact that Native people have contributed many of the 
foods our society uses today will help children gain a sense of pride in the 
accomplishments of Native people. 

With the aid of pictures, discuss the many foods we received from Native 
people. Practise making suggestions for a variety of well balanced meals by 
having students group certain foods together. 

This activity could be an appropriate lead-in for Thanksgiving. Students can 
bring an example of one of these foods from home to create a classroom 
Thanksgiving feast. 

In addition, the teacher, the students, or both, can bring a sample of food to 
the classroom. Class members can share information about where this food 
originated. 

Clothes we wear — Students should come to understand that much of our 
winter clothing comes from traditional Native designs. Hooded parkas, fur 
hats, gauntlets, sash belts, and mukluks are some of these. 

Have students discuss why these clothes are needed in our climate. Children 
will develop pride in our Native heritage when they realize how much Native 
people have contributed to enrich lifestyles in Canada and the world. Have a 
local organization such as a friendship centre or cultural centre bring a display 
of Native clothing to the class. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Have a student from your class or school, or a local person bring a pow- 
wow outfit or dance regalia to school. It should be explained carefully to the 
children that one does not dress up to become an Indian; rather, during 
certain celebrations, a Native person dresses up to show pride in his or her 
heritage. Reference can be made to the dress of other ethnic groups seen 
at celebrations, parades, or at Folklorama. It should also be explained that 
this clothing is not a costume. Costumes are worn to dress like someone 
else, regalia is worn to show your best. 

The student or resource person can explain the significance of the colours 
and designs, as well as how, where, when, and why the outfit is worn. This 
may be done in conjunction with a class or community pow-wow 
celebration. Children develop pride in Native culture by knowing that Native 
people have much to offer that can enrich our lives today. 

Houses we live in — By comparing our homes to a trapline cabin, 
students can see how we build houses to suit our needs and wants. 

Explore these relationships by asking students questions about which 
building materials can be found on a trapline. Then show students the logic 
behind building log cabins for trapline homes. 

Carry on the discussion by asking students about available heating materials 
for use on the trapline (wood). Since one has to cut dry, seasoned wood an 
carry it to the cabin, most cabins are small and as energy efficient as 
possible. Remind students that to cut wood, a chainsaw and gas, or other 
tools such as an axe or a bucksaw are necessary. 

If one has to carry these items into the bush, it becomes necessary to 
consider how to be most efficient. Not everyone would have their own 
bedroom in a trapline cabin. (Remember, walls block the flow of heat.) 
Recreation rooms, family rooms, dining rooms, and bathrooms become 
unnecessary luxuries. Have students explore the concept of needs and 
wants by comparing trapline homes with their own homes in terms of the 
types of rooms they have in their homes. Also, emphasize that the 
availability of resources is an important factor. For example, have students 
consider why homes in towns and cities use gas, oil, or electricity for heat. 

Is wood plentiful enough to be an efficient source of energy in a city? Also, 
ask them if choices made for building materials (i.e., finished lumber, stone, 
or brick, are made because of availability, needs, or wants). 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



On the trapline, a lake, river, or creek is the water source for drinking, 
washing, and transportation all year round. It is only natural, therefore, to 
situate cabins close to water. In our communities, water is piped or trucked 
in from a distant source or from wells. Ask students what they use for a 
transportation system and where their houses are situated (i.e., near a street 
or highway). 

Students should come to understand that we develop housing according to 
our needs, resources, and wants. Help them understand that many of the 
things we take for granted in our homes satisfy our “wants.” 

Today, most Native families live in homes similar to the homes of non- 
Native families. This is because Native people have similar wants and needs 
for their primary homes. If they also have a trapline cabin, the needs in that 
location may be different. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Unit Two 





Traditionally, Native children have many of their emotional and social needs 
met through their immediate family, extended family, clan, and through friends. 
Native children who attend integrated schools, especially where they are in a 
minority, often have acute emotional needs that the teacher should be aware of. 
Some of these are 

• Feeling accepted: The children need to feel accepted for who they are by 
the teacher and their peers 

• Feeling wanted: The children need to feel they are a necessary part of the 

class 

• Being understood: Especially when Native children speak a Native 
language as a first language, they need to have positive responses from the 
teacher and their classmates to feel they are understood 

TOPICS AND ACTIVITIES 

Have the children explore and discuss ways they can help those who are 
new to their class, school, or community become accepted members of the 
group. 

Our friends — Have students explore and discuss what they can do to 
help outsiders feel accepted by the group. Have them search magazine 
pictures for suggestions. The suggestions may be for work or play. List their 
ideas. Then, discuss what they can do in groups. Again, use pictures to 
suggest ideas. Make a second list from these suggestions. 

Discuss the difference between being alone and being lonely. Sometimes 
you are alone but you are not lonely. Sometimes you can be in a group, but 
be very lonely. Try to get the students to suggest situations where and why 
this might happen. 

To build inclusion, teachers can use the activity, Two On A Crayon, pp. 9- 
1 0, or the Inclusion Puzzle, pp. 11-13, The NESA Activities Handbook for 
Native and Multicultural Classrooms. 

Activity — Have the students discuss differences between people. 
Differences such as gender, physical abilities/characteristics, hair colour, hair 
style, eye colour/shape, skin colour may be noted. This will show that 
everyone has differences because we are individuals. 



45 




47 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Unit Three Historically, for many Native people, the extended family was a self-sufficient 

unit for meeting needs — food, clothing, shelter, love, learning, politics, and 
beliefs, to name a few. As a result of Indian and Inuit children being placed in 
boarding schools for a number of generations, much of their language and 
culture was destroyed and many of the family skills such as parenting were lost 
or at least weakened. In addition, the disruptions caused by the child welfare 
system’s apprehension of Native children in the last three decades, weakened 
many families. Native people have had to expend tremendous efforts in order to 
persevere and hold together any semblance of family at all. Today the Native 
nuclear family may be a single parent family, but the extended family includes 
grandparents, uncles, aunts, cousins, and other relatives. Today the extended 
family no longer shares one roof, if it ever did, but children continue to grow up 
learning from and being loved and accepted by a larger family unit. Children still 
play a vital role in the family by doing tasks suited to their abilities such as 
running errands, carrying messages between houses and camps, and caring for 

siblings. 

TOPICS AND ACTIVITIES 

The Native family tree — In Native tradition, ancestors are the roots of 
the family and give us nourishment and stability. 

Draw and copy for each student, a tree with its roots in the earth, a solid 
trunk, and branches reaching towards the sky. The tree should have four 
roots, one for each grandparent. The trunk would be the parents and the 
branches are each of the children in the family. 

Teachers needing guidance in this activity can modify the lesson, Family 
History, pp. 101-103, The Nesa Activities Handbook for Native and 
Multicultural Classrooms by Sawyer and Green, available from the 
Manitoba Text Book Bureau. 

My Mom Is Unusual by Iris Loewen, published by Pemmican Publications, is 
also a suitable resource. 




46 



48 



Grade Two 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Grade Two 



Unit One 



Life has been viewed as a cycle by many Native people. The four stages of 
mental, emotional, physical, and spiritual development found in this cycle 
can be diagrammed as follows in relation to the four main directions 



Parent or 
Adult W 



Grandparent or Elder 

N 




Adolescent 



E Child 



These stages are not set to any specific time period as in Canadian society 
where you are a child to the age of 12 and, at the age of 13, you 
automatically become a teenager or adolescent, at 18 an adult, and at 65 
an elder. Within Native society, the only given is that you start at a child's 
stage. How and when you progress is totally up to you. It depends on how 
much you are willing to listen and how well you are able to solve problems. 

The physical changes that one goes through continue regardless of where 
you are mentally. Refer to the information on this topic in the Information 
to the Teacher section of the kindergarten units. 

TOPICS AND ACTIVITIES 

I . Learn family terms in the Native Language — These terms 
should identify the father’s and mother’s families and, if possible, the 
extended family. 

At one time, there were strict rules for showing respect to in-laws. 
There were some relationships that were referred to as joking 
relationships and those that were referred to as serious 
relationships. For example, a married man did not to talk with his 
mother-in-law. The wife or other in-laws acted as intermediaries. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




For the extended family, there are terms that show exact 
relationships to the father’s and mother’s family. A Native speaking 



language resource person should be able to identify these terms for 
the teacher and the class. 



2. Story telling — have students deal with the following aspects of 
story telling 

• history — what the elders experienced or heard from their 
elders 

• legends — the stories or teachings told in the winter 

• written stories (other groups) — legends and histories of other 
Native people 

• traditions — surround story telling 



ERIC 



50 



51 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Tikenagun or Cradleboard 



(See the information on child-rearing, page 26, Kindergarten section.) 

The tikenagun or cradleboard is made up of two parts, the waspisoyan or 
mossbag and the tikenagun or board the mossbag is carried on. When the 
child is wrapped in the mossbag (waspisoyan), she or he is being given the 
comfort, warmth, and security that she or he experienced in the other world 
(before birth). 

The special moss that is used has already been gathered, dried, cleaned, and 
softened. This moss has great insulating value and draws moisture so that 
even when the moss is soiled, the moisture is drawn away from the child 
and the child stays warm and dry. During winter, loose rabbit fur is added 
to the moss. These are qualities our people look for in the moss so that the 
child is comfortable, especially during that time when the parents had to 
travel in order to make a living. 

The mossbag (waspisoyan) can be used by itself or placed within the 
cradleboard (tikenagun). Lacing the waspisoyan or the tikenagun takes away 
the hand and foot movement of the child. This leaves the child with the 
senses of sight, hearing, taste, and smell to be used in observing the world 
and learning about it. The tikenagun is carried upright upon the mother’s 
back so the child can see the world from an adult perspective. The child is 
carried looking back, to see where she or he comes from. All the information 
the child can remember is catalogued and stored in the child’s mind for the 
time she or he will need it in the future. 

The bindings that hold the child also help physical development. In the 
child’s struggles against the wrappings, the child develops muscles from 
head to toe. This type of exercise where force is exerted against an 
immoveable object is called isometrics. 

The board gives the children proper back support and ensures good posture 
in later years. This type of child rearing continues until the children 
outgrow the board. Sometimes progressively larger boards are used until 
the time when children can untie the lacings and enter the world on their 
own. In the past, many of the people working in the educational system did 
not understand the Native practice of child-rearing, and the tikanagun fell 
into disuse among some Native people. They did continue, however, to 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



wrap the children and pin them, often using a hammock within the home. In 
families and communities where the tikenagun or mossbag is not used, the 
children are wrapped with blankets. This wrapping incorporates much of 
the function of the tikenagun and mossbag without the physical article 
being present. 

The teacher should try to ensure that the lesson is in accordance with local 
practice. There may be variations by cultural group and even among 
relatives in a community. 

Activities 

• Have a mother bring her baby to visit the class. She could have 
her baby wrapped in a blanket, mossbag, or tikenagun. Have the 
children observe the differences between the baby and themselves. 
Make a chart of the differences. How does the mother care for her 
baby? How does this differ from the care a Grade 2 child receives — 
chart the differences. 

Have the mother discuss with the students how her baby learns. 

How is this different from how the children learn in school? 

Have the mother discuss the use of wrapping, mossbag and the 
cradleboard with the students. 

• An example of a tikenagun can be exhibited in class. 

• The teacher or resource person can demonstrate the use of the 
cradleboard to the student(s). 

• Instructions in the use of the traditional cradleboard or 
tikenagun may be given. 

• Student(s) can relate family stories on the use of the tikenagun. 

• Student(s) can assemble photos to make a booklet on the use of 
the tikenagun. 

Materials and Resources 

• Parent or grandparent knowledgeable in the use of the tikenagun 

• Tikenagun 

• Photos 




52 



53 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




Unit Two 




Extended families are usually made up of members of many different clans. 
Each clan has different responsibilities in the community, but are 
interdependent. The clans that live together in a certain area become 
known as a band. Bands were units of production and trade as well as 
consumption. Today trade goes on between families, between bands, and 
between bands and other communities. 

TOPICS AND ACTIVITIES 

1. Traditional roles of men and women (See the next four pages for 
teacher’s information) — Using the information provided, have the 
students list some of the changes that have taken place in the family 
life of Native people between the 1920s and the present. How did 
families fulfil their needs and wants at that time? How is this 
different from today? 

2. Survival — In my community and in the environment. 

Discuss the knowledge of the environment required to get to and 
from school safely (i.e., not to get lost). Community elders, 
teachers, and school staff can serve as resources. 

Discuss the role played by each family member in helping the unit 
survive — grandparents, children, and grandchildren. 

Review the role of aunts and uncles, especially in discipline and 
teaching of children. 




53 



54 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Male-Female Roles in Traditional Native Society 

In traditional Native belief, Man is Keeper of the Fire, and Woman is Carrier 
of Water. The relationship of Fire and Water is equal in the continuation 
and preservation of life. One cannot dominate the other without serious 
consequences: both are equal in the plan of life. 

This relationship is seen through Creation in the roles of the Sun and the 
Moon. The Sun is Fire and male, the Moon controls Water and is female. 
They never deviate from their appointed task and path in the heavens. They 
do not take each other's roles, but uphold their own part of the Creation as 
it was meant to be. 

In Native tradition, woman is used by the Creator to cast the light of 
knowledge on man just as the Moon casts its light on Earth. Alone, man’s 
potential is unfulfilled. He needs the light that woman gives to become 
whole and complete. 

At certain times a sign is given in the heavens of man’s and woman’s 
responsibility to each other even among their earthly tasks. Today, we call 
this sign an eclipse. The Sun as man, and the Moon as woman, come 
together for a brief instant to honour their role in Creation. 

Everyday on Earth, humanity is living out the teachings and symbolism of the 
Creator. The traditional Native person lived as respectfully as possible, 
trying to be in harmony with the rest of the universe just as the teachings 
say live should be. 

One should always remember that these are “roles” that are "played" by 
people. These roles create balance and order in a society. It does not mean 
that if a man is not present that a woman should freeze for want of someone 
to put wood on the fire, or that a man should thirst when there is no woman 
present to draw water. In playing these roles, common sense should prevail. 
Thus, a man as the woman’s helper ensures she has water when she has 
need of it and a woman provides for the fire when he has need of it. 

Through all the changes that technology has wrought, many Native people 
continue to honour these roles during ceremonies. 

Teachers may also use The Mishomis Book: The Voice of the Ojibway 
by Edward Benton-Banai. 



54 




55 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Survival in the Environment 

The following interviews are with two Native elders from Cross Lake, 
Manitoba. From their stories, you can see how life was from 1900 to 
the 1 920s. Compare the life they describe to life today. 

Excerpts from Native Studies: The Local History of Cross Lake by 
Ruby Beardy, printed by Manitoba Native Bilingual Program. 

Mary Monias 

I have seen many things happening in the past. I have seen the things made 
by the old people. In those days everything went well for the people. We 
usually used birch bark canoes for hunting and fishing. One moose could 
easily fit in a birch bark canoe. The canoes were light , and were easy to 
travel with. They did not cut right through the waves, they floated on top of 
the waves because they were so light. 

Our ancestors invented birch bark canoes. They used spruce gum from the 
tree, and they stripped the bark off the trees. They usually spent some time 
looking for and collecting the gum and the bark. They boiled the gum and 
strained it, so that no particles would remain in the glue. They also 
collected some charcoal, crushed it to pieces and mixed it with the white 
gum to create a black colour. The white gum was used for the front parts of 
the canoe, and certain other parts. The black gum was used on the part of 
the canoe where the birch bark had to be sewn, so it covered the open 
spaces on the canoe. 

I watched very closely as my grandfather made the canoes. Every part of the 
canoe was covered with glue, so it would not leak when it was put into the 
water. It was first sewed together properly before the glue was put on it. 
Sewing the canoe was the old ladies’ duty. They collected the roots, they 
boiled them together, then scraped and cleaned them, taking all the dirt 
out. Then they dried them, usually overnight before they can be used. They 
used sharp needles made of bone. 

When we ate food such as moose meat, fish and rabbit, a person felt good 
and well. We were brought up by using our natural resources. We always 
had an abundance of fish, partridges, rabbits and other game. They were all 
there, it was only for us to get them. We hardly had any white man’s food 
in those days. 

When we got sick, we were cured by Indian medicine. We had all kinds of 
Indian medicine, such as wild ginger and others made from plants and trees. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Even when someone cut himself or suffered from a severe loss of blood, 

Indian medicine was used to heal the wound, no matter how deep. The 
medicine was put on the cut to prevent more bleeding and infection. 

One time I witnessed an accident. I saw a boy climbing a tree. All of a 
sudden the boy fell down and broke his arm. We were not in Cross Lake, but 
out someplace else. My grandfather wrapped a piece of cloth around the 
boy’s injured arm. Then he went out to look for a hard birch bark from a 
tree. He then warmed up the bark against a fire. When the bark was 
heated he wrapped it around the boy’s broken arm. The bark was renewed 
with newly heated bark. Gradually the pain was relieved. The boy’s arm 
healed eventually. My grandfather used to cure other people also. He took 
his medicine from roots of trees and shrubs of all sorts. He cured 
headaches, burns and other illnesses. He made medicinal solutions to drink 
just from the grass and roots of herbs. 

Another thing the people used to make is sewing boxes. The boxes were 
made from birch bark. They used to keep their needles and thread in the 
boxes. All kinds of tools were made from birch bark, cups and pails for 
cooking. They sewed the bark and put paste on it. The paste was made 
from spruce gum. They made wooden spoons for stirring and small spoons 
for eating. 

Sharing was common in those days. If one killed a moose, deer or any other 
animal, the food was shared. Bannock and tea was not common. When 
people lived in the far bush, they used melted snow for water. By 
springtime, they would move near a lake, or ~a river bank. They-also-used-to 
build houses for themselves. In the middle of the house was a hole in the 
roof where the smoke could escape. We did not have stoves like we have 
today. They used mud stoves, they served the purpose. Anything could be 
cooked on these stoves. The log houses were always warm and comfortable. 
At the side of the house, there was a hole to serve as a window. The opening 
was 2' by 2‘. A small board was used to cover it at night. The stoves were 
made out of mud, dry grass, pieces of moose fur, and small twigs. First, they 
placed a flat rock at the bottom to protect it from fire on the ground. The 
stove was placed in the middle of the floor, where the open area is in the 
roof. 

People used to respect one another, and each other’s belongings. They 
never stole from each other. Traps were left behind, canoes, and other stuff. 



56 

O 

ERIC 



57 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



They travelled lightly in their canoes. When travelling they had beaver, rat 
or other meat with them. This is what it was like. My grandfather told it to 
me, also I experienced it myself. 

John Daniel Blacksmith 

I believe the first whiteman who came to settle in Cross Lake was from 
Selkirk (A so wa na nik). The other people who arrived here came from 
Churchill (A si ni wa sky kanik). Most of these people were traders. At the 
time, people did not live on the Reserve. Their tents were located north of 
Cross Lake. That is where they lived. 

Men did not wear the pants we have today. Rather they had a cloth called 
“man to way kin " covering their bodies. They used a belt to keep this cloth 
in place. The covering was not sewn up. Women wore long skirts or 
dresses and on their heads, they wore a moosehide bonnet which had fringes 
on the front so that their eyes were hidden. These fringes were there so 
they could not look at the men. 

For recreation, children played hide-and-go-seek while the favourite pastime 
for the men was lacrosse. 

It is true that man and woman were not united by marriage as we know it 
today. They stayed together. It is also true that man had more than one 
wife. I heard that one man had ten wives. 

I am not sure but I think the last Pow Wows were held around 1925. 

Long ago, there were not many illnesses. Old men had medicine bags which 
was their means of religion but many forgot about these medicine bags 
when they learned about Christianity. After the introduction of Christianity, 
many people died. They died in their sleep. This is what my grandfather 
told me. Men, long ago, were brave because they had their Indian medicine 
to rely on. 

In their homes, people did not have much furnishings. They lived in tents 
before they made houses out of logs, moss and mud. The major tool was the 
axe. Most of the people had gardens. The main crop was potatoes. 

Long ago when the first white people arrived on the shores of Churchill, 
they saw some Indian people. They asked the Indians what they called their 
land, and one who must have understood what the whiteman was asking 
replied, "Ka na tan” (holy). The whiteman interpreted him as saying, 
"Canada. ” This is why our land is called "Canada" today. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Unit Three 



How many Native people look at resource development can be summed up 
in this thought: "What I have and enjoy my children and grandchildren 
should have to enjoy for seven generations into the future . " How Native 
people perceive the future will depend on, among other things, the 
following: 



Faith in the future and the strength to deal with pressures will 
come from the basic values of Native people. As Native people 
encounter other people with different backgrounds, there will 
come about a greater understanding of others and a greater 
valuing of their own way of life. 

Education must be a part of preserving and enhancing the role 
and knowledge of Native elders. 



TOPICS 



Winter Teachings — Teaching of constant values. Families in the 
future will continue to depend on the environment in order to fulfil their 



needs and wants. 



What languages will Native people in Manitoba speak in the future if 
present trends continue? 



Only Cree and Ojibway may survive as Native languages in use in the 
future. Are there efforts among Native people or institutions to teach a 

Native language in your community? _ .. — 

Many Native communities have taken over the administration of schools 
and education programs in their area. Some communities are also 
assuming the administration of health services such as nursing stations 
and ambulances. 



In the future, Native people may hold many jobs in their communities. 
Some examples are lawyers, judges, and police administration. 



58 





59 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



FURTHER TOPICS 



I. Technological Innovations for winter — Developed by Native 
people for survival. 

a) Snowshoes were first developed by Aboriginal hunters and 
trappers of the north. They allowed a person to walk in deep 
snow without sinking. They were well suited for the 
environment and different kinds were used depending on the 
environment and the culture of the people. 

b) The toboggan was developed by the Aboriginal people of the 
north. It is like a large ski that was used to carry goods from one 
place to another. The toboggan was well suited to the snowy 
environment of the north. 



c) Sleeping bags were developed by the Aboriginal people of the 
north. They are warm, usually being made of goose and duck 
down, light and easily stored and transported. 




d) 



The ice house and refrigeration was developed to store meat 
and other perishables. Usually blocks of ice were cut from ice 
late in the fall or early in the winter. These were collected in an 
ice house, and insulated with natural materials. Ice could be kept 
in this manner all year round. This method of food preservation 
was and still is used in the commercial fish industry. Sometimes 
natural caves that collected snow were used as refrigerators to 
keep foods cold over the short hot summers in Manitoba. 



2. Fish — Students should learn about local fish, where they live, when 
and how they are caught, and how to prepare and preserve them. 



Activity — students can plan a field trip to a local fishing area such 
as Lockport, to catch and prepare a small fish. 

Alternate — visit a fishing community during fishing season. Have 
the students learn from observing what equipment is used, when it is 
used, where it is used, and why. Follow up with a fish lunch at 
school or a fish fry in a local park. 




60 



59 



Grade Three 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Grade Three 

Unit One 



An Indian band was traditionally understood to be a group of people who 
banded together to meet their needs and wants. Reserve lands were chosen 
for their proximity to good water, food and other resources. These lands 
were reserved for Indian use only through treaty negotiations between band 
leaders and representatives of the Crown. 

Most M6tis communities grew in proximity to Indian reserves or 
communities but each maintains its own distinct identity as a M6tis 
community. The needs and wants of the M6tis were fulfilled through 
interaction with the Indian and other communities through primary 
industries such as fishing and trapping. 

Urban Native communities came about when Native people, like many 
other rural residents, moved to urban areas to meet their needs and wants 
because they perceived greater economic opportunity existed there. 

TOPICS 

• Leadership — Find out what kinds of laws or by-laws can be enacted 
by a community council and by a band council. 

• Native Language — Look at the names, legends, and stories relating 
to surrounding geography 

• Recreation — Discover what kinds of traditional recreational 
activities Native people took part in. 

Leadership in the Native community — Compare the job of a Chief 
with that of a Mayor. 

Co-operation and Conflict — How is conflict resolved? How is 
harmony achieved in the Native community? Here are some examples 

• traditional use of meetings: each person has the right to speak, the 
opinions of Elders are important, solutions to problems are decided 
by consensus 

• use of the talking stick and the eagle feather 

• the Chief and Council have a more recent role as decision-makers; 
they are elected by majority and are expected to make decisions on 
behalf of the group 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



• much of traditional social control was based on honesty and mutual 
trust; transition now is to the use of constables and a police force 

• traditional respect for an individual’s right to choose 

• people don’t offer an opinion unless asked or unless they are in an 
official or traditionally recognized position to do so 

• support of a friend or relative when they are in difficulty is deemed 
important 

• leadership is seen as a commitment to serve. Traditional chiefs might 
be poor since they would be responsible to give help to others 

• interpersonal conflict is avoided by withdrawing from the situation 

• being careful to know something about a person before conversing 
freely; this avoids infringing on other’s personal beliefs and attitudes 

• by taking ownership. For example, “my band,” “my band Council,” 
“my community,” ”my community Council" 

• by sharing what was supplied by the land. Today this has changed as a 
result of money economy and modern appliances such as freezers 

Employment — Traditionally employment was provided in the context 

of the family survival unit. Now employment may come from 

• band administration or community council administration 

• building homes, local construction 

• -education 

• supplying wood for heat 

• small stores 

• welfare 

• community services — counselling, medical advice once supplied by 
Elders now done by agencies: 

• Awasis — Anishinabe, other Native child and family services 

• nursing stations 

• churches now ordaining Native ministers, priests 

• Native teachers in schools 

1 . What ways do people use local resources for employment in your 
community? 

2. What services do local people supply your community? 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




Units Two 
and Three 




There is a great variation in lifestyle, culture, and language among the 
Aboriginal people of Manitoba, depending on geographic location. While 
there may be no abrupt change, there is a gradual change from north to 
south and east to west. The different language and cultural groups in 
Manitoba are Sioux or Dakota, Inuit, Chipewyan or Dene, Cree, Ojibway, 
Oji-Cree, and Metis. The lifestyle of the people may depend more on 
primary industries such as fishing, trapping, farming or ranching. There is 
also a variation in orientation be it urban, rural or northern. Even within 
languages there are dialectic differences that must be respected. 

TOPICS 

Unit II Topic II — Look at Native language place names within and 
around the community. Students may list and investigate places and land 
forms with Native names and names derived from Native languages. 

Resources: Manitoba place names, Canadian place names. 

1 . Compare two Aboriginal communities in Manitoba that vary 
according to language, cultural group, and geographic location. 

Using the suggestions in the grade 3 Social Studies guide for this unit, 
compare the following aspects of each community. 

• language and culture of origin 

• community history 

• community situation (geography) 

• meeting needs and wants in the community 

• co-operation and conflict in community life 

2. Compare one of the communities previously studied to another 
located either in another province or territory of Canada or in the 
United States. Use the same criteria for comparison as in I . 

3. Compare one of the Manitoba Aboriginal communities studied with 
an Aboriginal community elsewhere in the world. Again, use the 
same criteria for comparison as previously used. 




65 



64 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Suggested world communities 

• Indian communities in the U.S. or Indian communities of South 
America 

• African aboriginal community or Indonesian aboriginal community 
Resource: Sarcee Reserve, an Indian Community, Calgary Board of 
Education, Reidmore Books, Edmonton, AB. 

FURTHER TOPICS 

1 . Plants — Look at their use as food, tools, and containers. Investigate 
ways of gathering and preserving foods. 

Resources 

A Guide to 20 Plants and Their Uses by the Cree, Anna Leighton, Lac La 
Rouge Indian Band, Education Branch, 1983. 

The Complete Outdoorsman’s Guide to Edible Wild Plants, Berndt 
Berglund and Clare E. Bolshy, Pagurian Press Limited, Suite I 106, 

335 Bay Street, Toronto, ON. 

2. Have the students research, especially through participation, Winter 
festivals and other community events. 




66 



65 



Grade Four 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Grade Four 

Unit One 



In the past, Aboriginal people understood that there were four directions on 
this earth and that this earth was round. Some also understood that the 
rivers and lakes in North America flowed to the seas in the four directions 
from a common point in the Rocky Mountains. These rivers and lakes were 
used for transportation to almost anywhere on the continent. It was 
understood that water was a source of life and when travelling, drink, food, 
and shelter could be found by the water. The sun and the moon marked 
three of the four directions as they travelled across the sky. When they 
were obscured, position could be determined by looking at glacial striations 
on bedrock. In a specific area, these markings would point in the same 
direction. 

TOPICS 

1 . Use the reference book Indian Giver, A Legacy of North American 
Native Peoples by Warren Lowes, Canadian Alliance in Solidarity 
with Native People (CASNP), Theytus Books, Penticton, BC, 1986, 
to identify the names of bodies of water such as lakes and rivers 
whose names originated in Native languages. Use a Manitoba map 
to identify similar place names with Native language origins. Use an 
atlas in conjunction with Indian Giver to identify Native language 
names for locations in Canada. 

2. Students may investigate the significance of the four directions in 
traditional teachings, such as that found on page 39 of the Early 
Years Native Studies Teacher's Resource Book. Resource people 
familiar with these teachings may be invited to discuss them with the 
students. 

3. Use the mapping skills from Unit I , Grade 4 of the Social Studies 
document to locate Native communities in Manitoba. 

4. Have students make a map of Manitoba showing where different 
Aboriginal communities are found. 

5. Have students make a map of Manitoba showing tribal council areas, 
etc. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Units Two 
and Three 



All over the world, the Indigenous people developed a harmonious 
relationship with the land and with nature. Within this relationship, people 
are able to develop their spiritual qualities as well as their social and 
political skills. Most Indigenous people have experienced colonialism under 
people who dominate by technology. 



TOPICS 



Have the students look for contrasts and similarities in the lifestyles and 
cultures of indigenous people from other parts of the world. Also, 
compare the way they meet their basic needs. Use the same criteria to 
compare the communities as outlined in the grade 4 Social Studies guide 
for Units II and III 



• community situation 

• community history 

• meeting needs and wants in the community 

• co-operation and conflict in community life 



Do Aboriginal people have a viewpoint that could help others in the 
world to do more creative problem solving? 

Have the students research different forms of recreation used for 
skill building by Aboriginal people. 



When a person participates in Native ceremonies, much more is learned 
than the spirituality or values of Native people. Concrete facts about the 
environment are learned as well. For example, when building the fire in a 
sweatlodge ceremony, one learns about the thermal qualities of different 
species of trees, e.g., which burn hot, which burn fast, and which leave 
coals. You learn about geology, e.g., most igneous rocks can be heated in 
the fire except those containing large quartz crystals which may explode 
upon contact with cold water. Sedimentary rocks are porous and contain 
water and break or explode when heated. You learn mapping or locational 
skills as the sweatlodge is oriented to a specific direction among the four 
directions. You also learn to “ conceptualize ” the finished lodge during the 
building process. You learn important math concepts such as points, lines, 
angles, planes, and circles. You even learn to count using different bases 
when tying the waterdrum for a ceremony — base seven for example. 
Exercise is gained through the physical activity involved in cutting wood, 
gathering rocks, and preparing the lodge and fire. Listening to the teachings 
and prayers, expands vocabulary, and an appreciation for music is developed 
by learning to sing and follow the rhythm of the songs. 




70 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Although not all Native people use the sweatlodge, a large number do and 
the study of Native people should look at what is learned by attending these 
ceremonies. This does not mean that you take your students in a 
sweatlodge, but the curriculum should recognize these important aspects of 
Native life and help enhance the self image of those Native students who do 
attend ceremonies. 

• Have the students research what is meant by “Fourth” World 
communities. 

— The students might investigate and report on story telling and 
teachings around the world. During the investigation students 
should look at the similarities and differences to stories told here. 
They should also discover in what seasons and for what purposes 
the stories are told. 

• Students might research the lives of other Indigenous people 

— Polynesians 

— Australian Aborigines 

— Saamis of Norway 

— Greenland and Canadian Inuit 

— Ainuofjapan 

— Maori of New Zealand 

— Indians of North and South America, m6tis and mestizos 

— African Aboriginal people 

— the Aboriginal people of India 

• What do Indigenous people have in common? 

— experiences with colonialism 

— highly developed sense of spiritual qualities, social, and political 
skills 

— holistic approach in thinking 

— history of ownership of land by group use 

— relationship to land and nature for harmony, not exploitation 

FURTHER TOPICS 

Make a list of famous Aboriginal people. Why are they famous? What are 
some of the positive qualities that they display that others might 
emulate? 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Students should research the lives of some famous Aboriginal people of 
the past, the present, and from the local area (locally famous) 

• What have they had in common? 

• In what ways are they different? 

Present Leaders 

Thomas Banyacya . Hopi . Elder and translator for spiritual leaders 
Edward Benton Banai . Ojibway . Educator . Spiritual leader 
John Kim Bell . Mohawk. Conductor (musician) 

Ernest Benedict . Mohawk . Educator . Elder 

Barbara Bruce . M6tis . Businesswoman 

Doug Cardinal . M6tis . Architect 

Ivy Chaske . Dakota . Activist 

Jim Compton . Ojibway . Journalist 

Dr. Marilyn Cook-Cox . Cree . Family doctor 

Beatrice Culleton . M6tis . Author . Publisher 

Yvon Dumont . Metis . political leader 

George Erasmus . Dene . Political leader 

Phil Fontaine . Ojibway . Political leader 

Rufus Goodstriker . Blood . Political/Spiritual Leader . Elder 

R. C. Gorman . Navajo . Artist 

Eljiah Harper . Cree/Ojibway . Political leader 

Charlie Hill. Oneida . Comedian 

Basil Johnston . Ojibway . Author 

_yerna_Kirkness . Cree ..Educator — 

Marion Ironquill Meadmore . Lawyer 

Buffie St. Marie . Cree . Musician 

Ovide Mercredi . Cree . Political leader 

Angus Merrick . Ojibway . Elder 

Eva McKay . Dakota . Elder 

Bea Medicine . Lakota . Anthropologist 

Alwyn Morris . Mohawk . Olympic Gold Medal winner 

Norval Morrisseau . Ojibway . Artist 

Billy Mills . Dakota . Olympic medal winner 

Bill Reid . Haida . Artist 

Dennis Sun-Rhodes . Arapaho . Architect 

Mary Richard . M6tis . Director of Manitoba Association of Native 
Languages 




72 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Myles Richardson . Haida . Political leader 
Kim Sandy . Ojibway . Fashion model and designer 
Murray Sinclair . Ojibway . Associate Chief Judge of Manitoba 
Ahab Spence . Cree . Political leader 

Peter O’chiese . Ojibway . Spiritual leader . Hereditary Chief . Elder 

Tom Porter . Mohawk . Spiritual leader . Clan Chief 

Winston Wuttunee . Cree . Musician 

Flora Zaharia . Blood . Educator 

Mae Louise Campbell . Metis Artist 

Late 

Amy Clemons . Ojibway . Activist . Elder 
Jackson Beardy . Ojibway . Artist 
Adam Dyck . Cree . Hereditary Chief . Elder 
Dan George . Salish . Actor 

George Manual . Shuswap . Political leader . Author 
Tom Prince . Ojibway . Veteran 
Carl Ray . Ojibway/Cree . Author 
Ernest Tootoosis . Cree . Spiritual leader . Elder 
Dave Courchene, Sr. Ojibway . political leader 

Past 

Louis Riel . Metis . Political leader 
Gabriel Dumont . Metis 
Waywayseecapo . Ojibway . Chief 
Kakekaypenaise . Ojibway . Chief 
Peguis . Ojibway . Chief 
Ozuwekwun . Ojibway . Chief 
Pontiac . Ottawa 
Tecumseh . Shawnee 

Handsome Lake . Six Nations. Prophet. Spiritual leader 

Sitting Bull . Dakota . Spiritual leader 

Piapot . Cree . Chief 

Big Bear . Cree . Chief 

Poundmaker . Cree . Chief 

Fine Day . Cree 

Maskipitoon . Cree 

Almighty Voice . Cree 

Crowfoot . Blackfoot . Chief 

Walking Buffalo . Stoney . Chief. Spiritual leader 



Bibliography 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Bibliography 

Barker, George. Forty Years A Chief. Winnipeg, MB: Peguis, 1979. 

Beardy, Ruby. Native Studies: The Local History of Cross Lake. Manitoba 
Native Bilingual Program, n.d. 

Beavon, Daphne. “Odjig.” Legends of Nanabush. Scarborough, ON: Ginn, 
1971. 

Benton-Banai, Edward. The Mishomis Book: The Voice of the Ojibway. 
Hayward, Wl: Indian Country Communications, 1988. 

Berglund, Berndt, and Clare E. Bolshy. The Complete Outdoorsman’s 
Guide to Edible Wild Plants. Toronto, ON: Pagurian Press, n.d. 

Big Tree, Little Tree. Winnipeg, MB: Pemmican Publications, 1988. 

Calgary Board of Education. Sarcee Reserve, an Indian Community. 
Edmonton, AB: Reidmore Books, 1987. 

Curtis, Edward S. The Girl Who Married A Ghost and Other Tales from the 
North American Indians. John Bierhost, ed. New York, NY: Four 
Winds, 1978. 

Encyclopedia Britannica. Stories Told by Native North Americans. Chicago, IL: 
Encyclopedia Britannica, 1977. 

— . The Wild Rose; Saynday and the Gambler. Chicago, IL: Encyclopedia 
Britannica, 1971. 

Eyvindson, Peter. Kyle's Bath. Wendy Wolsak, illus. Winnipeg, MB: 
Pemmican, 1984. 

— . Old Enough. Winnipeg, MB: Pemmican, 1986. 

— . The Wish Wind. Winnipeg, MB: Pemmican, 1987. 

Football, Virginia. Dogrib Legends. Yellowknife, NWT : Department of 
Education, 1974. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Fox, Mary Lou. How the Bees Got Their Stingers: An Ojibwe-Odawa Legend. 
Manitoulin Island, ON: Ojibwe Cultural Foundation, 1977. 

Goodwill, Jean and Norma Duman. John Tootoosis. Winnipeg, MB: 
Pemmican, 1984. 

Hacker, Charlotta. Crowfoot. Don Mills, ON: Fitzhenry and Whiteside. 

Heibert, Susan. Alfonse Has An Accident. Illus. Eddy Cobiness. 
Winnipeg, MB: Peguis, 1974. 

Hill, Kay. Glooscap and His Magic: Legends of the Wabanaki Indians. New 
York, NY: Caedmon, 1979. 

Houston, James. Ghost Paddle. James Houston, illus. Don Mills, ON: 
Longman Canada, 1972. 

The Indian Reading Series: Stories and Legends of the Northwest. Portland, 
OR: Developed by The Pacific Northwest Indian Reading and 
Language Development Program, 1977. 

Lavine, Sigmund A. The Games the Indians Played. New York, NY: Dodd 
Mead, 1974. 

Leighton, Anna. A Guide to 20 Plants and Their Uses by the Cree. Lac la 
Rouge Indian Band, Education Branch, 1983. 



Loewen, Iris. My Mom Is Unusual. Winnipeg, MB: Pemmican, 1986. 

Lowes, Warren. Indian Giver. A Legacy of North American Native Peoples. 
Penticton, BC: Canadian Alliance in Solidarity with Native People 
(CASNP), Theytus Books, 1986. 

Manitoba Education and Training. Cree Stories from Moose Lake (in syllabics), 
Roman Orthography and English. Winnipeg, MB: Manitoba Education 
and Training, n.d. 

— . K-6 Teacher Handbook for Poster Series: I want to be ....Winnipeg, MB: 
Manitoba Education and Training, n.d. 



78 




74 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Manitoba Education and Training. Stories from Moose Lake (Cree). Winnipeg, 
MB: Manitoba Education and Training, n.d. 

Manitoba Education and Training. Song Book. Winnipeg, MB: Manitoba 
Education and Training, n.d. 

Manitoba Education and Training. Songs and Poems. Winnipeg, MB: 
Manitoba Education and Traiing, n.d. 

McGill, Ken. Indians and Buffalo: To Feed My People: A Cheyenne Legend. 
Glendale, CA: Bowmar, n.d. 

Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs. Circle Program. Markham, ON: 
Fitzhenry and Whiteside, 1 988. 

Minor, Marz Nono. The American Indian Craft Book. New York, NY: Popular 
Library, 1972. 

Nightraveller, Will. Assiniboine Legends. Saskatoon, SK: Saskatchewan 
Indian Cultural College, 1973. 

Pelly, Linda. Nanabush and the Geese. Saskatoon, SK: Saskatchewan Indian 
Cultural College, 1 976. 

Petrie, A. Roy. Joseph Brant. Don Mills, ON: Fitzhenry and Whiteside. 

Philomena Hauk and Kathleen M. Snow. Famous Indian Leaders. Calgary, 
AB: Detselig Enterprises, 1989. 

Reid, Dorothy M. Tales of Nanabozho. Toronto, ON: Oxford University 
Press, 1963. 

Reynolds, Margaret. Dene Legends. Saskatoon, SK: Saskatchewan Indian 
Cultural College, 1973. 

Sanderson, Esther. Two Pairs of Shoes. Winnipeg, MB: Pemmican, 1990. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Sawyer and Green. “Two On a Crayon,” 9-10, or the “Inclusion Puzzle,” 
11-13. The NESA Activities Handbook for Native Multicultural 
Classrooms. Vancouver, BC: Native Education Services Associates, 
1984. 

Scribe, Murdo. Murdo’s Story. Terry Gallagher, illus. Winnipeg, MB: 
Pemmican, 1985. 

Sealey, Bruce, et al. Tawow: A Multi-Media Native Studies Kit. Agincourt, 
ON: Book Society of Canada, 1 975. 

Sealey, Bruce, and Peter Van De Vyvere. Thomas George Prince. Peguis, 
1981. 

Tapping the Gift: Manitoba’s First People. Winnipeg, MB: Pemmican, 

1992. 

Thompson, Albert Edward (Chief). Chief Peguis And His Descendants. 
Winnipeg, MB: Peguis, 1973. 

Toye, William, and Elizabeth Cleaver, illus. How Summer Came to Canada. 
Weston, ON: Weston Woods Studios, 1976. 

Wheeler, Bernelda. A Friend Called 'Chum'. Andy Stout, illus. Winnipeg, 
MB: Pemmican, 1984. 

v Where-Did You-Get Your Moccasins? WinnipegrMB: Pemmican, 1986. 

Whylie, Betty Jane. Tecumseh. Windsor, ON: Black Moss Press, n.d. 

Zeman, Brenda. To Run With Longboat. Twelve Stories of Indian Athletes 
in Canada. Edmonton, AB: GMS 2 Ventures, 1988. 

Zola, Maguido and Angela Dereune. Nobody. Wendy Wolsak, illus. 
Winnipeg, MB: Pemmican, 1983. 



80 

O 

tKJC 



76 



Resource List 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Resource List 



Audiotapes 

“What do you have in your canoe?" Winston Wuttunee tape. Cree and 
Ojibway Cultural Centre. 

Films 



The Cree of Paint Hills. 1974. Children’s walking out ceremony. 16 mm. 
The First Salmon. National Film Board of Canada, 1972. 

Haas, Rudi. Tales from the Treetops. International Cinemedia, 1973. 

The Mountain Goats ofTemlahem. Weston Wood Studios, 1976. 



Kits 



Native Storytelling. Wesakachak legends. Manitoba Education and Training, 
1982. Teacher notes, cassette (40 min.). 



Videotapes 

Copies of most videotape programs for your course may be obtained from 
the Instructional Resources Unit Dubbing Service. 

Registered students may supply sufficient blank VHS videotapes or purchase 
VHS videotapes from the Manitoba Text Book Bureau via the dubbing 
service. For requests sent to the dubbing service with videotapes provided, 
a dubbing fee per tape must be remitted with the order. Please check with 
the Instructional Resources Unit Dubbing Service for the amount of the 
dubbing fee. For those students who choose to purchase videotapes via the 
dubbing service the cost of the video cassette and applicable taxes plus the 
dubbing fee per tape dubbed must be remitted with the order (see course 
calendar for prices). A maximum of two programs with a total recorded 
time of 60 minutes or less will be recorded per tape. 




78 



>3 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Orders may be mailed or delivered to 

Instructional Resources Unit 
Dubbing Service 

P.O. Box 4, 1181 Portage Avenue 
Winnipeg MB R3G 0T3 
Telephone: 204-945-7848 
Toll free: 800-282-8069, ext. 7848 
Fax: 204-945-8756 

You must include your name, home address, home telephone, and course 
of study. Cheques are payable to the Manitoba Text Book Bureau. Return 
postage is covered by the dubbing service. 

More Than a Marathon. 1983. VT-0990. Dubbing Number — #8398 (VHS), 
#8399 (Beta). 

Music of the Indian and Metis. 1983. Part I — VT-0923. Part 2 — VT-0924. 
Teacher’s Guide. 

Native Language Basic Program, Cree Grade I , or Native Language Basic 
Program, Ojibway Grade I. Manitoba Education and Training. Available 
from Manitoba Text Book Bureau or on loan from Manitoba Education and 
Training Library. 

The Ptarmigan’s Beak: How the Woodpecker Got His Feathers. Gate Media 
Productions, 1977. 

A Visit to Sandy Bay. 1982. VT-0995. Dubbing Number — #7258 (VHS), 
#7261 (Beta). 

A Visit to Sioux Valley. 1 983. VT-0993. Dubbing Number — #7264 (VHS), 
#7267 (Beta). 






















,0 









Renewing Education: 
New Directions 



Manitoba 
Education 
and Training 

Linda G. McIntosh, 
Minister 



80 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 

A Teacher’s Resource Book Framework 



ISBN 0-771 1-1300-5 

Copyright © 1 995, the Crown in Right of Manitoba as represented by the Minister of Education and 
Training. Manitoba Education and Training, School Programs Division, Program Development Branch, 
1970 Ness Avenue, Winnipeg, Manitoba R3J 0Y9. 

Every effort has been made to provide proper acknowledgement of original sources and to comply 
with copyright law. If cases are identified where this has not been done, please notify Manitoba 
Education and Training to correct any omissions. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Acknowledgements 



Manitoba Education and Training gratefully acknowledges the contributions of the following 
individuals in the development of the Native Studies: Early Years (K-4), A Teacher’s Resource Book 
Framework 



First Nations Elder 

Ms Myrtle Thomas Peguis, Manitoba 

Course Writer 



Dan Thomas Consultant 



Humanities Unit 

Manitoba Education and Training 



Members of the Development Team 

Frontier S.D. No. 48 
Peguis 

Duck Mountain S.D. No. 34 
Winnipeg, Manitoba 
Garden Hill, Manitoba 
Nelson House, Manitoba 

Pilot Teachers of Winnipeg School Division No. I (1986-89) 



Byron Apetagon 
Margaret Fiddler 
Sophie Ledoux 
Marshall Murdock 
Connie Singleterry 
Larry Tait 



Norway House High School 
Peguis Central School 
Winnipegosis Collegiate 



Roland Lauze School 



Debbie Beach 
Mary Courcheney 
Rene Desmet 
Gail Gossfeld 
Melanie Hall 
Tom Howard 
Brenda Longclaws 
Leslee Boivin-McKay 
Joe McLelland 
Robert Milan 
Margaret Scott 
Anastasia Sych-Yerniuk 




Hugh John MacDonald School 

R. B. Russell Vocational 

Mulvey School 

David Livingstone School 

R. B. Russell Vocational 

Aberdeen School 

Hugh John MacDonald School 

Mulvey School 

Aberdeen School 

Argyle School 

Aberdeen School 

David Livingstone School 



Hi 



O 

ERIC 



83 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




Manitoba Education and Training Staff 



Lee-lla Bothe 


Consultant 


Technical Support Unit 
Program Development Branch 


Diane Cooley 


Project Manager 


Curriculum Frameworks 
Program Development Branch 


Lynn Harrison 


Desktop Publisher 


Technical Support Unit 
Program Development Branch 


Joyce MacMartin 


Project Manager 


Humanities Unit 

Program Development Branch 


Juliette Sabot 


Director 


Native Education Directorate 


Monty Szakacs 


Consultant 


Technical Support Unit 
Program Development Branch 


Dan Thomas 


Consultant 


Humanities Unit 

Program Development Branch 




iv 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Contents 



Introduction to the Native Studies 
Resource Book Framework (K-4) I 
Overview I 



Kindergarten 5 

Unit One 5 
Unit Two 7 
Unit Three 8 

Grade One 1 0 

Unit One 1 0 
Unit Two 12 
Unit Three 1 3 



Grade 




Two 14 
UnitOne 14 
Unit Two 16 
Unit Three 1 7 



Grade Three 1 8 

UnitOne 18 

Units Two and Three 19 

Grade Four 20 

Unit One 20 

Units Two and Three 2 1 



Appendix 22 
Bibliography 36 




v 



85 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Introduction to the Native Studies 
Resource Book Framework (K-4) 



Overview 




Purpose of this document 

This Native Studies: Early Years (K-4), A Teacher’s Resource Book Framework 
addresses the major goals Manitoba Education and Training intends schools 
to address through the integration of Aboriginal perspectives into curricula. 
It provides a conceptual framework for the use of the Early Years, Middle 
Years, and Senior Years Native Studies teacher resource books. The 
Teacher’s Resource Book Framework identifies learner outcomes for students 
based on First Nations and Metis cultures. It is designed to provide 
meaningful and relevant experiences for all students and to promote 
positive attitudes towards people of First Nations and Metis heritage. This 
framework is intended to assist schools integrate Aboriginal perspectives 
into curricula, enable students to learn the history of Manitoba and Canada 
before European settlement, and give the perspectives of Aboriginal people 
since that time. 

The Teacher’s Resource Book Framework provides the conceptual framework 
for teachers using the Native Studies resource books. These provide 
background information for teachers about Native perspectives on issues as 
well as suggestions on how to develop skills and attitudes that will help 
students become knowledgeable, purposeful, and responsible citizens. 

Nature of the Discipline 

Native Studies is a discipline that deals with the unique ways in which 
Aboriginals see the world. It focusses on Aboriginal philosophies of life and 
how these philosophies shape how Aboriginals see issues, how they identify 
priorities and how they interpret events that relate specifically to Aboriginal 
people. 

Philosophy 

The framework is based on the assumption that the acceptance of diverse 
cultures benefits all members of a pluralistic society. 



ERIC 



86 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



The Teacher's Resource Book Framework emphasizes Aboriginal traditional 

approaches to education. It is important for teachers using these materials to 

understand these approaches and to make their teaching strategies 

congruent with the following strategies. These include 

• emphasizing inquiry and discovery by students and the teacher 

• emphasizing process not conclusions 

• viewing the teacher’s role as facilitator, resource person, and inquirer 
together with students 

• emphasizing the cognitive and effective outcomes of student learning as 
opposed to covering large amounts of detailed facts 

• concentrating on activities, values, and actions of people rather than on 
places, objects, dates, and names 

• developing multiple objectives (i.e., research, thinking, knowledge, 
attitudinal, and social participation) 

• emphasizing and adapting units of study to local needs and local 
perspectives 

Teaching strategies should be guided by the following principles 

• basing new learning on previous learning 

• providing students with explanations of the meaning and significance of 
activities 

• involving students in their learning 

• providing for frequent interchange of ideas with others 



2 




87 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Aim 

The aim of presenting Aboriginal perspectives through integrating Native 
Studies into curricula is to have all students develop an understanding and 
respect for the histories, cultures and contemporary lifestyles of Aboriginal 
people and to assist them to develop informed opinions on matters relating 
to Aboriginal people. It also aims to provide learning experiences to assist 
Aboriginal students develop positive self-identities through learning their 
own histories, cultures, and contemporary lifestyles through participation in 
a supportive learning environment. It is intended that students be presented 
with knowledge that relate to the values of Aboriginal people. Students 
should be provided with opportunities to develop ways of thinking, feeling, 
and acting that will help them participate more actively and effectively in a 
changing society. Aboriginal students require the resources to enable them 
to participate in the unique civic and cultural realities of their communities. 

Aboriginal students are learners and participants in Aboriginal cultured, not 
necessarily experts in the cultures. Understanding of Aboriginal culture and 
traditions will vary from family to family. Aboriginal students’ knowledge 
about their culture may be the same as that of other students in the class, 
but if they do have extensive knowledge about their culture, it can benefit 
the entire class. 

Structure 

The Teacher’s Resource Book Framework is composed of broad guidelines for 
addressing Aboriginal perspectives, issues, content, and outcomes in Social 
Studies. It is intended to assist teachers develop specific lesson plans for 
Native Studies. A new resource book framework may be added or existing 
frameworks may be modified on an annual basis to accommodate changing 
course requirements. 

The Native Studies resource books are to be used along with the 
appropriate grade level Social Studies curriculum document. The units of 
study within the Native Studies resource books help teachers focus on a 
Native perspective for each topic of the Social Studies curriculum 
documents and present pertinent questions. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



This document is subject-specific and identifies outcomes and standards that 
students are expected to achieve and possess related to Native Studies. It 
provides an Aboriginal perspective to the Social Studies curriculum and a 
framework for integrating Native perspectives into other subject areas. 

The Native Studies resource books have been organized into three areas: 
Early Years, Middle Years, and Senior Years. Each of these areas follows the 
Social Studies curriculum, giving a Native perspective to each of the units of 
study. Within are topics focussing on the Social Studies units. Also included 
are additional units of study that will enhance the perspective given at that 
grade level. 

The units are meant to be integrated with the Social Studies curriculum and 
should be used when investigating concerns or issues deemed relevant by 
local educators, teachers, and students. Teachers may use Aboriginal 
content and perspectives from these units to enhance the Social Studies 
curriculum or to generate Aboriginal perspectives in other subject areas such 
as Language Arts and Science. Keeping in mind student and community 
interest and need, local curriculum development teams may combine or 
delete topics, activities, and units to form school initiated courses suited to 
the local perspective of education. 

At the Middle Years level where courses may be initiated by the school, the 
units for a specific grade may form a course of study. 

At the Senior Years level schools may develop a school initiated course in 
Native Studies from the various units of study in the Native Studies Resource 
Books. 

This document and the Native Studies: Early Years (K-4), A Teacher’s Resource 
Book should be used in conjunction with the Social Studies curriculum 
documents. 





Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Kindergarten 



Unit One 



Major Concepts and Content 

Valuing and accepting oneself and others is central to Native life. It is an 
individual’s birthright to receive the respect of others for his or her 
particular strengths, interests, temperament, physical, and mental capacities. 
An individual’s value in a community is not based on his or her appearance 
and wealth; it is determined by an individual’s willingness to serve, to 
co-operate, and to appreciate others. 

Students raised in this way come to school expecting to listen to advice and 
to make choices about what they will do, neither wanting nor expecting to 
be “first” among their peers. They may be accustomed to considerable 
freedom to explore their physical environment, even at some risk. Many 
will already be taking some responsibility for younger sisters and brothers as 
well as caring for their own needs. 

Classroom activities for Native students should avoid situations in which 
students compete individually, but at the same time should supply quiet 
recognition of individual accomplishments. Activities encourage children to 
help each other. Students have opportunities to choose among activities, 
the groups they work with, and the ways in which they participate within 
that group. 

When the students’ mother tongue is a Native language, that language is the 
one they use to formulate ideas and concepts, and solve problems. Giving 
them a firm knowledge of their first language enables them to express 
themselves better in a second language, as the ability to conceptualize is 
already in place. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

* demonstrate awareness that valuing and accepting oneself and others is 
central to Native life 

* identify different physical characteristics of people 




90 



5 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



• demonstrate an understanding of the names of the parts of the body 
in one of the Native languages of the students in class 



• identify different physical features of people 

• identify reasons why people can be unaccepting of other people’s 
differences 

• distinguish and give examples of how rejection feels in comparison to 
other feelings 

• identify better ways of behaviour by giving examples 

• articulate feelings evoked by different selections of Native music 

• understand that all children can complete tasks and achieve goals given 
the opportunity 

• identify through example different jobs they are interested in 

• identify what they like about Native life by giving examples 

• show an understanding of similarities and differences among people 

• articulate an understanding of traditional names, clans, and Native 
nations 

• demonstrate recognition of and the use of greetings in the Native 
language 

• demonstrate appreciation of the uniqueness of each individual in the 
classroom and in the world of work 

• identify and list different jobs in the school 

• appreciate different interests and abilities that they can share with others 

• identify and list household tools and their functions 



6 




91 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




Unit Two 




Major Concepts and Content 

It is expected that teachers model their approaches to be compatible with 
Native peoples’ traditional education. Traditional education sees learning as 
a lifelong process and as a product of living. Elders, parents, or other 
relatives can all be seen as teachers. Learning is seen as the result of 
participation as contributing members of families and communities. Children 
learn by watching adult role models, and through creative play, as maturity 
and interests allow. Children are included in adult social activities and listen 
to stories and experiences of others. They have time to try out skills alone. 
When they have acquired confidence and understanding they then try out 
their skills with others. 

For Native children, raised with this model, it is threatening and socially 
inappropriate to be asked to perform a task in front of others before they 
have had the opportunity to repeat tasks and observe others, especially 
adults. Their education involves listening to advice, making choices about 
their actions, observing and interacting with the environment, and 
disciplining themselves. It is these experiences that develop in children an 
appreciation for the details that make for a job well done. Young children 
should be encouraged to seek wisdom at home and in the community as 
well as in school. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• understand that there is wisdom they must seek at home and in the 
community as well as in school 

• identify and make a record of people in the family and community who 
help them learn both inside and outside of school 

• record observations of things that can be learned from family and 
community people by watching, listening, and helping 

• demonstrate what they can do, and explain the values of First Nations 
peoples 




92 



7 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Unit Three Major Concepts and Content 

In traditional Aboriginal communities and homes the cycles of change in lives 
and seasons are an important predictable framework for learning. Young 
children growing up in extended families can observe and interact with 
people at all stages of life from birth to old age. They develop an intuitive 
understanding of differences in activities, responsibilities, and knowledge. 
Children participate in celebrations and ceremonies ranging from those for 
new family members to ceremonies such as wakes or funerals. 

Cycles of activities accompany the seasonal changes. In some areas fishing, 
trapping, berry-picking, storytelling and visiting may all be part of this cycle. 
Each requires preparation and participation. Clothing, needs for heat, 
shelter, food, means of travel, and social interactions all change with this 
cycle. The ability to anticipate needs, to improvise in emergencies, to 
recognize what is really needed to survive, to live from the land, and 
patience are all learned within this context. Although these needs no longer 
apply for some Native people, awareness of these and patterns for activities 
are still a part of the lives of many young Natives. 

In other homes and communities the activities may relate to the farming 
cycle of planting, growth, and harvest. In fishing communities it may be tied 
to spring break-up or fall freeze-up. In urban areas the cycle of growth in 
plants such as trees and in gardens show change. Even the use of different 
kinds of clothing for different types of weather shows the changes that are 
going on around us. At all times, the changes identified should be in 
accordance with the lifestyle of the community and of the child. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• recognize and describe how in traditional Aboriginal communities and 
homes the cycles of change in lives and seasons are an important 
predictable framework for learning 

• identify seasonal activities and change learned from storytelling sessions 

• describe the changes learned from story reading 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




• identify changes in play and recreation that take place based on seasons 

• identify local seasonal changes such as break-up and freeze-up 

• recognize and list different types of clothing worn in different seasons 

• identify safety precautions observed in different seasons 

• articulate how people and place interact to become a home 

• distinguish and name local and seasonal birds 

• recognize and name local and regional animals 





ERIC 




9 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Grade One 



Unit One Major Concepts and Content 

Physical needs are universal. Native people meet these needs in a variety of 
unique ways. The Elders play an important role in providing understanding 
about survival. The Earth herself is looked upon as a great and all-providing 
mother to Native people. In the past, Native people understood they would 
be provided for by a plentiful, fertile Earth and a kind Creator, and they did 
not feel the need (as in the case of some other cultures) to store large 
amounts of food and material. 

The practical requirements of life on a trapline helped people sort out needs 
from wants, especially if goods had to be carried over portages. Respect for 
life was shown through the offering of tobacco and a prayer whenever 
animals were killed. Killed animals were fully used; this reinforced respect for 
life. People believed in and practised sharing with others; they knew that 
other family and clan members or friends would share with them, especially 
in an emergency. When travelling, your host would care for your needs, but 
you in turn shared something of equal value with your host. This was like 
insurance in Euro-Canadian society. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• identify universal physical needs 

• use the local Aboriginal language to express terms and phrases related to 
everyday foods 

• identify Native designed clothing worn on different occasions 

• identify and list local types of shelter 

• identify two main types of Native health care 





Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




• identify three types of communication technology and one medium of 
communication 

• identify three types of transportation used in traditional times and three 
types used now 

• understand and articulate two purposes of traditional recreation 

• describe three types of Native recreational activities 

• identify and list the difference between needs and wants 

• recognize that many of the foods society uses today have been 
contributed by Native people 

• describe the reasons for creating particular kinds of shelter or housing 





II 



ERIC 




Native Studies: Early Years ( K-4 ) 



Unit Two Major Concepts and Content 

Traditionally, Native children had many of their emotional and social needs 
met through their immediate family, extended family, clan, and through 
friends. Native children, who attend integrated schools where they are in a 
minority, often have acute emotional needs that the teacher should 
recognize. 

Some of these are 

• Feeling accepted: The children need to feel accepted for who they are 
by the teacher and their peers 

• Feeling wanted: The children need to feel they are a necessary part of 
the class 

• Being understood: Especially when Native children speak a Native 
language as a first language, they need to have positive responses from 
the teacher and their classmates to feel they are understood 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• identify two ways to help others who may be different 

• identify two ways to help a new person feel accepted in school 

• distinguish two enjoyable things to do on their own for work or play 

• recognize and describe the difference between being alone and being 
lonely 



12 

O 

ERIC 



97 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Unit Three Major Concepts and Content 

Historically, for many Native people, the extended family was a self- 
sufficient unit for meeting needs — food, clothing, shelter, love, learning, 
politics and beliefs, to name a few. As a result of Indian and Inuit children 
being placed in boarding schools for a number of generations, much of their 
language and culture was destroyed and many of the family skills such as 
parenting were lost or at least weakened. In addition, the disruptions 
caused by the child welfare system’s apprehension of Native children in the 
last three decades weakened many families. Native people have had to 
expend tremendous efforts in order to persevere and hold together any 
semblance of family at all. 

Today the Native nuclear family may be a single parent family. However, 
there still is an extended family that includes grandparents, uncles, aunts, 
cousins and other relatives. The extended family no longer shares one roof, 
if it ever did, but children continue to grow up learning from and being loved 
and accepted by a larger family unit. Children still play a vital role in the 
family by doing tasks suited to their abilities such as running errands, carrying 
messages between houses and camps, and caring for siblings. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• describe their family using the proper relational terms for each identified 
person 

• describe their role or responsibilities in the family 

• identify others who make up their extended family or a larger family unit 



Native Studies: Early Years ( K-4 ) 



Grade Two 



Unit One Major Concepts and Content 

Life has been viewed as a cycle by many Native people. The four stages of 
mental, emotional, physical and spiritual development found in this cycle can 
be diagrammed as follows in relation to the four main directions 



Grandparent or Elder 

N 



Parent or 
Adult W 




Adolescent 



E Child 



These stages are not set to a specific time period as in Canadian society 
where one is a child to the age of 1 2 and, at the age of 1 3, one automatically 
becomes a teenager or adolescent, at 18 an adult, and at 65 an elder. Within 
Native society, the only given is that one starts at a child’s stage. How and 
when one progresses is totally up to the individual. This depends on how 
much one is willing to listen and how well one is able to solve problems. 

The physical changes that one goes through continues regardless of where 
the individually is mentally. Refer to the information on this topic in the 
Kindergarten section of the Native Studies: Early Years (K-4), A Teacher's 
Resource Book. 



14 

er|c 



99 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• identify and use family terms in a Native language 

• recognize and use extended family terms in a local Aboriginal language 

• recognize and describe changes that take place over time 



15 



100 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Unit Two 



16 

O 

ERLC 



Major Concepts and Content 

Extended families are usually made up of members of many different clans. 
Each clan has different responsibilities in the community, but each clan is 
interdependent. The clans that live together in a certain area become 
known as a band. Bands are units of production and trade as well as 
consumption. We can compare what trade goes on between families, 
between bands, and between bands and other communities. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• describe traditional roles of Native men and women 

• relate safety practices that can be used in the local environment 

• identify the roles of each member of the family in helping the family 
survive 

• identify the roles of aunts and uncles in teaching and disciplining children 




Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Unit Three Major concepts and Content 

The views of Native peoples on resource development is summed up in this 

way: “What I have and enjoy, my children and grandchildren should have to 

enjoy for seven generations into the future.” Native peoples’ success in the 

future will depend on, among others 

• basic values which stress faith in the future 

• increased appreciation of their own way of life 

• understanding of others as they encounter people of different 
backgrounds 

• traditional education to preserve and enhance the role and knowledge of 
Native elders 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• relate ways that families in the future will continue to depend on the 
environment in order to fulfil their needs and wants 

• relate what they know about a local Aboriginal language 

• list jobs in Native communities that Native people may hold in the future 

• explain why snowshoes, toboggans, and sleeping bags were first 
developed by Aboriginal people 

• explain why ice houses and refrigeration were developed to store meat 
and other perishables 

• name and describe local fishes, where they live, when and how they are 
caught and how to prepare them 



17 



102 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Grade Three 



Unit One Major Concepts and Content 

An Indian band was traditionally understood to be a group of people who 
banded together to meet their needs and wants. Reserve lands were 
chosen for their proximity to good water, food and other resources. These 
lands were reserved for Indian use only through treaty negotiations between 
band leaders and representatives of the Crown. 

Most M6tis communities grew in proximity to Indian reserves or 
communities but each maintains its own distinct identity as a M6tis 
community. The needs and wants of the M6tis were fulfilled through 
interaction with the Indian and other communities through primary 
industries such as fishing, and trapping. 

Urban Native communities developed when Native people, like many other 
rural residents, moved to urban areas to meet their needs and wants 
because they believed greater economic opportunity existed there. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• explain using examples of how laws or bylaws can be enacted by a 
community council and by a band council 

• relate names, legends, and stories from the local Aboriginal language that 
are specific to their own area 

• compare two traditional recreational activities Native people took part in 

• compare the role of a band chief with the role of a mayor 

• describe one way Native people resolve conflict and achieve harmony in 
their communities 

• list current jobs available in the community 



18 





Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Units Two Major Concepts and Content 

and Three 

There is a great variation in lifestyle, culture and language among the 
Aboriginal people of Manitoba, depending on geographic location. While 
there may be no abrupt demarkation lines, there is a gradual change from 
north to south and east to west. The different language and cultural groups 
in Manitoba are: Sioux or Dakota, Inuit, Chipewyan or Dene, Cree, 
Ojibway, Oji-Cree and M6tis. The lifestyle of the people may depend more 
on primary industries such as fishing, trapping, farming or ranching. There is 
also variation in orientation be it urban, rural or northern. Even within 
languages there are dialectic differences that must be respected. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• report on Native language place names within and around the 
community 

• explain similarities and differences between two Aboriginal communities 
in Manitoba that vary according to language, cultural group, and 
geographic location 

• describe similarities and differences between their community and 
another which is located in another province or territory of Canada or in 
the United States 

• compare a Manitoba Aboriginal community to an Aboriginal community 
elsewhere in the world 

• report on one method of gathering and preserving plants 

• identify use of certain plants as food, tools, and containers 



O 



104 



19 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Grade Four 



Unit One Major Concepts and Content 

In the past, Aboriginal people understood that there were four directions on 
this earth and that this earth was round. Some also understood that the 
rivers and lakes in North America flowed to the seas in the four directions 
from a common point in the Rock/ Mountains. These rivers and lakes were 
used for transportation to almost anywhere on the continent. It was 
understood that water was a source of life and so in travelling, one would 
find drink, food and shelter by water. The sun and the moon marked three 
of the four directions as they travelled across the sky. When they were 
obscured, position could be told by looking at glacial striations on bedrock. 

In a specific area, these markings would point in the same direction. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

* locate similar place names with Native language origins on a map 

• describe the significance of the four directions in Aboriginal teachings 

* locate Native communities on a map of Manitoba 

• locate tribal council areas on a map of Manitoba 





Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Units Two 
and Three 



Major Concepts and Content 

All over the world the Indigenous people developed a harmonious 
relationship with the land and with nature. Within this relationship, people 
are able to develop their spiritual qualities as well as their social and political 
skills. Most Indigenous people have experienced colonialism under people 
who dominate by technology. 

Intended Outcomes 

After successfully completing this unit, students will 

• compare how Indigenous people from various parts of the world live, 
express themselves culturally, and meet their basic needs 

• describe an Aboriginal viewpoint that is different from his or her own 

• identify four different forms of recreation used for skill building by 
Aboriginal people 

• explain the importance of beliefs in the lives of Aboriginal people 

• explain the concept of “Fourth World” communities 

• describe the commonalities between Indigenous people around the 
world 

• identify qualities in famous Aboriginal people of the past, the present, and 
from the local area (locally famous) that we admire 



21 

106 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Appendix 



Assessment and Evaluation of Student Achievement 

The learning process is supported by assessment and evaluation. Assessment 
and evaluation must precisely correlate to the learning outcomes. Learning 
and assessment activities provide students with opportunities to display 
development in skills and in the ability to analyze, synthesize, and evaluate. In 
measuring student achievement teachers should take all learning outcomes 
into consideration and assess the extent to which students have achieved 
them. Accurate assessment is essential to ensure appropriate standards are 
maintained. 



Teachers should assess students’ written and oral work regularly, using a 
wide variety of evaluation instruments. Students’ daily work should be 
assessed on a continuous basis. In addition to assessing knowledge students 
possess about Aboriginal peoples, teachers should assess progress in the 
students’ ability to communicate, analyze, and make good judgements. 
Teachers should also assess students’ achievement at the end of each unit 
using instruments such as a test or a written assignment. 



Techniques for Student Assessment 
Methods of Organization 



• Assessment Stations 



In arranging for the assessment of student progress teachers can use an 
assessment station. This is usually a place designated by the teacher 
where students, individually or in groups, can be assessed on knowledge, 
processes, skills, and attitudes. 

The assessment station allows students to be assessed and evaluated on a 
task that may involve the manipulation of materials, ideas or words. It is 
designed to be used during regular classroom time but is not limited to 
the classroom setting. 



22 





Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Individual Assessments 

In assessing individual student progress, comparisons can be made to 

— his or her previous level of expertise 

— a predetermined standard 

— a group standard at the same age or grade as the student 
Group Assessments 

In collecting assessment information on students working in group 
situations, teachers should 

— evaluate group work by awarding the same mark to all members of 
the group 

— evaluate individual student progress within the group, and use groups 
to structure learning, not for evaluation purposes 

— award separate marks for group work 

Contracts 

Contracts are plans of intended learning that students develop either by 
themselves or in conjunction with the teacher. Usually a contract 
includes a statement of the outcomes to be reached, the way in which 
these will be reached, a timeline, and criteria whereby the performance 
will be evaluated. 

Self- and Peer-Assessments 

Self-and peer-evaluation are designed to allow students to take more 
responsibility for learning by providing for reflection and feedback. In self- 
evaluation the student is learning about learning through reflecting on his 
or her own activities. In peer-evaluation, the student is learning about 
learning through reflecting on the activities of other students. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



• Portfolios 

The portfolio is a collection of student-produced materials assembled 
over an extended period of time allowing the teacher to evaluate student 
growth and overall learning progress during that period of time. 

Collection of student materials should be started as early as possible. 

Methods of Data Recording 

• Anecdotal Records 

This is a written description of observations made on students. These 
records are collected in a specific book or folder. Anecdotal records offer 
a way of recording aspects of students’ learning that may not be 
otherwise identified. The entries can be used to help form a basis for 
communication; they are primarily for teacher use, not necessarily for 
students, parents, or guardians. They also provide data to assist in the 
assessment of the holistic dimensions of student growth. 

• Observation Checklists 

This is a listing of specific concepts, skills, processes, and attitudes that you 
may wish to observe. Identity whether or not these have been mastered. 
It is best kept simple as it is usually used during class time. These are 
designed to be used frequently. 

• Rating Scales 

Rating scales are instruments that measure the extent to which specific 
concepts, skills, processes, or attitudes are reflected in students’ work. 
They enable the teacher to record student performance on a wide range 
of skills and attitudes. They are useful in situations where the student 
performance can be described along a continuum, such as participation in 
a debate. 



24 




109 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Ongoing Student Activities 

* Written Assignments 

One may collect student progress information by having students plan, 
organize and produce a written product. This may be in the form of a 
contract or as an ongoing task. It may be on an individual or a group 
basis. The written report may accompany a presentation or it may be a 
separate activity. One may assess the content, skill development, 
attitudes of the student toward the task, as well as the learning processes 
demonstrated during the production of a written document. 

* Presentations 

Presentations may be done on an individual or group basis. They may 
accompany written assignments. 

* Performance Assessments 

Students may be assessed on various forms of performance. 

* Homework 

These are assignments students must complete during their time away 
from the classroom. Gathering information prior to a class can be 
classified as homework. The task may include reading assigned passages, 
researching a topic or bringing certain materials to class. As an 
instructional method it can involve activities for independent study such 
as assigned questions, reports, and presentations. As an assessment 
technique, it can be used to evaluate student performance. Homework 
can be assessed for student understanding, quality of work, task 
commitment, or indicators of student willingness to keep up with the 
assigned work. Consider how the students arrived at the product, 
conference with the students regarding their thought processes in 
completing the task, and note the technical development that took place. 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Quizzes and Tests 

• Oral Assessment Items 

Oral assessments may be used when written responses are not 
appropriate. Oral assessments can also be used in situations where the 
attributes being tested are best assessed through oral responses, such as 
the ability to use the spoken word correctly, the ability to speak a second 
language, or the ability to debate. 

• Performance Test Items 

Performance test items help one assess how well a student performs a 
practiced behaviour. They are used in situations where the student is 
required to demonstrate competence directly, such as when making a 
speech. 

• Extended Open-Response Items 

Extended open-response items require a thorough response to an 
assigned topic in written form. Extended open-response items give 
students the freedom to respond to a question in ways that each feels is 
appropriate. Open responses are effective in assessing students’ powers 
of argument, evaluation and synthesis. They allow students to present 
beliefs and value positions on a wide variety of issues. 

• Short Answer Items 

Short-answer items are useful when you wish students to answer a 
specific question. They are often used for testing students’ ability to recall 
knowledge. Short-answer questions can be used to test higher levels of 
thinking or to assess attitude. They are useful in assessing how well 
students have internalized content. They should be supplemented with 
other techniques that assess other aspects of student progress. 





Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



® Matching Items 

Matching-item questions consist of a set of questions aligned in one 
column and a set of possible responses aligned in another column. They 
test the recall of factual information. They can provide a means of testing 
a wide array of related facts, associations, and relationships in an efficient 
manner. They are most effective when used along with other types of 
items. 

• Multiple-Choice Items 

Multiple choice items involve providing a direct question or statement 
followed by a number of possible answers, one of which is correct. Most 
often they are used to test student recall and recognition. They are also 
capable of testing higher-order thinking skills. 

• True or False Items 

In true or false items the student is required to indicate whether a given 
statement is true or false. They are used mainly to assess knowledge of 
content. A true or false test can measure abilities in a broad range of 
thinking levels. 



Examples of evaluative charts follow 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Student Self-Evaluation 




very easily 


easily 


with difficulty 


Using planning skills 

• 1 understood the topic 

• 1 made up research questions 

• 1 suggested possible sources 
of information 

• 1 chose the questions 

• 1 developed a research plan 

Using Information Processing Skills 

• 1 identified sources of information 

— in the school 

— in the community 

Using Information Processing Skills 

• 1 gathered and organized information 

• 1 discovered new information 

• 1 answered the questions 

• 1 used my own words to write the research 

• 1 edited the work 

Using Information Sharing Skills 

• 1 presented the research 
Using Evaluation Skills 

• 1 carried out the action plan 

• 1 learned the following skills and 
knowledge which can be used in 
other activities 






' 



28 

ERIC 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Assessing Students * Attitudes and Values 
in Relation to an Issue 

Student Name: 

Date or Time Period of Assessment: 

Rate the following applicable criteria: 

0 Never I Sometimes 2 Most of the time 3 Always 

Student read the material, watched the film or video, or listened to the tape of the 

background information about the issue. 

Student was active in the discussion on the issue. 

Student contributed an answer when asked a question concerning the issue. 

Student expressed ideas, comments, agreements, or disagreement with the response of 

other students. 

Student showed evidence of seeking more information on the issue. 

Student defended her or his position on the issue regardless of how much others 

disagreed 

Student accepted criticism of the position taken on the issue. 

Student demonstrated a thoughtfully developed position on the issue. 




29 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Holistic Rating Scale for an Oral Presentation 

Student Name: 

Date or Time Period of Assessment: 



Scale: 3 = Words are clear. 

Voice has good modulation. 

Speed of speech is well-paced. 

Pauses or emphases are appropriate. 

Voice is loud enough to be heard easily. 

Presentation is organized, logical, and interesting. 

Large amount of student preparation is evident. 

Material in presentation is relevant to topic. 

Language used in presentation is appropriate. 

Evidence of creativity exists in presentation of topic. 

Audience appears “involved” in the presentation. 

2 = Some words are not clear. 

Voice has some modulation. 

Rate of speech is at times too quick for the listener to catch the full meaning. 
Sentences have some inappropriate pauses or run on together, hampering 
meaning. 

Voice dropping in volume at times makes it difficult to get the full import of the 
presentation. 

Presentation shows signs of organization; however, there may be portions that 
do not tie together. 

Presentation has “down” portions with regard to keeping the audience 
interested. 

There is evidence of a fair amount of student preparation^ 

Material in presentation is, for the most part, appropriate. 

Format of presentation is predictable. 

Audience is passive listener. 



Continued 



30 



O 



115 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



I = Many words are not clearly spoken. 

Voice is more monotone in presentation. 

Rate of speech is either too fast or too slow. 

Pauses or emphases for effect are not in evidence. 

Voice is low, making hearing of the presentation difficult. 

Presentation shows poor organization. 

The audience reacts in a disinterested manner. 

There is minimal student preparation in evidence. 

Material in presentation inappropriate or does not appear relevant 
to the topic. 

Format of presentation lacks structure. 

Audience is not engaged. 

Scoring for the presentation is done on the basis of the category that is most representative. 




31 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Appraisal Form for a Group Presentation 
(Peer Evaluation) 


Rate presentation: (1 = poor, 2 = fair, 3 = good, 4 = very good, 5 = excellent) 




1 


2 


3 


4 


5 


Introduction 
Aroused interest 












Explained what the presentation would cover 












Body 

Presentation of information 












Relevance of material 












Use of examples 












Organization of ideas 












Conclusion 
Concluding statements 












Presentation 
Eye contact 












Vocabulary (precise, varied, and accurate) 












Posture 












Use of audiovisual aids 












Response to questions 












Movements (natural and expressive) 















Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Anecdotal Records for Group Process Activities 

Students’ Names 



Date or Time Period of Assessment 

Observation Period 

Comments Regarding Group Members 

1 . Demonstrates balance between talking and listening 

2. Demonstrates respect for others 

3. States own opinion 

Student(s) who fulfilled the role of recorder for group information 
Effectiveness 

Student(s) who fulfilled the role of participant 
Effectiveness 

Students) who fulfilled the role of time-keeper 
Effectiveness 



33 



Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 



Group Effectiveness Appraisal 

Name Group 

Project Title 

Audience 



Rate your group (I =poor, 2=fair, 3=good, 4=verygood, 5— excellent) 



• worked cooperatively with all group members 

• completed task 

• group performance satisfactory 

• efficient use of time 

• contribution towards completion of task 

Personal Assessment and Observations 



2 3 4 5 
2 3 4 5 
2 3 4 5 
2 3 4 5 
2 3 4 5 



• Are you satisfied with your participation in the project? 



• Do you think the others in your group worked to the best of their ability? 



• Do you think your group could have learned more? 



• Do you prefer to work individually or in a group? Explain your answer. 



• Explain one thing you learned by working on this project. 



34 





Native Studies: Early Years (K-4) 




Student Information Sheet 



Place a check mark in the column that best describes how your group members performed. 



Skills which help get 
the job done 


All of 
the time 


Most of 
the time 


Some of 
the time 


Not 
at all 


Tried to arouse interest of other group members, 
suggested courses of action to follow, suggested new 
courses of action when the group bogged down. 

Provided factual information to the group. 

Gave personal opinion on a topic to the group. 

Evaluated suggestions of group members to 
determine whether ideas would work or whether 
two ideas were contradictory. 

Encouraged the group to make a decision. 

Kept the group focused on the job, deflected 
irrelevant ideas, maintained standards, set agenda and 
saw that it was followed. 

Recorded the ideas expressed by the group. 

Demonstrated skills which help students cooperate 

Encouraged other members of the group to speak 
up and give their ideas or opinions. 

Supported group members by accepting their ideas 
and suggestions. 

Tried to get people with different points of view to 
think about the views of others and reach a 
consensus (meditating). 











Write down some examples of what group members did in the areas in which you were successful. 




O 

ERIC 



120 



35 



Native Studies: Early Years ( K-4 ) 



Bibliography 



Bloom, B.S., et al .Taxonomy of Educational Objectives: Handbook I, 
Cognitive Domain. New York, NY: D. McKay, 1956. 

Saskatchewan Education. Student Evaluation: A Teacher Handbook. Regina, 
SK: Saskatchewan Education, 1991. 

— . Student Evaluation: A teacher handbook for grades I to 12. Regina, SK: 
Saskatchewan Education, 1983. 



36 







12 2 




U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 




This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 



O 

ERIC 




