Journal of Advanced Acaden 



Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 pp. 202-235 


Expanding 
Opportunities for 
High Academic 
Achievement: 


An International Baccalaureate Diploma 
Program in an Urban High School 


Anysia P. Mayer 

University of Connecticut 


1 1s it possible to use well-defined academic programs to prepare 
low-income students and students of color for 4-year universi- 
ties and to interrupt the reproduction of social and educational 
disadvantage (Bourdieu ScPasseron, 1990)? What does it take to 
establish a high-quality academic program in a low-performing 
high school serving these students? What are the consequences 
of trying something of this sort — for the program and for the stu- 
dents who participate in it? Federal incentives and the standards 
set forth in the No Child Left Behind Act (NCLB; 2001) have 
prompted struggling urban school districts across the country to 
introduce rigorous curriculum like Advanced Placement (AP) 
courses and International Baccalaureate (IB) programs to help 
raise students’ academic performance (Kyburg, Hertberg-Davis, 
& Callahan 2007). Although AP and IB programs have become 
important signals of college readiness, there is little empiri- 
cal evidence to justify using these programs as a type of school 
reform effort to stimulate high academic achievement among 


202 


Copyright © 2008 Prufrock Press, P.O. Box 88 1 3, Waco, TX 7671 4 


Students of color are consistently underrepresented in honors and gifted 
programs nationwide. Research suggests that even high-achieving stu- 
dents share many of the risk factors with their low-achieving peers. As a 
result, their continued academic success is far from assured. In addition, 
research on academic intervention programs designed to help these 
students suggests these programs are not widespread or institutional- 
ized in schools in ways that will lead to meaningful gains in closing 
the achievement gaps at the high end of the academic spectrum. The 
study presented in this paper employed mixed methods to investigate 
the relationship between the design of a rigorous college preparatory 
program, the International Baccalaureate Diploma Program (IB), and 
the socioeconomic status of the students the program serves. The study 
found that an open admission International Baccalaureate (IB) program 
was successfully attracting and retaining African American, Latino, and 
Native American students from economically disadvantaged back- 
grounds. Findings are attributed to IB teachers' deeply held belief in the 
ability of the students to meet the rigor of the program. This IB program 
also has instituted a number of academic and social support mecha- 
nisms to keep students motivated to pursue the challenging curriculum. 


Mayer, A. P. (2008). Expanding opportunities tor high academic achievement: An 
International Baccalaureate Diploma program in an urban high school . Journal of Advanced 
Academics, 19, 202-235. 


summary 



EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


low-income Latino and African American students (Kyburg et 
al., 2007). In this article, I describe a research study designed to 
answer these important questions. My findings reveal that imple- 
menting a rigorous academic curriculum was only the first step 
in the process of raising the academic achievement of Latino and 
African American students. To maintain the academic rigor of 
the IB program, educators had to implement additional academic 
and social support mechanisms to ensure students were able to 
meet the numerous challenges of the IB program. My findings 
suggest that not only can an urban school serving Latino and 
African American students successfully implement a rigorous 
college preparatory program such as IB, with the appropriate 
scaffolds, this program can benefit a wide range of students. 

This paper begins with a brief overview of the literature that 
documents the academic achievement gap among high-achiev- 
ing Latino and African American students, as well as the lit- 
erature on intervention programs designed to ameliorate these 
gaps. Following a description of my methodology, I present the 
recruitment and admission practices employed by the program I 
studied. I conclude with a description of the academic and social 
scaffolds developed and implemented by local IB teachers that 
directly support students’ academic achievement. 


Academic Achievement 
and Educational Opportunity Gaps 

Even High-Achieving Latino and African American 
Students Do Not Achieve at the Same Level as Their White 
and Asian Peers 

Closing the academic achievement gap is one of the most 
pressing issues facing policy makers and educators. This gap is 
not just a phenomenon that exists at the midrange of scores; it is 
a significant feature of the upper range as well. For example, the 
top fifth of Latino students in 2002 had a SAT verbal score of 598 
and mean of 646 on the SAT math compared to score of 663 and 


204 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


Table 1 

Mean GPAs of High School Graduates 
by Gender and Ethnicity 


Male 

2.86 

Female 

3.09 

Asian 

3.16* 

Latino 

2.82* 

African American 

2.69* 

White 

3.05 


Note. From High School Transcript Study (HSTS), 1990—2005 , by U.S. Department 
of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 2007, Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Education, Government Printing Office. Retrieved March 6, 2008, from 
http://nationsreporteard.gov/hsts_2005/data_hs_gpa_3a_lc.asp 

* Significantly different from White graduates. 

720 respectfully for the top fifth of White students (Gandara, 
2005). This is a difference of two thirds to three fourths of a stan- 
dard deviation. The recently published High School Transcript 
Study (Shettle et al., 2007) reveals that the GPAs for Mexican 
American and African American students also lagged behind 
their White and Asian counterparts (see Table 1). Fewer African 
American and Latino students are enrolling in a college prepa- 
ratory curriculum (see Table 2). In examining two national data 
sets — the Early Childhood Longitudinal Study (ECLS) and 
the National Educational Longitudinal Study (NELS) — even 
the top quintile of Latino students in these studies scored lower 
than White and Asian American students. A closer investigation 
reveals that the family backgrounds of high-achieving minor- 
ity students tend to look more like those of their low-achieving 
peers than their high-achieving peers. Thus, even high-achiev- 
ing students share the same risk factors 1 as low-achieving stu- 
dents (Barton, 2003). According to ECLS-K 1998 data, Latino 
high-achieving students are far more likely than White students 
to have a mother or father with less than a bachelor’s degree 
(Gandara, 2005). They also are less likely than White high per- 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 205 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


Table 2 

Percentage Distribution of High School Graduates in a 
Rigorous Academic Curriculum** By Ethnicity, Academic 

Year 2005 


Ethnicity 

White 

11 

African American 

6 

Hispanic 

8 

Asian 

22 


Note. From High School Transcript Study (HSTS), 1990-2005 , by U.S. Department 
of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 2007, Washington, DC: U.S. 
Department of Education, Government Printing Office. Retrieved March 6, 2008, from 
http://nationsreportcard.gov/hsts_2005/data_hs_curr_2b_lc.asp 

**4 years of English; 3 years eaeh of social studies, mathematics (which includes precaleu- 
lus or higher), and science (which includes biology, chemistry, and physics); and 3 years of 
foreign language. 


formers to live with their two biological parents. Looking at the 
other end of the academic pipeline, the NELS data replicates 
many of the patterns found in the ECLS data. High-achieving 
Latino students in the NELS sample are more likely to have 
parents with low levels of education; more than 25% of Latino 
students compared with 5% of the White sample have at least 
one parent without a high school diploma (Gandara, 2005). 

African American, Latino, and Native American students 
are underrepresented in programs for the gifted and talented 
throughout the nation, and White and Asian students are over- 
represented. Table 3 shows the percentage of each ethnic group 
participating in these classes in K-12 in the 1997 school year, 
the most recent year for which these data are available. Tables 
4 and 5 show more recent data on students enrolled in K-12 
gifted programs in states serving high percentages of minority 
students. 

As Gandara (2005) pointed out, it does not make numeri- 
cal sense to attempt to close the academic achievement gap by 
focusing only on the lowest third of students. Yet under cur- 


206 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


Table 3 

Percent Participation in Gifted and Talented Classes by Ethnic 
Group and Percent K-l 2 Population, 1997 




Percent K-12 

Ethnic Group 

Percent of Gifted 

Population 

White 

76.61 

64.0 

Black 

6.63 

17.0 

Hispanic 

8.56 

14.3 

Asian 

6.63 

3.1 

Native Am 

.90 

1.1 

Note. From The Condition of Education 1998 , by U.S. Depar 

tment of Education, National 

Center for Education Statistics, 1999, Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 

Government Printing Office. 




Table 4 


Percent Identified as 

Gifted and Talented 

in 2004 by Ethnic 

Group and Percent K-l 2 Population, California 


Percent of Gifted 

Percent K-12 

Ethnic Group 

(2004) 

Population (2004) 

White 

47 

32.9 

Black 

4 

7.9 

Hispanic 

26 

46.8 

Asian 

22 

11.3 

Native Am 

1 

.82 

Note. Data from California Department of Education (2005) and National Association for 


Gifted Children (2005). 


rent accountability systems this is what local leaders believe they 
must do to meet federal and state academic requirements. The IB 
coordinator at the high school examined in this paper reported 
that even at his school this was the case. 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 207 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


Table 5 

Percent Identified as Gifted and Talented in 2004 By Ethnic 
Group and Percent K-l 2 Population, Texas 


Ethnic Group 

Percent of Gifted 
(2004) 

Percent K-12 
Population (2004) 

White 

55 

38 

Black 

8.5 

14 

Hispanic 

20 

45 

Asian 

6 

3 

Native Am 

0 

.3 


Note. Data from National Association for Gifted Children (2005) and Texas Education 
Agency Information Analysis Division (2004). 


He said, 

The school community has chosen to place its energy and 
emphasis on numerical indicators of student progress. 

The prevailing educational philosophy within the school 
is to focus on improving the test performance of students 
in the lowest third in order to raise overall school test 
scores. (Diploma program evaluation, March 25, 2005) 

Academic Interventions for Traditionally 
Underrepresented 2 Students 

Raising the achievement of high-school-age, low-income stu- 
dents of color to levels of “high achievement” is generally seen in 
the literature as helping these students become eligible for college. 
This usually means helping students to access college preparatory 
coursework, honors, and AP classes, and in so doing, strengthen- 
ing their academic skills. Schools often create special intervention 
programs for disadvantaged students that consist of activities such 
as tutoring, summer academic bridge programs, special intensive 
curricular interventions, SAT and ACT test preparation, and 


208 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


peer study groups. The activities listed above are designed by pro- 
gram administrators to help disadvantaged students overcome the 
numerous academic achievement barriers they face. 

A recent study by Gandara and Bial (2001) reviewed a 
national sample of intervention programs. The study sought to 
describe the kinds of strategies that are employed by program 
staff to prepare traditionally underrepresented students for col- 
lege and to assess the extent to which they were successful in 
meeting this goal. Gandara and Bial investigated 13 programs 
that had completed sufficiently rigorous evaluations to allow 
a judgment about their effectiveness. These included school- 
centered, classroom-centered, individual-focused, and statewide 
models. They were initiated and supported by private founda- 
tions, government agencies, schools, and universities. The evalua- 
tions reviewed by Gandara and Bial provided very little evidence 
of students’ improved academic performance. Among the most 
effective strategies reported were: (a) close monitoring of stu- 
dents’ personal and academic growth; (b) providing access to 
high-quality curriculum; (c) providing appropriate “scaffolding” 
to ensure academic success (tutoring, supplemental coursework, 
more time on task); and (d) providing academically oriented, 
supportive peer groups. If students are to successfully attain 
bachelor’s degrees, students need to be both motivated to attend 
college and adequately prepared to do college-level coursework. 
The evidence points to a need for more comprehensive interven- 
tion programs (Cooper, Chavira, 8c Mena, 2005). An example 
that includes some of the key ingredients is AVID, a model that 
combines college preparatory coursework along with additional 
social and academic support systems (Watt, Powell, 8c Mendiola 
2004). Some critics of expanding opportunities for students to 
take rigorous courses argue that students either will not enroll or 
that courses will be watered down (Loveless, 1999). 

The program presented in this study seemed to be one way 
to address weaknesses identified by Gandara and Bial’s (2001) 
study, as it provides both access to rigorous academic courses 
through the IB Diploma Program as well as academic and social 
scaffolding. My findings suggest that given the right set of aca- 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 209 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


demic supports, high levels of academic achievement can be 
fostered among students from diverse academic, socioeconomic, 
and ethnic backgrounds. 

The International Baccalaureate Diploma Program 

The International Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma Program is 
an internationally recognized and externally validated compre- 
hensive program of study that provides students with access to 
highly trained teachers and a very high-level curriculum. The 
IB Diploma Program is a 2-year program that begins in 11th 
grade. It is a comprehensive program composed of six subject 
areas and a core of three additional activities. Students gener- 
ally enroll in courses from each of the six subject areas during 
their junior and senior year. To earn a diploma, students must 
pass exams in all six subjects and complete the three additional 
core activities. The overarching goal of the curriculum is for stu- 
dents to gain both depth and breadth in each area of knowl- 
edge and for students to reflect and think critically about how 
all six areas of knowledge fit together (IBO, 2002). Many IB 
programs are implemented in relatively advantaged communi- 
ties in the U.S. where upper middle class parents have sought out 
educational advantages for their children (IBO, 2006; Mathews, 
2003). As of fall 2006, there were 462 schools authorized to offer 
the Diploma Program in the U.S., representing 44% of the IB 
schools worldwide. In recent years, schools in California, Texas, 
Philadelphia, and New York that serve socioeconomically disad- 
vantaged students have implemented IB Diploma Programs as a 
type of organizational-level reform effort designed to stimulate 
high achievement (personal interview, IBNA Executive Officer, 
January 24, 2005). Increasing access for underrepresented stu- 
dents to IB programs was one of the International Baccalaureate 
North America (IBNA) Executive Board’s primary goals. Its 
strategic plan states: 

Access is the second principal concept of the new IB 

plan. By creating partnerships and seeking outside fund- 


2 1 0 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


ing, it is hoped that IBNA can expand IB programs to 
new schools and new populations in the region. This 
effort is not intended to diminish the achievement of 
existing schools receiving IB services, but to add to the 
richness and diversity of the current IB community. By 
purposefully reaching out to all communities, by seeking 
new ways to be inclusive, by sharing our expertise with 
the broader population in the region, IBNA places itself 
squarely behind the ideal expressed in the IBO mission 
statement. These efforts will be the best response to the 
charge of “elitism” that is leveled against IB programs. 
IBO is unapologetic about creating and maintaining high 
academic standards for all its academic programs, but it 
insists that these programs should be available to all stu- 
dents who seek the challenge of educational excellence. 
(International Baccalaureate Organization, 2004, p. 4) 

Although the recognition offered by prestigious 4-year uni- 
versities have made AP and IB courses signals of students’ col- 
lege readiness, there has been very little empirical research on 
how AP and IB participants fair in college (National Research 
Council, 2002). Adelman (1999) found students who took rig- 
orous courses were more successful in college but AP and IB 
courses were not the focus of his investigation. A study by Geiser 
and Santelices (2004) specifically attempted to ascertain the pre- 
dictive validity of AP and IB courses on college grades and reten- 
tion of students enrolled as first-time freshman from 1998-2004 
at all eight University of California campuses. Controlling for 
demographic and socioeconomic variables, they found students 
enrolled in IB courses in high school earned higher college 
grade point averages (GPA) than students who had not taken IB 
courses (Geiser 8c Santelices, 2004). Other research conducted 
in a school district in New York, serving socioeconomically and 
ethnically diverse students, attributed expanded AP and IB 
course enrollments to students’ higher scores on Regents’ math 
exams (Burris, Heubert, 8c Levin, 2004). A more recent study of 
three urban high schools investigated how well IB and AP pro- 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 21 1 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


grams serve underrepresented students’ academic needs (Kyburg 
et al., 2007). The paper presented a useful model that represents 
the incredibly complex factors that influence underrepresented 
students’ participation and success in advanced academic courses. 
Classroom observations and interviews with teachers, students, 
and parents at these schools revealed significant variation among 
these groups regarding the appropriateness of the AP and IB 
curricula to meeting students’ needs. Researchers also found that 
successful AP and IB programs were characterized by teachers’ 
beliefs in their students’ abilities to meet the high expectations 
of the curricula as well as support mechanisms designed to foster 
positive peer support groups and college-oriented activities. 


Methodology 

In 1982, as a response to a statewide effort to improve large 
urban schools, Jefferson High School received a grant to facili- 
tate the implementation of three small learning communities on 
campus. The International Baccalaureate (IB) Diploma Program 
was one of these programs, and the only one that sustained imple- 
mentation until the time of this study in 2003. In 1991, Portville 
School District began implementing a voluntary desegregation 
program in an effort to draw White families back to the dis- 
trict (all names are pseudonyms). Like many districts across the 
country, Portville launched magnet programs at local elementary, 
middle, and high schools in an attempt to create demographi- 
cally balanced schools (Rossell 6c Armor, 1996) and chose to 
include Jefferson High School’s IB program in this magnet plan. 
According to court order, the district monitored the ethnicity 
and socioeconomic status of students participating in the IB 
program and took an active role in marketing the program, one 
of three secondary-level magnet programs, to families through- 
out the district. Thus the IB program was required to participate 
in local recruitment events such as the Magnet Fair, held at the 
local shopping mall each winter where the teachers and students 
provided information about the program. The district also pro- 


2 1 2 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


duced a color brochure describing the unique attributes of the 
magnet programs that was mailed to local households. 

School Desegregation in Portville 

In 1974, a lawsuit brought about court-ordered desegre- 
gation in Portville School District. In 1977, when the district 
implemented a mandatory desegregation program, 59% of the 
district’s student population was White (Rossell, 1994). The 
mandatory desegregation plan implemented by the district 
involved involuntary bussing of both minority and White stu- 
dents. This program achieved its goal of creating racially balanced 
schools. But, not unlike communities attempting to desegregate 
schools in the South, 3 years into implementation, Portville 
saw its White enrollment decline by 32% (Rossell, 1994). The 
Portville community was deeply impacted by the implementa- 
tion of these programs and has not recovered. Even though the 
district switched to a voluntary magnet-based desegregation 
plan in 1991, the district did not see the return of White fami- 
lies. Due in part to a doubling of minority student enrollment, 
Portville’s students now attend some of the most racially iso- 
lated schools in the country (Frankenburg 6c Lee, 2002; Rossell, 
1994). At the time of this study few White or middle class fami- 
lies remained in the urban neighborhoods served by Portville 
School District (as of 2007 only 14% of the district population 
was White; Frankenburg 6c Lee, 2002) . In 2004, the courts found 
the district schools were in compliance with U.S. Constitutional 
requirements, and the district was declared unitary, ending the 
34-year court case. The district was allowed to maintain the mag- 
net programs. However, allocation of seats in magnet programs 
was to be made according to geographic distribution. The legacy 
of desegregation is important to this study for two reasons. First, 
schools in South Portville, like Jefferson, were at the center of 
the minority parents’ legal arguments claiming racial bias and 
educational inequality. Second, although the district intended 
to increase White enrollment by supporting the implementa- 
tion of a rigorous college preparatory academic program like IB, 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 213 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


Jefferson teachers responsible for the IB program’s day-to-day 
operations did not share this goal. 

Data Collection 

The literature describing the efforts of intervention programs 
designed to increase the numbers of traditionally underserved 
students transitioning from high school to college reported that 
these programs were successfully helping students who were 
already academically prepared, but they seemed to have little 
impact on increasing the academic achievement of underpre- 
pared students (Gandara & Bial, 2001). While collecting data 
on university partnership programs for another research project, 
I learned of the IB Diploma Program at Jefferson High School. 
In light of past research, I wanted to conduct an investigation 
of Jefferson’s IB program to understand how it operated, who 
it served, if it were implemented according to the prescribed IB 
model, and if it were impacting students’ academic achievement 
and in fact sending students to 4-year universities. My investiga- 
tion began with an initial study of all of the college prep path- 
ways available at Jefferson, which involved an in-depth study of 
each program’s recruitment and admissions practices. This article 
primarily reports findings from the second study I conducted at 
Jefferson — a study solely focused on the IB program. My under- 
standing of the IB program and its admission and recruitment 
practices draws on findings from the first study. 

A White female, I was the only researcher involved in the 
study and performed all of the data collection, coding, and anal- 
ysis. My study of IB program implementation spanned across 
dimensions such as program characteristics, local organizational 
capacity, resources and barriers, and program outcomes. I spent 
one day a week during the 2003-2004 academic year for a total 
of 24 visits to Jefferson High. Although I always introduced 
myself as a graduate student from a local university, I positioned 
myself as an interested observer during my visits, emphasizing 
that I was a former teacher interested in learning more about 


2 1 4 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


the program, so as not to leave the impression that I was there to 
judge or evaluate the program. 

To gain an understanding of the program philosophy and 
key components of the IB program, I interviewed officials from 
the national headquarters of the IB program in New York and an 
IB Executive Board member. Based on program documents and 
interviews, I identified key program components and actions 
schools would be required to take in order to implement the IB 
model with fidelity. Using a semistructured interview protocol 
with open-ended interview questions, I interviewed program 
coordinators, counselors, administrators, teachers, and parents 
affiliated with Jefferson’s IB program. I used a similar protocol 
to interview three district administrators and a school board 
member. I asked individuals to reflect on their experiences with 
the program, how they came to participate in the program, how 
they perceived the program was functioning, who they thought 
the program served, and their experiences with parents. During 
interviews with teachers, I asked about professional develop- 
ment participation, years of teaching experience, and educational 
background. I also asked teachers to compare their IB teaching 
experiences with previous teaching experiences. The interviews 
lasted 30-50 minutes on average. All interviews were conducted 
individually either in a classroom or school office. Parent inter- 
views were conducted in a group of four. Additional comments 
from parents were collected after recruitment sessions or IB par- 
ent meetings, until I felt I had collected the full range of parent 
experiences. I was able to identify key program stakeholders at 
the school, district, and national level from contact lists avail- 
able on the Internet. IB Program coordinators provided me with 
contact information for parents. All interviews were recorded 
electronically and then transferred to Annotape, partially tran- 
scribed and then coded. 

Thus the primary data sources for this study were transcrip- 
tions of 63 interviews with school personnel, parents, and IB 
administrators. In many cases, teachers invited me to observe 
their classes either before or after interviews. These observa- 
tions were not included in the data analysis, but they did inform 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 215 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


my understanding of the IB curriculum and student-teacher 
interactions. 

To triangulate interview data, I observed after-school activi- 
ties such as student recruitment and parent information ses- 
sions. I made detailed field notes during these observations, then 
I entered them into Annotape for coding and analysis. Using 
Annotape software, I reviewed transcripts and field notes and 
coded the data as I identified key program components in place 
at Jefferson. I then searched the data to capture other significant 
aspects of the IB program. Examples of these were coded as such 
and represent the significant findings presented in this report. 

A data sharing agreement between my university and the 
Portville school district allowed me to access longitudinal tran- 
script data for Jefferson students in attendance between 2000 
and 2004. Additional data on Jefferson students’ university 
attendance was collected and provided by the IBNA office in 
New York. 

Limitations of the Study 

During the research process, I was well aware that my pres- 
ence and status as a university researcher might influence respon- 
dents’ answers to my inquiries and that staff might “try to look 
good” for my benefit. To mitigate this influence, I attempted 
to have numerous interactions with key stakeholders in a vari- 
ety of situations until I was satisfied that I had obtained con- 
sistent responses through prolonged exposure. The findings I 
report in this study may not be generalizable beyond the school 
I investigated. 

Research Site 

Jefferson High School is an urban comprehensive high 
school that serves primarily Latino, Black, and Southeast Asian 
students. Jefferson High has been in operation for more than 40 
years. I was particularly interested in Jefferson because, based on 
my review of the literature, it was a highly unlikely place to find 


2 1 6 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


a rigorous college preparatory program. Jefferson High School 
was receptive to researchers from the local university because 
the school had an established relationship with the University 
of California prior to the inception of my study When I began 
my study, one of my first interviews was with a Portville school 
board member. He met me at a community center not far from 
Jefferson High for our interview. He greeted me and said, 
“Welcome to the ghetto.” I begin my description of Jefferson 
High School with this anecdote because the statistics that fol- 
low describe the school, but not the labels that often come with 
the statistics. Jefferson is an archetype of the urban comprehen- 
sive high school in California and, perhaps, the nation. Jefferson 
High School is set in a residential neighborhood a few miles 
from the downtown area of a moderately sized industrial city 
of Portville. The city of Portville is 37% Latino, 53% White, 
11% African American, 37% Asian, and .5% Native American/ 
Alaska Native (U.S. Census Bureau, 2005). Of the population 25 
years and over in Portville, 68.2% have a high school diploma, 
15.4% have a bachelor’s degree and 4.9% have a graduate or 
professional degree (U.S. Census Bureau, 2000). Jefferson High 
School is designated as a Title 1 school by the Department of 
Education. Title 1 schools receive special funds from the fed- 
eral government to provide remedial or compensatory education 
programs for low-income students. Jefferson serves a population 
that has all of the academic achievement risk factors identified 
in the literature (Barton, 2003). It is large, serving 3,176 students 
with 132 teachers on staff. It is diverse, 60% Latino, 13% Asian, 
12% African American, 10% White, and 5% American Indian 
or Alaskan Native. According to the California Department of 
Education (CDE; 2005) Academic Performance Index (API) 
report for 2005, 1,374 students were classified as economically 
disadvantaged. Their API score was 539 of a possible 1,000 
points in 2004. Jefferson’s API score is among the lowest in the 
state. The school has been sanctioned or called a “high priority 
school” under California’s school accountability system. These 
sanctions mean that the Portville school district received addi- 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 217 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


tional state funding from 2001-2004 to increase students’ aca- 
demic performance. 

International Baccalaureate Diploma Program 
Begins as a Magnet Program at Jefferson High 

The following paragraphs were written by Jefferson IB’s 
coordinators in 2004. They describe the context and the early 
history of the IB program at Jefferson High. 

The International Baccalaureate Diploma Program 
at Jefferson High School was established in 1993 as a 
magnet Program for Portville Unified School District in 
California. Following desegregation of the school system 
in 1970s, many of the affluent families in Portville moved 
to neighborhoods in the northern part of the city. The 
remaining population of Portville Unified School District 
consisted of a diverse group of families from low socio- 
economic backgrounds. In establishing the IB Diploma 
Program in 1993, the school administrators hoped to 
draw students from the more affluent neighborhoods of 
surrounding districts back to Jefferson High School. 

During the early years, the Program at Jefferson 
confronted issues similar to many new IB Programs. 
Generating energy and enthusiasm for IB was challeng- 
ing. There were few students willing to do any IB courses. 

The teachers lacked confidence in themselves and their 
students. At the time, few teachers even expressed the 
belief that “kids like ours” could be successful in an IB 
Program. Thus, they were unwilling to devote the time 
and energy that was necessary to succeed. Adding to the 
difficulties, all of the students had to take identical classes 
because the course offerings were limited. Students had 
to complete district and state requirements in addition 
to IB requirements, making the IB Diploma exceedingly 
difficult to attain. 


2 1 8 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


By 1999, the district and IBO were unhappy. The dis- 
trict increasingly viewed the Program as a failure because 
only a few students were earning the IB Diploma. The 
Program seemed to be going nowhere and the number of 
students entering the Program was declining. By the end 
of the year, the district lost the magnet funding for the 
Program. The outlook for the future of the IB Diploma 
Program at Jefferson High School was bleak. What could 
be done? (IBNA Journal of Best Practices, 2004) 

In 1995, Jefferson had only 3 IB diploma candidates. By 1999, 
the number had not increased. According to an IBNA official, 
Jefferson teachers knew something needed to change or the pro- 
gram’s authorization would be revoked by IBO (IBNA Executive 
Official, personal interview, January 24, 2005). In 1999, in an 
effort to rejuvenate the program, John (a history teacher) and his 
wife Helen (an English teacher) were asked by Jefferson’s princi- 
pal to serve as co-coordinators of the IB Diploma Program. John 
and Helen were both Stanford University graduates. John had a 
teaching certificate in gifted and talented education, had taught 
at Jefferson for 30 years, and was chair of the history department. 
Making the IB program work for the Latino, African American, 
Asian, and Native American students from Jefferson’s attendance 
area became John and Helen’s personal crusade. John and Helen 
once told me in an interview, “Doing this work remains an excit- 
ing and rewarding labor of love” (personal interview, May 31, 
2005). As a coordinator, John proved to be both charismatic and 
tenacious. John and Helen’s first task was to increase the number 
of students participating in the IB program, which meant adopt- 
ing a new admission philosophy. 

The IB Admission Philosophy at Jefferson High 

Given the persistent underrepresentation of minority stu- 
dents in advanced academic programs at all levels, the issue of 
how to identify students for participation in advanced programs 
has garnered considerable discussion in the literature (Ford, 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 219 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


Harris,Tyson,&Trotman,2002; Strong-Scott8cDelgado,2005). 
The use of traditional achievement tests to identify students for 
these programs has been blamed for minority underrepresen- 
tation (Figueroa Sc Ruiz, 1999; Vanderslice, 1999). Although 
researchers recognize the flaws of using traditional achievement 
tests, there seems to be little consensus among researchers on 
how schools should identify students who will be best served in 
advanced academic programs (Smutny, 2003). 

It is not uncommon for high school honors and AP or IB 
programs to serve as extensions of districts’ K-8 gifted and tal- 
ented programs and to maintain some minimum criteria, such as 
a score in the 85th percentile on a standardized test, for admission 
to the program according to IB administrators at the national 
level (IBNA Executive Officer, personal interview, January 24, 
2005). The IBO does not officially have any policy regarding 
admission to the IB Diploma Program; thus admission criteria 
are adopted by local coordinators. John, Jefferson’s IB coordina- 
tor, described his admission philosophy in the following way: 

One of the main reasons for our program’s recent growth 
is access. Jefferson High School has always extended a 
policy of open enrollment for the IB program. All students 
are encouraged to pursue the full diploma. Students from 
outside the Jefferson attendance area must take at least 
four classes to stay in the program. There are no entrance 
exams, no GPA requirements, and no interviews prior to 
taking IB courses. Any student who has the desire to enter 
our program may do so. We encourage students to be at or 
near grade level in language and math. We also emphasize 
the need to be self-motivated. Although some students 
are invited to apply based on a GPA of 3.0 or higher, any 
interested student can submit an application through the 
district’s magnet application process to enter the pre-IB 
program in ninth grade. We prefer to have students make 
the attempt, assess their prospects, and choose to leave the 
program on their own, rather than to exclude them at the 
outset, (personal interview, May 31, 2005) 


220 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Table 6 

Demographic Characteristics of Students 2004 


Mayer 


% 

African 

American 

Asian 

American 

Latino 

Native 

American 

White 

IB Program 

12.4 

15.8 

47.3 

.1 

21 

Jefferson High 
School 

13.7 

12.8 

56.1 

4.3 

11.8 

Portville School 
District 

14.9 

15.7 

47.4 

2.9 

13.5 

U.S. IB 
Students 

10 

15 

9 

.4 

63 


Note. Data from California Department of Education (2005) and International Baccalaureate 
North America (2004). 


In 2003, the open admission process attracted eighth-grade 
students with a wide range of GPAs (n = 172) — 59% of the 
incoming eighth-grade students had GPAs of 3.0 or higher, 35% 
had GPAs between 2.0 and 3.0, and the remainder had GPAs 
below 2.0. Only half of these students had completed algebra 
in eighth grade, and 42% of these students began their educa- 
tion in the U.S. as English learners. Approximately 50% of these 
students received federal free and reduced lunch. Table 6 dem- 
onstrates that the open-access admission policy had successfully 
captured students traditionally underrepresented in accelerated 
programs. 

Admission Perspectives From the International 
Baccalaureate Organization 

Unlike some college preparatory intervention programs, 
like AVID (Watt et al., 2004) or Puente (Gandara, Mejorado, 
Gutierrez, & Molina, 1998), the IB Diploma Program does not 
have formal admissions guidelines. When I asked IBO affiliates 
about admission policies, I learned that IBO administrators have 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 221 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


purposely chosen to leave this matter up to local schools (IB 
Executive Board Member, personal interview, March 18, 2005; 
IBNA Executive Officer, personal interview, March 28, 2005). 
For example, one state used data provided by local IB program 
coordinators to investigate differences in exam pass rates between 
IB programs based on the type of admission policy the school 
employed. 

The IB administrator said: 

One important bit of data from the Five Year Program 
Evaluations collected from all IB high schools in 
California related to the issue of program access. I really 
wanted to know about the entry criteria programs were 
using, because I wanted to compare the exam pass rates 
of schools with “open” entrance requirements [schools 
where the only criteria was motivation] versus “high 
gates” [schools who required gifted and talented status or 
test scores] for entry. A researcher did some analysis of 
the data and found that there was only a difference of two 
percentage points in pass rates. In other words, no differ- 
ence really [64% vs. 66% average pass rate]. (California 
IB Organization President, personal interview, January 
24,2005) 

IB executives understood the relationship between a pro- 
gram’s admission policies and students’ exam scores as evidenced 
by the following statement: 

You have to be careful how you interpret the results of 
an IB exam. If your goal is for all students to get five, 
six, sevens on IB exams and you want every kid in your 
program to get a diploma, well, you can accomplish that 
by limiting the number of kids that you allow to take 
the program, or make sure that you take only the best — 
the best isn’t the right word — only the most prepared 
students into your program. But, if you start to appreci- 
ate how much this [program] can help all kinds of kids 


222 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


then you may have a gentler view, when your diploma 
rate goes down or your kids are getting threes and fours, 
because you are more aware of the distance students have 
traveled. And this may be more important than the des- 
tination. (IBNA Executive Officer, personal interview, 
January 21, 2005) 

In 2004, at one suburban high school in California that accepts 
only students who have been previously identified as gifted and 
talented, 96% of the IB exam scores were passing or higher 
(Mayer, 2006). For the U.S. as a whole, 80% of IB exams are 
passed, and internationally 85% are passed (Mayer, 2006). By 
comparison, in 2004, only 48% of IB exam scores were passing 
or higher at Jefferson, where the program had an open admission 
policy. 

Despite the fact that national IB representatives said they 
actively share their open entrance philosophy with teachers with 
the hope that more teachers would be open to accepting a wide 
variety of academically prepared students into IB their classes, 
one IBO representative said, “I know some older IB teachers 
are really attached to the validation of their teaching that they 
get from their students’ exam scores. This need for validation 
keeps these teachers from taking Tow’ kids into their program” 
(IBNA Executive Officer, personal interview, January 21, 2005). 
According to this representative, school counselors were another 
group that needed to be convinced to let a wider variety of stu- 
dents into their IB programs. Although this representative was 
enthusiastic about communicating that an IB program could 
accommodate many levels of academic preparation, her state- 
ments also indicated that IBO was not currently planning to use 
policy levers to institute these beliefs. 

IB administrators at the national level argue that they can 
leave admission decisions up to the program coordinators at local 
schools because of the high level of program fidelity: “There is 
only one IB program . . . fidelity is a nonnegotiable” (California 
IB Organization President, personal interview, January 21, 
2005). I specifically asked IBNA representatives if they thought 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 223 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


IB programs implemented in schools serving low-income and 
minority students would need to implement their IB programs 
differently than schools that served socially and economically 
advantaged students. These representatives repeatedly empha- 
sized the importance of program fidelity. Data from a study on 
program implementation supports their claim (Mayer, 2006). 
The IB program at Jefferson was implemented as prescribed by 
the IBO with a very high level of fidelity. However, there was 
an important relationship between students’ academic and fam- 
ily backgrounds and program design. The Jefferson program had 
many unique qualities that went above and beyond the standard 
set of IB components. These components were directly related 
to the characteristics of the students they serve. I characterized 
these components as scaffolds. 

Meeting IB’s Academic Expectations: 

Providing Students With Academic and Social Scaffolds 

Scaffolding is a concept attributed to Vygotsky’s (1978) 
work in child development. In this context, Mehan, Villanueva, 
Hubbard, and Lintz (1996) defined scaffolding as a series of 
both social and academic supports specifically designed to help 
underachieving students achieve academically. For example, John, 
Jefferson’s coordinator, said, “For a lot of our kids just being here 
[at school] every day is an immense success, accomplishing stuff 
while they are here is an even greater success, and then for them 
to accomplish things at a high level is off the charts” (personal 
interview, March 20, 2004). After taking their positions as coor- 
dinators in 1999, Jefferson’s coordinators, John and Helen, real- 
ized that their open enrollment policy meant that students were 
entering the program with different levels of academic prepara- 
tion. In a 2004 newsletter, the coordinators wrote: 

As an open-enrollment program, we run the risk of los- 
ing some students before they finish the Diploma. In 

some cases, the students cannot do the work. In others, 


224 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


they are not willing to do the work. As each year passes, 
we find better ways to support those who are struggling. 

To ameliorate these differences, John and Helen developed 
several different types of scaffolds to help students acquire the 
academic skills and social supports most students already have 
when they enter the program at other schools. John said, 

The more things you have in place to reach more kids — 
teachers who are supportive and coming from their heart, 
a program where overall kids are excited to be there, 
where there is social connection — you have a chance of 
drawing in more and more kids, (personal interview, May 
31,2005) 

These aspects of the IB program appeared to be unique to 
Jefferson. These scaffolds included counseling, academic enrich- 
ment courses, and social supports. 

Counseling 

Counselors’jobs often differ depending on the demographic 
characteristics of the students they serve (Paul, 2002). At 
Jefferson the counselors said they had not been given the oppor- 
tunity to attend even the free college preparatory conferences 
sponsored by local universities. By comparison, IB counselors at 
another California school regularly attended college admissions 
workshops sponsored by Ivy League universities. Observation 
and interview data revealed that the majority of counselors at 
Jefferson were focused on helping students meet local high school 
graduation requirements. Jefferson’s IB coordinators realized 
that their students needed a counselor who could help students 
with college admissions requirements, financial aid, and moni- 
toring students’ academic progress. The IB coordinators worked 
with Jefferson’s administrators to have IB students assigned to 
a single counselor who participated in IB professional develop- 
ment. As the program grew, this counselor played an important 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 225 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


role in helping coordinators to track student progress, to identify 
students who might be struggling academically, and to provide 
students with financial aid and scholarship counseling. 

Academic Enrichment Opportunities 

Academic enrichment opportunities offered by the IB teach- 
ers occurred during and after the academic school day. For exam- 
ple, the ninth-grade Spanish-speaking algebra teacher provided 
free after-school tutoring for students. During lunch, 11th- and 
12th-grade biology students served as science tutors for 9th- and 
lOth-grade students. The IB coordinators also arranged for the 
district to offer a special summer course in algebra for students 
interested in IB who had not completed algebra in the eighth 
grade. In addition, Helen pointed out in a 2004 newsletter: 

Our students have 2 full years of IB-caliber classes before 
they enter the Diploma Program. A demanding pre- 
IB program helps to prepare students for the Diploma 
Program. Our freshman curriculum includes a course 
called Introduction to Inquiry, which is designed to ensure 
that all students have the skills necessary to be successful 
in the program. The commitment to community service 
also begins in the pre-IB program as part of the course 
evaluation in Introduction to Inquiry. The hours do not 
count towards the IBO service learning requirement in 
the Diploma program. However, the requirement instills 
in students the idea of service as part of the learning 
experience. We view the preparation as critical to their 
success in obtaining the Diploma. The 4-year commit- 
ment is essential to creating our IB family. 

Social Scaffolds 

Research demonstrates that students can benefit academi- 
cally from a positive, academically oriented peer group and can 
be similarly disadvantaged by a peer group that is not academi- 


226 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


cally oriented (Gandara, O’Hara, 6c Gutierrez, 2004; Henderson, 
1997; Ogbu, 1978; Stanton-Salazar 1997). As Ogbu (2003) 
pointed out, “For Black students, peers had a negative impact on 
academic engagement. . . . Poor academic performance . . . was 
partly due to the achievement norms of peer groups” (p. 197). 
John, the Jefferson IB coordinator, believed: 

The identity that the kids get from participating in the 
IB community is a healthy one. It feeds their self-esteem, 
their belief in themselves, but it doesn’t isolate them. IB 
kids don’t think that they are better than everybody else; 
they come from modest backgrounds. There isn’t the 
temptation to set themselves way above everybody else; a 
superior attitude is not encouraged by the staff, (personal 
interview, April 13, 2004) 

The Hispanic Dropout Project’s findings (Secada et al., 1998) 
support Jefferson coordinators’ views that supportive student- 
teacher relationships are important to students’ academic success. 
Other studies also support coordinators’ beliefs that building 
trusting relationships with teachers can influence student aca- 
demic achievement (Alexander, Entwisle, 6c Thompson, 1987; 
Gandara, 1995; Quint, 2006; Stanton-Salazar 6c Dornbusch 
1995). An IB club meets once a month during lunch to plan 
activities. The psychology teacher, who has a master’s degree in 
counseling and prior experience working with at-risk youth, runs 
an after-school physical education class in horsemanship. 

John and Helen also have developed several student retreats 
modeled after youth leadership development programs. As John 
described in a 2004 newsletter, 

One activity is “Warm-Up Week,” which all incom- 
ing freshmen are encouraged to attend. For 5 hours a 
day during Warm-Up Week we work with the students 
in developing the attitudes and teamwork strategies in 
order to succeed in the program. We also provide them 
with opportunities to practice and apply what they 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 227 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


learn. Students from grades 10 through 12 also attend 
and advise small groups. We find that the students who 
attend the Warm Up Week are more confident and bet- 
ter prepared starting the school year. They also have a 
head start on forming the connections with other stu- 
dents, an essential element to success in the IB program. 
During the Senior Diploma Candidate Retreat each fall, 
the candidates and some of the senior staff retreat for 
3 days to camp in the nearby foothills, an event that is 
sponsored by the Parent Booster Club. We instituted the 
retreat because our students were having serious diffi- 
culty completing their Extended Essays and maintain- 
ing the momentum of their junior year in the program. 
Ostensibly, the purpose is to read and discuss Extended 
Essays and to provide encouragement toward comple- 
tion, which does happen to a greater or lesser degree. For 
students who do not have a supportive home environ- 
ment, the retreat encourages them to rely on one another 
and on their teachers for support and motivation. 

In interviews, John and Helen shared that the purpose of the 
retreats and clubs is to give students an opportunity to build 
trusting relationships with teachers outside of the school con- 
text. They summarized their results in a 2004 newsletter: 

John and Helen’s attempts have been successful. As one 
set of parents reported: We feel that one thing which 
the IB program provides, which is very seldom accom- 
plished in public schools, is a sense of community. This is 
a quality which is most often found in the home, church, 
or organizations and clubs, but which is quite often dif- 
ficult, if not impossible, to create in a public school. Both 
of our children have found a close-knit support group 
within the IB community, both with other students and 
with staff. This has made it easier, more fun, and more 
rewarding to achieve the difficult goals of the IB program. 
Achieving these goals has made it possible for them to 


228 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


better synthesize, analyze, and articulate the information 
in the curriculum. 

Students’ own statements revealed that John and Helen’s 
efforts to create a supportive environment were working: 

Environment plays a major role in learning. The IB pro- 
gram is for kids who have a common goal, to learn. Being 
with other students who want to learn can make a big 
difference. In [regular] classes we are interrupted by stu- 
dents who are not willing to learn. Instead, we are in a 
classroom filled with students who are there for the same 
reason that I want to [be] there. Therefore, this causes 
less distraction for us. And gives us the grades we want. 
(Student 4, essay, May 5, 2004) 

Other students said, “IB is more than just an academic pro- 
gram . . . It’s a family. There’s Helen and John playing the role 
of parents . . . our fellow peers play the role of brothers and sis- 
ters” (Student 77, essay, May 5, 2004), and “The program offers 
a small family environment in a school filled with a tremendous 
amount of students” (Student 86, essay, May 5, 2004). During 
exam week I observed on two different occasions teachers bring 
breakfast to their students and provide encouragement during 
the tense hours prior to their exams. 


Significance 

Jefferson’s IB students are succeeding in an extremely rigor- 
ous academic curriculum and preparing to go to college in part 
because of the additional scaffolds John and Helen have built 
into their program. Student data in Table 7 illustrates the tre- 
mendous growth of the IB program since the implementation of 
the open application process and scaffolds. In 2006, 48 of the 55 
diploma candidates went on to college. Findings from this study 
suggest a wide range of students can succeed in a rigorous aca- 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 229 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 



cQ 

Jd 

a 

o 

Q 

CD 

> 

Q_ 

U 

oo 

0 

Q 



"■a 

<d 


vp 

O' 

vp 

O' 

Vp 

o' 

'vP 

o' 

>p 

o'- 


C/D 

C/D 

IT -1 

o 


00 


er) 


OS 

£ 

T— 1 

CO 

co 

oo 

T— 1 



HH 


LT) 

CO 

en 

NO 


'P 

O' 


00 

00 

00 

00 

00 

C/D 

o 







s 



Np 

0 s - 

>P 

o' 

>p 

o' 

Np 

O' 

'p 

O' 

cP 

"■a 

CO 

^J- 

O 

<N 


nO 

r *j 

<d 


p 


NO 

<n 

00 

w 

C/D 


ON 

o 

T— 1 

co 

<N 

>p 

0 s 

C3 

PL, 



00 

00 

00 

00 


B 'Q 
S £ 
W s* 

•vO ^ 


'p 

O' 

'P 

O' 

'p 

O' 

'vP 

o'- 

>p 

O' 

co 

O 

O 

er) 

en 

en 

T— 1 

On 

en 

CO 


00 

ON 


T— 1 



LT) 

en 

er> 


S T> 


(N 00 IT) 


NO 


Ctf <U 

s M 

o 3 

^ £ 

n 

M O 


I 

S " J - 

rt <» 


w 


to 

er> 


cn 


NO 

co 


LT) 

NO 


00 

o 



W S 




co 

CO 

<N 

00 

00 

ON 

T Tf 

O 

ON 


CO 

CO 

r<j 

T— 1 

T— 1 


v od 

-J-* <D 

r£ C 

*3 1 

s a 

o w 


cn 

^r 


NO CNJ o 

no m 


C/D 

CJ 


52 ^ 

^ a 

o 

O 

PQ ° 


£ 


NO 

er> 


cnj 

T— 1 

T— 1 

H 

rH 

T— 1 

T— 1 

er> 


co 

<N 

T— 1 

o 

O 

o 

O 

o 

o 

o 

O 

O 

o 

ON 

CNJ 

cnj 

CNJ 

CS 


230 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


demic program like IB. Academic programs can maintain their 
integrity without limiting student access. The full implementa- 
tion of the IB Diploma Program at Jefferson required that IB 
coordinators raise students’ performance to the level of program 
expectation rather than lower the expectations to accommodate 
students’ limited academic preparation. 

A rigorous academic program like the IB Diploma Program 
should complement intervention efforts at schools across the 
country that already offer underserved students scaffolds such 
as motivational retreats, tutoring, and college preparatory clubs. 
As educators strive to create more high schools that support the 
academic achievement of low-income and minority students, 
this study underscores the incredible challenges these schools 
will face. These schools will be required to implement both a rig- 
orous curriculum and the scaffolds to ensure students can meet 
the challenges of rigorous academic courses. Policy makers at 
the local and federal level will need to support teachers like John 
and Helen, who are committed to helping all students succeed 
at high levels with funds for ongoing professional development 
and the implementation of rigorous academic programs like the 
IB Diploma Program. 


References 

Adelman, C. (1999). Answers in the tool box. Academic intensity, atten- 
dance patterns, and bachelors degree attainment. Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of Education, Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement. 

Alexander, K., Entwisle, D., & Thompson, M. (1987). School perfor- 
mance, status relations, and the structure of sentiment: Bringing 
the teacher back in .American Sociological Review, 52, 665—682. 

Barton, P. (2003). Parsing the achievement gap: Baselines for tracking 
progress. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Bourdieu, P, & Passeron, J. C. (1990). Reproduction. London: Sage. 

Burris, C., Heubert, J., & Levin, H. (2004) Math acceleration for all. 
Educational Leadership, 61, 68—71. 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 231 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


California Department of Education. (2005). DataQuest. Retrieved 
June 15,2007, from http://dq.cde.ca.gov/Dataquest 

Cooper, C., Chavira, G., &Mena, D. (2005). From pipelines to part- 
nerships: A synthesis of research on how diverse families, schools, 
and communities support children’s pathways through school. 
Journal of Education for Students Placed at Risk, 10, 407—443. 

Figueroa, R.,&Ruiz,N. (1999). Minority underrepresentation in gifted 
programs: Old problems, new perspectives. In A. Tashakkori, H. 
Salvador, & E. Kemper (Eds.), Readings on equal education, Vol. 
16. Education of Hispanics in the United States: Politics, policies and 
outcomes (pp. 119-141). New York: AMS Press. 

Ford, D., Harris J. J., Tyson, C., &Trotman,M. (2002). Beyond deficit 
thinking: Providing access for gifted African American students. 
Roeper Review, 24, 52—58. 

Frankenburg, E., & Lee, C. (2002). Race in American public schools: 
Rapidly resegregating school districts. Cambridge, MA: The Civil 
Rights Project, Harvard University. 

Gandara, P. (1995). Over the ivy walls: The educational mobility of low- 
income Chicanos. Albany: State University of New York Press. 

Gandara, P. (2005) . Fragile futures: Risk and vulnerability among Latino 
high achievers. Princeton, NJ: Educational Testing Service. 

Gandara, P, &Bial, D. (2001). Paving the way to postsecondary education: 
K—12 intervention programs for underrepresented youth. Report of the 
National postsecondary education cooperative working group on access 
to postsecondary education (NCES Report No. NCES2001205). 
Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics. 

Gandara, P, Mejorado, M., Gutierrez, D., &Molina, M. (1998). Final 
report of the evaluation of High School Puente, 1994—98. Davis: 
University of California, Davis. 

Gandara, P., O’Hara, S., & Gutierrez, D. (2004). The changing shape 
of aspirations: Peer influence on achievement behavior. In G. 
Gibson, P. Gandara, & J. Koyama (Eds.), School connections: U.S. 
Mexican youth, peers, and school achievement (pp. 39—62). New York: 
Teachers College Press. 

Geiser, S., & Santelices, V. (2004). The role of Advanced Placement and 
honors courses in college admissions. Berkeley, CA: Center for Studies 
in Higher Education. 

Henderson, R. W. (1997). Educational and occupational aspirations 
and expectations among parents of middle school students of 
Mexican descent: Family resources for academic development 
and mathematics learning. In R. D. Taylor &M. C. Wang (Eds.), 


232 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


Social and emotional adjustment and family relations in ethnic minor- 
ity families (pp. 99-131). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

International Baccalaureate Organization. (2002). Schools’ guide to the 
Diploma Programme. Geneva, Switzerland: Author. 

International Baccalaureate Organization. (2004). Expanding access: 
The IBO mission in North America. International Baccalaureate 
Organization Strategic Plan. New York: Author. 

International Baccalaureate Organization. (2006). From growth to 
access: Developing an IBO access strategy. Geneva, Switzerland: 
Author. 

Kyburg, R., Hertberg-Davis, H., & Callahan, C. (2007) Advanced 
Placement and International Baccalaureate programs: Optimal 
learning environments for talented minorities? Journal of Advanced 
Academics, 18, 172—215. 

Loveless, T. (1999). The tracking wars. Washington, DC: The Brookings 
Institution Press. 

Mathews, J. (2003, June 2). The 100 Best High Schools in America: 
The surge in the number of students taking AP tests is chang- 
ing life inside America’s classrooms — and altering the rules of the 
college-admissions game. Newsweek, 141, 48-54. 

Mehan, H., Villanueva, I., Hubbard, L.,&Lintz, A. (1996). Constructing 
school success. The consequences of untracking low-achieving students. 
New York: Cambridge University Press. 

Mayer, A. (2006) Interrupting social reproduction: The implementation of 
an International Baccalaureate Diploma Program in an urban high 
school. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of California, 
Davis. 

National Association for Gifted Children. (2005). State of the States: A 
report by the National Association for Gifted Children and the Council 
of State Directors of Programs for the Gifted 2004—2005. Washington, 
DC: Author. 

National Research Council. (2002). Learning and understanding: 
Improving advanced study of mathematics and science in U.S. high 
schools — Report of the Content Panel on Mathematics. Washington, 
DC: National Academies Press. 

No Child Left Behind Act of 2001 (NCLB), Pub. L. No. 107-110, § 
115 Stat. 1425. 

Ogbu, J. U. (1978). Minority education and caste. New York: Academic 
Press. 

Ogbu, J. U. (2003). Black American students in an affluent suburb: A study 
of academic disengagement. London: Lawrence Erlbaum. 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 233 


EXPANDING OPPORTUNITIES FOR HIGH ACADEMIC ACHIEVEMENT 


Paul, F. (2002). Bridging paradigms: A profession in transition (Student 
Affairs Research and Information Brief Vol. 2, Issue 2). Davis: 
University of California, Davis. 

Quint, J. (2006). Meeting five critical challenges of high school reform. 
Oakland, CA: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation 
(MDRC). 

Rossell, C. (1994). The progeny of Brown-. From the old freedom 
of choice to the new freedom of choice in four decades. Urban 
Geography, 15, 435-453. 

Rossell, C., & Armor, D. (1996). The effectiveness of school desegre- 
gation plans, 1968— 1991. American Politics Research, 2, 267—302. 

Shettle, C., Roey, S., Mordica, J., Perkins, R., Nord, C., Teodorovic, 
J., et al. (2007). America’s high school graduates: Results from the 
2005 NAEP High School Transcript Study (NCES Publication No. 
2007467). Washington DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. 

Secada, W. G., Chavez- Chavez, R., Garcia, E. E., Munoz, C., Oakes, 
J., Santiago-Santiago, I., et al. (1998). No more excuses: The final 
report of the Hispanic Dropout Project. Retrieved March 6, 2008, 
from http://www.ncela.gwu.edu/pubs/hdp/final.htm 

Smutny, J. (2003). Underserved gifted populations: Responding to their 
needs and abilities. Perspectives on creativity research. Cresskill, NJ: 
Hampton Press. 

Stanton-Salazar, R. (1997). A social capital framework for under- 
standing the socialization of racial minority children and youths. 
Harvard Educational Review, 67, 1—40. 

Stanton-Salazar, R. D., & Dornbusch, S. M. (1995). Social capital 
and the reproduction of inequality: Information networks among 
Mexican-origin high school students. Sociology of Education, 68, 
116-135. 

Strong-Scott, M., & Delgado, C. (2005). Identifying cognitively 
gifted minority students in preschool. Gifted Child Quarterly, 49, 
199-210. 

Texas Education Agency Information Analysis Division. (2004). 
Standard reports and core products. Retrieved January 5, 2007, from 
http :/ / tea. state, tx. us/ adhocrpt 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2000). United States Census 2000. Retrieved 
March 6, 2008, from http://www.census.gov/main/www/cen2000. 
html 

U.S. Census Bureau. (2005). American Community Survey. Retrieved 
March 6, 2008, from http://www.census.gov/acs/www 


234 Journal of Advanced Academics 


Mayer 


U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education 
Statistics (NCES). (1999). The condition of education 1998. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Government 
Printing Office. 

U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education 
Statistics (NCES). (2007). High School Transcript Study (HSTS), 
1990-2005. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, 
Government Printing Office. 

Vanderslice, R. (1999, March). Rural Hispanic children and gifted- 
ness: Why the difficulty in identification ? Paper presented at the 
Rural Special Education for the New Millennium: Conference 
of the American Council on Rural Special Education (ACRES), 
Albuquerque, NM. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED429752) 

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psycho- 
logical processes. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Watt, K., Powell, C., &Mendiola, I. (2004). Implications of one com- 
prehensive school reform model for secondary school students 
underrepresented in higher education. Journal of Education for 
Students Placed at Risk, 9, 241—59. 


End Notes 

1 These risk factors include parents’ educational background, 
income, rates of residential mobility, number of adults in the 
household, and level of English proficiency. For a complete review 
of this literature, see Kyburg, Hertberg-Davis, and Callahan, 
2007. 

2 Underrepresented minorities are defined as those whose 
proportion of college enrollments are substantially below their 
proportion of high school graduates. In California, these groups 
include Chicano/Latino, African American, and American 
Indian students. 


Volume 19 Number 2 Winter 2008 235 


