DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 481 556 



EC 309 863 



TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



People with Disabilities on Tribal Lands: Education, Health 
Care, Vocational Rehabilitation, and Independent Living. 
National Council on Disability, Washington, DC. 

2003-08-01 
14 lp . 

National Council on Disability, 1331 F St., NW, Suite 1050, 
Washington, DC 20004-1107. Tel: 202-272-2004/ TTY: 202-272- 
2074; Fax: 202-272-2022/ Web site: http://www.ncd.gov. 
Reports - Evaluative (142) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

Alaska Natives/ ^American Indian Education/ ^American Indian 
Reservations; American Indians; * Disabilities / ^Federal 
Indian Relationship; Federal State Relationship; Government 
Role; *Health Services; Independent Living; *Needs 
Assessment; Tribal Government; Vocational Rehabilitation 
*National Council on Disability 



ABSTRACT 

This report is the product of a project that examined 
services to people with disabilities living on American Indian or Alaska 
Native (AI/AN) tribal lands. Research such as the American Indian Disability 
Legislative Project and other studies on health, rehabilitation, independent 
living, and education issues that affect people with disabilities living in 
Indian country were surveyed. It also considered views and perspectives of 
AI/AN people with disabilities, tribal leaders, and federal agency 
representatives. This report reviews the literature, reports on interviews 
with stakeholders, and examines and recommends improvements in government-to- 
government (including sovereign tribal governments) relationships. The report 
makes the following major recommendations: (1) fulfill the federal trust 

responsibility to AI/AN tribes and the national mandate for the elimination 
of discrimination against individuals with disabilities; (2) ensure 
meaningful consultation and involvement of people with disabilities and 
tribal leaders; (3) provide tribes with better access to federal resources 
and funded programs; (4) develop cultural competence within federal agencies 
and increase agencies’ interaction with tribes; (5) include disability issues 
among tribal priorities and federal initiatives in tribal communities. Seven 
appendices provide additional documentation such as interview guides, case 
studies, and community stories of innovation. (DB) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



EC 309863 



r 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCAwdJAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

& This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 




Education, Health Care, Vocational Rehabilitation, 

and Independent Living 



! 

| 

I 

i 

! 



! 



! 





National Council on Disability 
August 1, 2003 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 




National Council on Disability 
1331 F Street, NW, Suite 850 
Washington, DC 20004 

People with Disabilities on Tribal Lands: Education, Health Care, Vocational 
Rehabilitation, and Independent Living 

This report is also available in alternative formats and on NCD’s award-winning Web site at 
www.ncd.gov. 

Publication date: August 1, 2003 

202-272-2004 Voice 
202-272-2074 TTY 
202-272-2022 Fax 

The views contained in this report do not necessarily represent those of the Administration as this 
and all NCD reports are not subject to the A- 19 Executive Branch review process. 




3 



NATIONAL COUNCIL ON DISABILITY 



An independent federal agency working with the President and Congress to increase the 
inclusion, independence, and empowerment of all Americans with disabilities. 



LETTER OF TRANSMITTAL 



August 1, 2003 

The President 
The White House 
Washington, DC 20500 

Dear Mr. President: 

The National Council on Disability (NCD) is pleased to submit to you this special report entitled People 
with Disabilities on Tribal Lands: Education , Health Care , Vocational Rehabilitation , and Independent Living . We 
are particularly proud of this report because it reflects the results of a project that was developed and 
guided to completion in conference with American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) representatives of 
people with disabilities, their families, and tribal community leaders. 

NCD has targeted the significant, unmet needs of unserved and underserved people with disabilities, 
including people from diverse cultures, as a policy priority. While people from diverse cultures constitute a 
disproportionate share of the disability community, they also have unique needs in addition to those expe- 
rienced by other people with disabilities. At 22 percent prevalence, according to national research data, 
American Indians and Alaska Natives have the most disproportionate rate of disabilities of all population 
groups, compounded by factors such as high poverty and school dropout rates, geographic isolation from 
state or local district rehabilitation and health care, and limited employment options. 

This project examined research on health, rehabilitation, independent living, and education issues that 
affect people with disabilities living in Indian Country. The report discusses views and perspectives of 
AI/AN people with disabilities, tribal leaders, and federal agency representatives identified as productive 
in meeting the needs of people with disabilities residing in tribal lands. This report also assesses and rec- 
ommends government- to-govemment (state to sovereign tribal to U.S. government) improvements in rela- 
tionships needed for effective coordination across existing federally funded projects /programs. In addi- 
tion, a Toolkit guide providing resource information was developed for use by consumers, tribal commu- 
nities, and people at state, local, and federal levels. 

NCD stands ready to facilitate federal agency dialogue with stakeholders who seek to address jointly the 
unmet needs of American Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities in meaningful and culturally sensi- 
tive ways. It is only then that we can rest assured that all of our citizens with disabilities have the freedom 
to fulfill their dreams, access economic independence, and participate meaningfully in their communities. 



1331 F Street, NW ■ Suite 850 ■ Washington, DC 20004 
202-272-2004 Voice ■ 202-272-2074 TTY ■ 202-272-2022 Fax ■ www.ncd.gov 



Sincerely, 




Lex Frieden 
Chairperson 



(This same letter of transmittal was sent to the President Pro Tempore of the Senate and the Speaker of the 
House of Representatives.) 



National Council on Disability Members and Staff 



Members 

Lex Frieden, Chairperson, Texas 
Patricia Pound, First Vice Chairperson, Texas 
Glenn Anderson, Ph.D., Second Vice Chairperson, Arkansas 

Milton Aponte, Florida 
Robert R. Davila, Ph.D., New York 
Barbara Gillcrist, New Mexico 
Graham Hill, Virginia 
Joel I. Kahn, Ohio 
Young Woo Kang, Ph.D., Indiana 
Kathleen Martinez, California 
Carol Hughes Novak, Florida 
Anne M. Rader, New York 
Marco Rodriguez, California 
David Wenzel, Pennsylvania 
Linda Wetters, Ohio 

Staff 

Ethel D. Briggs, Executive Director 
Jeffrey T. Rosen, General Counsel and Director of Policy 
Mark S. Quigley, Director of Communications 
Allan W. Holland, Chief Financial Officer 
Julie Carroll, Attorney Advisor 
Joan M. Durocher, Attorney Advisor 
Martin Gould, Ed.D., Senior Research Specialist 
Geraldine Drake Hawkins, Ph.D., Program Specialist 
Pamela O’Leary, Interpreter 
Brenda Bratton, Executive Assistant 
Stacey S. Brown, Staff Assistant 
Carla Nelson, Office Automation Clerk 




111 



5 



Acknowledgments 



The National Council on Disability’s (NCD) project, People with Disabilities on Tribal Lands: 
Education, Health Care, Vocational Rehabilitation, and Independent Living, was formed and 
guided by the powerful sharing of experiences, knowledge, and hopes of American Indian people 
with disabilities, their families, and advocates. These individuals strived to create a new 
perspective about what it means to be an American Indian and Alaska Native with a disability. 
This new consciousness will serve to transform Indian communities nationally and offer a new 
hope to so many individuals who for so long have felt invisible and not heard. 

NCD expresses its gratitude to the team at Kauffman and Associates, Inc., for drafting this report. 
Team members include Ann Kauffman, president; Project Director Martina Whelshula; Victor 
Paternoster; Tim Spellman; Wendy Thompson; and Ara Walline. 

Others who supported the development of this work and deserve special acknowledgment are 
Mike Blatchford, consultant; Desautel Hege Communications; Kathy Langwell and Project 
HOPE; Robert Shuckahosee, consultant; Frank Ryan, consultant; the Consortia of Administrators 
for Native American Rehabilitation (CANAR); the American Indian Disability Technical 
Assistance Center; the American Indian Rehabilitation Research Training Center; the National 
Congress of American Indians (NCAI); focus group participants at NCAI and CANAR 
conferences; and Judy Babbit from the City of San Antonio Disability Access Office. 

A special acknowledgment goes to those who represent the heart and soul of this effort, our 
Technical Expert Panel members Mark Azure, Julie Clay, Julia Davis-Wheeler, LaDonna 
Fowler, Joanne Francis, Joseph Garcia, Cordia LaFontaine, Carol Locust, Danny Lucero, David 
Miles, Damara Paris, Andrea Siow, H. Sally Smith, Raho Williams, and Alvin Windy Boy. 

Thank you to Jessie Stewart, age 10, for sharing her story. 

In attempts to understand the complex make-up of Indian Country as it addresses the needs of 
tribal members and descendants with disabilities, tribal program directors shared willingly about 
the challenges and inspirations experienced in their work. NCD acknowledges these people and 
the tribes they represent: Jo White, Oglala Nation at Pine Ridge; Arlene Templer, Confederated 




v 



6 



Salish and Kootenai Tribes; Rita LaFrance, St. Regis Mohawk; Rhonda Talaswaima, Hopi 
Nation; Ela Yazzie-King and Paula Seanez, Navajo Nation; Darlene Finley, Three Affiliated 
Tribes; Linda Pratt, Yakama Nation; Larry Alflen, Pueblo of the Zuni; Steven “Corky” West, 
Oneida Nation; and Len Whitebear, Cook Inlet Tribal Council. 

Federal and regional officials contributed to an increased awareness of practices that promote 
government-to-govemment relationships. NCD acknowledges those agencies that offered their 
insights into the delicate circumstances of improving govemment-to-government relationships 
between tribes and federal/state governments. Those agencies who contributed were Indian 
Health Service, Elder Care; Region X, Rehabilitation Services; BIA, Special Education; Indian 
Health Service, Public Health; American Indian and Alaska Native Social Security; 
Administration for Native Americans; and Administration on Aging, Native American Programs. 



Contents 



I. Preface 1 

II. Executive Summary 3 

Summary of Research Findings 4 

Key Elements of Promising Practices in Indian Country 6 

Barriers and Challenges to Effective Govemment-to-Govemment Relationships . . 7 

Key Findings And Recommendations 9 

Conclusion 12 

III. Research Findings 13 

Overview 13 

Method 14 

Technical Expert Panel 15 

Project Strategy 15 

Literature Review 16 

Definition and Description of the American Indian and Alaska Native 
Population Living in Indian Country Overall, People with Disabilities, 
and Types of Disabilities 19 

Unique Legal, Environmental, and Economic Factors Affecting Provision 

of and Access to Appropriate Services for People with Disabilities in 

Indian Country 26 

Barriers to Provision of and Access to Appropriate Services for People 

with Disabilities in Indian Country 36 

Assessing the Effectiveness of Strategies for Reducing Barriers to 

Provision of and Access to Appropriate Services 47 

Limitations to Understanding Issues of People with Disabilities Living 

in Indian Country 58 

Federal Responsibility to Address Gaps in Knowledge 61 

Key Respondent Interviews 63 

Tribal Interviews 64 

Key Elements of Promising Practices 72 

Federal Interviews 75 



erIc 



Vll 



8 



IV. Government-to-Government Relationships: Findings and Recommendations 83 

Findings: Barriers to Effective Govemment-to-Govemment Relationships 83 

Recommendations to Increase Effective Govemment-to-Government 

Working Relationships 89 

V. Conclusion 103 

APPENDIX A. The Technical Expert Panel 105 

APPENDIX B. Interview Guide for Discussions with Federal/State Agency Staff 109 

APPENDIX C. Interview Guide for Discussions with Tribal Programs Ill 

APPENDIX D. Case Studies of Three Tribal Communities 113 

APPENDIX E. Observations of Community Leadership 125 

APPENDIX F. Community Stories of Innovation 127 

APPENDIX G. Mission of the National Council on Disability 133 




vm 



9 



SECTION I 
Preface 



Among the strategies and decisions that emerged from the National Council on Disability’s May 
2000 think-tank process was a commitment by people with disabilities from diverse cultures, 
supporters from national advocacy groups, and the U.S. Congress to (1) investigate different 
approaches to advancing disability, civil, and human rights and (2) develop an informational 
toolkit with attention to different cultural needs. 

American Indian and Alaska Native (AI/AN) people with disabilities, particularly those who live 
in Indian country, face unique circumstances and legal environments that require special outreach 
and consultation in addition to the development of culturally appropriate methods and tools to 
address their unmet needs for services and support. This project, People with Disabilities on 
Tribal Lands: Education, Health Care, Vocational Rehabilitation, and Independent Living, was 
intended to facilitate consultation and input from AI/AN people with disabilities, tribal leaders, 
and community organizations, to obtain information, and to recommend strategies for improving 
services to people with disabilities who live in Indian Country. In addition, the project developed 
a culturally appropriate Toolkit, specifically designed to address the unique political and legal 
foundations of AI/AN tribal communities. The Toolkit provides background on education, 
health, vocational rehabilitation, independent living, and other services important to people with 
disabilities; model approaches; and supporting documentation for improving services and support 
to people with disabilities living in Indian Country. 

“As a child when I moved to a deaf school off tribal lands I couldn ’t participate in 
my cultural rituals such as powwows and ceremonies. My life was like a torn 
piece of paper. When I could reconnect these ceremonies and my ability to be first 
a Native American and then a deaf person — my life came together again. ” 

— Mark Azure, Intertribal Deaf Council 




1 



10 



SECTION II 

Executive Summary 



"My disabilities are perceived by my American Indian and Alaska Native peers 
as a part of me. I do not feel as stigmatized as I do in mainstream society. 

At the same time, powwows and community tribal events are not sign language 
interpreted. How can I learn my traditions from my people without 
communication support? " 



— Damara Paris, Intertribal Deaf Council 

In passing the 1990 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), Congress announced its purpose to 
provide “a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the elimination of discrimination 
against individuals with disabilities.” This national mandate for the elimination of discrimination 
ignored the unique circumstances faced by American Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities 
living in tribal lands. Caught in a public policy paradox, American Indian and Alaska Native 
(AI/AN) people with disabilities are stuck between the sometimes conflicting priorities of 
protecting the sovereignty of tribal governments and ensuring the civil rights guaranteed to all 
people with disabilities. 

AI/AN tribes are sovereign governments and enjoy a unique government-to-government 
relationship with the United States that is based upon treaties, the U.S. Constitution, federal law, 
executive orders, and affirming court decisions. In addition to this unique legal status, Indian 
Country is disproportionately rural, which poses a number of logistical and resource challenges 
to the provision of and access to social, health, and support services. Historically, American 
Indians and Alaska Natives tend to have less education, greater unemployment, and higher rates 
of poverty than people of other racial groups in the United States. Meeting the needs of people 
with disabilities living in Indian Country requires recognition of the unique legal and 
socioeconomic environment of tribal communities, as well as an understanding of various AI/AN 
cultures and history that shape each community. Appropriate consultation and input from tribal 
leaders and tribal members with disabilities is critical in understanding the depth and complexity 
of AI/AN cultures. The activities undertaken through this project explored the complex weave of 




3 



ii 



federal disability laws, tribal sovereignty, tribal cultures, perspectives of AI/AN people with 
disabilities, and the diverse economic and physical environments in which they find themselves. 

The American Indian Disability Legislative Project (AEDLP) reports that only 6 percent of tribal 
governments surveyed are familiar with major disability legislation, such as ADA or Sections 
503 and 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1975. The survey responses indicate that only two- 
thirds of the tribal schools, stores, churches, and other buildings were accessible to people with 
disabilities. Lack of employment opportunities, transportation, financial resources, and elevated 
health care costs all add to the numerous inequities faced by people with disabilities living in 
Indian Country. 

This National Council on Disability (NCD) project examined research such as the AEDLP and 
other studies and reports on health, rehabilitation, independent living, and education issues that 
impact people with disabilities living in Indian Country. In addition, this report discusses views 
and perspectives of AI/AN people with disabilities, tribal leaders, and federal agency 
representatives identified as productive in meeting the needs of people with disabilities residing 
in tribal lands. Finally, this report assesses and recommends government-to-government (state to 
sovereign tribal to U.S. government) improvements in relationships needed for effective 
coordination across existing federally funded projects/programs. 

Summary of Research Findings 

“Everybody has his or her own unique gifts. It is up to us to find our path. 

We must show others and teach people to look beyond differences and find 
good in everyone. ” 



— Andrea Siow, Hopi Nation 

According to the 2000 U.S. Census, nearly 2.5 million Americans identify themselves 
exclusively as “American Indian or Alaska Native.” There are 4.1 million people who identify 
themselves either as Indian only or as Indian in combination with another race. Of this total, 
approximately 944,433 Indian or Alaska Native people live on federal reservations or on off- 
reservation trust lands. Thirty-five states have federal reservations within or overlapping state 
borders. The Federal Government, through the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA), officially 




4 



12 



recognizes 560 tribes and Alaska Native villages. They are known as “Federally Recognized 
Tribes.” 

Data from the 1 997 Survey of Income and Program Participation found that 22 percent of the 
AI/AN population have one or more disabilities. If we consider the 2.5 million who reported on 
the 2000 census that they identify themselves exclusively as “American Indian or Alaska 
Native,” this means that at least 550,000 American Indians and Alaska Natives have disabilities. 

Every type of disability that is found in the general population can also be found in the AI/AN 
population. Several small studies have surveyed tribal communities to identify the most frequent 
types of disabilities. These studies generally found that the following types of disabilities are 
most often reported in Indian community surveys: spinal cord injury; diabetes complications; 
blindness; mobility disability; traumatic brain injury; deafness or hardness of hearing; orthopedic 
conditions; arthralgia; emotional or mental health concerns; learning disabilities; and alcoholism 
or drug dependence. 

This NCD project sought to bring our understanding of people with disabilities living in tribal 
lands closer to the community level. The project tapped the knowledge and experience of a 
Technical Expert Panel (TEP) to begin to identify the major issues related to health, education, 
vocational rehabilitation, and independent living for people with disabilities in Indian Country. In 
consultation with the TEP, 10 Indian communities were identified for individual tribal interviews 
as follows: Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation (MT), Cook 
Inlet Tribe (AK), Hopi Nation (AZ), Navajo Nation (AZ, NM, UT), Oglala Sioux Tribe (SD), 
Oneida Nation (WI), The Pueblo of Zuni (NM), St. Regis Mohawk (NY), Three Affiliated Tribes 
at Fort Berthold (ND), and Yakama Nation (WA). 

These tribal interviews uncovered specific strategies and programs implemented at the local 
community level that have effectively improved access, protections, and services for people with 
disabilities in tribal communities. Several tribes, such as the Salish and Kootenai Tribes in 
Montana, the Oglala Sioux Tribe in South Dakota, and the Navajo Nation in the Southwest, have 
adopted tribe-specific ordinances to establish protections and services for people with disabilities 
in their communities. The Hopi Nation in Arizona and the St. Regis Mohawk in New York 




13 



5 



provide active case management approaches with extensive outreach and grassroots consumer 
involvement. The Pueblo of Zuni of New Mexico place a high priority on public transportation 
services as the key to providing assistance and advocacy for people with disabilities. Six key 
elements emerged as common practices across promising programs. These are summarized 
below. 

Key Elements of Promising Practices in Indian Country 

“The consumers are the leadership. Learn from the consumer. ” 

— Steven ‘Corky ’ West, Oneida Nation 

• Effective program leadership characteristics: At the tribal community level, leaders 
of promising programs commonly embody qualities of passion, perseverance, vision, 
commitment, change agents, consistency, connection to consumers, and a sense of 
hope. 

• Responsiveness to the consumer: Members of program staffs embrace people with 
disabilities as a part of their teams, developing relationships and shared power in the 
planning and implementation of services and programs. 

• Innovation in removing barriers: Breaking down barriers and reshaping tribal 
communities require personal and collective creativity/inventiveness and risk taking. 
The reshaping of resources can help to provide a seamless array of supports, 
programs, and services for people with disabilities. 

• Effective collaboration: Program staff communication and coordination with other 
nontribal resources recognize the role of services and resources outside the realm of 
individual programs or communities and seek to build bridges among separate 
entities. This also requires personal relationship building. 

• Advocacy strength: It is important to instill a strong sense of advocacy into the 
program philosophy and staff approaches to policy and program implementation. The 




6 



14 



multiple and disjointed systems that impact people with disabilities require strong 
self-advocates and supporters to navigate administrative barriers. 

• Support from tribal leadership: A common ingredient is strong and committed 

leadership from elected tribal officials, although each tribe interviewed for this report 
operated differently in its approach to meeting the needs of tribal members with 
disabilities. 

Barriers and Challenges to Effective Government-to-Government Relationships 

“Sometimes when an elder leaves the home to live in an institutional setting their 
spirit is just lost. The foundation of the family is gone and the cultural unity of the 
family suffers. When it is appropriate, day care can help elders and we can see a 
difference with this personal care. We have a lot of work to do to be recognized 
and know how to access services like these. ” 



— Raho Williams, Navajo 

Federal laws designed to protect people with disabilities are not always enforceable against tribal 
governments because of the sovereign immunity and sovereign status that tribal governments 
enjoy. The U.S. Supreme Court has yet to rule on whether or not and to what extent federal 
disability laws apply to Indian tribes. In the absence of that, different and sometimes conflicting 
opinions are being developed in lower courts. In addition, the services and resources that should 
be available to people with disabilities are not always accessible in tribal communities. Chronic 
underfunding of tribal community programs and a lack of physical infrastructure upgrades create 
barriers for people with disabilities in these communities. This NCD report identified barriers 
and challenges that hamper or prevent meaningful govemment-to-govemment relationships to 
develop among tribes and state or federal entities. Such relationships can help governments better 
address jointly some of the issues related to people with disabilities in Indian Country. Based 
upon a review of the literature, interviews with tribal officials, and interviews with federal 
program administrators, the following major barriers were identified: 




7 



15 



Disjointed coordination among agencies: 



• Fragmentation of services across federal agencies and offices 

• Lack of coordination and collaboration among federal, state, and tribal programs 

• Federal travel and budget limitations 

• Advocacy made difficult by multiple education systems (public, BLA, tribal) 

Limited knowledge or understanding about tribal communities: 

• Lack of federal staff knowledge and training for federal personnel on the federal trust 
responsibility to AI/AN people and on tribal sovereignty 

• Agency staff fear of the unknown and unfamiliarity with AI/AN populations 

Limited enforcement of laws protecting people with disabilities on tribal lands: 

• Lack of clarity about legal enforcement options 

• Failure to ensure that the national mandate to eliminate discrimination against 
individuals with disabilities included equal benefits for American Indian and Alaska 
Natives with disabilities 

Limited local tribal planning to protect and support people with disabilities: 

• Lack of involvement of tribal leaders and tribal members in the design, development, 
and implementation of programs 

• Limited consumer involvement at all levels of policy development 

• Difficulties in tribal/state relationships 

• Limited tribal awareness and access to new strategies that can better serve people with 
disabilities 

• Historical distrust of the Federal Government by tribal leaders and members 




8 



16 



Key Findings and Recommendations 

“You have control. Just ask for what you need. ” 

— Jo White, Quad Squad, Oglala Sioux Tribe 

It is important to note that this NCD study found a very active and articulate network of AI/AN 
people with disabilities who are working through a variety of local and national organizations to 
bring important resources to their communities and to reshape the way tribal governments 
address their issues. Examples are numerous, including a one-person sit-in on the steps of a tribal 
building to force the tribe to construct a ramp sponsored by the Pine Ridge Quad Squad; the 
development of national research expertise found at the American Indian Rehabilitation Research 
and Training Center; and the organization of national advocacy groups such as the Intertribal 
Deaf Council and the American Indian Rehabilitation Rights Organization of Warriors. Through 
individual self-determination and collective bravery and persistence, changes are occurring in 
tribal communities. Based in large part on the groundwork performed by the AI/AN disabilities 
community, this study identified 15 major areas of findings and corresponding specific 
recommendations to improve govemment-to-govemment relationships for the benefit of people 
with disabilities in tribal communities. Detailed descriptions of these findings and 
recommendations are provided in subsequent chapters of this report. The following is a summary 
of the five major categories of recommendations proposed in this report: 

Fulfill the federal trust responsibility to AI/AN tribes and the national mandate for the 
elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities: 

• Clarifying application of federal disability laws: The Department of Justice should 
provide robust leadership to ensure that the protections of ADA are extended to 
individuals with disabilities in AI/AN communities, working in close consultation 
with tribes and AI/AN people with disabilities. 

• Holding federal agencies accountable for information dissemination and service: 
Federal agencies must fulfill the federal trust responsibilities to tribes by assertive 




9 



17 



efforts to disseminate pertinent information and by developing culturally specific 
strategies to reach out to tribal communities. 

• Improving coordination and collaboration among programs: Culturally responsive 
strategies should be developed among the various federal programs intended to serve 
people with disabilities to ensure that tribal communities are able to access important 
services. 

Ensure meaningful consultation and involvement of people with disabilities and tribal 
leaders: 

• Recognizing and valuing tribal and consumer consultation: Pursuant to the 
president’s Executive Order on tribal consultation, federal agencies should engage 
tribes and consumers in meaningful consultation to better address issues related to 
people with disabilities in tribal communities. 

• Improving state and tribal relationships to better serve people with disabilities: The 
Department of Education and other federal agencies supporting state programs and 
initiatives should provide leadership and encouragement to improve state and tribal 
relationships regarding services to people with disabilities. 

• Convening national meeting(s) of key stakeholders to better address the needs of 
people with disabilities in tribal lands. The federal Departments of Justice, Education, 
Health and Human Services, Transportation, Housing and Urban Development, and 
Interior should collaborate with tribal leadership and Indian community consumer 
groups to convene a national summit to begin to address issues raised in this report 
and to develop ongoing collaboration. 

Provide tribes with better access to federal resources and funded programs: 

• Providing tribal communities access to Independent Living Centers: The Department 
of Education should provide a specific set-aside in funds to support independent 
living centers in tribal communities. 




10 



• Increasing access to American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services (AIVRS): 
Funding for AIVRS must be substantially increased to allow for more tribes to 
participate in this important program and an increase in technical assistance and 
support to existing programs. 

• Expanding home- and community-based services options in tribal communities: 

The Indian Health Service and Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services should 
collaborate to provide necessary training and technical assistance to tribal health care 
systems to provide home- and community-based services and to decrease unnecessary 
dependence on institutional care. 

Develop cultural competence within federal agencies and increase agencies’ interaction 
with tribes: 

• Expanding cultural competence, training, and orientation: Each of the federal 
agencies providing services and programs targeting people with disabilities should 
ensure staff are trained and oriented to understand and engage tribal communities. 

• Recruitment and hiring of AI/AN professionals and advocates within the federal 
system: Specific staff positions to provide liaison between federal programs and tribal 
communities should be established for federal agencies and programs. In particular, 
the Social Security Administration should provide a Native American liaison position 
in each of its federal regional offices for tribal outreach and advocacy. 

Include disability issues among tribal priorities and federal initiatives in tribal 
communities: 

• Increasing employment opportunities for people with disabilities in tribal 
communities: Tribal governments should consider ways to create expanded 
employment opportunities for people with disabilities in their communities. 

• Making all public buildings and public infrastructure in tribal communities 
accessible to people with disabilities: Federal departments such as Interior, 



Transportation, Housing, and Health and Human Services should collaborate with 
tribal governments to identify funds to retrofit tribal buildings and infrastructure to 
ensure tribal communities are accessible to people with disabilities. 

Conclusion 

Effective collaboration among sovereign tribal governments and federal and state programs is 
key to successfully addressing the issues and needs of tribal members with disabilities and 
descendants living in Indian Country. AI/AN people with disabilities and advocates must be 
invited to the table for key conversations regarding application of disability policies, initiatives, 
and program development and resource allocation. Unless and until this govemment-to- 
government collaboration occurs, AI/AN people with disabilities will continue to remain locked 
out of the protections and services guaranteed to all Americans with disabilities. 

Andrea Siow (Hopi Nation), a TEP member, stated, “By getting the word out that people with 
disabilities are not helpless, we can create awareness and improve things... .It is up to us to find 
our path....” Self-determination is a fundamental and important principle not only for tribal 
governments, but for individual tribal members with the human need for opportunity, inclusion, 
support, access, and freedom to chart one’s own course. This nation’s mandate to eliminate 
discrimination against individuals with disabilities has thus far failed to appropriately address the 
inclusion of AI/AN communities. For many people with disabilities in tribal communities, the 
freedom to fulfill their dreams, access economic independence, and meaningfully participate in 
their tribal community may rest in the willingness of tribal, state, and federal governments to 
work together. Stakeholders will need to work cooperatively and effectively in ways that respect 
both the mandates and benefits of ADA and other disability laws, as well as this nation’s time- 
honored moral and legal obligations to tribal governments. 




12 



20 



SECTION III 
Research Findings 



Overview 

The National Council on Disability (NCD) has made a major and continuing commitment to 
identifying barriers to access, appropriate services, and supports that differentially affect people 
with disabilities from diverse cultures. This project reflects that commitment and was intended to 
provide information and products for consumers and to meet the goals set forth for the project. 
The project goals included addressing key disability policy issues from a multiprogram, cross- 
agency perspective; offering culturally competent information to tribal communities based on 
representative input from tribal people with disabilities and tribal leaders; and suggesting 
practical models to support the empowerment of people with disabilities. 

Despite representing a small percentage of the total U.S. population, American Indians and 
Alaska Natives enjoy a unique legal, historical, and political relationship with the Federal 
Government. As indigenous peoples, Indian tribes engaged in government-to-government 
relationships with other sovereign countries before the United States was established. 1 At its 
formation, the United States recognized the unique relationship with Indian tribes, and this 
recognition continues today. Meeting the needs of people with disabilities living in Indian 
Country requires recognition of these unique relationships and cultures and appropriate 
consultation with and input from tribal leaders and communities to develop effective and useful 
service approaches. The activities undertaken throughout this project sought to obtain that 
necessary consultation and input through culturally responsive and appropriate strategies. The 
result is information presented in both a report and a Toolkit that form a foundation for long-term 
development of policies and initiatives that can be used to improve access to services and support 
for this population. 



See, e.g., Montoya v. United States, 180 U.S. 261 (1901). 



i 



The stated objectives of this project were to 



1 . Summarize recommendations from relevant research and reports on health, 
rehabilitation, and education issues that impact independent living and self- 
determination realities for people with disabilities living in Indian Country. 

2. Provide scheduled involvement for representatives of American Indian/Alaska Native 
(AI/AN) communities, advocates, and key organizations concerned with issues of 
education, rehabilitation, health, and independent living, as project advisors. 

3. Identify and recommend basic factors/elements and key processes that have been 
productive in getting sovereign governments to develop tribal laws to protect and 
meet the service needs of people with disabilities who live in Indian Country. 

4. Provide a capacity-building toolkit that is user friendly, incorporates principles of 
cultural competency, and includes as examples for consideration what seems to be 
working/what has been effective in different tribal settings. 

5. Assess and recommend government-to-govemment (state to sovereign tribal to U.S. 
government) improvements in relationships needed for effective coordination across 
existing federally funded projects/programs. 

6. Plan to broadly disseminate the project materials among Native people. 

Method 

This aggressive seven-month project inquired into the needs and issues facing people with 
disabilities in AI/AN communities as they affect education, health care, vocational rehabilitation, 
and independent living. A review of relevant literature and research findings was conducted. A 
15-member Technical Expert Panel (TEP) was identified 2 and convened for three meetings at 
different points of the project. The TEP proved to be a solid foundation for this effort, providing 
ongoing advice and guidance. In addition, a tribal and disability community consultant provided 



2 The TEP members are identified in Appendix A of this report. 




14 



22 



input during the course of the project. Headquarters and regional federal officials were identified 
and interviewed to discern their perspectives on opportunities for and barriers to realizing 
improved govemment-to-govemment relationships with sovereign tribal governments in meeting 
the service needs of tribal members and descendants with disabilities. Finally, throughout this 
report and the Toolkit, the term “Indian Country” is used to indicate the federally recognized 
tribal lands across the United States. 

Technical Expert Panel 

Individuals representing consumers and advocates within the AI/AN disability community across 
the country were recommended to serve as members of a national TEP. Tribal leaders were also 
recruited for the TEP to serve as advisors, particularly in the government-to-government 
discourse. Members of the TEP functioned in project consultant and advisory roles throughout 
the course of the research, providing guidance on the direction of the project. The TEP was 
instrumental in providing input on plans, critical feedback, direction, and redirection of issues 
this project addressed. In addition, the TEP was utilized to identify sovereign tribal governments 
to be interviewed as potential case studies. 

Project Strategy 

The project objectives and tasks were implemented in three major phases. Phase I involved the 
gathering of preliminary data and information. This phase culminated with the first gathering of 
the multidisciplinary TEP in July 2002. Phase I also incorporated timelines to organize the 
project, finalize work plans and schedules, and receive initial project sanction from the TEP. 
Phase II efforts centered on the collection of data, information, and input. This phase represented 
the substantive bulk of work for this project. It included finalizing the literature and research 
reviews, concluding the key respondent interviews, concluding the case studies, and concluding 
the consumer and tribal leader focus groups. Phase III provided a final feedback loop for the 
content of the deliverables through the TEP. Each of these three major phases required a strategy 
that built upon the development of relationships within the AI/AN communities, especially as the 
strategy relates to tribal members and descendants with disabilities and communication with 
tribal leadership. 




15 



23 



Literature Review 

The literature review and synthesis provided a foundation of information for defining key issues 
and for the design and conduct of the approach to the key respondent interviews and case studies. 
In addition, the findings were shared with the TEP for review, discussion, and suggestions for 
revision. 

The approach to this task was designed broadly to identify, obtain, and assess published and 
unpublished information that provided insights into the nature of barriers to access to services in 
Indian Country, and the factors that may be associated with greater or lesser degrees of 
difficulties in obtaining supports and services in Indian Country. 

Based on the preliminary literature review conducted as background for the initial project 
proposal, it was anticipated that standard literature search techniques would produce sparse data 
on barriers to access and on effective strategies for increasing access to services for the 
population of interest. Consequently, the supplementary activities included 

• Search of Internet Web sites to identify organizations that serve or advocate for 
people with disabilities who live in Indian Country and to identify background papers, 
issue papers, data sources, projects, and studies that have addressed the relevant 
issues for this project. 

• Telephone interviews with researchers who have been involved in studies of AI/AN 
health issues, to identify past and ongoing research projects and findings that may be 
relevant to this study. 

• Telephone interviews with Federal Government employees in agencies that have 
responsibilities for health, education, vocational rehabilitation, independent living, 
and other services provided to people in Indian Country, to identify relevant data 
sources, studies, and initiatives for this study. 

• Search of national databases (e.g., National Health Interview Survey, Medicare 
Current Beneficiary Survey, National Medical Expenditure Survey, Current 



0 

ERIC 



16 



24 



Population Survey, 1990 census, and 2000 census) and publications of data 
summaries from these surveys to obtain estimates of the number of people with 
disabilities in Indian Country and prevalence of each type of disability. 

The first step in the literature survey was to conduct a search of published literature through 
standard literature sources, including 

• Medline 

• MedlinePlus: AI/AN Health 

• Native Health Research Database 

• Native Health History Database 

• Education Resources Information Center 

• www.disabilityresources.org/Native 

These sources enabled identification of relevant published literature, from which a 
comprehensive bibliography was compiled and organized according to key topic areas. Brief 
abstracts of each publication were prepared from relevant and available full text. References cited 
in each publication were also searched to identify additional relevant literature. 

Once the published literature bibliography was compiled, the search was expanded to Web sites 
of national Indian organizations concerned with health and social service issues, as well as 
organizations specifically focused on serving and advocating on behalf of AI/AN people with 
disabilities. These organizations included 

• National Council of American Indians 

• National Indian Health Board 

• National Indian Council on Aging 

• Association of American Indian Physicians 

• American Indian Rehabilitation Research and Training Center (AIRRTC) 



• National Center for American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research, 
University of Colorado Health Sciences Center 

• The Native Elder Health Care Resource Center, University of Colorado Health 
Sciences Center 

• Rural Institute on Disabilities and American Indian Disability Technical Assistance 
Center (AIDTAC), University of Montana 

• Native American Research & Training Center, University of Arizona 

• Vocational Rehabilitation Service Projects for American Indians with Disabilities 
(Rehabilitation Services Administration Programs) 

In addition, a search 3 of relevant Federal Government Web sites included 

• Indian Health Service (IHS) 

• Administration for Native Americans 

• Administration on Aging 

• Department of Education 

• Department of Labor 

• National Institutes of Health, including National Institute on Aging, National Institute 
on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism, National Institute of Mental Health, National 



3 A search of the U.S. Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs Web site was not 
possible because of the temporary closing due to judicial order. Some BLA data were available at 
Project HOPE from other project work. During the next stage of this literature review task, 
contact and interviews with BLA staff were used to obtain additional information on relevant 
topics. 




18 



26 



Institute on Deafness and Communication Disorders, National Institute of Diabetes 
and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, and National Institute on Drug Abuse 

• Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 

• Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality 

After all the literature and interview results were synthesized by topic area with key findings 
highlighted, each topic area was then reviewed for completeness and gaps in information and 
research. The questions to be addressed in this review included the following: 

1 . What do we know with reasonable certainty, based on valid and reliable research? 

2. What do the research findings suggest, for which supporting evidence is weaker? 

3. What important issues, in this area, have not been addressed by any research? 

4. What are the reasons that these issues have not been addressed (e.g., lack of 
appropriate data)? 

The review includes a summary of findings from the literature, identification of gaps in the 
research and findings, and suggestions that could address these gaps in information and research. 

Definition and Description of the American Indian and Alaska Native Population Living in 
Indian Country Overall, People with Disabilities, and Types of Disabilities 

According to the 2000 U.S. Census, nearly 2.5 million Americans, or 0.9 percent of the U.S. 

population, identified themselves as American Indians or Alaska Natives. Approximately 4. 1 

million people or 1.5 percent of the U.S. population identified themselves as AI/AN or AI/AN in 

combination with another race. Of the people who indicated that they were AI/AN in 

combination with another race, the majority (66 percent) identified the other race as “White.” 



In 1990, the population of AI/AN was approximated at 1 .9 million. 4 Although comparison of the 
1990 and 2000 census data suggests a 10-year increase in the AI/AN population, the actual 
magnitude of this increase is unclear because of changes in how the census collects and reports 
information on race. Specifically, the 1990 census required people to affiliate with only one 
racial group, and the 2000 census allowed people to identify with multiple racial groups. 
Comparison of the 1 990 AI/AN population estimates to the population who indicated that they 
were AI/AN in 2000 shows a rate of increase of 26 percent. However, comparison to the total 
number of people who identify their race as AI/AN only or AI/AN in combination with other 
races shows a 10-year increase of 1 10 percent. In contrast, the population of the rest of the United 
States (all races) increased by only 13 percent during that same period (U.S. Census, 2000). 

Population Off and On the Reservation 

Although American Indians and Alaska Natives reside in all states of the United States, 
approximately 42 percent of the AI/AN population (one race only) living both on and off 
reservations are located in four states: Arizona, California, New Mexico, and Oklahoma. 5 Nearly 
one-half of the AI/AN population reside in the Western United States, compared with 30 percent 
who reside in the South, 16 percent who reside in the Midwest, and less than 7 percent who 
reside in the Northeast. 

Defining Indian Country: The Census Bureau distinguishes several types of tribal lands. 
Federally recognized reservations and off-reservation trust lands are those geographic areas to 
which the Federal Government has granted sovereignty and whose tribal members are eligible to 
receive services from the U.S. Department of the Interior’s Bureau of Indian Affairs (BLA). 

Indian tribes with or without a land base may also be recognized by individual states but not by 
the U.S. Department of the Interior. In the latter case, the census considered tribal members to be 

4 The number of American Indians reported in 1990 is believed to understate the actual number 
of Indians residing in the United States. Census takers are believed to have undercounted the 
number of Indians residing on reservations by more than 12 percent. (Richardson D, Bureau of 
Labor Statistics Daily Report, December 28, 1999.) 

5 U.S. Census Bureau, “The American Indian and Alaska Native Population: 2000,” Census 2000 
Brief, February 2002. 




20 



23 



residing in a state-designated American Indian statistical area. In some cases, an American Indian 
population that resides within a geographic area may function as an organized tribe but not be 
recognized by either the state or the Federal Government. These distinctions across American 
Indian lands are important in understanding barriers to access to health and social services that 
people with disabilities face, because it is only on federally recognized tribal lands that the tribal 
jurisdiction is granted sovereignty. As such, it is only on federally recognized reservations where 
the benefits afforded to people with disabilities through the Americans with Disabilities Act 
(ADA) are not consistently ensured. The matter of this exemption is discussed later in this report. 

Approximately 944,433 people resided on federal reservation and off-reservation trust land in 
2000. States with the largest population on federally recognized reservations are Arizona, New 
Mexico, and Washington. These three states are home to nearly one-half of the U.S. populations 
who live on federal reservations. It is important to note that the number of American Indians and 
Alaska Natives that are currently living on or near reservations is expected to be somewhat less 
since these figures include people of all races and ethnicities. 6 In fact, less than one-third of 
people who identified themselves as AI/AN in the census and one-fifth of people who identified 
themselves as either AI/AN or AI/AN in combination with another race resided on a federally 
recognized reservation in 2000. 7 

BIA officially recognizes over 560 tribes. The 10 largest tribal groupings in the United States are 
the Cherokee, Navajo, Latin American Indian, Choctaw, Sioux, Chippewa, Apache, Blackfeet, 
Iroquois, and Pueblo. Two-thirds of all people who specified a tribal affiliation on the 2000 
census identified themselves as Cherokee either in whole or in combination with another tribal 



6 For example, only 15 percent of the population residing in the Southern Ute Reservation of 
Colorado in 2000 indicated that they were entirely American Indian or American Indian in 
combination with another race. Similarly, according to the census, only 35 percent of the 
population of the Lake Traverse Reservation of South Dakota self-identified themselves as 
American Indian. The majority of the population on both these reservations identified themselves 
as “White.” 

7 Personal conversation with Jackie Kruszek, Office of Native American Programs, Denver 
National Program Office, June 20, 2000. 




21 



29 



group. One-fourth self-identified with the Navajo Tribe. Among Alaska Natives, the largest tribal 
group is the Eskimo. 8 

Disability Prevalence Among American Indians and Alaska Natives 
It is important to note that statistics vary, depending on the source of data and the definition of 
disability. The numbers also vary according to the type and severity of the disabilities included. 
There continue to be problems with widely used disability employment and other data in U.S. 
Census 2000, including concern about the inadequate collection and analysis of relevant and 
reliable statistical data on America’s population with disabilities. 

O 

NCD recognizes that findings of the 2000 census, together with those of other compilations 
relating to the employment status of Americans with disabilities, are being severely questioned 
on methodological and validity grounds. The accuracy of this data is critically important in an era 
of evidence-based policy because misleading information can lead to misguided or premature 
public policy decisions. 

Data from the 1997 Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP) indicates that nearly 20 
percent of the U.S. population has some level of disability. Twelve percent of the population had 
a developmental or other disability of sufficient severity to require the use of a wheelchair, cane, 
or crutches and to prevent them from working, or for which they required assistance in 
performing activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living. 9 The prevalence of 
disabilities has been found to vary significantly by racial and ethnic group. In 1991-1992, nearly 
20 percent of Whites and Blacks were estimated to have a disability (defined as the presence of 
one or more functional limitations) compared with 15 percent of Hispanics and 10 percent of 
Asian and Pacific Islanders. According to the SIPP, rates of disability were highest among 
American Indians and Alaska Natives; nearly 22 percent of American Indians, Eskimos, and 



8 Ogunwole S, “The American Indian and Alaska Native Population: 2000,” Census 2000 Brief, 
February 2002. 

9 McNeil J, “Americans with Disabilities 1997,” Current Population Reports, U.S. Census 
Bureau, February 2001 . 




22 



30 



Aleuts were estimated to have a disability. Rates of disability were even higher among the 
working age population. Nearly 27 percent of American Indians and Alaska Natives between the 
ages of 16 and 64 were estimated to have a disability in 1991-1992. 10 

The state-specific estimates from 1990 U.S. Census data on American Indians and Alaska 
Natives (living both on and off reservations) with a disability reveal that rates of disability vary 
substantially across states. With few exceptions, rates of disabilities in the AI/AN population 
tend to be higher in southern states compared with rates in Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah. 
Among working age AI/AN adults (ages 16 to 64), rates of disability range from a high of over 
25 percent in the states of Kentucky, Mississippi, and West Virginia to a low of approximately 
12 percent in the states of Alaska, North Dakota, and Wyoming. Rates of disability also vary 
significantly among the elderly AI/AN population, from a low of 16 percent in Wyoming to a 
high of nearly 41 percent in Mississippi. 

Reservation-specific estimates of disability, for reservations with more than 5,000 persons, are 
also provided in the 2000 census for the states of California, Arizona, Washington, New Mexico, 
Montana, and South Dakota. These estimates are based upon a sample of the population. 
Estimates may therefore be unreliable because of the small number of American Indians and 
Alaska Natives from any reservation included in the samples. Nevertheless, this data may suggest 
trends in the prevalence of disability across tribal groups that should be further investigated. 

There is a three-fold difference in the proportions of children with disabilities residing in these 
reservations sampled in the six states listed in the previous paragraph. Approximately 3.4 percent 
of children living on the Hopi Reservation in Arizona are estimated to have a disability compared 
with over 10 percent of children in the Tohono O’odham Reservation in Arizona. Rates of 
disability were not only higher among adults but also varied widely, from a low of 13.5 percent 
in the Port Madison (WA) Reservation to a high of over 37 percent in the Fort Apache (AZ) and 
Salt River (AZ) Reservations. Estimated rates of disability among senior citizens living on 



10 Bradsher J, “Disability among Racial and Ethnic Groups,” Disability Statistics Center, January 
1996. 



O 

ERIC 



23 



31 



reservations are, in many cases, dramatically high. Nearly three-quarters of residents over the age 
of 65 in the Fort Apache (AZ), Gila River (AZ), Hopi (AZ), Navajo (AZ), and Zuni (NM) 
reservations are estimated to have a disability. 

The extent to which variation in disabilities across reservations is attributable to difference in the 
proportion of American Indians (as opposed to people of other racial groups) who are living on 
these reservations is unclear. 

Types of Disabilities 

Information on the types of disabling conditions that are most prevalent on Indian reservations is 
limited to a small number of studies that either have surveyed organizations serving American 
Indians and Alaska Natives (e.g., tribal representatives, independent living centers) or have 
analyzed administrative data. In 1994 the American Indian Disability Legislation Project 
conducted a survey of 143 AI/AN tribes to obtain information on the accessibility of public 
buildings, availability of rehabilitation services, and tribal awareness of disability laws. Surveyed 
tribes were also asked to report on the frequency of disabling conditions. The disabilities most 
frequently cited by tribes in the continental United States were diabetes (29 percent), emotional 
disabilities (22 percent), and learning disabilities (1 1 percent). Among tribes in Alaska, 
emotional disabilities (31.3 percent), learning disabilities (17 percent), and deafness or hardness 
of hearing (17 percent) were the most frequently reported disabling conditions. 11 

Clay (1992) conducted a survey of independent living centers (ELCs) to identify the services that 
are available to American Indians residing on reservations. According to 42 ILCs that indicated 
that they served people on reservations or tribal lands, the most frequently observed disabilities 
among American Indians living on reservations were spinal cord injury, diabetes, blindness, 



11 Fowler L, Seeking T, Dwyer K, Duffy SW, Brod RL, Locust C, “American Indian Disability 
Legislation and Programs: Findings of the First National Survey of Tribal Governments,” 
Journal of Disability Policy Studies 1 0(2): 1 66-1 85. 



mobility disability, traumatic brain injury, deafness, hardness of hearing, orthopedic conditions, 
and arthralgia. Rates of each of these disabilities were not provided. 12 

AIRRTC also examined the prevalence of different types of disabilities among American Indians 
using data from administrative files maintained by the U.S. Department of Education’s 
Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA). Since the RSA files contain information on 
people who have undergone rehabilitation, estimates of the prevalence of disabling conditions 
may not be representative of the AI/AN population; rather, estimates of disabling conditions 
derived from this data are likely to reflect the characteristics of people who utilized these 
services. Nonetheless, this data is useful for purposes of comparing the prevalence of disabling 
conditions among AI/ANs to that of other racial groups. 

AIRRTC analyses found that alcohol abuse or dependence was the most common cause of 
disability among American Indians and Alaska Natives represented in the 1997 RSA database. 
Approximately 1 1 percent of AI/AN clients had a major diagnosis of alcohol abuse compared 
with only 4 percent of White, nearly 6 percent of Black, and less than 2 percent of Asian clients. 
Although the prevalence did not vary substantially by race, learning disabilities were found to be 
the second most frequent major diagnosis (9 percent) among AI/AN clients represented in the 
RSA database. The frequency of sensory disabilities, however, tended to be slightly lower among 
American Indians and Alaska Natives than other racial groups. Among AI/AN clients, 1 percent 
were blind/low vision and 0.8 percent were deaf/hard of hearing compared with 1.9 percent and 
1.24 percent, respectively, of the total in the RSA database. 13 



12 Clay J, A Profile of Independent Living Services for American Indians with Disabilities Living 
on Reservations, University of Montana Rural Institute, Missoula, MT, 1992. 

13 Schacht R, Gahungu A, White M, LaPlante M, and Menz F, An Analysis of Disability and 
Employment Outcome Data for American Indians and Alaska Natives, American Indian 
Rehabilitation Research and Training Center, Flagstaff, AZ, September 2000. 




25 



33 



Unique Legal, Environmental, and Economic Factors Affecting Provision of and Access to 
Appropriate Services for People with Disabilities in Indian Country 

Compared with other U.S. citizens, American Indians and Alaska Natives living in Indian 

Country have a unique legal status that affects the protections and services available to people 

with disabilities living on these lands. The definition of Indian Country is derived from 18 U.S.C. 

Subsection 1151. Although Subsection 1151 is in the criminal code, this section has been applied 

in civil cases as well. Subsection 1151 provides that “Indian Country” means 

(a) all land within the limits of any Indian reservation under the 
jurisdiction of the United States Government, notwithstanding the 
issuance of any patent, and, including rights-of-way running 
through the reservation, (b) all dependent Indian communities 
within the borders of the United States whether within the original 
or subsequently acquired territory thereof, and whether within or 
without the limits of a state, and (c) all Indian allotments, the 
Indian titles to which have not been extinguished, including rights- 
of-way running through the same. 14 

Indian Country, in both civil and criminal matters, is subject to the jurisdiction of tribal 
governments. 15 

In addition to the unique legal status of AI/AN residents, Indian Country is disproportionately 
rural or frontier. This poses a number of logistical and resource challenges to provision of and 
access to social, health, and support services. Historically, American Indians and Alaska Natives 
tend to have less education, less employment, and lower incomes than other people in the United 
States and, thus, tend to have fewer resources to address the needs of people with disabilities. 

Environmental Factors 

Most of Indian Country is located in rural and frontier areas in the United States, and American 
Indians and Alaska Natives are more likely than any other racial group to reside in 



14 18 U.S.C. § 1151. 

15 See, e.g., DeCoteau v. District County Court, 420 U.S. 425 (1975). 




26 



34 



nonmetropolitan areas. 16 While the challenges of providing services to people with disabilities in 
rural/frontier areas are not unique to American Indians and Alaska Natives, the substantial 
majority of people with disabilities in Indian Country are located in rural/frontier areas. People 
living in rural areas generally experience barriers to accessing health care and other social 
services; people with disabilities in rural areas face even greater barriers in obtaining the 
complex medical and related services that they require. 17 

Barriers to health care access and other services in rural areas include lack of resources, long 
travel distances, and lack of transportation. In addition, people from diverse cultures in rural 
areas often experience cultural and language barriers to obtaining appropriate health care. They 
seldom encounter health care and other service providers of the same cultural backgrounds or 
who have been educated to provide services in a culturally appropriate manner. 18 

NCD has identified a number of challenges in obtaining necessary services faced by people with 
disabilities from diverse cultures and by people with disabilities in rural areas, including lack of 
resources and lack of education and training on policy, cultural issues, services, and attitudes. 19 
Thus, American Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities residing in rural Indian Country are 
dually challenged in their efforts to obtain appropriate services and support. 

Economic Factors 

American Indians and Alaska Natives, particularly those living in Indian Country, face 
significant economic challenges. National data shows that in 1990, 78 percent of Whites had 



16 Snipp C, “Selected Demographic Characteristics of Indians,” in American Indian Health: 
Innovations in Health Care, Promotion, and Policy (ed. by ER Rhoades), The Johns Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, MD, 2000. 

17 Lishner D, et al., “Access to Primary Health Care Among Persons with Disabilities in Rural 
Areas: A Summary of the Literature,” Journal of Rural Health, Winter 1996; 12(1): 45-53. 

18 Mueller K, et al., “Health Status and Access to Care among Rural Minorities,” Journal of 
Health Care for the Poor and Underserved, May 1999; 10(2): 230-249. 

19 National Council on Disability, Outreach to Minorities with Disabilities and People with 
Disabilities in Rural Communities: Roundtable Report on Findings, Atlanta, Georgia, August 4, 
1997. 




27 



Od 



completed high school and 22 percent had completed a college degree; AI/AN rates compared at 
65 percent and 9 percent, respectively. 20 Lower educational levels are associated with reduced 
income potential, and AI/AN household and family income levels in 1989 were approximately 60 
percent of White household and family income. 

People who live in Indian Country are more likely than all American Indians and Alaska Natives 
to be very poor and unemployed. BIA data indicates that in 1999, approximately 50 percent of 
American Indians and Alaska Natives who were members of a federally recognized tribe living 
on tribal lands were either unemployed or employed with household incomes below the federal 
poverty levels. 21 

Poverty, unemployment, low levels of education, inadequate housing and sanitation, and 
inadequate funding for federal health and other programs responsible for providing services to 
American Indians and Alaska Natives in Indian Country are all current problems in Indian 
Country. These problems contribute to the poor health status of American Indians and Alaska 
Natives. These problems also contribute to a lack of services to meet health care and social 
service needs of all people residing in Indian Country, particularly those people with disabilities. 

Understanding Government-to-Government Relationships 

Despite representing a small percentage of the total U.S. population, American Indians and 
Alaska Natives enjoy a unique legal, historical, and political relationship with the Federal 
Government. As indigenous peoples, Indian tribes engaged in govemment-to-government 
relationships with other sovereign countries before the United States was established. 22 At its 
formation, the United States recognized the unique relationship with Indian tribes, and this 



20 Snipp C, “Selected Demographic Characteristics of Indians,” in American Indian Health: 
Innovations in Health Care, Promotion, and Policy (ed. by ER Rhoades), The Johns Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, MD, 2000. 

21 Barents Group of KPMG Consulting, Inc., American Indian/Alaska Native Eligibility and 
Enrollment in Medicaid, SCHIP, and Medicare: Design Report, prepared for Centers for 
Medicare and Medicaid Services, April 11, 2002. 

22 See, e.g., Montoya v. United States, 180 U.S. 261 (1901). 




28 



00 



recognition continues today. The Federal Government recognizes tribes as “domestic dependant 
nations.” 23 

To further this govemment-to-government relationship, in 2000, the Federal Government 
announced a policy of consultation with tribal governments in Executive Order #13175. 24 The 
Executive Order requires meaningful consultation with tribal officials on any regulatory policies 
that have tribal implications. Federal agencies are required to consult with tribes during the 
development of new policies. When possible, federal agencies must grant tribes the maximum 
administrative discretion possible. Agencies are required to consult with tribes when developing 
federal standards. They must also encourage tribes to formulate and implement their own policies 
and establish standards. This Executive Order was reconfirmed recently by the Honorable 
Alberto R. Gonzales, Counsel to the President, in a letter to Congressman Frank Pallone dated 
June 25, 2002. 25 Subsequently, Congressman Frank Pallone issued a letter to advocates of Indian 
Country quoting Mr. Gonzales and stating his own commitment to Executive Order #13 175. 26 

Legal Factors 

Individuals with disabilities living in Indian Country face a complex legal environment. Long 
recognized as distinct political entities, 27 Indian tribes enjoy the “inherent powers of a limited 
sovereignty which has never been extinguished.” 28 Indian tribes are protected from private 



23 Cherokee Nation v. Georgia, 33 U.S. 1, 33 (1831). 

24 Executive Order #13175 ofNovember 6, 2000. 

25 Reconfirmation of Executive Order #13175 of June 19, 2002. Official White House 
correspondence from Alberto Gonzales, Counsel to the President, to Congressman Frank Pallone, 
Jr. 

26 Reconfirmation of Executive Order #13175 of June 19, 2002. Official Correspondence from 
Congressman Frank Pallone to Advocates of Indian Country. June 25, 2002. 

27 Worcester v. Georgia, 31 U.S. 515, 559 (1832). 

28 United States v. Wheeler, 435 U.S. 313, 322 (1978). 

29 

O 

ER i.C 



37 



lawsuits under the doctrine of sovereign immunity. 29 As a result of tribal sovereign immunity to 
suit, not all federal regulations that apply in Indian Country are enforceable by private parties 
against tribes. 

A tribe is subject to suit by a private party under these laws only when the tribe has expressly 
waived its sovereign immunity. Thus, individuals with disabilities concerned about their rights 
and protections guaranteed under the Rehabilitation Act or ADA may face unique barriers when 
seeking enforcement by a tribal government. Recent decisions in the Eleventh Circuit suggest 
that while tribes are not specifically excluded from the provisions/requirements and protections 
of the Rehabilitation Act of 1 973 30 and the Americans with Disabilities Act of 1992, 31 
enforcement may be limited. 32 

Title I of the Americans with Disabilities Act and Tribes 

In passing ADA, Congress announced the purpose as providing “a clear and comprehensive 
national mandate for the elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities.” 33 
Title I of ADA requires that employers with 15 or more employees provide qualified individuals 
who have a disability with an equal opportunity to benefit from the full range of employment 
benefits available to others. Title I also restricts discrimination in hiring, promotions, pay, and 
other privileges of employment. Employers must make reasonable accommodation for the known 
physical or mental disability of otherwise qualified individuals with disabilities, unless it results 



29 See, e.g., Kiowa Tribe of Oklahoma v. Manufacturing Technologies Inc., 523 U.S. 749 (1998) 
(holding that, with regard to suits brought by private parties against Indian tribes, “s a matter of 
federal law, a tribe is subject to suit only where Congress has authorized the suit or the tribe has 
waived its immunity”). 

30 Rehabilitation Act of 1973, 29 U.S.C. §§ 701 et seq. 

31 Americans with Disabilities Act, 42 U.S.C. §§ 12101 et seq. 

32 See Florida Paraplegic Association, Inc. v. Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida, 166 F.3d 
1 126 (1 1 th Cir. 1999); Sanderlin v. Seminole Tribe, 243 F.3d 1282 (1 1 th Cir. 2001). 

33 42 U.S.C. § 12101(b)(1). 




30 



33 



in an undue hardship. While Title I categorically excludes tribal governments as employers under 
this title, ADA does not exclude qualifying private employers operating in Indian Country. 34 

Title II of the Americans with Disabilities Act 

ADA did not include an explicit exemption for tribal governments under Title II as it did in Title 
I. On June 22, 1999, the Supreme Court decided a landmark ruling interpreting Title II. In 
Olmstead v. L.C., the Supreme Court held that Title II of ADA requires states to provide 
community-based treatment for persons with mental disabilities when the state’s treatment 
professionals determine that such placement is appropriate, the affected persons do not oppose 
such treatment, and the placement can be reasonably accommodated. 35 When considering 
whether the placement can be reasonably accommodated, it is necessary to consider the resources 
available to the state and the needs of others with mental disabilities. The practical application of 
this ruling is that states must help to provide the least restrictive level of care for people with 
disabilities, moving away from institutionalization and toward home- and community-based care. 
This ruling could present new opportunities for tribal governments to develop home- and 
community-based services that are reimbursed by Medicaid or other sources. 

Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act and Tribes 

Title III of ADA prohibits discrimination in public accommodations. A case involving public 
accommodations for people with disabilities at a tribal facility provides some insight. On the 
basis of Congress’ intent to end discrimination and the statute’s broad language, the Eleventh 
Circuit has ruled that Title III of ADA does apply to tribes. 36 

However, a federal court finding that a statute is applicable to a tribe is not the same as finding a 
waiver of tribal sovereign immunity. 37 While Title III of ADA may apply to tribes, the Eleventh 



34 42 U.S.C. § 121 1 l(5)(B)(i). 

35 Olmstead v. L.C., 527 U.S. 581 (1999). 

36 Florida Paraplegic Association, Inc. v. Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida, 166 F.3d 1 126 
(1 1 th Cir. 1999). 

37 Ibid. 




31 



39 



Circuit found that the sovereign immunity of tribal governments prohibits private suits for 
enforcement against tribes in federal courts. In such cases, individuals with disabilities may have 
a right without a remedy. 

Title III does provide for suits brought for enforcement by the U.S. Department of Justice. 38 
While this possibility exists, no such action has been brought by the Department of Justice to 
date. It is also important to note that this ruling of the Eleventh Circuit was not taken to the U.S. 
Supreme Court. 

The Rehabilitation Act and Tribes 

The Rehabilitation Act prohibits discrimination based on disability in programs conducted by 
federal agencies, including programs receiving federal funds and in federal employment. In 
determining employment discrimination, the Rehabilitation Act uses the same standards as Title I 
of ADA. 

Section 121 of the Rehabilitation Act authorizes RSA to make grants to tribes for the purpose of 
vocational rehabilitation (VR) services. Tribes accepting these grants, and generally other federal 
funds, agree to comply with federal law. However, this agreement may not amount to a waiver of 
sovereign immunity, which protects tribes from suit in federal court. 39 

The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act and Tribes 

The purpose of the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) is to ensure that every 
child has available a free, appropriate public education that meets individual needs. 40 IDEA 
intends to improve the educational results of children with disabilities. To reach this goal, IDEA 
requires (1) an Individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP) for infants and toddlers with 
developmental delays, and (2) an Individualized Education Program (IEP), developed by the 



38 Ibid. 

39 Sanderlin v. Seminole Tribe, 243 F.3d 1282 (1 1 th Cir. 2001); but cf. Cruz v. Ysleta Del Sur 
Tribal Council, 842 F. Supp. 934 (W.D. Texas 1993) (order dismissing Tribe’s motion to dismiss 
because of sovereign immunity). 

40 20 U.S.C. § 1400(d)(1)(A). 





IFSP or IEP team, which includes parents and others as decisionmakers, for each eligible child of 
school age with a disability. 

To assist in meeting needs of children and families in Indian Country and in Department of the 
Interior-funded schools, IDEA provides a set-aside or percentage of funds from the U.S. 

Secretary of Education to the Secretary of the Department of the Interior. IDEA funds for infants 
and toddlers (ages 0-3) are provided directly to tribes by the Department of the Interior. Until the 
late 1990s, the tribes were not contacted directly by the Department of Education and asked to 
account for how needs were met for children with disabilities and their families. While IDEA 
calls for states to provide services to all children of preschool age eligible under IDEA, many 
children ages 3 to 5 in Indian Country face difficulty in receiving any support from state 
agencies. Thus, many children often fall through the cracks until they are five years old and can 
be served by either public or BIA-funded schools. 

IDEA provides that the Secretary of the Department of the Interior receive funds from the 
Secretary of Education to educate children ages 5 to 21 with disabilities on reservations in 
elementary and secondary schools operated and funded by the Secretary of the Interior. 41 The 
IDEA also provides an administrative enforcement process that the BIA-funded schools are 
subject to, based upon their status as a local educational agency. 42 However, IDEA does not 
waive tribal sovereign immunity because the federal law does not contain the explicit, 
unequivocal waiver that is necessary. While the U.S. Department of Education has the authority 
to withhold federal funding when the BIA-funded schools have been out of compliance in 
meeting children’s needs and in protecting families under IDEA, as well as in failing to improve 
physical accessibility of BIA facilities, this sanction has not been applied. The investigation for 
this NCD project revealed concern at the local level regarding adequate federal funding to ensure 
the BIA’s ability to meet its mandates under IDEA. Advocacy by parents and other groups is 
critical to protect the rights of Indian children with disabilities, whether in BIA-funded or public 
schools. 



41 20U.S.C. § 141 l(i)(l)(A). 

42 20 U.S.C. § 1401(1 5(C). 




33 



41 



Advocacy Options 

The outcomes above may suggest that along with states where tribal lands are located, some 
tribal governments are failing to meet their responsibility to individuals with disabilities. For 
many tribes, current funds may be inadequate to address all of the needs of people with 
disabilities, including improving accessibility in Indian Country. Although, entangled in this 
complex legal environment, individuals with disabilities living in Indian Country have potential 
options. A tribe could waive its sovereign immunity to allow suits brought under ADA in federal 
courts. A more likely scenario might be an increase in the number of tribal governments passing 
ordinances providing protections similar to those in federal statutes, such as ADA or the 
Rehabilitation Act. A tribe could thus provide a legal remedy within the existing tribal legal 
system through a limited waiver of sovereign immunity. Tribal governments have the inherent 
authority to pass laws, develop programs, and ensure protection and accessibility for people with 
disabilities under their jurisdiction. A recent survey conducted by the American Disability 
Legislation Project found that “schools, stores, churches, Bureau of Indian Affairs and other 
federal buildings, and tribal courts and jail facilities were accessible about two-thirds of the time” 
(p. 2). Other major tribal facilities, such as health centers and senior citizen buildings, were 
found to be accessible about 75 percent of the time. Similarly, most major services for people 
with disabilities were accessible about 71 percent of the time. 43 However, this report also notes 
that only 13 percent of tribes had a line item in their budget for disability issues. The political 
power of people with disabilities, their families, and advocates could help to move tribal 
governments toward adopting such ordinances. 

The doctrine of tribal sovereign immunity from suit in federal court does not necessarily support 
the proposition that the requirements of ADA are inapplicable to tribal governments in all 
circumstances. In drafting ADA, Congress makes it clear that the act is a “national mandate” to 
end discrimination. Furthermore, the Act and other comparable legislation suggest that Indian 
tribes should be the recipients of grants to ensure compliance. If tribes are to meet these federal 
requirements, increased funds are necessary. Currently, a policy paradox exists in which AI/AN 

43 Fowler L, Seeking T, Dwyer K, Duffy SW, Brod RL, Locust C, “American Indian Disability 
Legislation and Programs: Findings of the First National Survey of Tribal Governments,” 

Journal of Disability Policy Studies 1 0(2): 1 66—1 85 . 



people with disabilities, caught between the doctrine of tribal sovereign immunity and a national 
policy to end discrimination, suffer the consequences. 

Despite the legal challenges for enforcement of ADA and related legislation in Indian Country, 
American Indians and Alaska Natives have a unique relationship with the Federal Government 
that promises federally provided health, education, and social services. To uphold this promise, 
the Federal Government could provide appropriate services and support for people with 
disabilities in Indian Country. Pursuant to trust responsibility of the Federal Government to 
Indian tribes, federal agencies are responsible for carrying out these guarantees. However, 
funding for these programs has been inadequate to effectively address the needs of people with 
disabilities in Indian Country. 

In addition, the complex and conflicting structure of federal responsibilities for services provided 
to American Indians and Alaska Natives results in jurisdictional conflicts, both intra-agency and 
inter-agency. Such conflicts may lead to a lack of accountability and inadequate or no services 
provided to people with disabilities in Indian Country. For example, 10 years ago a National 
Indian Justice Center report suggested that the Department of Education assign to BLA exclusive 
responsibility for Indian children on reservations that have BLA schools. However, in light of the 
fact that the overwhelming majority of AI/AN children are educated in public schools, BLA 
believed it was responsible only for those children enrolled in its programs. 44 The authors of the 
report also note that multiple organizations with roles in developing and delivering services to 
American Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities have led to “interagency competition and 
conflict, jurisdictional confusion, and ‘passing the buck’.” 45 



44 National Indian Justice Center, Disabilities and Their Effects on American Indian and Alaska 
Native Communities: Final Report on Roundtable Conference, December 12-13, 1991, 
Department of Health and Human Services, Public Health Service, Indian Health Service, 
Rockville, MD, 1992. 

45 Ibid, p. 2. 




35 



43 



Barriers to Provision of and Access to Appropriate Services for People with Disabilities in 
Indian Country 

“ People have ideas about disabilities but they don ’t know what it ’s like. They 
might want to hold you back. I still have all the mechanical knowledge from 
running heavy equipment but just because I can ’t do that anymore, 1 can still do 
things like change the transmission on my car by myself. ” 

— Joseph Garcia, Prairie Band of Potawatomi 



General Barriers 

In this section, general barriers common to people from diverse cultures and rural people with 
disabilities are discussed. Then specific barriers that are unique to people with disabilities in 
Indian Country are described. 

While all people with disabilities may face a myriad of challenges in obtaining appropriate 
services to enable them to function effectively and productively, people who are members of 
diverse racial and ethnic populations and people with disabilities in rural areas may encounter 
even greater barriers to necessary supportive services and accommodation than do other people 
with disabilities. Recognizing the significant difficulties that may face people from diverse 
cultures who have disabilities and their unique needs, NCD developed a key initiative to address 
these needs. 46 

NCD has continued from 1993 to the present to focus attention on the need for special efforts to 
ensure that people with disabilities from diverse cultures are able to obtain necessary appropriate 
services and support. In the 1997 Roundtable Report of Findings, NCD noted that “there was 
consensus that the needs of [people] with disabilities and from [diverse cultures] and people with 
disabilities living in rural communities warrant ongoing corrective attention in all aspects of the 
fabric of American public policy” (NCD Roundtable Report, p. 2). In 1999, NCD summarized 



46 National Council on Disability, Meeting the Unique Needs of Minorities with Disabilities: 
A Report to the President and the Congress, April 26, 1993. National Council on Disability, 
Lift Every Voice: Modernizing Disability Policies and Programs to Serve a Diverse Nation, 
December 1, 1999. National Council on Disability, “Carrying on the Good Fight: Summary 
Paper from Think Tank 2000 — Advancing the Civil and Human Rights of People with 
Disabilities from Diverse Cultures,” August 23, 2000. 




36 



44 



findings and recommendations for addressing barriers to access to services and support for 
people with disabilities from diverse cultures and their families. 47 

General barriers to access to necessary and appropriate services identified through the NCD 
meetings on consumers and advocates included 

• Persistent lack of access to appropriate job training and employment opportunities 

• Persistent lack of childcare and afterschool programs 

• Greater difficulty gaining access to public accommodations (e.g., markets, 
restaurants) due to lesser compliance with ADA access mandates 

• Greater difficulty gaining access to public transportation and greater unwillingness of 
public transportation personnel to accommodate people with disabilities who are also 
from diverse cultures 

• Lack of culturally competent and culturally appropriate service delivery, including 

lack of people from diverse cultures in the disability service professions, 
particularly in rural areas 

inadequate culturally appropriate outreach to ensure that people are aware of 
services and resources that are available to them 

lack of bilingual speakers, interpreters, and language-appropriate communications 
materials 

The digital divide or limited information technology infrastructure in rural areas poses another 
barrier to independent living for American Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities. For 



47 National Council on Disability, Lift Every Voice: Modernizing Disability Policies and 
Programs to Serve a Diverse Nation, December 1, 1999. National Council on Disability, 
“Carrying on the Good Fight: Summary Paper from Think Tank 2000 — Advancing the Civil and 
Human Rights of People with Disabilities from Diverse Cultures,” August 23, 2000. 




37 



45 



instance, approximately 24 percent of AI/AN households do not have telephones. Less than 30 
percent of AI/AN households are equipped with a computer and less than 20 percent have 
Internet access. 48 In addition to these general barriers to access that are encountered by people 
with disabilities from diverse cultures, people in rural areas with disabilities also face additional 
barriers, including long distances to obtain services, lack of transportation and appropriate 
accommodation to travel to services, greater difficulty obtaining assistive technology or 
specialized equipment due to lack of commercial establishments with sufficient market demand, 
and lesser awareness of and/or lack of resources to provide accommodation to facilitate access to 
services in rural areas. 

People with disabilities in Indian Country encounter these general barriers in common with other 
people from diverse cultures and rural people with disabilities. Since many tribal lands are in 
remote rural and frontier areas, the barriers that tribal members face may be more extreme on 
average than those faced by rural people with disabilities generally. Similarly, because the AI/AN 
population in Indian Country is less than 0.5 percent of the U.S. population, the lack of AI/AN 
disability service providers is likely to be more severe than for other culturally diverse 
populations. In addition, for people in Indian Country who speak a native language, appropriate 
interpreters and language-appropriate communications materials are even less likely to be 
available. 

Over and above these general barriers to access to services, people with disabilities in Indian 
Country also face a number of additional uniquely difficult and challenging barriers. 

Unique Barriers 

People with disabilities in Indian Country reside in areas that pose special issues for obtaining 
access to services and accommodation to facilitate their full participation in society. These 
unique aspects of tribal lands include the following: 

• Legislation mandating rights for people with disabilities is not automatically 
enforceable in Indian Country. 

48 Davis T and Trebian M, “Shaping the Destiny of Native American People by Ending the 
Digital Divide,” EDUCAUSE Review, January/February 2001: 38-46. 



• Tribal leaders and communities lack awareness and adequate knowledge of programs 
to meet the needs of people with disabilities in Indian Country. 

• A number of federal agencies have interrelated and conflicting responsibilities for 
provision of health, education, and social services in Indian Country that result in 
failure and lack of accountability to meet the needs of people with disabilities. 

• Chronic underfunding of federal programs serving people in Indian Country results in 
inadequate and rationed services that do not meet the needs of all people in Indian 
Country, including those of people with disabilities. 

• Indian Country, for the most part, is composed of small, isolated populations with 
limited resources and capabilities to develop and implement programs and 
accommodations for people with disabilities. 

• Tribes are distinct groups, with different cultures, languages, and resources, and 
would likely require unique approaches to inform and facilitate changes to meet the 
needs of people with disabilities in Indian Country. 

Disability Legislation in Indian Country 

People with disabilities living in Indian Country may not be afforded the benefits and protections 
of ADA and other legislation affecting rights and services. Because of the unique relationship 
between tribal governments and the U.S. government, legislation that does not specifically 
address Indian tribes is generally assumed not to apply to tribal areas. For ADA (and other 
similar legislation) to apply to tribal lands, the Federal Government likely would need to conduct 
separate negotiations with each of the more than 500 federally recognized tribes. 49 A recent 
decision in the Eleventh Circuit Court suggests that while tribes are not specifically excluded, 
there is limited enforcement for ADA compliance. Like federal and state governments, tribes 
enjoy sovereign immunity from being sued unless the tribe allows for suit or Congress explicitly 



49 American Indian Disability Legislation Project, Findings of a National Survey of Tribal 
Governments, Rural Institute on Disabilities, The University of Montana, December 1995. 



provides for suits. Thus, enforcement of ADA in Indian Country would require that the Federal 
Government bring suit against the tribes or that Congress take explicit action to include tribes 
within the scope of ADA. 

In the absence of legislative action or conduct of separate negotiations between the Federal 
Government and tribal governments, individuals with disabilities in Indian Country are limited to 
negotiation and political efforts to persuade tribal governments to adopt policies to ensure rights 
and provide accommodations. 

A 1995 survey conducted by the American Disability Legislation Project found that at least one 
tribe has chosen to adopt ADA as a whole through tribal resolution and is now sorting out what 
this means for its members. In addition, AIDLP reported that several tribes had passed 
resolutions that deal with employment of people with disabilities, one tribe had created an Office 
of Special Education to ensure that tribal children with disabilities would have their educational 
needs met, and other tribes had taken steps to begin addressing issues for meeting the needs of 
people with disabilities. At the same time, the AIDLP survey revealed that only 13 percent of 
responding tribes had at least one line item in their budget related to disability services; however, 
the average amount per tribe for these line items was very small (e.g., an average amount of 
$5,033 for staff training on disability issues and $12,500 for employment services for people with 
disabilities). 

Lack of Awareness/Adequate Knowledge 

The AIDLP survey of American Indian tribes indicated that only 37 percent of respondents 
reported that their tribe was familiar with ADA, the relevant sections of the Rehabilitation Act, 
or IDEA. Only 6 percent indicated that their tribal governments were very familiar with major 
disability legislation. None of the Alaska Native respondents stated that their tribal governments 
were very familiar with major disability legislation. Of American Indian respondents, 74 percent 
said that they believed that their tribal government would be interested in participating as a focus 
group for establishing disability legislation within their tribe (NCD Roundtable Report, p. 23). 50 



50 Ibid. 




40 



43 



Most respondents to the survey indicated that it was very important that tribal members with 
disabilities be treated with respect. 

Complex and Interrelated Federal Agency Responsibilities 

A wide variety of federal agencies have some level of responsibility for providing services for 
people with disabilities in Indian Country. However, it has never been clearly delineated which 
agencies are specifically accountable for providing specific services. As a result, many services 
may be provided on a piecemeal basis or not at all, even when there are clear federal 
responsibilities under law and treaty agreements. The U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services’ (HHS) IHS, the U.S. Department of the Interior’s BLA, and the U.S. Department of 
Education’s Office of Special Education Programs and RSA all have some role in developing 
and delivering services to AI/AN people with disabilities in Indian Country. However, a 1991 
report states, “There are disagreements about who is primarily responsible for providing services 
to Indian children with disabilities.” 51 The authors go on to note that ‘“jurisdictional confusion 
and ‘passing the buck’ . . .have impeded delivery of services to people with disabilities. This lack 
of coordination needs to be remedied at federal and state levels to ensure efficient delivery of 
services....” 52 This same study notes that American Indian children received special education 
from a variety of sources including BLA, Head Start, IHS, and local public school districts. 
However, less than 30 percent of those in need of special education services received some 
services and, of those, about one quarter received fewer services than prescribed by their IEP. 

Inadequate Funding of Federal Agencies with Responsibilities for Providing Services to People 
with Disabilities on Tribal Lands 

Members of federally recognized tribes have access to health services through the federal IHS 
that provides services to all eligible tribal members. Similarly, BLA is responsible for providing a 
variety of services that address the needs of people with disabilities (e.g., education and services 
to school-age children with disabilities). However, chronic underfunding of AI/AN programs by 
the Federal Government has severely lessened the ability of these federal agencies to meet the 
needs of the AI/AN population. 

51 National Indian Justice Center, op. cit., p. 18. 

52 Ibid., p. 19. 




49 



41 



Funding of Education Programs. Funding for special education programs for AI/AN children 
with disabilities is provided from a variety of sources from the U.S. Department of the Interior’s 
BLA, U.S. Department of Education, and state education departments, depending on the type of 
school attended. Ninety percent of AI/AN children attend publicly funded schools and 10 percent 
attend BIA-funded schools, which are run by BLA, contractors, or tribes. 

Responsibilities for providing special education and related services to AI/AN children ages 5 to 
21 with disabilities reside with the school district in which they are enrolled. Since 90 percent of 
AI/AN children attend public schools, state and local governments are responsible for funding 
special education and related services for the vast majority of Indian children with disabilities. 

All BIA-funded schools that use IDEA allocations from the U.S. Department of Education, 
whether managed by BLA or tribes, are responsible for carrying out the IDEA requirements by 
providing special education and related services to eligible children with disabilities who may be 
among the remaining 10 percent of AI/AN children who attend BIA-funded schools. BLA reports 
that school administrators believe that funding for staff is still a factor that presents a challenge to 
fully meeting the requirements. 53 

Funding for Health Programs. IHS estimates that the funding it receives to care for eligible 
AI/AN people is only about 50 percent of actual need. On a per capita basis, IHS funding has 
declined by nearly 20 percent since 1987. 54 Total U.S. per capita spending for health care was 
$3,619 in 1998, compared with IHS funding of $1,186 per capita for American Indians who live 
on or near reservations and use IHS facilities. Total estimated per capita expenditures, paid 
through all sources of financing including out-of-pocket costs, for the American Indian 
population were about 58 percent of average U.S. per capita expenditures. For people who reside 
in Indian Country, however, it is likely that IHS-funded health services constitute the primary or 
only source of health care available. IHS reports that authorization for referrals to contract health 



53 Office of Special Education Programs, Bureau of Indian Affairs Monitoring Report, U.S. 
Department of Education, Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation Services, April 20, 
2000. 

54 Cox D and Langwell K, Sources of Financing and the Level of Health Spending for Native 
Americans, The Henry J. Kaiser Foundation, Washington, DC, October 1999. 



services (i.e., services purchased outside the IHS because the needed services are not available 
directly from IHS) is currently limited to “emergent, saving of life and limb” due to limited 
funding. 55 

IHS direct service or tribally managed health programs may augment financial resources through 
Medicaid, Medicare, or State Children’s Health Insurance Program reimbursement for services 
provided to patients who are enrolled in these programs. However, there are many barriers to 
enrollment in these programs and not all IHS or tribally managed health programs have the 
information system capabilities or third-party reimbursement experience to effectively obtain the 
reimbursements that they may be eligible to receive. 

While health care is only one component of the services and support needed by people with 
disabilities living in Indian Country, the relative poor health status and the underfunding of the 
IHS reflects the general lack of financial resources directed by the Federal Government to meet 
health, education, vocational rehabilitation, independent living, and other service needs of all 
people living in Indian Country. People who have disabilities and need appropriate services to 
permit them to participate fully in society face grave barriers to obtaining these services and 
support in an environment where the available resources are vastly inadequate to meet basic 
needs of all tribal members. 

Funding for Vocational Rehabilitation, Independent Living, and Assistive Technology Services. 
Federal funding for VR and independent living services is stipulated in the provisions of the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973 as amended. Title I, Part C, Section 121 of the Rehabilitation Act 
establishes competitive grants for the provision of VR services to American Indians with 
disabilities. Indian tribes located on federal and state reservations are eligible to compete and 
receive grants under the American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services (AIVRS) program. 
Programs approved under Section 121 may be funded for a period of five years and must provide 
services that are comparable to those provided by state VR programs. The federal share of costs 
is equal to 90 percent of the costs of VR services; the remaining 10 percent, or the nonfederal 



55 Indian Health Service, Indian Health Care Services and Eligibility Information, Rockville, MD 
(42 CFR 136.23). 




43 



51 



share (which may be waived), may be rendered in cash or in kind. The 1998 amendments to the 
Rehabilitation Act set a reserve for programs funded through Section 121 at an amount greater 
than 1 percent and no more than 1 .5 percent of federal appropriations for state VR grants. 
Currently, among the more than 560 federally recognized tribes, a limited number of 121 grants 
have been made available. Only 69 programs are in operation and among this small 
number, two receive no federal funds for their programs, but the tribes still work to meet needs 
of people with disabilities. The tribes funding their own programs are Sycuan (which is a 
consortia) in California and the Eastern Band of Cherokee in Cherokee, North Carolina. 56 

Independent living services and centers are funded through Title VII of the Rehabilitation Act. 
Title VII provides funds that states may use to provide independent living services, develop and 
maintain state independent living centers, and improve working relations between independent 
living programs, ILCs, state independent living councils, vocational rehabilitation, supported 
employment, and other federal and nonfederal programs established or supported through the 
Rehabilitation Act. Funds to provide independent living services are available through a grant 
mechanism. Tribal governments may apply to receive a Title VII grant; however, according to 
Lansing and Yazzie-King, 57 the success of tribal governments in obtaining funding for 
independent living services through this mechanism may be limited because “tribes must 
compete for these grants with the majority society, where greater knowledge of the independent 
living philosophy, the independent living movement, and federal requirements is already in 
place.” Currently, only one ILC grant has provided a place for service on tribal land anywhere in 
the United States. Grants are administered through the U.S. Department of Education’s RSA. 

The Assistive Technology Act of 1998 provides funds through state assistive technology (AT) 
programs. There are 56 such federally funded programs, including one in every state, 



56 Personal correspondence with Carleen Anderson, Region X: Rehabilitation Services, January 
10,2003. 

57 Lansing SP and Yazzie-King E, “Access to Independent Living and Assistive Technology for 
American Indians with Disabilities,” in Rehabilitation and American Indians with Disabilities: 
A Handbook for Administrators, Practitioners, and Researchers (ed. by CA Marshall), Athens, 
GA: Elliot and Fitzpatrick, Inc., 2001 , p. 76. 




44 



52 



commonwealth, and territory of the United States. 58 Funds may be used, in part, to improve 
access to assistive technology, to increase consumer awareness of technology, and to develop 
alternative financing mechanisms, such as loan programs, for consumers to purchase assistive 
technology. Information on the extent to which these state programs meet the AT needs of 
American Indians with disabilities is unknown. 

IHS provides access to only a relatively narrow set of AT devices (e.g., hearing aids, eyeglasses). 
Funding for assistive technology necessary for independent living must generally be obtained 
from various other sources. Assistive technology may be covered under Medicare, if the required 
services fall within the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) definition of “durable medical 
equipment” or by Medicaid if services are deemed to be “medically necessary” and are covered 
under the different states’ Medicaid plans or their waiver programs. An eligible child with a 
disability may have access to assistive technology (e.g., computer equipment, listening devices, 
and communication equipment) to meet needs identified by the IEP team to provide a free 
appropriate public education under the IDEA educational activities and support his/her 
opportunities for educational attainment through IDEA. State VR agencies and specifically the 
AIVRS programs may provide technological equipment including sensory and 
telecommunications devices; however, data from an evaluation of the AIVRS 59 suggests that the 
rehabilitation technology services available through these programs may be limited. 60 The 
effectiveness of these programs in assisting American Indians with disabilities to access assistive 
devices is not known but, based on lack of access to electricity, telephones, and cable, for 



58 “RESNA Technical Assistance Project: AT Connections — State Assistive Technology (AT) 
Programs.” Retrieved from www.resna.org/taproject/at/connections.html on March 18, 2003. 

59 Hopstock P, Baker C, Kelley J, and Stephenson T, “Evaluation of the American Indian 
Vocational Rehabilitation Services Program,” Arlington, VA, Development Associates, June 30, 
2002. 

60 Of the 54 AIVRS programs included in this evaluation, only seven indicated that they provided 
rehabilitation technology services to “some” or “most” of their consumers. 




45 



53 



example, in remote/rural areas, it is widely believed that American Indians residing in Indian 
Country face significant barriers to accessing assistive technology. 61 

Limited Tribal Resources to Meet the Needs of People with Disabilities on Tribal lands 
American Indians and Alaska Natives are among the most impoverished population groups in the 
United States. This is particularly the case for American Indians and Alaska Natives who live in 
Indian Country. Most tribal lands have small populations, with high levels of poverty and 
unemployment. In 1 990, for instance, the second largest Indian reservation had a population of 
less than 12,000 and only 18 reservations had populations of over 5,000. 62 The limited population 
size seldom is sufficient to generate revenues for tribes that would enable them to directly fund 
any significant level of services to meet the needs of people with disabilities. Services are 
generally dependent upon a tribe’s ability to develop programs through federal or state funding. 

Diversity Among AI/AN Populations 

There are over 560 separate federally recognized tribes and each has its own culture, history, 
health beliefs, and practices. There is also a diversity of languages among the AI/AN population; 
linguists recognize at least 62 language families among those spoken by American Indians. 63 
Community attitudes and cultural beliefs about the causes of disabilities and perceptions differ 
substantially among tribes, with consequent differences in beliefs about appropriate responses 
and support that should be offered to people with disabilities. 64 As a result, designing and 
implementing culturally competent and culturally appropriate outreach programs and training 
disability services professionals to offer culturally competent services is not a simple task. There 
is not a generic approach that can be adopted and used across all tribal lands to address the needs 

61 National Council on Disability, “Federal Policy Barriers to Assistive Technology,” May 31, 

2000. 

62 Snipp C, “Selected Demographic Characteristics of Indians,” in American Indian Health: 
Innovations in Health Care, Promotion, and Policy (ed. by Rhoades E), The Johns Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, MD, 2000. 

63 Demalle R and Rhoades E, “The Aboriginal People of America,” in American Indian Health: 
Innovations in Health Care, Promotion, and Policy (ed. by Rhoades E), The Johns Hopkins 
University Press, Baltimore, MD, 2000. 

64 National Indian Justice Center, op cit., p. 14. 




46 



54 



of people with disabilities. Programs must be tailored to the specific tribal population through 
significant input from tribal members. The Tribal Disability Actualization Process illustrates the 
tailoring of a one-to-one approach that is important when addressing disability policy and 
services issues with individual tribes. It involves bringing together a wide range of concerned 
tribal members, using a “self-directed” approach for tribes to develop disability legislation that 
respects tribal culture and sovereignty. 65 While the model developed by the Tribal Disability 
Actualization Process is a uniform one, it requires extensive work with individual tribes and 
community members to produce change in attitudes and effect change in policy. This process is 
described in more detail below. With over 500 tribes in the United States, implementation of this 
process across all tribes would require significant resources and time to accomplish substantial 
change on behalf of people with disabilities in Indian Country. 

Assessing the Effectiveness of Strategies for Reducing Barriers to Provision of and Access to 
Appropriate Services 

Although strategies to advance the independent living and self-determination realities of 
American Indians with disabilities have been initiated, the review of the literature indicates that 
the effectiveness of most efforts has not been empirically tested. The few studies that report an 
evaluation component are methodologically weak; small sample sizes and the use of subgroups 
that are not representative of Indian Country as a whole are among the factors that limit the 
ability to generalize findings from these studies to the larger population of American Indians and 
Alaska Natives with disabilities. Evidence on the extent to which initiatives have succeeded in 
removing barriers to education, health, vocational rehabilitation, and independent living among 
American Indians residing in Indian Country is primarily anecdotal, with limited information on 
trends or analyses of patterns across the data that might suggest similarity across findings. 

Tribal Disability Actualization Process 

Project staff at the University of Montana Rural Institute on Disability AIDTAC designed and 
evaluated a model to assist tribes in developing disability policy that reflects the tribe’s culture 



65 Fowler L, Dwyer K, Brueckmann S, Seekins T, Clay J, and Locust C, American Indian 
Approaches to Disability Policy: Establishing Legal Protections for Tribal Members with 
Disabilities: Five Case Studies, American Indian Disability Legislation Project, University of 
Montana, December 1 996. 




47 



55 



and values. This model is composed of four primary steps that are designed to increase tribal 
members’ awareness of unmet independent living needs and enhance their understanding of the 
adequacy or appropriateness of existing tribal disability policies. In the first step of this process, a 
tribal member willing to advocate and assist in educating the community on disability issues is 
identified. In the second step, the authorization of the tribal government and support for the 
actualization process is obtained; typically, this is done through an educational presentation to 
tribal leaders. Step three consists of focus groups or “talking circles” in which tribal members (as 
well as invited state and local disability providers) discuss beliefs concerning disability, unmet 
needs, sovereignty issues, and approaches for establishing disability policy. In the final step in 
the process, focus group members present to their tribal governments a set of approaches for 
meeting the needs of people with disabilities through tribal legislation. 

A qualitative evaluation of the impact of the Tribal Disability Actualization Process indicates 
that tribes that participated in this process have in fact engaged in a variety of activities that have 
resulted in an increased awareness of disability issues within their communities and address 
barriers to independence within the reservation. Among the outcomes attributed to the Tribal 
Disability Actualization model are the following: the Oglala Lakota Sioux Tribes in the Pine 
Ridge Reservation in South Dakota adopted ADA in 1994; in addition to making enhancements 
to ensure the accessibility of public buildings, tribes located in the Flathead Reservation of 
Montana adopted a resolution that conformed to the spirit of ADA and made modifications to 
policies to address hiring and training of people with disabilities; and the Navajo Reservation in 
the Northeast Arizona and Colorado Plateau initiated activities to arrange for personal assistance 
training for tribal members. 66 



66 Dwyer K, Fowler L, Seekins T, Locust C, and Clay J, “Community Development by American 
Indian Tribes: Five Case Studies of Establishing Policy for Tribal Members with Disabilities,” 
Journal of the Community Development Society, 2000; 3 1 (2): 1 96-2 1 4. 




48 



56 



Education 

A number of strategies have been developed and implemented to increase the availability and 
effective use of special education and related services for Al/AN children with disabilities. 67 
Several IDEA grants have been awarded to train special education teachers to work with AI/AN 
students. These include the Reaching American Indian Special/Elementary Educators (RAISE) 
project at Northern Arizona University and two relevant projects at Pennsylvania State 
University. The RAISE project provides opportunities for students to work directly with Navajo 
children in local communities and schools and offers experience with culture, language, and 
traditions. The Pennsylvania State University program provides training in special education and 
educational administration to AI/AN students and offers them opportunities to conduct research 
on improving education of AI/AN students with disabilities. Graduates of the program work in 
special education in AI/AN communities for two years for each year of funding they receive. In 
addition, the American Indian Higher Education Consortium reports that 34 tribal colleges 
operate in the United States. BLA reports that 27 tribal colleges receive BLA funding. Some tribal 
colleges receive grants to train special education personnel at all levels. 

Programs are also available to provide education, support, and assistance to parents of AI/AN 
children with disabilities regarding rights and effective strategies to obtain services for their 
children. Currently, 106 Parent Training and Information Centers and Community Parent 
Resource Centers, funded by the U.S. Department of Education, are located throughout the 
United States. Technical assistance to the centers is provided by the Technical Assistance 
Alliance for Parent Centers. These centers provide training and information to parents of infants, 
toddlers, and school-aged children and young adults with disabilities, as well as the professionals 
who work with families. The assistance provided to parents helps them participate more 
effectively with school personnel and other professionals to meet the educational needs of 
children and youth with disabilities. 68 At least two of these centers specialize in assisting AI/AN 



67 Faircloth S and Tippeconic J, “Issues in the Education of American Indian and Alaska Native 
Students with Disabilities,” ERIC Digest, EDO-RC-OO-3 (December 2000). 

68 Technical Assistance Alliance for Parent Centers, “Parent Training and Information Centers 
and Community Parent Resource Centers.” Retrieved from www.taalliance.org/PTIs.htm on 
March 20, 2003. 



families who have a child with a disability. The National Native American Families Together 
Parent Center (NNAFT), located in Moscow, Idaho, is directed and staffed by members of tribal 
communities. NNAFT provides information on the educational rights of children with special 
needs; communicating with school and medical personnel and other professionals; how to 
participate in developing and monitoring a child’s educational plan; and disability-specific data 
on sensory, mental, emotional, or specific learning disabilities. The centers recruit and train 
community members to provide support and assistance to families of AI/AN children with 
disabilities. 69 The Native American Family Empowerment Center, located in Lac du Flambeau, 
Wisconsin, is a program of the Great Lakes Intertribal Council. This program seeks to ensure 
access to services for tribal families with children who have a disability, and other impairments 
as determined under IDEA. This program works to empower AI/AN families with knowledge to 
work with schools and state and local health and human services agencies. 70 These are two 
examples of programs with a special emphasis on AI/AN populations. However, it is important 
to point out that all of the federally funded parent centers across the country are charged to serve 
all families whose children have disabilities, including families in ethnically diverse 
populations. 71 

With regard to testing methods, Faircloth and Tippeconnic (2000) cite examples of school 
districts that have developed culturally and linguistically appropriate testing methods to 
distinguish AI/AN children with learning disabilities from those with cultural/linguistic barriers 
to learning to ensure that referrals for special education and related services are appropriate. 

Although a variety of approaches have been designed and implemented to improve services to 
AI/AN children with disabilities, little data exists providing evidence of the impact of these 



69 National Native American Families Together Parent Center, “National Native American 
Families Together Parent Center.” Retrieved from www.nativefamilynetwork.com on March 20, 
2003. 

70 Great Lakes Intertribal Council, “Native American Family Empowerment Center.” Retrieved 
from http://glitc.bfm.org/programs/default.php. 

71 Jordan, Dixie, PACER Center, Inc., Minneapolis. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. 
March 20, 2003. 




50 



58 



strategies on educational outcomes. In addition, since most educational services for AI/AN 
children with disabilities are provided through state programs (rather than on reservations 
through BLA-funded and tribally managed programs), the major barriers to appropriate 
educational services are similar for both AI/AN and non-AI/AN children with disabilities. 
However, cultural and language differences may create additional barriers for the effectiveness of 
mainstream services that are provided to AI/AN children. 

Vocational Rehabilitation 

Available evidence suggests that American Indians with disabilities who complete a program of 
vocational rehabilitation are likely to experience employment outcomes superior to American 
Indians who are not rehabilitated. A study that analyzed the employment status of 21 American 
Indians who participated in VR programs and 40 American Indians who participated in job 
training programs found that 85 percent of those who completed their VR program were 
employed following rehabilitation, compared with only 25 percent employment among American 
Indians, living on and off reservations, who were not rehabilitated. Similarly, 63 percent of 
American Indians who successfully completed a job training program or were “positively 
terminated” — meaning they were employed 13 months following the job training program — were 
employed, compared with only 8 percent employment among the population with training. 72 

The 64 projects that were supported through the AIVRS program in 2001 served approximately 
4,500 persons. 73 Estimates suggest that of the consumers served by these AIVRS projects, over 
28 percent had a substance abuse problem, 22 percent had an orthopedic disability, 17 percent 
had a mental or emotional disability, and 15 percent had a learning disability. Interestingly, in 
interviews with project staff conducted as part of an evaluation of the AIVRS program, 



72 Gahungu A and Sherman JM, An Examination of the Relationship Between Consumer 
Satisfaction and Employment Outcomes for Rehabilitated and Non-Rehabilitated American 
Indians , American Indian Rehabilitation Research and Training Center, July 18, 2000. 

73 U.S. Department of Education, American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services Program 
Performance Report, 2001. Available at www.ed.gov/pubs/annualreport2001/333.html. 




51 



59 



respondents indicated that American Indians/Alaska Natives with physical disabilities were most 
likely to be in need of but not receive AIVRS services. 74 

Although estimates were not independently validated, data reported to RSA by tribal VR 
agencies indicates that nearly 65 percent of American Indians who exited the AIVRS program in 
2001 achieved an employment outcome. 75 In their evaluation of the AIVRS program, which was 
conducted under contract to RSA, Hopstock et al. noted that in fiscal years 1998 and 1999, only 
53 percent of AI/AN consumers who exited state VR programs achieved successful employment 
outcomes. 76 During fiscal year 2000, 963 American Indians with disabilities were successfully 
rehabilitated under AIVRS programs. In addition to the successful rehabilitation, tribal VR 
programs served 4,178 AI/AN consumers. Thirteen tribes or consortia applied but were not 
funded in fiscal year 2000 for AIVRS programs. In the 2001 fiscal year, insufficient funds 
prevented 9 out of 14 tribes or consortia from being funded for AIVRS programs. With the 
potential to achieve positive results from AIVRS programs, reauthorization with an increase in 
funding is desperately needed. 77 

Vocational Rehabilitation: Native American Technician Program 

The Native American Technician (NAT) program was established by the Florida State 

Vocational Rehabilitation Agency as a pilot rehabilitation program. The NAT program is 



74 Hopstock et al., “Evaluation of the American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services 
Program,” 2002. 

75 U.S. Department of Education, American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services Program 
Performance Report, 2001. Available at www.ed.gov/pubs/annualreport2001/333.html. 

76 Hopstock et al., “Evaluation of the American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services 
Program,” 2002. 

77 The Consortia of Administrators for Native American Rehabilitation (CANAR) Legislative 
Committee developed a set of 1 1 resolutions for consideration by those who are responsible for 
reauthorization of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended. The resolutions were designed to 
promote the continuing growth of culturally responsive rehabilitation services for American 
Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities. The resolutions were edited and finalized with input 
from CANAR members at the CANAR Annual Conference in Seattle, Washington, on December 
1 1 , 2001 , and named “The CANAR 1 1 .” Retrieved from 
http://www.nau.edu/ihd/CANAR/legislation.html on January 10, 2003. 




52 



60 



premised on the belief that because tribal members are most familiar with their American Indian 
values and culture, they are also best suited to conduct outreach in their respective communities. 
Through contractual agreements, the state arranged for Indian members of the community to 
assist non-Indian counselors in providing VR services to the Indian community. Among their 
responsibilities, NAT assisted the agency in case management and identified members of their 
community who were in need of but had not received VR services. Preliminary evidence 
suggested that the NAT program succeeded in increasing participation of American Indians in the 
state VR system. 78 However, the program lost funding sometime after 1996. In its place, a pilot 
program called the Native American Outreach Program was begun in Gainesville, Florida. 
Outreach counselors from the program attend powwows and tribal gatherings, where they inform 
American Indians with disabilities of available government programs and funding. Referrals and 
applications are provided as needed. Further follow-up will be needed to assess the outcomes of 
this program. 

Vocational Rehabilitation: Self-Employment Options 

The Jemez/Zia Vocational Rehabilitation Center in New Mexico and the Tanana Chiefs 
Conference Vocational Rehabilitation Program in Fairbanks, Alaska, are among the programs 
that are assisting American Indians with disabilities to achieve independence through self- 
employment. In addition to receiving training in budgeting and marketing, skills that are 
necessary to operate a small business, the Jemez/Zia program employs tribal people with 
disabilities to train clients in one of several crafts, such as pottery making or silversmithing. 
Among the successful outcomes that the Tanana Chiefs VR program seeks is for clients to enter 
into competitive employment, become self-employed, or engage in subsistence hunting, fishing, 
and trapping. Subsistence hunting and fishing are respected as culturally appropriate and as an 
exercise of a person’s right to self-determination. Both the Jemez/Zia and the Tanana Chiefs 
programs assist clients in purchasing or obtaining supplies and equipment to operate the clients’ 
businesses. Emerging patterns across anecdotal evidence indicate that these programs are 



78 Locust C and Lang J, “Walking in Two Worlds: Native Americans and the VR System,” 
American Rehabilitation, Summer 1996: 2-11. 




53 



61 



succeeding in their goal of assisting people with disabilities to move toward economic self- 
sufficiency; however, empirical evidence of these impacts is unavailable. 79 

Independent Living and Transportation in Indian Country 

Recognizing that a weak transportation infrastructure may limit economic opportunities and pose 
a substantial barrier to accessing essential health and social services, several tribes have 
developed transportation systems that may be replicated. For instance, with funding from RSA, 
the tribally controlled Salish Kootenai College (SKC) on the Flathead Reservation of Montana 
developed a point-to-point transportation system for residents of the reservation with disabilities. 
The SKC transportation program purchased wheelchair-accessible vans and coordinated access to 
employment and rehabilitation services as needed by both tribal and nontribal members of the 
community. An early (six-month) evaluation of this program indicated that ridership was below 
initial projections. Eligibility limitations and difficulties in advertising availability of services in 
rural communities were thought to account for this initial low rate of use. 80 Current information 
on the status of this program was not available for this NCD report. 

Several tribes have also used funding obtained from a combination of federal and state sources 
(e.g., the Federal Transit Administration, the HHS’ Administration on Aging, Medicaid) to 
develop transportation systems that are accessible to people with disabilities. These systems were 
designed to link tribal members to employment centers and health and human services programs. 
Among the tribes with such transportation systems, the Chickasaw Nation Transportation System 
in Oklahoma, the Navajo Transit System in Arizona, and the Shoshone and Arapaho Nation 
Transit Association in Wyoming operate paratransit vans or vehicles that are fully accessible or 



79 CANAR, “Business Incubator Promotes Self-Employment,” CANAR: Newsletter for American 
Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Programs, 2001; 3(2): 1-2. CANAR, “Self-Employment and 
Subsistence Hunting and Fishing in Alaska,” Newsletter for American Indian Vocational 
Rehabilitation Programs, 2001; 3(2):3 — 4. 

80 Hermanson M, Landstrom B, and Domitrovitch J, “Developing a Transportation System for 
Individuals with Disabilities on a Rural Indian Reservation,” American Rehabilitation, Autumn 
1994:28-31. 




54 



62 



ADA compliant. 81 Although it may be reasonable to assume that these transportation systems 
enhanced the independent living opportunities of people with disabilities living in Indian 
Country, empirical evidence is not available in the literature. 

Independent Living and Training Models for Sensitivity 

Staff of AIRRTC developed and pilot-tested an independent living training workshop to provide 
technical assistance to service providers and policymakers on the provision of outreach services 
culturally appropriate to AI/AN clients with severe disabilities. The purpose of this training 
module was three-fold: “(1) identify differences among American Indian cultures... (2) create 
outreach independent living services for American Indians with severe or significant disabilities 
on and off Indian lands, and (3) identify strategies related to the independent living needs of 
American Indians.” 82 The training module assists participants in developing “Blue Prints for 
Action Plans” — strategies for providing outreach to American Indians with disabilities — and 
identifying resources to implement the plans. Reports of results connected with outreach training 
at one month, three months, and six months suggested that the 16 program participants were able 
to identify and/or had taken action toward implementing outreach strategies to assist AI/AN 
clients with disabilities to achieve their independent living objectives. 

Staff of the Northern Arizona University also developed a program to train American Indian 
community representatives to understand and address the independent living needs of elderly 
American Indians with visual impairments. Representatives from tribal health departments, 
senior citizen programs, and other service programs were invited to participate in a five-day 
workshop in which hands-on training on topics such as the techniques for mobility and daily 
living, assistive devices, and cultural and rural issues were provided. The 38 trainees were 
required to practice newly acquired skills with visually impaired volunteers. Following the 
workshop, an in-service training with tribal members was conducted to address the specific needs 

81 Shawn K, “American Indian Transportation: Issues and Successful Models,” Technical 
Assistance Brief #14, RTAO National Transit Resource Center. Retrieved from 
www.ctaa.org/ntrc/rtap/pubs/ta/am_ind.html on May 31, 2002. 

82 Sanderson PL and Clay JA, Strategies on Successful Independent Living Services for American 
Indians with Disabilities: A Research Dissemination Final Report, American Indian 
Rehabilitation Research and Training Center, Northern Arizona University. 



3 

ERIC 



55 



63 



of the reservations. Evaluation of the workshop was conducted using a pre- and post-test design. 
The improvement in test scores suggested that the workshop objectives had been met. Study 
investigators reported that the community representatives who were trained under this one-year 
program served a total of 21 1 American Indians with visual impairments. 83 

Independent Living and Personal Assistance Services 

Recognizing the need for culturally sensitive personal care services, the Blackfeet tribal council 
adopted and guaranteed start-up funds for the Blackfeet Personal Care Assistance (PCA) 
program. The program hires, trains, and arranges for attendants to provide services to tribal 
members. The program also provides case management services for elderly tribal members with 
dementia or Alzheimer’s disease and has worked to bring independent living apartments to the 
local community. The Blackfeet PCA program is believed to be among the largest of the personal 
assistance providers operating in the State of Montana. Most clients are Medicaid-eligible, and 
funding for program services is obtained largely through Medicaid. Anecdotal evidence suggests 
that tribal members favorably received the Blackfeet PCA program and that the program has 
contributed to the local economy through the hiring and training of personal assistants. 84 

A Single Independent Living Center in Indian Country 

ASSIST! to Independence is a Native American-operated nonprofit organization that has been 
very effective in reducing barriers to the provision of, and access to, appropriate services for 
those tribal members living on reservations. ASSIST! is located on the western edge of the 
Navajo Reservation in Tuba City, Arizona, and provides services to individuals with disabilities, 
or chronic health conditions, residing on or near the Navajo, Hopi, and Southern Paiute 
Reservations. At present, it is the only ILC located in Indian Country. 



83 Martin WE, White K, Saravanabhavan RC, and Carlise K, “Training Programs for Working 
with Older American Indians Who Are Visually Impaired,” American Rehabilitation, Summer 
1993:2-6. 

84 Spas D, “People with Disabilities, Employees, a Local Rural Economy: Everybody Wins with 
the Blackfeet PCA Program,” Common Threads, Summer 1999. Available at 
http://ruralinstitute.umt.edu/rtcrural/indian/AmICT.htm. 




56 



64 



ASSIST! provides culturally relevant services to cross-disability American Indian consumers and 
its programs emphasize quality of life and community access through the maximization of 
independence and the improvement of functional skills. Community members with disabilities 
created ASSIST! to respond to the need for a more flexible service delivery system, where all 
services reflect the following independent living principles: (1) it is consumer controlled at the 
operating policy level with a board of directors that consists of a majority of people with 
disabilities; (2) the majority of administrative and staff-level personnel are represented by people 
with disabilities; (3) there is an emphasis on cross-disability consumer services; (4) there is an 
emphasis on peer role modeling and consumer-controlled service objectives; and (5) the four 
core services of advocacy, peer mentoring, independent living skills training, information and 
referral are provided. In addition, ASSIST! has provided services such as home modifications, 
transportation, attendant care, assessment and evaluation, and AT demonstration/loan. 85 

In 2002, ASSIST! was one of four winners of The Association of Programs for Rural 
Independent Living’s competition for The Best Center for Independent Living Practices in Rural 
Independent Living to Emerging Disability Populations. 86 Also, in 2002, ASSIST! was 
recognized by the National Council on Independent Living as a Best Practice for Assistive 
Technology Projects. 87 

The main factors contributing to the ability of ASSIST! to successfully reduce barriers to the 
provision of and access to appropriate services for tribal members living on reservations are (1) 
dynamic and fluid services allowing for a quick response to needs; (2) understanding, respecting, 
and immersing in the culture being served; (3) aggressive outreach promoting “wellness” 
services; (4) extensive networking and collaboration activities; (5) developing relationships with 
nontraditional disability specialists (senior centers, public health nurses, community health 



85 “Best CIL Practices in Rural Independent Living.” Retrieved from 
http://www.rtcfpil.org/best_cil_practices_in_rural.htm on March 18, 2003. 

86 Diana Spas, Electronic Mail, Subject: “The winners of APRIL’S Best Practices Competition!” 
ASSIST! to Independence, August 8, 2002. 

87 Maureen Ryan, Electronic Mail, Subject: “Best Practice AT Projects,” ASSIST! to 
Independence, July 31, 2002. 




57 

65 



representatives, etc.); and (6) maintaining a visible presence in the community (senior functions, 
health fairs, etc.). 88 

Statistical data, maintained by ASSIST!, exemplifies the positive impact that this organization 
has had on tribal members with disabilities living on reservations. Between October 1, 2001, and 
September 30, 2002, ASSIST! opened a case file and conducted ongoing case management for 
1,098 individuals with disabilities, of all ages; processed 415 phone and e-mail requests; assisted 
784 people who visited the center (721 of whom were American Indian); and conducted 143 off- 

. . . oq 

site visits. 

Of the many individuals served by ASSIST! in 2002, roughly 85 percent were referrals received 
from collaborative efforts developed with community health representatives and public health 
nurses. The remaining 15 percent were individuals who investigated independent living services 
on their own. Approximately 70 percent of the ASSIST! budget is devoted to direct consumer 

* 90 

services. 

Limitations to Understanding Issues of People with Disabilities Living in Indian Country 
It is difficult to ascertain the extent to which many programs or initiatives actually impact 
outcomes since many of the studies or programs identified in the literature, particularly literature 
on effective strategies for reducing barriers to access, do not include a formal evaluation 
component. In some cases, failure to evaluate program effectiveness was attributed to lack of 
funds. In those cases where a formal evaluation appears to have been conducted, small sample 
sizes, failure to account for confounding factors, and the lack of a control group for comparison 
make it difficult to determine the actual effect of these initiatives or whether these model 
programs may be successfully replicated in other tribes or settings. 



88 “Best CIL Practices in Rural Independent Living.” Retrieved from 
http://www.rtcfpil.org/best_cil_practices_in_rural.htm on March 18, 2003. 

89 Pifer, Beth. Assist! to Independence. Telephone interview. March 20, 2003. 

90 “Best CIL Practices in Rural Independent Living.” Retrieved from 
http://www.rtcfpil.org/best_cil_practices_in_rural.htm on March 18, 2003. 




58 



86 



Much of what is currently known about people with disabilities living in Indian Country — from 
estimates of the size of the population to information on the impact of barriers to successful 
education, health, vocational rehabilitation, and independent living outcomes — has been based 
primarily on anecdotes, individual perceptions, and/or studies with limited statistical validity. 

The ability to use the information gathered from these studies to identify the unmet needs of 
American Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities who reside in Indian Country may be 
limited by flaws in the methodological or research design and the failure of some studies to 
understand the characteristics of the AI/AN population. 

For instance, data on the size of the AI population with disabilities and the nature or types of 
disabilities that they experience is among the most basic information for understanding their 
unmet needs. Yet, the reliability or precision of the estimates that are presently available are 
affected by discrepancies in the classification of people as American Indians and Alaska Natives, 
small sample sizes, inconsistent definitions of terms for types of disabilities, and use of 
nonrepresentative samples to derive these figures. The understanding of trends in the growth of 
the AI/AN population is significantly affected by changes in the reporting of race and ethnicity 
that occurred between the 1990 and 2000 censuses and specifically the change from single to 
multiple race groups. As previously discussed, depending upon whether individuals of multiple 
races are included, estimates of 10-year growth in the AI/AN population range between 26 
percent and 1 10 percent. This wide variation makes large-scale program planning more 
challenging. 

Information on the characteristics of the American Indian population with disabilities that are 
derived from national surveys and even those surveys that are commonly used to study disability- 
related issues (e.g., the National Health Interview Survey, the Medicare Current Beneficiary 
Survey, SIPP) are often not statistically reliable for analyses of certain populations of people 
from diverse cultures. The size of the AI/AN population is small relative to that of other groups 
and the number of American Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities is an even smaller 
population segment. If oversampling techniques have not been applied, the margin of error 
associated with these estimates could be relatively large. This sampling issue is one of the 




59 



67 



primary reasons why many studies do not analyze data separately for population segments of 
people from diverse cultures. 

Service records, such as RSA data on VR closures or IHS hospital discharge data, have also been 
used to gain an understanding of the types of chronic and disabling conditions that are most 
prevalent among American Indians and Alaska Natives. Although analyses of the characteristics 
of American Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities that are conducted with this data may 
not be affected by small sample sizes, they may have poor external validity. People who utilize 
these services may not be representative of the target population, and the ability to generalize 
findings from these studies to the larger AI/AN population may be limited. 

Social and environmental factors, such as the high poverty rate and poor living conditions, may 
also make it more challenging for people studying the American Indian population. As noted by 
investigators in the Strong Heart Study, the recruitment of American Indians in studies may pose 
particular difficulty because “[documented historical events may also affect the spirit of 
cooperation in government-funded studies of the AI people....” 91 Practical considerations such as 
the lack of street addresses, telephones, and transportation also make it difficult for American 
Indians with disabilities who are living in Indian Country to participate in health and social 
services programs or in studies that assess and attempt to address their unmet independent living 
needs. 

Tribal values are likely to affect the adequacy and comprehensiveness of many studies dealing 
with access to and services for people with disabilities in Indian Country as well as tribal 
members’ willingness to participate in initiatives to reduce barriers. AI/AN culture, languages, 
traditions, and beliefs concerning health and disability are distinct across tribes. Studies that 
“combin[e] groups as separate as Seminole and Sioux into one category called ‘Indian’ seem 
little different than combining Polish Jews and Scottish Protestants into one category called 



91 Stoddart ML, Jarvis B, Blake B, Fabsitz RR, Howard BV, Lee ET, and Welty TK, 
“Recruitment of American Indians in Epidemiologic Research: The Strong Heart Study,” 
American Indian and Alaska Native Mental Health Research, The Journal of the National 
Center, 2000; 9(3):20-37. 




60 



63 



‘European’.” 92 Regardless of the intended benefits, a program that fails to incorporate cultural 
beliefs will have difficulty in obtaining community support. Similarly, a study that is not 
culturally competent may obtain incomplete or inaccurate information. As one example, the word 
“disability” is often value-laden. Depending on tribal beliefs and values surrounding the term, 
American Indians who are asked to self-identify on the basis of disability may be reluctant or 
refuse to participate in programs that promote independent living objectives, vocational 
rehabilitation, or special education. Participatory action research methods, such as that used in 
the Tribal Disability Actualization model, which includes consumers in the design and 
implementation process, have been recommended as a means to ensure that research is culturally 
sensitive and findings are both accurate and relevant. 93 

Federal Responsibility to Address Gaps in Knowledge 

This study begins to scratch the surface of understanding the issues faced by people with 
disabilities in tribal communities. Federal agencies with significant trust responsibilities to Indian 
tribes must become much more engaged with and committed to addressing the gaps in research, 
services, and protections related to this population. Specifically, the U.S. Departments of 
Education, Interior, Justice, and Health and Human Services have particular interest in better 
understanding people with disabilities in tribal communities. Although a substantial amount of 
literature addresses issues relevant to access to and use of services by people with disabilities in 
Indian Country, the issues discussed above may limit the usefulness of much of the research. 

This is of particular importance when research-based evidence is sought for planning and 
developing effective strategies to increase services to people with disabilities in Indian Country. 

On the basis of available existing research and data, conclusions may be drawn as follows: 

1 . A significant number of American Indians and Alaska Natives in Indian Country have 
disabilities. 



92 Ericksen EP, “Problems in Sampling the Native American and Alaska Native Population” in 
Changing Numbers, Changing Needs: American Demography and Public Health. National 
Research Council Committee on Population, National Academy Press, Washington, DC, 1996. 

93 Davis SM and Reid R, “Practicing Participatory Research in American Indian Communities,” 
American Journal of Clinical Nutrition, 1999; 69(4 Supp):755S-759S. 




61 



2. Services and accommodations to assist people with disabilities in Indian Country are 
limited and availability of supports and services varies across Indian Country. 

3. Limited legal protections, limited financial resources, and lack of awareness about the 
needs of and strategies for enhancing opportunities for people with disabilities are 
major barriers that must be overcome to increase availability of appropriate services 
in Indian Country. 

4. Cultural awareness and competency are important aspects of any strategy to increase 
knowledge and awareness of the needs of people with disabilities and to design and 
implement effective programs to meet those needs. 

5. The complex federal-state-tribal government relationships and the complicated maze 
of programs that fund and administer implementation of laws and programs serving 
people with disabilities pose communication and coordination barriers to improving 
the provision of services in Indian Country. 

The potential for developing effective strategies to increase the availability and use of services to 
people with disabilities in Indian Country would be enhanced by additional data collection and 
research in several specific areas, including 

• Collection of systematic data on the number of people with disabilities in Indian 
Country, by type of disability and geographic location 

• Identification of the service needs of people with disabilities in Indian Country, by 
geographic area 

• Comprehensive review and documentation of existing programs and current services 
available in Indian Country, by geographic area 

• Estimation of the gap between need and available services, by geographic area 

• Identification of promising practices, or what seems to be working effectively, based 
on outcomes, for education, health, vocational rehabilitation, and independent living 



American Indians and Alaska Natives constitute a very diverse set of multiple cultures, 
traditions, and languages that make it difficult to generalize findings from research in a generic 
way. As a result, research designed to provide a foundation of knowledge for designing and 
implementing strategies to increase the availability of services to people with disabilities in 
Indian Country will require early involvement in planning and decisionmaking, as well as 
leadership and direction by AI/AN researchers and program managers. In addition, findings from 
future research will require adaptation and modification to be effective in different tribes. 

Key Respondent Interviews 

“The perspective I think we need to take is a national perspective, which is not 

just about our own tribe but about all native people. ” 

— LaDonna Fowler, Turtle Mountain Chippewa/Santee Sioux/Assiniboine 

The core research strategy in this project was an interview and focus group methodology that 
provided a free-flow process of information gathering. Open-ended qualitative interviews 
allowed a flow of feedback to inform and guide the research. The following techniques were used 
for deepening the inquiry into the issues affecting people with disabilities in Indian Country: 

• Tribal and federal key respondent interviews 

• Focus group interviews 

• Informal talks with professionals and community advocates 

Methods for analyzing and interpreting qualitative interviews vary widely. For this report, 
Technical Expert Panel (TEP) members expressed a desire for a participatory approach toward 
research. This method appears to be more congruent with AI/AN cultures. The analysis and 
interpretation of data through a participatory approach with the TEP assisted stakeholders in the 
construction of a common body of knowledge. The TEP and interviewees served as co- 
researchers in the project. As new information emerged from the interviews, there was an inquiry 
into the meaning of the information, what the information suggested, and why. This process 
generated new questions, thereby deepening the inquiry that served to test the explanations or 
confirm interpretations. Each phase of the process included gathering, interpreting, testing, and 




63 



71 



revising information until a reasonable explanation was developed. Once the analysis was 
complete, stakeholders collaborated on findings, conclusions, and recommendations. In addition 
to summarizing the tribal and federal interviews, the following section also highlights promising 
practices and model approaches identified as examples of improving govemment-to-govemment 
relationships, as well as expanding services for people with disabilities living in Indian Country. 

The discussions with key respondents from the 10 tribal communities occurred between 
September 9, 2002, and January 13, 2003. The 10 tribes were selected from a list of tribes 
recommended by the TEP. The TEP members were asked to nominate tribes that they believed to 
be actively engaged in developing programs, services, or tribal laws/ordinances that address the 
needs of people with disabilities in their communities. On the basis of this preliminary list, tribes 
were sorted to provide geographical representation across the United States and to reflect 
diversity in the size (small, medium, large) of the tribes. Finally, only tribes who agreed to 
participate in this project were interviewed. In alphabetical order, the 10 tribes interviewed were 
the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes of the Flathead Reservation, Montana; Cook Inlet 
Tribe of Alaska; Hopi Nation of Arizona; Navajo Nation of Arizona, New Mexico, and Utah; 
Oglala Sioux Tribe of Pine Ridge, South Dakota; Oneida Nation of Wisconsin; Pueblo of the 
Zuni, New Mexico; St. Regis Mohawk of New York; Three Affiliated Tribes of North Dakota; 
and the Yakama Nation of Washington State. 

Tribal Interviews 

As stated earlier, each tribe addresses the unique circumstances of tribal members with 
disabilities in very different ways. The task was to identify those tribes across the country that 
demonstrated leadership in creating awareness, developing programs, adopting tribal laws, and 
meeting the needs of its tribal members and descendants with disabilities. Leaders and advocates 
in the Indian Country disability movement recommended 16 tribes for a nationwide inquiry about 
promising practices in leadership as described above. Of the 16 tribes recommended, 10 were 
randomly selected for follow-up interviews. Letters sent to the tribal leaders of each tribe 
introduced the research project and requested permission for representatives of their tribal 
programs to participate in the interview process. Interviews were then scheduled with appropriate 
program directors. 




64 



1Z 



Discussion guides for interviews touched upon tribal government support through the 
development of disability laws, support services, major barriers, and promising practices for 
people with disabilities; access to health care; barriers to health care; children with disabilities 
who are treated differently; available employment services through the tribe; and what types of 
information or resources would be helpful to tribes. The tribal program representatives’ 
interviews provided more than ample information, and wisdom was shared during the brief 
discussions. 

Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes 

In 1995, the Tribal Council of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes (CSKT) adopted a 
resolution in the same spirit as ADA. 94 Under the guidelines set forth by this resolution, the tribe 
modifies buildings or work environments according to the access needs of tribal members with 
disabilities. The CSKT have adopted a “one-stop shop” approach to providing services to tribal 
members with disabilities. At one location, tribal members can access not only VR services, but 
also, under a Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) grant, Medicaid, commodities, 
General Assistance, cash assistance, trust management, Individual Indian Money accounts, 
childcare, and senior care. Satellite offices in smaller towns help to increase the accessibility of 
services. By integrating services, the staff and management of these programs are able to make 
better use of resources, which improves service coordination and delivery of services to tribal 
members with disabilities. 

The promising approach taken by the CSKT entailed networking and developing coordinated 
services through partnerships within agencies in the tribe as well as with agencies and 
organizations external to the tribe. The VR director for the CSKT also serves on the state 
rehabilitation council and the State Independent Living Board. In addition to strong partnerships 
developed with Salish Kootenai College, she attends conferences to keep abreast of the changes 
in and developments of programs, funding, grants, and service opportunities. 



94 Templer, Arlene. Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes. Telephone interview by Martina 
Whelshula. September 10, 2002. 




65 



73 



Cook Inlet Tribe 

The Cook Inlet Tribal Council, located in Alaska, has a Section 121 Vocational Rehabilitation 
Program that serves the Cook Inlet Region. 95 The Cook Inlet Tribal Council faces different 
challenges than tribes in the lower 48 states, as their lands and jurisdiction are not necessarily 
“reservation based” but are based on village affiliation, with some Native and village land 
allotments. The program is in its third year of operation. Participants must have either a tribal or 
Native village affiliation. In many of the villages there is no economic base and unemployment 
may exceed 50 percent of the population. Lack of transportation is also an extreme barrier to 
employment. 

Over 70 individuals with disabilities currently receive assistance through the Cook Inlet VR 
program. To help tribal members with disabilities overcome obstacles, each tribe provides 
different employment-related services, which range from career guidance and training to a 
consumer work center on the Internet. The VR program provides services as outlined in the 
Rehabilitation Act and is in the beginning stages of a school-to-work transition program. The 
Cook Inlet Tribe is also outlining VR procedures with the state to further collaborative efforts. 
People with disabilities benefit by the coordination of services offered through Cook Inlet, 
including assistance with the state’s TANF and other resources. 

Hopi Nation 

The Hopi Nation’s continuum of services for tribal members with disabilities extends from early 
infant and childhood intervention to adult VR services with their recent award of a Section 121 
grant. 96 Grassroots parent advocacy has been at the heart of the Hopi Nation’s service approach. 
In 1996, the tribes established the Office of Special Needs. Since the Office was formed, 
partnerships within the community and with national organizations have helped it to grow and 
become a community resource. These partnerships have allowed the Office of Special Needs to 
host training and education sessions on topics such as Social Security, fetal alcohol syndrome 



95 Whitebear, Len. Cook Inlet Tribal Council. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. 
September 25, 2002. 

96 Talaswaima, Rhonda. Hopi Nation. Telephone interview by Wendy Thompson. September 13, 

2002. 




66 



74 



and fetal alcohol effect, parent mentoring, and caregiver training. These trainings provide the 
Hopi community, including families of children with disabilities, with an increased awareness 
about issues and resources for Hopi children with disabilities. 

The Special Needs Activity Day held each year exemplifies the unique community approach that 
this program has taken. Since 1996, attendance at the event has grown from a core of interested 
parents to 600 participants last year. The theme is “Celebrate Diversity — Everyone is Unique.” 
Support for the events, activities, and refreshments is provided in part by a grant from the 
Arizona Governor’s Council on Developmental Disabilities. In addition, other Hopi community 
programs and outside agencies volunteer their time to make this event so successful. The Hopi 
Nation, by creating a central office to assist people with disabilities, has vastly improved the 
understanding of its community, the awareness of tribal programs, and the access, support 
network, and services for individuals with disabilities and their families. 

Navajo Nation 

The Navajo Nation tribal VR program was the first tribal VR program in the country, paving the 
way for other tribal VR programs in the nation. In the mid-70s, Navajo Nation leaders recognized 
a serious gap in VR services to tribal members with disabilities. This gap was due, in large part, 
to the fact that the Navajo Nation spans the comer of three states: Arizona, New Mexico, and 
Utah. Concern about this gap in services sparked negotiations between the Navajo Nation and 
surrounding states. Navajo leaders provided strong testimony during the reauthorization of the 
Rehabilitation Act during the mid-1970s. Because of the Navajo Nation’s unique position in a 
tri-state area, Navajo leaders felt that their tribe needed to be funded directly rather than having 
funds funneled through each state office. This made the Navajo Nation the first tribe to receive 
the funds under the RSA grant, which provided greater access to vocational rehabilitation for 
tribal members with disabilities. Currently, this program is funded through a five-year grant from 
the U.S. Department of Education’s RSA. 97 

Serving Navajo children are 32 schools located on and off the Navajo Reservation. It is estimated 
that 85 percent of the student population in these schools are Navajo children. The director for 



97 Seanez, Paula. Navajo Nation. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. January 6, 2003. 




67 



i D 



Safe Schools and Healthy Students and former council member of NCD believes that schools 
need to focus more on career development for Navajos with disabilities. 98 Students are not 
typically encouraged to continue with any education beyond high school. 

Support to provide individuals with the assistive technology they need has been obtained through 
a loan to the tribe from the Department of Vocational Rehabilitation. This unique service allows 
consumers to try out AT equipment on a loan basis to see what works for them. The Navajo 
Assistive Bank of Loanable Equipment Consortia is an organization composed of professionals 
from a variety of fields with the goal of assisting people with disabilities. The needs of 
individuals with disabilities are addressed in tribal regulations that were developed 
approximately 15 years ago by consumer advocates who gave testimony at an open tribal council 
meeting on topics such as special education, vocational rehabilitation, employment, and housing. 
These comments were then used as the basis for current tribal legislation. 99 

While the effectiveness of many of the Navajo Nation’s programs and services for individuals 
with disabilities has been hampered by barriers caused by jurisdictional overlap, language, and 
geographic remoteness, the tribal government has worked to offset these barriers and uphold its 
responsibility to tribal members with disabilities through a unique financial trust fund for 
programs and service provision. About 10 years ago, a former president of the Navajo Nation 
oversaw the set-aside of monies obtained from renegotiation of land lease contracts for agencies 
that provide services to Navajos with disabilities, including border towns. Each year a committee 
that manages the trust fund reviews proposals from agencies and awards grants from the interest 
accrued by this trust fund. Grants have been awarded to provide for needs of tribal members with 
disabilities, which have ranged from creative employment options to improving rehabilitation 
services and decreasing agency caseload. 



98 Yazzie-King, Ela. Navajo Nation. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. January 13, 
2003. 

99 Ibid l. 




ib 



68 



Oglala Sioux Tribe 

The Oglala Sioux Tribe passed the Americans with Disabilities Act in 1991. 100 It is the only tribe 
thus far to undertake the step of adopting within its own tribal code the entire ADA, thanks in 
large part to the power of leadership within the tribal council, which included at that time a tribal 
member with a disability and member of the “Quad Squad,” a grassroots advocacy group for 
people with disabilities. However, tribal interviews report that enforcement of the ADA 
provisions, particularly with regard to physical infrastructure and parking, is still a problem. 

The Oglala Sioux Tribe’s Quad Squad has become an active advocate for people with 
disabilities. The Quad Squad collaborates with state agencies to help consumers find support 
services. Although most support services are provided through the state, many people did not 
know how to obtain them. The Quad Squad helps increase the access that tribal members with 
disabilities have to resources, assistive technology, and employment by helping and advocating 
for them. As advocates for people with disabilities, the Quad Squad has worked for safe and 
accessible sidewalks, crossing lights, housing, transportation, and purchases of wheelchairs and 
other equipment. 

Oneida Nation 

Located in Wisconsin, the Oneida Nation has developed a strong employment-centered service 
program and has had success in finding work placements for many tribal members with 
disabilities. In 1995, the Job Training Program was developed because tribal members with 
disabilities were not receiving the kind of assistance they needed from state or other employment 
programs. 101 Program enrollment and dropout rates identified this service as one that needed to 
be addressed from a tribal perspective. The job center was designed as a one-stop service 
approach that provides mental health, childcare, and other related services in a seamless delivery. 
Developing employment opportunities through participation in a workforce diversification 
initiative has helped to reduce employment barriers for tribal members with disabilities. The tribe 



100 White, Jo. Pine Ridge Oglala. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. September 9, 2002. 

101 West, Steven “Corky.” Oneida Nation. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. 

September 26, 2002. 




69 



77 



also supplements funding for its IHS health clinic to provide four doctors and a complete nursing 
staff. 

The next goal that the program has set for itself is extending the reach of its services to include 
those tribal members who may be reluctant to identify themselves as people with disabilities or to 
ask for help. 

Pueblo of the Zuni 

The Pueblo of the Zuni, located in Northwest New Mexico, is the largest of 1 9 pueblos in New 
Mexico. 102 The population is approximately 1 1,000 people, of which about 96 percent are 
enrolled tribal members. The area is remote and isolated and covers about 1,000 square miles. 

The tribe has a comprehensive array of services for tribal members with disabilities, which 
include supported and assisted living services and employment services. Supported living and 
assisted living services allow tribal members with disabilities to live more independently. 
Supported living provides one-on-one services on a 24-hour basis. Assisted living provides 
services for individuals with the ability to live more independently. Employment support, which 
includes supported employment, vocational rehabilitation, and day habilitation, provides tribal 
members with disabilities with increased opportunities for employment. 

An extensive public transportation program supports people with disabilities as well as other 
members of the community. Last year the transportation program provided approximately 33,000 
trips around the community. Transportation services are funded by multiple sources. The tribe 
has a Section 531 1 grant that assists with administrative monies and capital and recently received 
approval to provide transportation under the Medicaid program. The transportation program also 
serves as a mechanism to employ people with disabilities. 



102 Alflen, Larry. Pueblo of the Zuni. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. 
September 24, 2002. 




70 



78 



St. Regis Mohawk Tribe 

The St. Regis Mohawk tribal government has been active at the local, regional, and national 
levels in promoting tribal resolutions to address disability issues. 103 The tribe is in the process of 
implementing tribal codes that pertain to disabilities. 

The St. Regis Mohawk Tribe collaborates with the county, state, and federal governments to 
offer a wide array of services to people with disabilities, ranging from family support programs 
to vocational rehabilitation. The tribes have a family support program that provides 
transportation to appointments and grocery shopping, which gives tribal members with 
disabilities increased mobility. A respite service for parents of children with disabilities provides 
support to families who have children with disabilities living in the family home. An adult 
recreation program and an inclusive afterschool recreation program are also available, so that 
tribal members with disabilities can be active community members. 

Members of the staff for the tribal VR program have an excellent working relationship with the 
state VR program staff. This increases the level of effectiveness for services that can be provided 
to participants. 

Three Affiliated Tribes 

The Three Affiliated Tribes report that the tribal government has adopted requirements to protect 
and serve people with disabilities in their communities. The tribe’s legal services department is 
called upon to help tribal members with disabilities resolve any complaints or appeals. Services 
and support for people with disabilities are coordinated through the tribes’ Social Service 
Program. Networking and personal attention have been keys to the success of the Three 
Affiliated Tribes’ Social Services Program. 104 The Social Services staff is knowledgeable about 
the services available through both the tribe and other agencies, thus making them better 
prepared to help tribal members with disabilities get their needs met. 



103 LaFrance, Rita. St. Regis Mohawk Nation. Telephone interview by JoAnn Kauffman. 
September 13, 2002. 

104 Finley, Darlene. Three Affiliated Tribes. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. 
September 9, 2002. 



The Three Affiliated Tribes provide General Assistance and grants to families, including people 
with disabilities. The Social Services Program will also research other services for which tribal 
members with disabilities may qualify and provide advocacy for them at tribal, state, and federal 
levels. The Program has found that assigning one person to follow the client through the entire 
application process increases the effectiveness of obtaining services. Working in collaboration 
with county, state, and federal agencies, the Three Affiliated Tribes can better serve clients. 

Yakama Nation 

Services for individuals with disabilities living on the Yakama Reservation are provided through 
the tribal VR program, the IHS clinic system, the Community Health Representative program, 
the Veterans’ Affairs program, and the Home Health program. 105 In the past, the welfare-to-work 
program was used to provide transportation services; however, funding is no longer available. 
There are ongoing attempts through memoranda to educate the tribal council about the needs of 
tribal members with disabilities, such as providing curb access to public tribal buildings. 
Diabetes and alcoholism are the disabilities with the greatest impact on the community and 
where services are currently focused. 

The promising approach taken by the Yakama Nation involved education, outreach, and program 
development. To accomplish this goal, the Yakama Nation hosted a 2002 Regional Disabilities 
Conference. Area programs had the opportunity to come together, share experiences, and learn 
from each other. The VR program director believes that ongoing workshop and program 
opportunities for awareness and collaboration and developing coordinated services between state 
and tribal programs are essential to strengthening the local services and resources available to 
tribal members with disabilities. 

Key Elements of Promising Practices 

Leaders and advocates in the Indian Country disability movement recommended tribes that 
exemplified successful practices that enhanced program and/or service results for people with 
disabilities. Of the 16 tribes recommended, 10 were selected for follow-up interviews. 



105 Pratt, Linda. Yakama Nation. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. September 23, 

2002. 




72 



SO 



Throughout the interviews with leaders of tribal programs and services, certain themes emerged 
across the different tribes. The themes of leadership and program qualities appeared to be key 
elements of success. This rich information can be shared with all tribal communities desiring to 
improve their tribal community environment for members with disabilities. The following 
section summarizes key elements for these promising practices identified in tribal communities. 

Leadership Characteristics 

A program leader who embodies the qualities and characteristics of passion, perseverance, 
vision, commitment, change agents, consistency, and connection and who is seen as an agent of 
hope can influence greatly the success of a program. Appendix F provides a more detailed 
description of common qualities and characteristics. 

Responsiveness to the Needs of the Consumer 

Successful programs require staff to know their consumers well. This requires moving beyond 
the initial identification of consumer needs to the development of personal relationships with 
consumers in order to truly understand the realities experienced by tribal members with 
disabilities. These programs tailor their services to the unique needs presented in each tribal 
community and to each consumer. 

Innovation in Removing Barriers 

“Necessity is the mother of invention” is a phrase that exemplifies the motivation behind many 
innovative programs throughout Indian Country. The personal diligence and leadership of 
individuals with disabilities and/or their family members have helped to reshape tribal 
communities and create more awareness, break down barriers, and push for expanded services 
and advocacy. Through their advocacy, tribal programs have realigned programs to create 
seamless services and more comprehensive support. 

Effective Collaboration 

A key factor for a successful program rests in the program’s ability to effectively collaborate 
between agencies, programs, and funding sources. Those programs whose staff have extensive 
knowledge and awareness of other programs and services were able to develop the most 
comprehensive and innovative programs. All 10 of these tribes have demonstrated how their 




73 



81 



creative collaborations increased the success of their programs in serving tribal members with 
disabilities. 

Advocacy Strength 

Advocacy is another key program success factor. Advocacy seems to be an inherent process of 
the work in Indian Country. It is a primary source of support for tribal members with disabilities 
who do not know how to or cannot advocate for themselves. Advocacy comes in many forms and 
is multidimensional. It is evident from the many voices of program leaders that it is essential to 
successfully serve people with disabilities. 

Support from Tribal Leadership 

Every tribal program included in this report noted that tribal leader support was an important 
factor in the success of the program. However, tribal leader support looked very different from 
tribe to tribe. Although not all tribes have laws protecting the rights of tribal members with 
disabilities, some have personnel policies and procedures, while other programs feel supported 
by their tribal leadership in some way. 

Conclusion 

Combinations of the elements identified from promising practices observed in existing programs 
seem to be aligned with comments by tribal leader Chief Joseph, Nez Perce: “The earth is the 
Mother of all people, and all people should have equal rights on it.” 

In the development of local policies, processes, and programming to serve and protect the rights 
of tribal members with disabilities, consideration needs to be given to the power of collaboration 
and an overarching awareness of local tribal culture. Unless programs are culturally responsive, 
consumers will not patronize the services offered to assist them. Knowing the consumer through 
meaningful inclusion in planning and hiring, and risking innovation in program designs to fit 
consumer needs, rather than attempting to fit consumers to program designs, are critical for 
success. Combined support from tribal leadership, committed and culturally responsive program 
staff, and positive results can realize enhanced empowerment for people with disabilities in 
Indian Country. 




74 



82 



Federal Interviews 

A series of interviews were conducted with federal and regional officials on govemment-to- 
govemment improvements. The selection of federal agency staff who were interviewed for this 
task was a joint decision, with input from the TEP. Three initial federal contacts were selected 
and then asked for additional suggestions of other officials to interview. This process led to the 
use of staff from headquarters and from regional offices in some agencies. 

Ten federal interviews were conducted between September 15 and October 16, 2002. 

Interviewees included individuals who had management or operational responsibilities for AI/AN 
policies and programs within the following federal agencies: Administration for Native 
Americans, HHS; Administration on Aging, HHS; BLA, Department of the Interior; Department 
of Education; Department of Labor; IHS, HHS; and the Social Security Administration, HHS. 

Discussion guides were developed and reviewed with the NCD project officer prior to the 
interviews with tribes and federal and state officials (see Appendix B). The discussion guides 
were used by the interviewer to focus the discussion, rather than as a formal questionnaire. 

Department of Health and Human Services: Indian Health Service 

IHS’ Elder Care Program contributes to policy development and consultation with the tribes on 
issues affecting elders, including elders with disabilities. 106 IHS held a roundtable on elder issues 
in April 2002, and much of the discussion and focus of the meeting emphasized the importance 
of developing stronger linkages between the disability community and elders, since both groups 
are facing many of the same challenges in obtaining similar services. 

IHS is working to develop mechanisms to support tribes in their development of support and 
programs to meet the needs of elders with disabilities. The approach is one that recognizes that 
tribal culture and understanding of disabilities are different from that of mainstream culture; 
tribes must develop culturally appropriate services and programs to meet their unique situations 
and preferences. The optimal approach is one that creates tribally controlled programs that are 
planned and developed by each tribe. 



106 Interview with Dr. Bruce Finke, director, Elder Care Program, Indian Health Service, October 
17,2002. 




75 



83 



The public health advisor involved with long-term care issues was interviewed for this study. She 
works closely with the Offices of Tribal Self-Governance and the Office of Treatment 
Activities. 107 With funding through these offices, tribes have a number of options: they can 
subcontract, purchase services, and/or provide services directly and pay salaries — such flexibility 
was touted as one of the strengths of crafting federal policy to match tribal environmental and 
political realities/needs. Moreover, this flexibility insulates tribes from having to “spend-down,” 
when such action may not be in the best interest of effective program administration; they can 
also roll-over funds to the next year if necessary. 

As a result of current funding mechanisms, the govemment-to-government relationship between 
IHS and tribes is well established. In 1975, the Indian Self Determination Act (P.L. 93-638) 
provided authority for tribes to contract and administer IHS programs directly. 108 More recently, 
federal law has allowed for increased flexibility for tribal contractors through a permanent self- 
governance program. 109 These two federal statutes provide a common point of reference and 
understanding that affirms the right of each tribe to determine if health services will continue to 
be provided through IHS or be administered through the tribe. In addition, frequent meetings 
between various IHS staff and tribes on funding issues and health services programming provide 
for enhanced interaction. One of the most significant stressors to govemment-to-govemment 
relationship is the unmet level of funding — a persistent undercurrent in almost any federal-tribal 
interaction. 

The trend in CMS is to pay more attention to providing services on the reservation or at home. 

By fusing a series of resources together, some level of service often can be provided on the 
reservation. An example of interagency collaboration (and flexibility) that has worked well is the 
ability to pay family members to provide care at home. In an effort to sidestep internal barriers, 



107 Interview with Lehoma Roebuck, public health advisor, Office of Public and Behavioral 
Health, Indian Health Service, September 27, 2002. 

108 Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, P.L. 93-638, 88 Stat. 2203, 25 
U.S.C. §450. 

109 The tribal Self-Governance Amendments of 2000, P.L. 106-260, 114 Stat. 711, August 18, 

2000. 



O 

ERIC 



76 



84 



agencies initiate memoranda of understanding. These memoranda of understanding have proven 
successful in providing additional technical assistance and works to address/solve multiple 
agency issues at once. Having an interagency team go to council meetings to seek input would be 
very beneficial in terms of removing barriers. 

Department of Education: Rehabilitation Services 

The Department of Education’s Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation Services 
Administration oversees formula and discretionary grant programs that help individuals with 
physical or mental disabilities obtain employment and live more independently through the 
provision of such supports as counseling, medical and psychological services, job training, and 
other individualized services. There are 10 federal regions with responsibility for RSA programs 
across the country. 

Region X staff provide oversight and monitoring of programs in the states of Oregon, 
Washington, Idaho, and Alaska. In addition, Region X staff provide oversight, mentoring, and 
technical assistance to AIVRS programs across the country (of which there are only 69, even 
though there are more than 562 federally recognized tribes). By federal statute, American Indian 
rehabilitation programs function comparably to the state VR agencies; however, their services are 
provided to members of tribes who have disabilities and live on or near a reservation. The 
AIVRS grant application process is a competitive process; however, in keeping with their 
“community culture,” tribal programs often share successful grant applications with new 
applicants for use as a template. 

In 1996, RSA offered the assistant regional commissioner for Region X the opportunity to 
develop a technical assistance and mentoring program for all tribal VR projects. RSA provided 
him with time and a limited amount of money to cover costs to visit tribal VR programs and 
provide technical assistance and other support. In the first year, with cost containment in mind, 
he and his wife traveled in their motor home to 1 1 tribal VR programs in Montana, South 
Dakota, North Dakota, and Idaho. The agenda was based on two-day monitoring and technical 
assistance activities at each location. 




77 



85 



Technical assistance was provided throughout the monitoring activities and was expanded to 
include meetings at each site with tribal council members, tribal VR staff, tribal colleges, state 
VR agencies, and client assistance program staff. The tribal VR agency directors were 
encouraged to invite state VR program staff and client assistance program staff to participate in 
two-hour meetings. The state agencies responded in 100 percent of the locations and in most 
cases it was the first time that state and tribal VR staff had met in the tribal communities and 
discussed common issues and coordination. 

Department of the Interior: Bureau of Indian Affairs, Center for School Improvement - 
Special Education Programs 

BLA’s Office of Indian Education Programs (OIEP) receives funds through the U.S. Department 
of Education to provide funding for special education services in BIA-funded schools, of which 
there are 185 in 23 states. In addition, 14 peripheral dormitories receive BLA funding. 110 

BIA-OIEP awarded contract funds to 13 tribally controlled community colleges and state 
universities for the specific purpose of providing professional development opportunities for 
BIA-OIEP personnel and the provision of technical assistance and training to BIA-funded 
schools. This initiative is funded through the comprehensive system of personnel development 
requirement under the Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA) of 1997. 

There is a general shortage of “certified” personnel in special education to meet the existing 
need. Special education is part of the continuum of services for people with disabilities. A 
primary element of the BLA mission for education is to provide and ensure that special education 
services are available to tribal school-age children in order to help them achieve academically. 
Professionals involved in that mission include physical therapists, speech therapists, counselors, 
and others. 

All BIA-funded K-12 schools have schoolwide programs and are expected to provide an 
inclusive learning environment for all children; a priori planned placement separation between 
children with special education needs and other children is unacceptable. In accordance with the 



110 Interview with Sherry Allison, Ed.D., director, Special Education Programs, Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, Center for School Improvement, September 27, 2002. 




78 



86 



mandates of IDEA, BIA-OIEP submitted a Coordinated Services Plan for Special Education 
(CSP) to the U.S. Department of Education’s Office of Special Education Programs. The CSP 
outlines a plan to coordinate services for children with special education needs at the local, 
regional, and national levels. Providers include vocational rehabilitation, Head Start, and tribal 
colleges. 

Honoring Native American culture and language is an integral part of the school curriculum. 
BIA-OIEP has identified five general education goals, of which one is “students demonstrate 
knowledge of language and culture to improve academic achievement.” Toward this end, BLA, 
through its state plan, requires schools to deliver at least eight two-curriculum units that address 
culture/language. Conversely, BLA does not require teachers in BLA-operated and/or BLA 
grant/contract schools to formally demonstrate their degree of cultural sensitivity. BIA-funded 
schools that are operated by individual tribes can make a determination about such a requirement 
individually. 

Bureau of Indian Affairs - Division of Human Services 

The Division of Human Services provides General Assistance (GA) to tribal members who are in 
need. 111 GA is a “secondary” program, available as an interim support program to people who 
have applied for TANF and are awaiting approval for services. It also provides support for people 
who are not eligible for TANF (e.g., single people without children). Under contracts/compacts, 
tribes operate 80-85 percent of the GA programs, with BLA regional offices providing oversight 
and monitoring. Within BLA, the Individual Indian Money accounts are the primary source of 
support for people with disabilities who have tribal trust monies. Tribal social workers or 
agencies evaluate and assess the needs of individuals with disabilities and determine whether 
they have special needs that require a wheelchair or other special equipment in order to hold a 
job or to maintain independence. This program is a source of funds to meet those needs and is 
flexible and specific to the individual’s needs. The regulations have been in place for only a year 
and time has not been sufficient to assess effectiveness. 



111 Interview with Larry Blair, director, Division of Human Services, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 
October 14, 2002. 




79 



87 



Social Security Administration 

The national lead for American Indian/Alaska Native Social Security Programs located in the 
Denver office was interviewed for this study. This person is involved in a number of activities 
designed to increase outreach, communication, and understanding of Social Security 
Administration (SSA) programs for American Indians and Alaska Natives. 112 In March 2000, 

SSA convened a national meeting to work with the tribes to identify strategies for better delivery 
of SSA programs to the AI/AN population. The Social Security Disability Insurance (SSDI) 
program was a major focus of that meeting. 

As a result, SSA has developed several ongoing programs to better inform and assist American 
Indians and Alaska Natives. These initiatives include an interagency agreement with IHS and 
CMS. This agreement engaged the National Indian Council on Aging in piloting outreach to 
Indian Nations in New Mexico, Minnesota, and Montana. Results from the Montana Blackfeet 
Reservation suggest that these outreach efforts are helpful; over 100 people participated and 70 
applications were completed on-site. SSA has also prepared a video titled “You and Social 
Security Disability,” in which AI/AN people explain the SSDI program. The video was made, in 
part, in response to information that AI/AN people generally do not pursue SSDI enrollment if 
they receive a notice denying their initial application (regardless of the reason for the denial). 

SSA is also developing a training package on Social Security and Medicare/Medicaid programs 
that will be provided to all SSA regions. This package, the result of the pilots conducted under 
the interagency agreement, will be useful in training benefit coordinators and community health 
representatives serving Indian Nations. 

Administration on Aging’s Native American Programs 

The Administration on Aging (AOA) teams with the National Indian Council on Aging and other 
Indian organizations to provide training and technical assistance at national and regional 
meetings/conferences. Regional offices also provide technical assistance and on-site technical 
assistance every three years. In addition, the central office disseminates technical assistance 

1,2 Interview with Richard Schremp, director, Electronic Service Delivery, American 
Indian/Alaska Native Social Security Programs, Social Security Administration, Denver Region, 
October 16, 2002. 




80 



88 



briefs on an ongoing basis to tribal grantees. In the near future, AOA intends to fund an Indian 
contractor to provide technical assistance to Title VI programs. 

The Title VI program works very well and a substantial comfort level has been established 
between federal program staff and the tribes. In part, this is due to the program’s flexibility and 
the fact that AOA has consulted with and involved the tribes in developing the programs. AOA 
conducts national Listening Sessions with tribes to learn about and to identify areas for change 
and improvement. For example, tribes are allowed to define “elder” for the purposes of these 
programs. 

In addition, AOA works closely with the National Title VI Association and with the National 
Association of Area Agencies on Aging to coordinate and collaborate on programs. AOA also 
administers Title VI, Part C, which provides family caregiver support services (the tribe must 
have a Part A grant to be eligible for Part C). 113 There are 178 Tribal Part C grants. The program 
permits meals to be delivered to people with disabilities who are not “elders.” 



113 Interview with Yvonne Jackson, Administration on Aging, Native American Programs, 
October 14, 2002. 




81 



89 



SECTION IV 



Government-to-Government Relationships: 

Findings and Recommendations 

The major objective of this study was to develop a foundation of knowledge and information 
upon which to base specific govemment-to-government recommendations. Specifically, this 
section is provided (1) to identify barriers to effective federal-tribal government relationships and 
(2) to develop recommendations for improvements in govemment-to-government relationships. 
To accomplish these objectives, input was obtained from AI/AN people with disabilities (through 
the TEP), tribal leaders, tribal program administrators, and federal agency staff regarding their 
perceptions of these relationships and on strategies and processes that could be implemented to 
improve effective working relationships. The comments and recommendations from these 
interviews were considered and presented to two focus groups to determine if these are 
appropriate and reflect the concerns in Indian Country. One focus group was held at the National 
Congress of American Indians annual conference in November 2002 and included tribal leaders 
and AI/AN people with disabilities. The second focus group was held at the annual meeting of 
the Consortia of Administrators for Native American Rehabilitation, and included primarily 
consumers (AI/AN people with disabilities and VR program administrators). Based upon this 
extensive review by consumers, advocates, program specialists, and leaders in the field, the 
following government-to-govemment findings and recommendations are provided. 

Findings: Barriers to Effective Government-to-Government Relationships 

The barriers to effective federal-tribal government-to-govemment relationships were identified 
through the tribal and federal interviews. These barriers include 

• Fragmentation of services across federal agencies and offices. Interviewees cited 
the fact that while a multitude of services are available, these programs and services 
are uncoordinated, and people with disabilities, and their advocates, are required to 
search for assistance with little assistance or advocacy to coordinate services. The 
complexity of seeking information and completing paperwork to obtain the full range 



of services required is daunting and very time-consuming. Based on tribal and federal 
interviews, this factor is identified as a major barrier for people with disabilities in 
Indian Country where information and assistance to obtain these services is more 
limited than in other areas of the country. There is no “single source” within the 
Federal Government that tribes or tribal members can access to secure services, 
funding, or better understanding and resources to meet the needs of people with 
disabilities in Indian Country. 

Lack of coordination and collaboration among federal, state, and tribal 
programs. Since there are multiple overlapping programs, it is not always clear 
which government agencies have primary responsibility and which have secondary 
responsibilities or are the “payer of last resort.” This is a particular problem for people 
with disabilities who live in Indian Country because, according to key respondent 
interviews and the review of literature, some federal and state agencies assume that 
IHS, B1A, or other federal agencies with responsibilities for AI/AN programs provide 
funds for all services to AI/AN people. This same lack of clarity is particularly a 
problem for federal programs that are operated through the states, since state agencies 
may assume that responsibilities for people in Indian Country are federal and that 
state programs do not need to serve tribes. The result may be that no one provides 
funding for some services. In addition, several reservations cross state borders, and 
tribal members may seek care in more than one state, adding to the difficulty in 
coordinating services and benefits. 

Lack of federal personnel knowledge and training on the Federal Government 
trust responsibility to AI/AN people and on tribal sovereignty. More attention and 
priority is needed at federal program levels to ensure adequate understanding and 
knowledge and to elevate the concerns of AI/AN people with disabilities. Lack of 
attention by program managers leads to an inadequate understanding of the federal 
trust relationship between the U.S. government and tribal nations. Many people in the 
Federal Government have limited understanding of the federal trust responsibility to 



AI/AN people and/or the implications of tribal sovereignty. As a result, some 
programs may be designed inappropriately or not made available in Indian Country. 

Lack of clarity about legal enforcement options. The U.S. Supreme Court has yet 
to rule on whether and to what extent federal disability laws apply to Indian tribes. In 
the absence of such a ruling, different and sometimes conflicting opinions are being 
developed in lower courts. Federal laws designed to protect people with disabilities 
are not always enforceable against tribal governments because of the sovereign 
immunity and sovereign status that tribal governments enjoy. This does not mean that 
all other enterprises located in Indian Country are exempt from federal disability laws, 
only that tribal governments enjoy sovereign immunity. Many tribes have opted to 
adopt their own ordinances and codes to protect Indian people with disabilities within 
the tribal system. 

Lack of involvement of tribal leaders and tribal members in the design, 
development, and implementation of programs. Cultural and logistical issues 
require that effective programs to serve people with disabilities in Indian Country be 
designed and implemented to meet the unique needs and preferences of individual 
tribes. Many federal and state programs are designed from the top down and, as a 
result, may be inconsistent with the preferences of tribal members or with the 
structure of tribal programs. 

Fear of the unknown and unfamiliarity with American Indians and Alaska 
Natives. Federal key respondent interviews revealed that some federal agency staff 
are uncomfortable working with people from other cultures and are fearful of visiting 
tribal lands. This discomfort leads them to avoid meeting and interacting with AI/AN 
people and making visits to tribal areas where programs are operating. As a result, 
there is inadequate support and technical assistance to implement and effectively 
operate programs that serve people with disabilities in Indian Country. 

Federal travel and budget limitations. Federal headquarters and regional office staff 
members who administer or coordinate programs serving American Indians and 



Alaska Natives face limited budgets for travel. Those who want to work with tribes to 
provide technical assistance, monitoring, and outreach related to programs for people 
with disabilities often are not able to obtain travel funds. 

Historical distrust of the Federal Government by tribal leaders and members. 

The Federal Government has a long history of not living up to its commitments to the 
tribes. In turn, tribal leaders and tribal members are distrustful and sometimes 
unwilling to work with federal agencies to develop and implement programs, 
particularly those that are developed without appropriate consultation with the tribes. 

Difficulties in tribal/state relationships. Relationships between tribes and states can 
be strained as a result of overlapping or conflicting jurisdictions and resource issues 
that may have nothing to do with disabilities. Tribes that are most successful at 
meeting the needs of people with disabilities in their communities have found ways to 
work with state programs. States may offer many services and programs that can be 
helpful for people with disabilities and their families living in Indian Country. It is 
important to remember that while tribes are sovereign governments, their members 
are also citizens of the state and of the United States and must be able to access state 
programs like any other citizen. Population statistics used by states to support funding 
for disabilities programs will also include AI/AN data, further adding to the 
justification for improved tribal access to state resources. 

Limited consumer involvement at all levels of policymaking. AI/AN people with 
disabilities and their advocates are not being consulted and involved in a meaningful 
way at all levels of tribal, state, or federal policy development. The participation of 
people with disabilities in the planning and implementation of appropriate policies, 
ordinances, programs, and services could make an important and meaningful 
difference for the quality of lives for people with disabilities living in tribal 
communities. 



* Failure to ensure that the national mandate to eliminate discrimination against 
individuals with disabilities included equal benefits for American Indians and 
Alaska Natives with disabilities. In passing Title in of ADA, Congress announced 
the purpose as providing “a clear and comprehensive national mandate for the 
elimination of discrimination against individuals with disabilities.” Title III of ADA 
attempts to accomplish this goal by prohibiting discrimination in public 
accommodations. Unlike Title I, Title III does not provide an explicit exemption for 
tribal governments. Yet, there are limited means for enforcement of public access 
requirements against tribal governments, without a specific waiver of sovereign 
immunity by the tribe. Interviews with tribes indicate that accessible transportation is 
still the primary barrier for people with disabilities in Indian Country. Most tribal 
lands are located in rural and remote areas of the United States and lack public 
transportation systems, which could provide people with disabilities with access to 
transportation and increased independence. Tribes appear to be more concerned about 
roads and highways in Indian Country than with the need for public transportation 
systems within those same areas. Surveys of tribes found that one-third of the tribal 
and federal office buildings intended to serve the tribal communities are not 
accessible to people with disabilities (AIDTAC). Tribal lands and tribal communities 
may not have the infrastructure to support access and accommodation for people with 
disabilities, such as sidewalks and sidewalk ramps for wheelchair access. Federally 
recognized Indian tribes are specifically exempt from Title I of ADA, which prohibits 
discrimination against qualified individuals with disabilities in employment, and the 
requirement that employers make reasonable accommodation for employees with 
disabilities. This exemption is a barrier for Indians with disabilities in Indian Country, 
particularly in rural areas where tribal governments are often the largest employer. 
Some tribal governments have voluntarily complied with ADA or adopted their own 
codes to protect people with disabilities from employment discrimination; however, 
enforcement and local environmental changes to increase access, protections, and 
services are still far from meeting the national mandate described in ADA. 




87 



94 



• Advocacy made difficult by multiple education systems. The majority (90 percent) 
of AI/AN children are educated by the public school systems in each state. The 
remaining 10 percent of Indian children are educated in tribally operated schools, or 
federally run schools of BIA. IDEA, funded by the Department of Education, requires 
both public schools and Interior-funded schools to provide children with disabilities 
with a free appropriate public education based upon an Individualized Education 
Program (IEP). Each child determined eligible for special education and related 
services must have an IEP team. Parents of children with disabilities in Indian 
Country may not be aware of the evaluation, services, and support their children are 
entitled to receive and may not know how to advocate for their children effectively. 
More parent advocacy training and on-reservation protection and advocacy services 
are needed for children and their families in both public school and BIA-funded 
school settings. 

• Limited tribal awareness and access to new strategies that can better serve 
people with disabilities. Tribes are only just beginning to take advantage of the 
national trend toward increased home- and community-based services as a means to 
meet long-term care needs for people with disabilities, as opposed to institutionalized 
care, such as nursing homes. More states are providing Medicaid payments to cover 
these costs. However, studies show that AI/AN populations experience barriers to 
applying for Medicaid and Medicare eligibility, despite the fact that these 
reimbursements are representing a more and more significant part of the IHS annual 
budget. Access to affordable home- and community-based services can result in a 
significant quality-of-life adjustment for people with disabilities. Just getting out of 
bed, bathed, dressed, and out of the house can represent major barriers for some 
people with disabilities. Yet, with the support of a personal care attendant and other 
accommodations, many people with disabilities have become valuable members of 
the tribal workforce. 




88 



95 



Recommendations to Increase Effective Government-to-Government Working 
Relationships 

The vast majority of individuals interviewed throughout the investigation believed it was 
possible to improve the effectiveness of govemment-to-govemment working relationships, 
although some of the recommendations would require additional federal and state funds in order 
to implement them. The following findings and recommendations are a result of key respondent 
interviews, input from people with disabilities in tribal communities, findings from previous 
research, and feedback from focus groups. 

Finding 1. Consultation: The majority of federal agency representatives stressed that programs 
should be designed and developed by the tribal communities, rather than top-down from the 
bureaucracy. Flexibility in program design and implementation was seen to be critical to the 
success of federally funded programs for AI/AN people with disabilities. Executive Order 
#13175 dated November 6, 2000, states that it will “...establish regular and meaningful 
consultation and collaboration with tribal officials in the development of federal policies that 
have tribal implications, to strengthen the U.S. govemment-to-govemment relationships with 
Indian tribes, and to reduce the imposition of unfunded mandates upon Indian tribes....” This 
Executive Order was reinforced by a letter from Alberto R. Gonzales, Counsel to the President, 
to Congressman Frank Pellone, dated June 19, 2002, in which Mr. Gonzales states that “In early 
2001, the Bush Administration reviewed the Executive Order (13175) and found it to be 
consistent with the views of the Administration on tribal consultation and coordination. 
Currently, the Administration is working to see that the Order is implemented....” With regard to 
addressing issues of disabilities in tribal communities, this consultation has not happened in a 
comprehensive or meaningful way. 

RECOMMENDATION 1.1: Formal government-to-government consultation needs to be 
initiated by the Federal Government in a way that will coordinate all the various federal 
agencies involved in issues of disabilities and tribal governments, and that involves tribal 
governments in the planning for these consultation sessions. The President’s directive 
should identify a lead agency, such as the Department of Education, and require 
coordination among all the various federal agencies involved in issues of disability and 




89 



96 



tribal governments. It should also require collaboration with tribal governments in a 
manner that involves appropriate representatives in planning for the consultation sessions. 

RECOMMENDATION 1.2: The President’s directive needs to clarify that existing tribal 
consultation plans should be reviewed at the agency level to ensure that each federal 
department identifies strategies for increasing meaningful discussions. The review should 
include plans for consultation around issues of disabilities prioritized in Indian Country 
and for expanding the participation of AI/AN people with disabilities in discussions and 
consultations. 

Finding 2. Cultural competence, training, and orientation: Tribal and federal/state interviews 
revealed the importance of cultural competence, trust-building, and outreach when addressing the 
issues facing people with disabilities living in Indian Country. The improved understanding of 
tribal culture and of the federal responsibilities to American Indians and Alaska Natives is 
critical to developing positive working relationships that lead to effective programs. As one 
interviewee noted, “concerted, continuous efforts that include both initial outreach/consultation, 
and establishing a track record of ‘follow through’ is essential to developing a positive working 
relationship and to gain the trust of the tribes.” National AI/AN organizations have established 
relationships with tribes and tribal leaders and can help overcome the historical distrust of the 
Federal Government. AI/AN organizations also bring to partnership efforts the depth of 
understanding of AI/AN culture and tribal structure that will facilitate and increase federal 
agencies’ understanding and responsiveness to these issues. 

RECOMMENDATION 2.1: Pursuant to the Executive Order on tribal consultations, a 
mandated, formal, and sustained education and orientation program that increases face-to- 
face interaction between federal officials and tribal officials should be implemented. The 
President’s directive should require cabinet-level heads of federal agencies to ensure that 
orientation programs for all federal officials who administer programs for tribes or tribal 
members will be required by a certain date. Federal staff should plan to communicate and 
meet directly with tribal leaders, tribal program staff, and tribal people with disabilities on 
a regular basis. This ongoing contact will facilitate program flexibility and provide 
technical assistance to help tribal programs increase effectiveness. The more frequent 




90 



97 



exposure of federal staff to tribal culture will also increase the comfort level of federal staff 
and strengthen positive working relationships. This exposure to tribal culture can occur 
effectively and in meaningful ways if sufficient travel funds and allocation of time are 
provided for tribal community visits. Such interaction should be mandated and monitored 
pursuant to the Executive Order. 

RECOMMENDATION 2.2: Federal agency staff should be required to receive education 
and training about tribal governments and programs, the federal trust responsibility to 
tribes, an orientation on AI/AN cultures, and training on the unique challenges and 
opportunities faced by people with disabilities in Indian Country, if assigned to administer 
grants or contracts in AI/AN communities. 

RECOMMENDATION 2.3: Consumer involvement must be increased substantially during 
the development of programs for people with disabilities in Indian Country. Tribal 
programs, state agencies, and federal programs must provide for meaningful consultation, 
involvement, and active leadership of American Indians and Alaska Natives with 
disabilities in addressing all needs assessments, planning, program implementation, and 
evaluation regarding the issues related to people with disabilities. To provide for effective 
consumer involvement, program budgets must include funding for travel and other 
accommodations. 

RECOMMENDATION 2.4: Federal agencies should develop strong partnerships with 
existing national AI/AN advocacy organizations in order to develop culturally responsive 
strategies and approaches, to better address disabilities issues in Indian Country, and to 
conduct increased and more effective outreach and information dissemination campaigns. 
Specifically, agencies such as the Departments of Education, Interior, Health and Human 
Services, and Justice should convene an initial face-to-face working session and follow-up 
dialogue through scheduled telephone/video conferences. Joint strategy planning should be 
planned through the conferences with organizations such as the National Indian Health 
Board, the National Congress of American Indians, the Intertribal Deaf Council, the 
Consortia of Administrators for Native American Rehabilitation, and other grassroots 
entities. 




91 



90 



Finding 3. Coordination and collaboration: The lack of coordination and collaboration among 
the various federal, state, and tribal programs charged with the responsibility of addressing the 
needs of people with disabilities is a significant barrier to improved services. There is a need to 
clarify responsibilities pertaining to the funding of services for people with disabilities in Indian 
Country among federal agencies and between federal programs and federally funded state-run 
programs. 

RECOMMENDATION 3.1: Co-lead agencies, such as the U.S. Departments of Education 
and Health and Human Services, must be authorized to carry out the federal trust 
responsibility to provide culturally responsive information that raises awareness about 
protections and assistance to people with disabilities in Indian communities. Improved 
dissemination of information about programs that provide services to people with 
disabilities in Indian Country must be accomplished, and this information must be readily 
available to tribes, other federal agencies and staff, and state agencies and staff. This 
information must include clear descriptions of services, regulations, and responsibilities 
and could take the form of regularly issued newsletters, bulletins, a frequently updated 
Web site, or multiple communication media. 

Finding 4. Recruitment and hiring of AI/AN professionals and advocates: Federal agencies 
do not demonstrate effective efforts to recruit, hire, and retain AI/AN staff within federally 
funded disability programs. Interviewees pointed out that federal data shows few AI/AN staff 
employed in the Federal Government, even in some agencies and programs that directly serve 
primarily AI/AN people. This fact may contribute to the finding that in some cases federal staff 
do not feel comfortable or competent when dealing with Native issues, including issues affecting 
AI/AN people with disabilities and their families. 

RECOMMENDATION 4.1: The Federal Government must broaden its outreach efforts to 
increase the recruitment and hiring of American Indians and Alaska Natives. Specifically, 
the U.S. Department of Education’s Rehabilitation Services Administration (RSA) should 
redirect a percentage of its funds for education grants to tribal colleges and universities for 
enhancing vocational rehabilitation studies. The Rehabilitation Act, Title III, Professional 
Development and Special Projects and Demonstrations provides RSA with the opportunity 




92 



99 



for expanding efforts to improve conditions in tribal communities. In addition to its 
responsibility to oversee grants and to coordinate the vocational rehabilitation program 
and policy issues for American Indians and Alaska Natives within its agency headquarters 
and among its regional offices, RSA needs to recruit and hire people with extensive 
authentic experience both living in Indian Country and being actively involved with 
various types of AI/AN community affairs and cultural traditions as well as experience and 
knowledge about people with disabilities. 

Finding 5. Application of federal disability laws: The degree to which Indian tribes are subject 
to federal disability laws is unclear within Indian Country. The Federal Government has a 
govemment-to-govemment responsibility to better inform its agencies and tribal governments 
with regard to the extent to which existing federal disability laws apply to tribal governments. 
This project looked at issues related to people with disabilities on “tribal lands,” yet the legal 
jurisdictional issues have less to do with lands than with the sovereign status of tribal 
governments and the sovereign immunity of tribes. While rights and protections are provided in 
federal disability law, there is a lack in enforcement or lack of remedy for Indians with 
disabilities within Indian Country when those violations involve tribal governments or tribal 
enterprises. 

RECOMMENDATION 5.1: In consultation with Indian tribes and AI/AN people with 
disabilities and their advocacy organizations, the Department of Justice, in cooperation 
with the Department of the Interior and with the participation of other relevant federal 
agencies, should immediately conduct an in-depth review of federal disability law as it 
applies to tribal governments, tribal enterprises, and people with disabilities who reside 
within Indian Country. A written report on findings of clarification should be provided to 
all tribes, Indian organizations, and disability advocate organizations. 

RECOMMENDATION 5.2: The Department of Justice Civil Rights Division, in 
consultation with AI/AN people with disabilities and their advocate organizations, should 
convene a series of regional meetings to hear issues related to the application and 
enforcement of federal disability laws in Indian Country from both tribal and consumer 
perspectives. The Department of Justice should conclude these regional meetings with a 




93 



100 



report on findings and recommendations to be disseminated throughout Indian Country 
and among other federal agencies. 

Finding 6. Access to Independent Living Centers: AI/AN people are disproportionately 
underserved by independent living services. American Indian populations have the highest 
disability rate of any racial group in the United States and the least access to resources. As 
established under Title VII of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, independent living services are to 
be provided to all people regardless of race, age, gender, or location. Services include 
information and referral; independent living skills training; peer counseling; and individual-based 
systems advocacy. Yet, only 3 of 350 federally funded independent living centers (ILCs) target 
services specifically to meet the needs of AI/AN populations. Expanding ILC services would 
represent the vital first step toward employment of people with disabilities. 

RECOMMENDATION 6.1: The U.S. Department of Education RSA should provide a 25 
percent set-aside of all funds available for ILCs. The funds should be allocated on a 
competitive basis for tribal communities to develop and provide ILCs for people with 
disabilities living in Indian communities. RSA should work to ensure that ILCs work 
cooperatively with all American Indian vocational rehabilitation services to ensure that 
appropriate independent living skills are developed before vocational rehabilitation occurs. 

Finding 7. Access to vocational rehabilitation services: Tribal vocational rehabilitation 
services represent a potential starting point for increasing outreach and targeted services for 
AI/AN people with disabilities across Indian Country. Section 121 of the Rehabilitation Act of 
1973 provides grants to governing bodies of Indian tribes located on federal and state 
reservations to assist American Indians and Alaska Natives with disabilities with vocational 
rehabilitation and employment assistance. Section 121 funding has been provided to tribes on a 
competitive basis, with limited opportunities to expand the total number of participating tribes. 
Currently, only 67 tribes out of a total of 560 federally recognized tribes receive federal funding 
from RSA. Many more communities warrant funding, and of those that receive funding, much 
more training, orientation, and technical assistance are needed to improve services for people 
with disabilities. While American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services (AIVRS) programs 




94 



101 



have matured substantially, advancing their concerns through national meetings and sharing, 
additional funding stability and capacity building are needed. 

RECOMMENDATION 7.1: The RSA Commissioner and the Secretary of the Department 
of Education need to agree to set aside the maximum amount in funding for Section 121 
AIVRS programs allowable under law. 

RECOMMENDATION 7.2: Future amendments to the Rehabilitation Act, which would 
allow for a substantial increase in funding set-aside and an allocation methodology 
developed in consultation with tribes to provide vocational rehabilitative support for all 
560 federally recognized tribes in the United States, should be examined. There should be a 
planned expansion schedule of the AIVRS programs, increasing the amount of funds 
allotted each year. 

RECOMMENDATION 7.3: In addition to funding tribal AIVRS programs, RSA should 
set aside funding for an ongoing national training and technical assistance project and to 
support field staff training and monitoring of the program. 

RECOMMENDATION 7.4: RSA should revise its administration of AIVRS projects to 
show improvement in ways that promote the achievement of stability and sustainability in 
tribal communities. Once a program is funded, AIVRS should continue the funding based 
on objective criteria and indicators for program monitoring, evaluation, and appropriate 
technical assistance rather than requiring all to compete for continuation every five years. 
This new approach is similar to the funding process that supports the ILCs in section 
722(e)(1) in the Rehabilitation Act. Each AIVRS project should receive at least a cost-of- 
living increase as per the Consumer Product Index each year, similar to programs under 
Titles I and VII. The President and Congress should develop legislative amendments to the 
statute to provide for continued funding of all the programs meeting performance 
standards. NCD should make this recommendation to the President and Congress in its 
annual report. 

RECOMMENDATION 7.5: RSA should work closely with states to ensure improved 
results of efforts to comply with the provisions of the Rehabilitation Act in Indian Country. 




95 



102 



This includes consultation with tribes and the inclusion of tribal members with disabilities 
in the development of state plans and commissions on rehabilitation. Results on a state-by- 
state basis should be reported to the public when each state plan is approved at the federal 
level. 

RECOMMENDATION 7.6: Federal and tribal vocational rehabilitation programs should 
look more creatively at the possibilities of expanding employment of people with disabilities 
in Indian Country, including promoting the definition of employment outcome as stated in 
the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended in 1998; to wit: 

Section 7: Definitions (11) “The term ‘employment outcome’ means, with 
respect to an individual — (A) entering or retaining full-time or, if 
appropriate, part-time competitive employment in the integrated labor 
market; (B) satisfying the vocational outcome of supported employment; or 
(C) satisfying any other vocational outcome the Secretary may determine to 
be appropriate (including satisfying the vocational outcome of self- 
employment, telecommuting, or business ownership, in a manner consistent 
with this Act.” (emphasis added) 

Finding 8. Access to home- and community-based services: AI/AN tribes rely upon the U.S. 
Indian Health Service (IHS) to meet their health care needs. These resources are drastically 
underfunded when compared with the average annual expenditure for all U.S. citizens or even 
when compared with annual expenditures for Medicaid recipients. For people with disabilities 
living in tribal communities, this lack in health care resources can mean the difference between 
life or death, independence or confinement. More and more tribal health programs are beginning 
to bill Medicaid and Medicare for services provided to eligible patients in tribal clinics. 
Opportunities to establish home- and community-based services (HCBS) for people with 
disabilities in tribal communities, financed through Medicaid or Medicare reimbursement, are 
developing. 

RECOMMENDATION 8.1: IHS and the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services 
(CMS) should develop an initiative, in consultation with tribal governments, to expand 
training and technical assistance at the local level. They must also build HCBS in tribal 
communities to better serve people with disabilities. These training and technical assistance 
sessions should provide practical advice, manuals, toolkits, or other mechanisms to orient 




96 



103 



tribal health providers in HCBS, funding or reimbursement opportunities, and strategies 
for including people with disabilities in the planning and design of these services. IHS and 
CMS should consult with AI/AN people with disabilities while developing and designing 
these training and technical assistance tools. In addition, regional or state-based meetings 
should be encouraged by IHS and CMS so that tribes and states can work together to plan 
and develop the services appropriate for each community. 

RECOMMENDATION 8.2: IHS, Social Security Administration (SSA), and CMS should 
provide training for consumers, their families, and their advocates in Indian Country 
concerning the resources available to support improved health services and how to access 
appropriate long-term care services. 

Finding 9. Social Security Administration liaison: One of the most significant barriers 
reported by tribal interviews was the rigidity and difficulty in working with SSA to secure either 
Supplemental Security Income for people with disabilities or Social Security Disability 
Insurance. There is significant dissatisfaction at the local tribal level with regard to 
administrative barriers that prevent access to these benefits. In many cases, these barriers could 
be based on a lack of cultural sensitivity and the absence of an effective Indian outreach approach 
by the agency. 

RECOMMENDATION 9.1: The President should ensure that an Indian Desk is 
established at the headquarters level of SSA, the Department of Labor, and the 
Department of Education’s RSA and Office of Special Education Programs specifically 
addressing needs of AI/AN people with disabilities. 

RECOMMENDATION 9.2: An Indian liaison position should be established and filled in 
each of the federal SSA regional offices, providing outreach, technical assistance, and 
advocacy for the tribes and urban Indian organizations located in each of those regions. 
The positions should be filled by otherwise qualified people with the most extensive 
authentic experience living in Indian Country and active involvement with various types of 
AI/AN tribal community affairs and cultural traditions, including practical experiences 
and knowledge about people with disabilities. 




97 



104 



Finding 10. Access to public transportation: Transportation was identified by our tribal 
interviews as one of the leading barriers for people with disabilities residing in Indian Country. 
The lack of accessible transportation for people with disabilities affects all other aspects of life, 
including establishing an independent living environment; attending school; and securing 
employment, housing, health care, and job training. The Federal Transportation Administration 
represents the largest source of funding in the United States for urban and rural transportation 
systems, yet in 1995 only 19 out of 560 tribes were receiving assistance through this resource. 
According to the Association of Programs for Rural Independent Living report in 1999, only 5 
percent of transportation dollars were allocated to serve 27 percent of the population that lives in 
rural areas. The problem appears to be even more severe in tribal communities. 

RECOMMENDATION 10.1: The Department of Transportation (DOT), in collaboration 
with other federal agencies, should set aside a more appropriate percentage of its funding 
to ensure that public transportation options are available in rural tribal communities. DOT 
should engage in a tribal consultation process, including discussions with tribal leaders and 
Indian people with disabilities, to develop specific strategies to increase accessible public 
transportation systems in tribal communities. 

Finding 11. Employment opportunities: People with disabilities represent a valuable and 
underutilized asset for tribal communities seeking to develop a reliable and capable workforce. 
More education and awareness are needed among tribal officials and tribal program 
administrators to recruit, hire, and maintain people with disabilities in the tribal workforce. 

RECOMMENDATION 11.1: Tribal governments and tribal programs serving people with 
disabilities should engage community and employer awareness programs in the 
development of employment opportunities for people with disabilities. 

RECOMMENDATION 11.2: Tribal community colleges or other local educational 
institutions serving tribal communities should develop targeted outreach for people with 
disabilities in tribal communities to access education, training, and skills development to 
become substantial contributors to the tribal workforce. 



RECOMMENDATION 11.3: Congress, with funding through the Department of 
Education, should provide the resources necessary to bring assistive technology to Indian 
Country that will increase the ability of people with disabilities to participate in daily 
activities, employment, and tribal government. 

Finding 12. Public facilities access: Previous research has found that one-third of tribal and 
federal facilities located in Indian Country are not accessible to people with disabilities. This is a 
hardship for AI/AN people with disabilities residing in Indian Country, and a disincentive to 
other people with disabilities visiting or doing business in Indian Country. Tribal interviewees 
report that a major obstacle for tribes is the cost associated with retrofitting facilities to meet 
ADA accessibility requirements. 

RECOMMENDATION 12.1: Congress, in the fulfillment of its federal trust responsibility 
and pursuant to the goals of ADA, should provide special funding for tribes to construct or 
retrofit tribal facilities and local federal infrastructure to maximize accessibility for all 
types of disabilities. 

Finding 13. State and tribal relations: One of the major barriers preventing the expansion of 
services specifically targeted to meet the needs of people with disabilities in tribal communities 
is the tenuous relationship that has historically existed between tribal and state governments. 
Many of the programs and services needed to create a supportive network in tribal communities 
are administered through state agencies. Even though these programs are often federally funded 
programs, they are administered by the state, following a state plan and under the supervision of 
a state commission. While states have begun to recruit Indian consumer representatives to serve 
on the state councils or commissions, more collaboration is needed to leverage additional 
resources and services for Indians with disabilities in tribal communities. 

RECOMMENDATION 13.1: The U.S. Department of Education’s National Institute on 
Disability and Rehabilitation Research, RSA, and Office of Special Education Programs 
should provide a series of forums for dialogue in Indian Country. Therein, regional staff, 
state staff, and tribal members can discuss opportunities to work together to create 
partnerships for better serving and supporting the empowerment of people with disabilities 



O 

ERIC 



1 fi r> 

loo 



99 



in tribal communities. Participants should identify strategies to ensure all citizens with 
disabilities are provided access to the same level of services, through service agreements 
and other cooperative arrangements. 

Finding 14. Federal information dissemination: As articulated by Coria La Fontaine, a 
member of this project’s TEP, “there are a lot of hidden disabilities and we need to make people 
aware of this....” AI/AN communities lack adequate resources to help raise awareness about 
disabilities, programs, protections, and services and to implement needed new programs and 
services for people with disabilities; they need the partnership, assistance, and funding of state 
and federal agencies. Any federally funded research should produce practical applications that 
can be implemented in Indian communities to improve the conditions of the people with 
disabilities studied. Considerable enthusiasm and anticipation have been generated by this NCD 
project in Indian Country, specifically with regard to the development of a culturally appropriate, 
user-friendly Toolkit for AI/AN communities. 

RECOMMENDATION 14.1: Federal agencies that serve AI/AN communities, such as the 
U.S. Departments of Education, Interior, Justice, and Health and Human Services, should 
make a continuing and concerted effort to identify information appropriate for 
dissemination to those communities and make it readily available. Federal agencies should 
develop and implement strategies for culturally sensitive outreach and contacts with AI/AN 
tribes and individuals with disabilities. The NCD Toolkit developed by this project should 
serve as a resource and guide to federal agencies in their outreach efforts. 

Finding 15. National gathering of key stakeholders: One theme that came through very 
strongly from discussions with federal and tribal staff was the need to “bring people together.” 
Federal, state, and tribal people who get together to talk through common issues and problems 
will learn from each other and develop relationships that will provide a foundation for working 
together to improve programs and resolve problems facing people with disabilities. 

Organizations have emerged to support the self-determination and advocacy efforts of people 
with disabilities in AI/AN communities across the United States. It is important that these 
organizations have the support and encouragement from federal funding sources to collaborate 




and convene, in partnership with organizations representing tribal governments, various forums 
to further address the issues raised in this report. 

RECOMMENDATION 15.1: A federal initiative, with funding from multiple agencies, 
including the U.S. Departments of Education, Health and Human Services, Justice, 
Transportation, and Interior, should support the planning, coordination, and 
implementation of a National Summit on American Indians with Disabilities, gathering 
organizations such as the American Indian Disability Technical Assistance Center, 
American Indian Rehabilitation Research and Training Center, Consortia of 
Administrators for Rehabilitation, Intertribal Deaf Council, Commission for the Blind, and 
Native American Protection and Advocacy, in cooperation with organizations such as the 
National Congress of American Indians, National Indian Child Welfare Association, 
National Council on Indian Aging, and National Indian Health Board. The purposes of this 
summit would be to 

* Provide education and awareness on disability issues 

* Provide education and awareness on disability law and its application and 
opportunities for tribal initiatives in tribal communities 

* Provide a clearinghouse of information available to tribes 

* Establish a legislative and federal policy agenda 

* Interact with representatives of federal and state agencies 

* Spotlight “best practices” in Indian Country 

* Develop strategies for national advocacy 

RECOMMENDATION 15.2: An effective summit must include substantial participation 
by AI/AN people with disabilities. Any and all federal or tribal support for this summit 
should include a percentage of the budget allocated for “consumer participation,” so that 
Indian people with disabilities can participate en masse. 

RECOMMENDATION 15.3: This summit should not be a one-time event, but should be a 
recurring gathering, meeting at a minimum of every two years. This frequency is important 



to sustain focused momentum and to ensure continued support for new leadership within 
the field of AI/AN disabilities. These summits should be repeated every two years in 
various regions across the United States under the sponsorship of multiple federal agencies, 
including the Departments of Education, Labor, Health and Human Services, Justice, and 
Interior. 



SECTION V 
Conclusion 



AI/AN people with disabilities are among the most underserved and neglected populations in the 
nation. The high level of poverty among AI/AN populations; limited federal funding available for 
tribal communities for housing, education, or health care; and limited access to important 
infrastructure such as roads, sidewalks, and public transportation create a difficult and 
challenging environment for people with disabilities. Added to these socioeconomic challenges is 
the lack of clarity in Indian Country regarding the enforcement of federal disability laws that 
impact people with disabilities. Without the enthusiastic participation of tribal communities and 
tribal, state, and Federal Government representatives in closing the gaps between appropriate 
services and support received by the majority population and people from tribal communities, the 
level of disparity would be even greater. Yet, underserved and unserved people with disabilities 
among AI/AN populations face an uncertain and bleak future in terms of obtaining equal 
opportunities, independence, inclusion, and freedom from discrimination. Effective collaboration 
between sovereign governments is key to successfully addressing the issues and needs of tribal 
members with disabilities and descendants living in Indian Country. Emphasis must be placed on 
the building of relationships between all stakeholders. American Indians and Alaska Natives with 
disabilities must be invited to the table in key conversations regarding policies, initiatives, 
program development, and resource allocation. 

Where do we go from here? In the spirit of self-determination, Andrea Siow (Hopi Nation), TEP 
member, stated, “By getting the word out that people with disabilities are not helpless, we can 
create awareness and improve things... .It is up to us to find our path....” Self-determination is 
fundamental not only from the perspective of tribal government, but from the view of the 
individual tribal member with the human need for opportunity, inclusion, support, access, and 
freedom to chart one’s own course. This nation’s mandate to eliminate discrimination against 
individuals with disabilities has thus far failed to appropriately address the inclusion of AI/AN 
communities. For people with disabilities in these communities, the freedom to fulfill their 
dreams, access economic independence, and meaningfully participate in their tribal community 





may rest in the willingness of tribal, state, and federal governments to work together, 
cooperatively and effectively. Ultimately, this will need to be accomplished in ways that will 
achieve the Congressional intent of disability laws and will fully respect this nation’s historic 
legal obligations to tribal governments. 

Collectively, the traditional leaders can look to tribal people with disabilities as key among the 
stakeholders who can change the current environment in ways to reach all unserved and 
underserved people across this great nation. Many small tribal nations, a good deal of which do 
not possess the adequate economic base needed to fully accommodate, protect the rights, and 
serve the unmet need of tribal members with disabilities, comprise the majority of Indian 
Country. Federal, regional, and state program leaders must seriously consider and commit to 
expanding the necessary financial resources. The time for these leaders to establish opportunities 
for dialogue and begin building collaborative working relationships with tribal governments and 
people with disabilities is now. In the words of Steven “Corky” West (Oneida Nation), “the 
consumers are the leadership. Learn from the consumers.” 




104 1 



11 



APPENDIX A 

The Technical Expert Panel 



Azure, Mark 

Tsimshian/Hunkpapa Lakota 

Intertribal Deaf Council 
Consumer 

Clay, Julie Anna, M.P.H. 

Omaha Tribe 

Training and Dissemination Coordinator 

American Indian Rehabilitation Research and Training Center (AIRRTC) 

Consumer 

Davis-Wheeler, Julia 

Nez Perce 

Tribal Leader 

Nez Perce Tribal Council 

Chair, National Indian Health Board 

Fowler, LaDonna 

Turtle Mountain Chippewa Cree/Santee Sioux/Assiniboine 
Chairperson, Subcommittee on Disability, National Congress of American Indians 
Co-Founder American Indian Rehabilitation Rights Organization of Warriors (AIRROW) 
National Board Member, AIRRTC 

Secretary, Multicultural Committee, National Council on Independent Living 
Co-Secretary, Native American Alliance for Independent Living 

Charter Member, Cultural Diversity Advisory Committee for National Council on Disability 
Native American Disability Consultant/Consumer 




105 



112 



Francis, Joanne 
Akwesasne Nation (Mohawk) 

International Disability Consultant 
Consumer 

Garcia, Joseph 

Prairie Band of Potawatomi 

Board Member, American Indian Disability Technical Assistance Center 

Student, Salish Kootenai College 

Consumer 

LaFontaine, Cordia 

Consumer 

Locust, Carol 

Eastern Band Cherokee 

Indian Health Services Health Consultant/ 

Cultural Sensitivity Trainer and Consultant 
Consumer 

Lucero, Danny 

Navajo/Apache Nations 

Vice President, Intertribal Deaf Council 

Gallaudet University 

Consumer 

Miles, David J. 

Nez Perce Tribe 

Director, Nez Perce Vocational Rehabilitation Services 
Board Member, Idaho State Independent Living Council 
Board Member, Idaho State Rehabilitation Council 




106 



1 13 



Paris, Damara 
Cherokee 

President of the Intertribal Deaf Council 
Consumer 

Siow, Andrea 
Hopi Nation 

Miss Hopi Nation 
Consumer 

Smith, H. Sally 

Tribal Leader 

Executive Committee, Alaska Native Health Board 
Executive Committee, National Indian Health Board 

Williams, Raho 
Navajo Nation 
Independent Living Specialist 
San Juan Center for Independence 
Consumer 

Windy Boy, Alvin 
Chippewa-Cree 
Tribal Leader 
Rocky Boy Reservation 




107 114 



APPENDIX B 

Interview Guide for Discussions with Federal/State Agency Staff 



Interviewer will briefly summarize the study and objectives of the interview and discuss/answer 
any questions that the interviewer may have. 

• What are the responsibilities of your agency/office with respect to providing funding, 
services, and/or protections to people with disabilities in Indian Country? 

• How do you and others in your office work with tribal governments? particularly on 
issues affecting people with disabilities? 

• Are these government-to-government relationships well established? What are the 
processes for working with tribal governments? 

• Do these processes work well? What are some of the factors that contribute to the 
effectiveness of your programs, policies, and procedures? Can you provide examples 
of effective processes? 

• Do you have examples/evidence of “promising practices” (within your agency or 
others of which you are aware) that seem to work well to benefit people with 
disabilities in Indian Country? 

• What types of “outreach” efforts does your agency have in place to improve services 
and programs to American Indians/Alaska Natives in Indian Country? nontribal 
areas? for people from any other diverse cultural/ethnic/racial groups? 

• Within your agency, are any programs, training, or policies in place to address cultural 
competency in implementing/monitoring/enforcing laws and programs and services? 




109 



115 



• Are you aware of any problems or difficulties that have occurred between your office 
and tribal governments, when the processes in place have not worked well? Can you 
provide examples? 

• What are the barriers/difficulties you or others in your office have encountered in 
developing and maintaining effective government-to-govemment relationships? 
examples? 

• Are you aware of any innovative approaches or strategies (within your agency or 
others) that have helped to develop and maintain effective govemment-to-govemment 
relationships? 

• What changes would you like to see made (within your agency or others) that would 
result in improved services and programs to assist people with disabilities who live in 
Indian Country? to assist American Indian/Alaska Native people with disabilities, 
wherever they may live? 

• What suggestions or recommendations do you have that would improve 
communication and collaboration among federal/state/tribal governments on issues 
that would improve support and services to people with disabilities in Indian 
Country? 




110 



116 



APPENDIX C 

Interview Guide for Discussions with Tribal Programs 



1. Does your tribal government have a law or resolution that prohibits discrimination against 
people with disabilities and requires equal opportunities for people with disabilities? 

• If no: How does your tribe protect rights and opportunities for people with 
disabilities? 

• If yes: What were the key elements or factors that convinced this tribe to develop 
tribal laws, ordinances, or codes to protect and meet the needs of people with 
disabilities? 

2. How does your tribe address support services for persons with disabilities and their 
families, such as home support programs, respite coverage for parents, personal care 
attendants, and other caregivers? 

3. What are the major barriers for people with disabilities on your reservation? 

4. Describe how people with disabilities access health care in your tribal community. Who 
are the health providers most likely to see and understand the needs of people with 
disabilities? 

5. What are the barriers to health care experienced by people with disabilities in your tribal 
community? 

6. Are children with disabilities treated differently in your school systems? Please describe. 

7. What services (supported employment, transportation assistance, job coach) for 
employment for people with disabilities come from inside your tribe? outside your tribe? 




Ill 



117 



APPENDIX D 

Case Studies of Three Tribal Communities 



Introduction 

The following case studies provide additional insight into the approaches used by three tribal 
communities and a federal region — Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes, Hopi Nation, 
Oneida Nation, and federal Region X — to address the needs of people with disabilities on tribal 
lands. The three communities were selected from the 10 tribes interviewed for this study. They 
were selected because their level of tribal government commitment to taking actions and 
changing the attitudes and environment of tribal communities with regard to providing improved 
access and services for people with disabilities stands out. The results for people with disabilities 
have been improved services to individuals and families and enhanced support for self- 
determination efforts. The case studies are summarized below: 

Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes 

The Flathead Reservation, home of the Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes (CSKT) in 
western Montana, spans 1.5 million acres in seven communities." 4 The reservation is largely 
divided between tribal and non-Indian ownership. The local county population is approximately 
22,000 — and of that population, only 4,000 are tribal members. This means that the CSKT are 
the minority on their own reservation. This creates great challenges when faced with an 
environment of racial discrimination. In the town of Ronan, 51 percent of the students are 
American Indian, and only 4 to 5 percent actually graduate from high school. In addition to tribal 
members and non-Indian landowners, the Flathead Reservation is home to a high count of 2,600 
American Indians from other tribes. The local tribal college draws many other Indian people into 
the territory. 



114 Templer, Arlene. Confederated Salish and Kootenai Tribes. Telephone interview by Martina 
Whelshula. December 19, 2002. 




113 




There is a 41 percent unemployment rate year-round, with winter having the highest rate. CSKT 
is the major employer on the reservation, employing approximately 1,200 people in the summer 
months and about 700 in the winter months. There are many who also depend on the timber 
industry, which has been difficult since the fires in 2000; tribal revenue is down since then. Other 
employment opportunities include farm work, odd jobs, and small businesses. 

CSKT Collaborative Programming 

Since the late 1990s, the only referrals for vocational rehabilitation came from other tribal 
departments. Staff came to realize that many Indian people do not see their disability as an 
“issue.” It was part of their journey in life, and a person needed to learn how to deal with it. The 
term “disability” is not in either the Salish or Kootenai languages. Staff had to explain to people 
that their disability met the criteria to qualify them to receive disability services. The positive 
results associated with the vocational rehabilitation program at CSKT may be attributed to three 
key elements. The first is people who know the systems and services that can assist people with 
disabilities. The second key element is awareness of different perceptions of the term 
“disability.” The third key element is outreach and coordination across several programs to 
ensure services and people are connected. 

The vocational rehabilitation program is 17 years old. It used to be based in the tribal college and 
was known as a program for college students. CSKT removed it from the college in 1998 to 
provide services to the whole reservation. The way it carries out a “one-stop shop” model is the 
program’s strength. A strong relationship with department heads led to building programs 
simultaneously and providing access to many other programs that serve consumers. Program 
leaders report that they recognize the benefits of knowing about various grants and programs, and 
of building positive working relationship. The vocational rehabilitation program serves the entire 
reservation, making collaboration critical to consumer success. There are satellite offices in 
Mission, Ronan, and Poison. The number of people served by the vocational rehabilitation 
program range from 80 to 110. 

Benefits are coordinated to expand the services for tribal members with disabilities through the 
CSKT One-stop Shop. How does this work? As one example, a family served by the tribal 
Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF) program would have an Individualized 




114 

119 



Family Plan for Employment developed and then utilized to fulfill the work requirements for 
TANF. The consumer would obtain cash assistance from TANF for living expenses and 
vocational rehabilitation funds for specific training needs only. The CSKT vocational 
rehabilitation and Adult Basic Education staff members work together frequently to help people 
get their general education diplomas and obtain learning disability testing. Vocational 
rehabilitation staff members also ensure that the consumer is having basic needs met through 
food stamp and commodity services. The food stamp office is next door to the vocational 
rehabilitation office. Childcare is provided through a block grant to provide daycare services 
during work-related activities for parents. Vocational rehabilitation staff members also work 
closely with a job specialist, the tribal Department of Human Resources, and On-the-Job 
Training to secure job placements for consumers with disabilities. 

CSKT tribal staff members for different programs were once described as a lot more 
territorial — working alone rather than collaborating across programs — until the CSKT Tribal 
Council placed everybody in one department. Public Law 102-477 — commonly called 
477 — provides Indian tribes with the option to integrate their federal employment, training, and 
childcare funds into one consolidated budget and program. The 477 option also allows tribes to 
consolidate reporting requirements for these various federal programs, reducing paperwork and 
streamlining services. Although the CSKT vocational rehabilitation and the Women, Infant, and 
Children’s programs are not included in the 477 contract, these programs are coordinated with 
the other employment, training, and childcare opportunities. A positive outcome of coordinating 
these services is that people with disabilities can access assistance through a seamless program, 
resulting in improved and more comprehensive services. 

CSKT Transportation Services 

In addition to the collaborative service delivery, there has been opportunity to focus on a number 
of barriers facing people with disabilities. Program staff members developed ways for 
transportation resources to connect tribal members to employment opportunities. Transportation 
has been identified as a leading barrier for the CSKT. Remoteness and isolation are primary 
barriers for the community as well. Many tribal members are as far as an hour away from the 
tribal complex and tribal health and human service offices where the majority of services are 




115 

120 



provided. Transportation needs were integrated into vocational rehabilitation, elderly, and 
independent living grant proposals. In this way, a resolution to the barrier became part of the 
process of strengthening existing services. The transportation program uses a number of 
approaches, yet recognizes challenges to the implementation of the program. Use of a 
transportation voucher system is a limited option because of the lack of availability of licensed 
drivers with automobile insurance and the fact that there are few service providers to receive the 
voucher. In an attempt to find a solution to this problem, workshops are provided to help people 
get their driver’s license. An additional barrier is that the closest cities in which to obtain driver’s 
licensing are Missoula and Kalispell, and they are both about one hour away. The CSKT co- 
authored a grant with Missoula’s Rural Transportation Department, If the reservation has buses, 
they can link at Missoula. 

The significant impact of the transportation problem has led to seeking a more long-term 
resolution. Using accessible buses, vans, and cars, the vocational rehabilitation staff members are 
developing a combination fixed-route dispatch service in collaboration with the Salish Kootenai 
College. The CSKT’s approach to meeting the transportation need has been to integrate services 
and to seek technical assistance through a network of partnering agencies. By taking a two- 
pronged approach, the tribe is able to offer temporary transportation services to supplement 
vocational rehabilitation, elderly services, and services for individuals with disabilities while 
working to develop a more comprehensive service that is tailored to its community’s specific 
need. 

CSKT Education 

Many CSKT members have not received a lot of education. This is apparent when testing shows 
they do not have the knowledge to pass tests. A vocational rehabilitation leader Ms. Arlene 
Templer (CKST) has begun work with the schools in all six districts on the reservation. The local 
Bureau of Indian Affairs school provides — and pays for — disability services to the children 
attending. In working with the other school districts, the vocational rehabilitation leader assists 
with development of an Individualized Education Program for students beginning at age 14. She 
goes to the schools as a tribal and vocational rehabilitation representative and tells students about 
resources available to them as Indian people. She provides them with transition kits (packets) 





that include information on a variety of different resources and programs, such as the tribal 
Department of Human Resource Development, Salish Kootenai College, and Job Corps, and a 
letter from the tribal chairman encouraging students to finish their education. 

CSKT and State-Level Collaboration 

Ms. Arlene Templer, the vocational rehabilitation leader whose activities were described above, 
now chairs the Montana State Rehabilitation Council after a year as vice chair. She stays up-to- 
date on grants made to the state and develops proposals for grants to the tribes. She is uniquely 
positioned to know about state and federal grant dollars. The Section 121 regulations mandate 
tribal representation on state rehabilitation councils. The State of Montana conducts consumer 
surveys to determine satisfaction with state programs and services. Along this line, Ms. Templer 
has asked the state to survey a tribal program and suggested CSKT as the pilot program. She 
indicated that she feels comfortable enough with the program to recommend it. Both located in 
Montana, the American Indian Disability Technical Assistance Center and the Rural Institute on 
Disabilities are attempting to assist in program development across Indian Country in the state, 
enhancing services in self-employment, among other services CSKT consumers access. 

CSKT Lessons Learned 

It is important to network with service providers, agencies offering grants, and technical 
assistance organizations in order to understand the service options and funding available to the 
community. In addition, a program could consider integrating transportation services with 
vocational rehabilitation and job employment, education programs, elderly services, and 
disability services. 

Hopi Nation 

The Hopi Reservation is located in northeastern Arizona. It occupies about 2,439 square miles. 
The tribal population is approximately 1 1 ,000, with 8,000-9,000 tribal members residing on the 
reservation. 115 The reservation lies 92 miles northeast of Flagstaff and 50 miles north of 
Winslow. The Hopi people reside in 12 villages throughout three mesas, including two villages 

115 Talaswaima, Rhonda. Hopi Nation. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. December 
26, 2002. 



located 45 miles west of Third Mesa. The village of Kykotsmovi is home to the Hopi tribal 
government headquarters. The size of the population of each village determines the number of 
council seats. However, not all villages have representation; some choose to practice their 
traditional form of leadership and governance. The council is composed of both male and female 
representatives. 

The Hopi are a closeknit matrilineal people with strong extended family and clan relationships. 
They are by tradition farmers and practice dry farming. In addition, the Hopi are a nongaming 
tribe, choosing not to participate in this economic venture for philosophical and religious 
reasons. 

Hopi Office of Special Needs 

The Hopi Office of Special Needs includes the early intervention program and the newly awarded 
vocational rehabilitation program. Their office serves tribal members residing on the Hopi 
Reservation. The program director attributes the success of the program to tenacity and 
motivation. The establishment of the Office of Special Needs all started with a parent group with 
the determination and dedication to make a difference. 

Success is enhanced through networking with other tribal programs within the tribal 
organizational structure. The tribal personnel department supports the program’s efforts and 
assists in the hiring and orientation of tribal members with disabilities. Staff at the Office of 
Special Needs is aware that any kind of change takes time and should be approached “one step at 
a time.” Staff report that the Hopi philosophy addresses disability with the basic belief that all 
people have value and worth. Tribal departments typically support efforts of the Office of Special 
Needs to serve tribal members with disabilities through concerted efforts to comply with any 
requests made for assistance. 

Hopi State-Level Collaboration 

The Hopi early intervention program is provided with technical assistance through the state. In 
addition, staff members for the new vocational rehabilitation program are working with the state 
staff to finalize a cooperative agreement for providing services to consumers. Tribal staff 
members report a positive relationship with state counterparts and work collaboratively to 




118 



123 



expand services. They also report that working cooperatively with other resources results in 
people with disabilities being provided with better and more comprehensive services. 

The director of the Office of Special Needs, Mrs. Rhonda Talaswaima, was appointed by the 
state governor and is the only Native American to sit on the Arizona State Governor’s Council 
for Developmental Disabilities. She was also involved with Partners in Policymaking, a 
leadership program developed to empower consumers and parents of individuals with disabilities 
to make systemic changes in their communities. Staff members report it was an opportune time 
to network and make a difference in the state. According to Mrs. Talaswaima, who believes in 
demonstrating initiative, people need to be supported in becoming empowered to believe that 
they can make a difference. 

The director of the Office of Special Needs also serves on The Institute of Human 
Development’s Community and Consumer Advisory Committee at Northern Arizona University. 
The role of this organization is to review different issues and priorities affecting people with 
disabilities. In addition, Hopi is one of the first tribes in the State of Arizona to participate in the 
Department of Economic Security (DES) Advisory Council. This council provides an 
opportunity for Hopi people to discuss specific issues related to DES programs on the 
reservation, including programs dealing with individuals with disabilities. 

Hopi Lessons Learned 

Tribal staff members report that dedicated employees who share a vision of improving the lives 
of individuals with disabilities are key to creating a better environment in reservation 
communities. Demands upon the time and commitment of staff are significant, and the Hopi 
Tribe has addressed this by building a strong foundation of understanding, vision, and 
participation in leadership. Staff members also report that while funding is important, of more 
importance are staff who work hard to provide options and resources in the lives of people with 
disabilities. The Annual Hopi Special Needs Activity Day attracts over 600 people from 
reservation communities. This turnout is significant, according to tribal staff, and can be linked 
to the staff s level of outreach and enthusiasm. Another key to improving the reservation 
environment for people with disabilities is the ability of tribal staff to network throughout the 
larger state agencies and leverage new resources and support. 



Oneida Nation 

By tribal constitution, direction for the Oneida Nation is provided by a General Tribal Council 
(GTC) that must meet a minimum of two times per year. 116 The GTC includes all of the voting- 
age enrolled members. At GTC meetings, the general direction for tribal operations is 
established. That general direction is carried out and further defined by the business committee, 
which is a nine-member panel that includes four executive officers and five council members 
who are elected at-large. The business committee is also responsible for administration of the 
day-to-day operations of the tribe and its programs, services, and affairs. 

The Oneida Nation has nearly 15,000 tribal members with, according to the 2000 census, roughly 
7,600 living on, or adjacent to, the reservation in Brown and Outagamie Counties. The census 
figures may be skewed in that respondents who self-identified as American Indian may include 
tribal affiliations other than Oneida. The data indicates that another 2,000-3,000 Oneida live in 
Milwaukee, Chicago, and other urban areas. Surprisingly, a significant population of Oneida 
lives in California because of relocation. 

The Oneida Reservation spans 56 square miles and lies diagonally in Brown and Outagamie 
Counties, along a northeast-southwest axis west of the Fox River in northeastern Wisconsin. The 
reservation is “checker-boarded” with tribal and non-Indian land ownership. A large portion of 
the reservation lies within the city limits of Green Bay, Wisconsin. The Oneida Reservation can 
be classified as an “urban” reservation. This creates a great advantage in accessibility. Yet the 
Oneida are faced with frequent intercultural-interracial relationships. These can be rocky or they 
can be smooth. There exists a subtle racial discrimination among some members of neighboring 
communities, but it does not manifest often. The Oneida Nation and the City of Green Bay, along 
with other neighboring communities, generally have a positive working relationship. 

Diversified business development is building gradually for the tribe. Among the tribal businesses 
are a hotel/conference center, a printing business, a casino, smoke shops, a cooperative food 
store, and a communications corporation. Their largest revenue producer is gaming. Prior to 

116 West, Steven “Corky.” Oneida Nation. Telephone interview by Martina Whelshula. January 2, 
2003. 




120 



125 



gaming, there was not much business or revenue. The Supreme Court case Bryant vs. Itasca 
opened the door for smoke shops and retail gasoline outlets (One-Stops). These smoke shops and 
One-Stops became a significant source of revenue for the tribe. 

The primary coordinator for service to people with disabilities is the director of the Tribal 
Vocational Rehabilitation Services Program. The 1998 amendments to the Rehabilitation Act 
made it possible for Oneida and other tribes in Wisconsin to be involved under Section 121 of 
the Rehabilitation Act. Previously the Oneida Nation had provided similar services through the 
Job Partnership Training Act (JTPA). The Oneida received their initial vocational rehabilitation 
services grant in 1998. 

Finding Hopi Supports and Overcoming Attitude as a Barrier 

The tribal staff reported that many JTPA participants who received training services were 
repeatedly coming back for the same types of services. Staff observed a pattern emerging that 
those without cognitive or emotional problems were the only ones benefiting from conventional 
job training services. It was realized that the problem was not the individuals’ intent or 
motivation. Cognitive or other disabilities appeared to affect client ability to handle job training 
and key life issues. Tribal staff identified the need for supplemental services for some consumers 
in the program and put these consumers in contact with other directed rehabilitation resources. 
This move has increased participation in the Oneida program 10-fold. The state served 16 Oneida 
people in one year prior to Oneida receiving the vocational rehabilitation grant. Since then, the 
Oneida program has served 1 80 consumers in approximately three years. The Oneida program 
has a cooperative relationship with local employers. One of the greatest needs has been to help 
people get motivated and job ready. 

Members of the tribal staff report that one of the barriers is the tendency for service providers to 
perpetuate dependency, which can lead to learned helplessness. In a dependency mode the tribe is 
looked to for all tribal consumer needs. Staff report that changing the system is a slow process, 
and they are working so that both consumers and the tribe change their way of thinking. The 
members of tribal vocational rehabilitation program staff are working to create interdependent 
models that provide opportunities for creating choices and eliminating barriers for people with 
disabilities. 




121 



126 



When the counseling staff works with an individual with a disability, a team is formed. The team 
is made up of a counselor and other human service professionals who share case management. In 
the past there did not seem to be any communication on coordination of services and one 
program would not be aware that a consumer was receiving other services such as mental health 
counseling. This lack of coordination would inevitably create a conflict in which one program 
would develop an Individual Plan for Employment (IPE) that was in conflict with the mental 
health program. These programs now work together and IPE are developed that parallel treatment 
plans. They may even “piggyback” appointments. The One-Stop Job Center, which the Oneida 
have created under the Workforce Development Act, improves communication between the 
multiple service provider partners and the consumer while developing closer working 
relationships. This translates into a better delivery system shifting the responsibility to the 
consumer. 

Oneida Nation and Wisconsin State-Level Collaboration 

The tribe’s vocational rehabilitation director currently serves as chair of the Wisconsin State 
Independent Living Council. The state council annually sets aside funds for requests for 
proposals for outreach to underserved populations such as tribes. All independent living centers 
(ILCs) in the state that serve tribal populations are provided with supplemental funds if their 
proposals show that the supplemental funds can enhance delivery of services to tribal 
populations. Wisconsin is the first state to have all of its ILCs federally funded. Mr. Steve West 
(Oneida Nation) was appointed to the state ILC as a result of the 1998 Rehabilitation Act 
amendments. He reports no problems from the state’s side with the 1998 amendment. This is the 
amendment that mandates that Section 121 programs should be represented on the state ILC and 
rehabilitation council. The governor of Wisconsin appointed the tribal vocational rehabilitation 
director, who also serves on the regional Workforce Development and the Governor’s Manpower 
Planning Boards. The director also actively serves on the Consortia of Administrators of Native 
American Rehabilitation executive board as treasurer. 

Oneida Nation Funding Options 

The Oneida Nation made their annual payment of $4.8 million to the State of Wisconsin in 
January 2003 from tribal gaming revenues in accordance with their agreement (compact) with the 




122 



127 



state. The compact allows the tribe to designate where these funds are spent. Tribes supported a 
request from the state vocational rehabilitation agency to make funds available for the purpose of 
matching additional federal dollars under Title I of the Rehabilitation Act. The state legislature 
agreed and allocated $350,000. These dollars supplement vocational rehabilitation activities and 
made it possible to create two full-time counselor positions in urban Milwaukee. This compact 
also serves to supplement projects such as the Great Lakes Inter-Tribal program (covering nine 
tribes). This strategy helps save vocational rehabilitation funds for use in providing other direct 
services to all people with disabilities across the State of Wisconsin. 

Oneida Nation Lessons Learned 

The experiences of the Oneida Nation vocational rehabilitation staff indicate that one key lesson 
is to focus on changing the attitudes among tribal leadership, tribal staff, and consumers about 
fostering independence and reducing dependence as a universal goal. Another key lesson was the 
importance of program coordination among tribal and state resources and case management in 
providing effective services and long-term employment for people with disabilities. Finally, the 
experience at the Oneida Nation further underscores the impact of strong leadership at both tribal 
and state levels on the creation of new funding and programming opportunities to better serve 
people with disabilities in tribal communities. 

Rehabilitation Services Administration - Region X 

The Region X Rehabilitation Services program has a person with involvement in tribal affairs 
and cultural traditions serving as rehabilitation services specialist. Others have described her 
sharing intimate knowledge of tribal government and federal and tribal barriers as particularly 
helpful to American Indian Vocational Rehabilitation Services agencies and Rehabilitation 
Services Administration staff. 117 Monitoring of and technical assistance to the American Indian 
vocational rehabilitation programs were sparse because of budgetary needs until during the 
1990s, when despite budgetary restrictions, limited technical assistance and monitoring became 
available thanks to the personal commitment of the assistant regional commissioner for Region 



117 Interview with Department of Education: Region X Rehabilitation Services Specialist, 
September 27, 2002. 




123 



123 



X. He conducted recent onsite visits in California, Oregon, Arizona, New Mexico, Colorado, 
Wyoming, and Oklahoma, as well as revisited sites that were visited in previous years. 

Region X Lessons Learned 

Among the many lessons learned from this regional experience was the importance of cultivating 
and displaying positive leadership qualities at the federal level. Perseverance, commitment, 
innovation, and inclusion were among the leadership qualities reported as important regarding 
the way Region X staff worked with tribal leaders and people with disabilities across the affected 
tribal entities. Region X actions demonstrating these and other leadership qualities, such as the 
ability to lead by example, to “smooth the way,” and to demonstrate commitment, raised the 
consciousness of other people about the needs of the American Indians with disabilities. Other 
demonstrations of effective leadership were noted in accounts of culturally sensitive personal 
contacts with tribal councils and tribal leadership to assist in the understanding of vocational 
rehabilitation programs and the potential benefits for tribal members. 




124 



1 ? 

•ft. 



9 



APPENDIX E 

Observations of Community Leadership 



In the course of interviewing the tribes, it became increasingly evident that the program took on 
the qualities and characteristics of its leadership. Common elements shared by each program 
director were as follows: 

• Passion 

Each of the program directors demonstrated this trait in thoughts shared and actions 
taken. The passion was conveyed not only through descriptions of the programs and 
services delivered, but in the difficulties many programs transcended over time. 

• Perseverance 

In the face of many challenges and obstacles, the program leader’s belief in the work 
helped individuals to keep moving and fighting for changes when the task seemed 
almost impossible. 

• Vision 

Each program leader believed in the possibilities for change in tribal communities in 
ways that improve the provision of disability services and seemed to have mental 
pictures and plans that were demonstrated through unique or innovative approaches to 
addressing the gaps in services for tribal members with disabilities. 

• Commitment 

The majority of program leaders had been with the program for several years and 
were determined to create change to improve the quality of life and services for tribal 
members with disabilities. 

• Change Agents 

These program leaders pushed for creative and different ways of doing things that 
sometimes made them unpopular with others favoring the status quo. 




125 



130 



• Consistency 

Program leaders who stayed with their programs for many years provided a sense of 
reliability, stability, and consistency. The element of consistency nurtured the 
sometimes slow process of growth that also occurred in ways that built upon the many 
lessons learned through the years. 

• Connection to Consumer 

These program leaders strive to know their consumers despite some complex 
circumstances and multiple variables surrounding programs. 

• Agents of Hope 

Many of the conditions surrounding the whole issue of disabilities in Indian Country 
are severe enough to leave consumers and advocates with a sense of hopelessness. 
Some program leaders have described the bleak realities of tribal members with 
disabilities. In the face of some desperate conditions, these program leaders try to 
embody a positive sense of hope, inspiring consumers to hang in there; change is 
coming. 

Most program leaders who were interviewed for this report will tell you that they hold only one 
part of the total effort needed to improve the quality of life for tribal members with disabilities. 
The leaders described the many people, including tribal people with disabilities, who have 
contributed to the success of effective programs and the services. Humility was apparent as 
leaders expressed excitement at how segments of their tribal communities fought long and hard 
for change that resulted in improvements for people with disabilities. When they speak of 
success, the tribal leaders do not speak solely in terms of a personal success; rather, they speak of 
success in terms of a collective effort by other community members who have expressed their 
own passion in the work. 




126 



131 



APPENDIX F 

Community Stories of Innovation 



Innovations in Breaking Down Barriers: Parents, Self-Advocates, and Other 
Advocates in Action 

A parent acts. Ms. Rhonda Talaswaima’s story about what led to the creation of the Hopi Office 
of Special Needs captures the spirit of innovation from a grassroots perspective. Her pathway 
into the world of disabilities began with the birth of her son in 1991. Before that she did not think 
much about disabilities. After he was born with disabilities, her eyes were opened to the needs of 
children with disabilities and their families. In 1996, an event featuring a guest speaker on 
disabilities brought several families together who had children with disabilities. For the first 
time, at that meeting, she saw other family members from the tribe who had children with 
disabilities. Ten to twelve families connected there and began to learn and understand together 
how the community could better serve their children — a new generation. They started meeting in 
each other’s houses together with other interested people; the Hopi Parent-to-Parent Support 
Group was thus formed. This group wanted to protect the rights of children. Culturally 
(historically), Hopi families kept family members with disabilities at home. Then, contact with 
people outside of the reservation suggested sending them away. Ms. Talaswaima noticed that this 
generation wants to learn and find out more. They advocated for an Office of Special Needs for 
two years until the office was formed. Prior to that, there was no program to protect the rights of 
people with disabilities. 

Today, the Office of Special Needs receives federal funding for their early intervention program, 
which provides services for children from birth to age five. One goal of the program is to 
strengthen the early intervention program. They have created a culturally appropriate video, 
brochure, and calendar. They are working from a different angle. While most tribes operate from 
an elderly perspective, the Hopi program works from birth up. They recently applied for a 
vocational rehabilitation grant and just received notice that they received it. Now students 
graduating from high school can transition to a new program to prepare for employment. 





The Hopi Office of Special Needs sees the great need for training in the community. One way 
they have increased awareness is through their Special Needs Activity Day. The Hopi Parent-to- 
Parent Support Group first organized this community event in 1996 as a grassroots effort. Last 
year 600 attended. Many residential centers bring their consumers, and local musicians play 
music. A Hopi motivational speaker, David Talas, who is blind, spoke at this year’s event. Some 
event activities include a bean bag toss with visual disability simulation, a Polaroid family 
picture with frames made by participants in the Hopi childcare program, a wheelchair obstacle 
course, a fish pond, a simple lunch, T-shirts with their logo, and door prizes donated by various 
programs and businesses. The theme of the event is “Celebrate Diversity — Everyone is Unique.” 

The Hopi Office of Special Needs was recently awarded a vocational rehabilitation grant that will 
serve individuals with disabilities ages 16 to 64. In addition to their newly granted vocational 
rehabilitation program there is collaboration with the Division for Developmental Disabilities to 
provide support for families, such as respite and other services. There is a movement to train and 
certify caregivers through various service providers. This assists in moving toward self- 
determination, as a person with a disability can choose a family member to provide respite care. 
This family member can be certified to provide services, which improves choices of caregivers. 

A new provider, ARISE, is interested in setting up a program on the reservation. Currently, 
ALPINE has a day program to transport people to their arts and crafts program. This program has 
a unique component: tribal members with disabilities create art products and market them on the 
Internet. They hold open houses during the year and they’ve done a great job in marketing 
products. As with all of the other programs, this is only one component of many. 

Larry Alflen of the Pueblo of the Zuni offers a different twist on innovation. The Zuni program 
provides a unique service, one that many tribes may wish to duplicate. The Pueblo of the Zuni 
territory is extremely remote and isolated. Transportation issues play a big role in the need for 
improved access for tribal members with disabilities. 

The Pueblo of the Zuni has a program that offers a comprehensive array of services. These 
include supported living and assisted living services. Supported living provides one-on-one 
services on a 24-hour basis. Assisted living provides services for individuals with the ability to 
live more independently; periodic support, respite, and personal care are provided. Services are 




128 



133 



provided in the home (e.g., assistance preparing for daily activities and respite for a family 
member who is the caregiver). 

The Pueblo of the Zuni operates an extensive public transportation program that supports persons 
with disabilities as well as other members of the public. Last year they provided approximately 
33,000 trips around the community. The program is funded under Section 5311, Small Urban and 
Rural Transportation grant, which assists with administrative monies and capital. The Pueblo 
owns several 15-passenger vans, some with wheelchair lifts; they are demand responsive with a 
dispatcher. A State of New Mexico vocational rehabilitation transportation grant provides for the 
use of peer drivers. The Pueblo of the Zuni also has Section 53 10, a capital program for Elderly 
and Disabled Transportation. 

The program provides up to 200 trips per day. The number one challenge is getting people to 
where they need to go. Unemployment is high. Among those who are employed, most work in 
Gallup, representing a transportation challenge to this off-reservation community. An additional 
challenge is keeping the vehicles operational. How do they maintain funding? They’re an 
established program and have a positive relationship with the grant funds manager . 

Twelve years ago, Mr. Alflen saw the need and decided he wanted to implement transportation 
services. The efforts have been successful. He looks at different options in order to meet as many 
needs as possible. The Pueblo of Zuni recently got approved to provide transportation under a 
Medicaid program. This will enable the tribe to submit a bill for transportation under Medicaid 
and will also help their transportation program to sustain itself. 

Unemployment among the Pueblo of Zuni can run as high as 67 percent of the workforce. 

Finding employment is difficult; finding employment for people with disabilities is even more 
difficult. In response, they have created several consumer-owned businesses: a convenience 
grocery store and a regional recycling program. They also have a foundation grant to start a 
computer center. In addition, the Pueblo uses the transportation program as a mechanism to 
employ people with disabilities: several drivers and the dispatcher have received training through 
the Pueblo of Zuni’s vocational rehabilitation program. 




129 



134 



Again, the Hopi Nation and the Pueblo of Zuni are only two tribes among many who are 
creatively approaching the barriers they face locally in addressing the needs of tribal members 
with disabilities. Other tribes have conducted collaborative efforts through strategies that work, 
as shown in the examples below. 

Effective Collaboration 

Advocates and self-advocates act. Darlene Finley of the Three Affiliated Tribes emphasizes the 
importance of “knowing the system.” To complement self-advocacy, she believes that you can be 
your client’s best advocate if you know and take advantage of the available services, grants, and 
resources. Ms. Finley also suggested that consumers find one person to follow them through the 
entire application process from beginning to end. This helps in minimizing the confusion that can 
result from many people assisting one individual in the process without a single point of contact 
for consistency. Program staff can assist consumers more effectively if they take a case 
management approach and follow a client through the entire process. Ms. Finley has stated that a 
comprehensive knowledge of resources available has led to the success of her program. 

Like the Three Affiliated Tribes, the Oneida Nation has created a very sophisticated network of 
program collaborations. Steven Corky West, with the Oneida Nation’s Job Training Program, has 
advocated for a number of social service initiatives funded by the tribe such as their tribally 
supported One-Stop Job Center. This initiative is supported by various tribal, federal, and state 
funds. A combination of tribal dollars supports the center; activities and adjuncts such as mental 
health, alcohol, and other drug abuse services; and childcare and development programming, all 
of which integrate into a seamless delivery of services. In addition, Mr. West has collaborated 
with 125 employers on and bordering the Oneida Nation Reservation who have come together to 
develop a workforce diversification initiative. Employers started this initiative. The motivation 
may not be altruistic, but he feels that it gets the job done and it increases success for his 
consumers. A key for successful employment programming is the active involvement in the 
workforce development system. There is a close link between the Workforce Investment Act and 
vocational rehabilitation; together they can create a plan that is to the best advantage of the 
consumer. Mr. West’s experience tells him that developing collaborations with the state 
Workforce Development Board increases the chances for success. 



Supporting Self-Advocacy 

Jo White of the Pine Ridge Quad Squad advocates from a grassroots level for appropriate 
services through state and local programs. Ms. White has developed numerous links with key 
service providers in the state and locally. She works closely with consumer self-advocates and 
listens intently to their needs. In one such case, Ms. White was confronted with consumers who 
use wheelchairs and were being pushed off the roads by passing cars. Motorized wheelchairs do 
not seem to be very practical on the reservation where there are no sidewalks. Ms. White then 
began to work with the housing department of her tribe to get crossing lights and sidewalks 
installed. These are ways that advocacy can transform a community and increase the awareness 
of tribal members about unmet needs. Ms. White’s primary focus is in teaching and urging tribal 
members with disabilities to advocate for themselves. She cannot emphasize enough how 
important it is that consumers learn to take control of their lives by asking for the help they need. 

Len Whitebear of the Cook Inlet Tribal Council in Anchorage, Alaska, feels that it is her job to 
advocate in support of consumer advocates by educating the community and tribal leaders about 
the diversity of disabilities. She believes that acceptance goes hand-in-hand with education. 
Much of Ms. Whitebear’s time is dedicated to developing relationships with tribal leaders and 
community members. 

Rita LaFrance with the St. Regis Mohawk Nation in New York State advocates at the state and 
national levels for much needed change. Chief Hilda Smoke of the St. Regis Mohawk Nation 
shared how advocacy at the national level assists in clarifying who addresses disability issues 
unique to tribal communities. As tribes seek assistance in providing much-needed services, they 
discover the huge gaps in accountability. The St. Regis Mohawk Nation approached the National 
Congress of American Indians and the United South and Eastern Tribes to ask for a resolution in 
support of tribes who have endorsed the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) through their 
own tribal laws and in challenging the Indian Health Service and the Bureau of Indian Affairs to 
better address disability issues. 




131 



136 



Support from Tribal Leadership 

The Oglala Nation passed ADA as a tribal resolution in 1991 . It happens that one of the founding 
members of the Quad Squad was a tribal council member. The Confederated Salish and Kootenai 
Tribes passed their own version of ADA through tribal resolution in 1995. The Three Affiliated 
Tribes also have their own laws protecting tribal members with disabilities. 

The Navajo Nation adopted such alternative tribal support. The strategy was shared in interviews 
with two tribal members, Mrs. Ela Yazzie King with the Gallup-McKinley School District, also a 
consumer and a former member of the National Council on Disability, and Mrs. Paula Seanez 
with the Navajo Nation’s Office of Special Education and Rehabilitation. They both spoke of the 
landmark decision by the Navajo Nation to support its tribal members who had been underserved 
for so long. In 1986, under the leadership of the Navajo Nation president, a renegotiation of 
several land lease contracts led to a significant set-aside of monies in a specific trust fund to 
provide for services in eight or nine categories such as veterans’ services, elder services, and 
services for tribal members with disabilities. 

Of the eight or nine trust fund categories, only the fund account that serves Navajo tribal 
members with disabilities remains. Each year, the committee managing the trust awards grants 
funds from the accrued interest of the trust fund to agencies and programs serving the Navajo 
Nation. Grants are awarded for as long as three years. One of the most significant impacts of this 
trust was in providing seed money to develop ASSIST! to Independence and the independent 
living services on the Navajo Reservation. This trust has also supported transportation services, 
recreation services, development and improvement of rehabilitation services, and caseload 
reduction. While it is true that consumers on the Navajo Nation continue to experience 
significant barriers to service, this trust honors the responsibility that the tribal government has to 
tribal members with disabilities and works to improve the conditions and service. 




132 



137 



APPENDIX G 

Mission of the National Council on Disability 



Overview and Purpose 

The National Council on Disability (NCD) is an independent federal agency with 15 members 
appointed by the President of the United States and confirmed by the U.S. Senate. The overall 
purpose of NCD is to promote policies, programs, practices, and procedures that guarantee equal 
opportunity for all individuals with disabilities, regardless of the nature or significance of the 
disability, and to empower individuals with disabilities to achieve economic self-sufficiency, 
independent living, and inclusion and integration into all aspects of society. 

Specific Duties 

The current statutory mandate of NCD includes the following: 

• Reviewing and evaluating, on a continuing basis, policies, programs, practices, and 
procedures concerning individuals with disabilities conducted or assisted by federal 
departments and agencies, including programs established or assisted under the 
Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended, or under the Developmental Disabilities 
Assistance and Bill of Rights Act, as well as all statutes and regulations pertaining to 
federal programs that assist such individuals with disabilities, in order to assess the 
effectiveness of such policies, programs, practices, procedures, statutes, and 
regulations in meeting the needs of individuals with disabilities. 

• Reviewing and evaluating, on a continuing basis, new and emerging disability policy 
issues affecting individuals with disabilities at the federal, state, and local levels and 
in the private sector, including the need for and coordination of adult services, access 
to personal assistance services, school reform efforts and the impact of such efforts on 
individuals with disabilities, access to health care, and policies that act as 
disincentives for individuals to seek and retain employment. 




133 



133 



Making recommendations to the President, Congress, the secretary of education, the 
director of the National Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research, and other 
officials of federal agencies about ways to better promote equal opportunity, 
economic self-sufficiency, independent living, and inclusion and integration into all 
aspects of society for Americans with disabilities. 

Providing Congress, on a continuing basis, with advice, recommendations, legislative 
proposals, and any additional information that NCD or Congress deems appropriate. 

Gathering information about the implementation, effectiveness, and impact of the 
Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (42 U.S.C. § 12101 et seq.). 

Advising the President, Congress, the commissioner of the Rehabilitation Services 
Administration, the assistant secretary for Special Education and Rehabilitative 
Services within the Department of Education, and the director of the National 
Institute on Disability and Rehabilitation Research on the development of the 
programs to be carried out under the Rehabilitation Act of 1973, as amended. 

Providing advice to the commissioner of the Rehabilitation Services Administration 
with respect to the policies and conduct of the administration. 

Making recommendations to the director of the National Institute on Disability and 
Rehabilitation Research on ways to improve research, service, administration, and the 
collection, dissemination, and implementation of research findings affecting persons 
with disabilities. 

Providing advice regarding priorities for the activities of the Interagency Disability 
Coordinating Council and reviewing the recommendations of this council for 
legislative and administrative changes to ensure that such recommendations are 
consistent with NCD’s purpose of promoting the full integration, independence, and 
productivity of individuals with disabilities. 



• Preparing and submitting to the President and Congress an annual report titled 
National Disability Policy: A Progress Report. 

International 

In 1995, NCD was designated by the Department of State to be the U.S. Government’s official 
contact point for disability issues. Specifically, NCD interacts with the special rapporteur of the 
United Nations Commission for Social Development on disability matters. 

Consumers Served and Current Activities 

Although many government agencies deal with issues and programs affecting people with 
disabilities, NCD is the only federal agency charged with addressing, analyzing, and making 
recommendations on issues of public policy that affect people with disabilities regardless of age, 
disability type, perceived employment potential, economic need, specific functional ability, 
veteran status, or other individual circumstance. NCD recognizes its unique opportunity to 
facilitate independent living, community integration, and employment opportunities for people 
with disabilities by ensuring an informed and coordinated approach to addressing the concerns of 
people with disabilities and eliminating barriers to their active participation in community and 
family life. 

NCD plays a major role in developing disability policy in America. In fact, NCD originally 
proposed what eventually became the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). NCD’s present 
list of key issues includes improving personal assistance services, promoting health care reform, 
including students with disabilities in high-quality programs in typical neighborhood schools, 
promoting equal employment and community housing opportunities, monitoring the 
implementation of ADA, improving assistive technology, and ensuring that those persons with 
disabilities who are members of diverse cultures fully participate in society. 

Statutory History 

NCD was initially established in 1978 as an advisory board within the Department of Education 
(P.L. 95-602). The Rehabilitation Act Amendments of 1984 (P.L. 98-221) transformed NCD into 
an independent agency. 




135 



140 



National Council on Disability 
1331 F Street, NW, Suite 850 
Washington, DC 20004 

Official Business 
Penalty for Private Use, $300 



Media Mail 
US Postage Paid 
Permit No. G-279 



ADDRESS CORRECTION REQUESTED 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




Educmionoi Resources InionralfQD Cenier 



NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 



X 



This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release (Blanket)" 
form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all or classes of 
documents from its source organization and, therefore, does not require a 
"Specific Document" Release form. 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may be 
reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form (either 
"Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 




