DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 478 402 



SO 035 099 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Old Elk, Arlene; Stoklas, Jackie 
After the Rain: Using the Rain. 

Heard Museum, Phoenix, AZ . 

2001 - 00-00 

53p.; For related units, see SO 035 097-102. 

Heard Museum, 2301 North Central Avenue, Phoenix, AZ 85004- 
1323. Tel: 602-252-8344; e-mail: education0heard.org. For 
full text : http: // 

www.heard.org/rain/using_the_rain/usingtherain . pdf . 

Guides - Classroom - Teacher (052) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC03 Plus Postage. 

Art Activities; Community Resources; ^Cultural Context; 
Educational Facilities; ^Integrated Curriculum; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; Language Arts; Mathematics; 
^Museums; Primary Education; Primary Sources; Sciences; Skill 
Development ; Student Educational Objectives ; ^Thematic 
Approach 

Native Americans; *Rain; United States (Southwest) 



ABSTRACT 



The Heard Museum (Phoenix, Arizona) has developed and updated 
an integrated curriculum for .use in grades K-3. The goals for this curriculum 
are to: (1) share museum resources with schools; (2) promote cross-cultural 

understanding through a focus on rain, a universal requirement for life; (3) 
help students understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modern world; (4) develop an awareness 
of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature, and customs of the 
native people of the greater southwest; and (5) use culturally specific 
materials as a vehicle for developing essential . skills , especially as they 
relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program-. The curriculum may be used 
in any order. This unit contains: (1) art prints of artifacts in the Heard 

Museum collection related to rain; (2) specific cultural information and 
materials relating to a particular Native American tribe or nation featured 
through the art prints this cultural information is the basis for some of the 
lessons in mathematics, science, and language skills; (3) mathematics lessons 
with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing; (4) science lessons, 
usually hands-on or observational units; (5) language skills, including 
reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary, and poetry skills; and 
(6) art projects. (BT) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 478 402 



s 



N 



& 



ERIC 




Heard Museum 
2301 North Central Avenue 
Phoenix, Arizona 85004-1323 




http;//www.heard.orq/rain/rain pdf main.html 



Updated 2001 



0 \\ 

o^l 

o 



yn 

m 

o 



O 

GO 



2 



BEST COPY AVAEMil^ 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

Jfl This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 



□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



I- • Points of view or opinions stated in this 
I document do not necessarily represent 

/-iffirial OPRI nriQitior* or nolicu. 



Introduction 



The Heard Museum has developed this integrated curriculum for use in schools in grades K 
through 3. The overriding goals for this program are to: 

• 1 . Share museum resources with schools; 

• 2. Promote cross-cultural understanding toough a focus on rain, a universal requirement 
for life on earth; 

• 3. Help students to understand that Native Americans are contemporary people 
maintaining identity and values in the modem world; 

• 4. Develop an awareness of the varied expressions of rain in the art, literature and 
customs of the native peoples of the Greater Southwest; 

• 5. Use culturally specific materials as a vehicle for developing essential skills, especially 
as they relate to the Arizona Student Assessment Program. 

This curriculum is divided into six units that can be used in any order. 

Each unit contains: 

• 1 . Art Prints of artifacts in the Heard Museum collection related to rain. While these 
prints are used for art history and aesthetics lessons, these artifacts are also used to begin 
lessons in math, science and language skills. 

• 2. Speciflc cultural information and materials relating to a particular Native American 
tribe or nation featured through the art prints. This information includes a map, text from 
the RAIN exhibit applicable to the people, and other information of special interest to 
children. This cultural information is the basis for some of the lessons in math, science 
and language skills. 

• 3 . Math lessons with a special emphasis on measuring and comparing. 

• 4. Science lessons, usually hands-on or observational units. 

• 5. Language skills, including reading, listening comprehension, writing, vocabulary and 
poetry skills. 

• 6. Art projects 



This K-3 curriculum was developed teachers by Arlene Old Elk (Dine') and Jackie Stoklas 
during a year-long residency at the Heard Museum, made possible by the Lila Wallace-Readers 
Digest Museum Accessibility Fund. Additional information was developed by the Heard 
Museum Education Department staff. 



3 



Rain 



The Southwest United States and Northwest Mexico exist in a rain shadow cast by mountain 
ranges to the west. Rainfall is light and undependable. There are two rainy seasons: summer and 
winter. Often, summer rains are brief and highly localized, as clouds suddenly boil up fi’om the 
south in the afternoon and early evening. Winter storms come fi’om the Pacific Ocean and may 
arrive in waves, soaking the ground. In higher elevations, the rain becomes snow. In between 
these two seasons are dry periods, when great care must be taken to ensure life and growth until 
the next rain. 

The indigenous people of the Southwest welcome rain into their lives and land, praying for the 
blessing of rain through a variety of ceremonies and creative expressions. Many expressions of 
rain and water focus on rain's connection to making life and growth possible. Expressions may 
be enduring, such as embroidered figures on a ceremonial garment. Some are intended to be 
temporary, such as body paint on a ceremonial participant or the pigments of a sand painting. 
Other expressions take the form of music, song, oratory, poetry, and prayer. 

For all of the cultures in this exhibit, rain has deep meanings that reflect a culture's unique 
experience with the universe. This deep spiritual relationship is far fi’om the stereotype of the 
"Indian Rain Dance", or feeble jokes suggesting a superficial and simplistic magic. 

As you look at specific designs or symbols, please remember that they are part of a whole and 
have meaning as part of that whole. Expressions of rain span centuries. Some of the forms 
change, but the intent of people to bring the blessings that come fi’om rain into their lives and the 
world remains unchanged. 




4 



H?D> 




Make a Cornfield 




Activity: Students in a class work 
together to create their own cornfield. 

Focus Acthity: Look at the growing 
com in Coil Plaque by Lucinda 
Palevooyonma (Hopi). 

Outcomes: Students will create their 
own cornfield with different types of 
com. 

Vocabulary: ears, stalks, cobs 

Materials: copies of com cobs, crayons or markers, scissors, upright sticks wrapped 
with green paper (for stalks), stapler or tape 

Procedure: 

1) Each child should color two ears of com. 

2) Children must make their ears different types of com. 

3) Just as on an actual plant, stalks should carry only one type of com. Thus, all 
red ears are grouped together; all yellow ears are grouped together, all multi- 
colored com is grouped together; etc.. 

4) After coloring, cut out each ear. 

5) Staple or tape the ears to free-standing green sticks to make a field. 




Assessment: 

1) Do the students understand that the Hopi people use various colors of com? 

2) Do the students understand that all colors of com are edible? 

Extension: 

• Share recipes for various com dishes 



best copy available 





6 




Cornhusk Doll 



Activity: Children make a cornhusk 
doll. 

Focus Activity: Look at the art print 
"Frog, Sun, Flute Player, and Bird" by 
Milland Lomakema (Hopi). Notice 
that the com cob is surrounded by 
leaves or husks. In the picture, the 
husks are green. When the husk dries, 
it turns a golden yellow. 




Outcomes: Students will make a doll out of comhusks. 

Vocabulary: husk 

Materials: instruction sheet, comhusks (available in the Mexican food section of the 
grocery store), yam (cut into 5-6 inch lengths), warm water to soak the husks, scissors 

Procedure: 

1) Begin this activity by discussing the origins of this type of doll. Cornhusk dolls 
were not made by the Native American peoples of the Southwest. Cornhusk dolls 
were and still are made by the Iroquois people (Mohawk, Oneida, Onondaga, 
Cayuga, Seneca and Tuscarora) of northern New York state. This is an excellent 
time to explain that com (along with beans and squash) was the most important 
food for the Native American farmers. 

2) Soak the comhusks in warm water until they are pliable (5 minutes) 

3) Using the diagram, make a doll. 

4) To make a boy, omit the shawl (steps 8 through 10). Instead: 

8) Tie yam under the arms to form a waist. 

9) Separate the cornhusk below the "waist" into two bundles to form two 
legs. Tie yam around each "ankle." 



7 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Assessment: 

1) Could each student follow the instructions and make a doll? 
Extension: 

• Discuss some other uses for comhusks (e.g., tamales). 



8 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



How to make a cornhusk doll 




Moisten cornhusks. 
Hold the ends of 
2 cornhusks 
together. 




WYap another 
cornhusk around 
the ends to hold 
them together. 
Makeabig limp 
when you do t. 




Fold the husks 
down over the 
limp. 



1 . 


5 


J'l-' 
SU* / 


\ 






\ ' 
r 1 






!\ \ 


/ / 


\ 


/A.;)' 


'■J 


I.U 



Tie the folds wth 
a piece of yarn. 
This makes the 
doll's head. 



Splk a cornhusk 
into three parts. 
Tlethestri)6 
together at one 
end. 










\ 



'■y 

Braid the three 
slrps together. 
Tie the other 
endtomakethe 
hands and arms. 




8 




Poskion the aims 
between the f rst 
two husks and 
under the head. 



/ 

Li,j 



Splk one more 
husk ihtotwo 
parts. 





Fold one part 
over each 
shoulder. 



Tiewkhyarnat 
the mist. This 
makes abek for 
yoir doll's shrt. 



9 



o 

ERIC 



Pottery 



Activity: Students make a clay pot 
with a lid. 

Focus Activity: Look at the Jar with 
Lid by Marianita Roybal (San 
Ildefonso). Identify the designs. 

Examine the shape. Discuss why a pot 
has a lid. 

Outcomes: Children will make a 
decorated pot. 

Vocabulary: pinch pot, kiln 

Materials: Clay, paint brushes, paint 
Procedure: 

1) After discussing the art print, give each child some clay. 

2) Using either the pinch method or the coil method, make a pot. 

3) Remind students to also make a lid for their pot. 

4) Set clay pot aside to dry. If necessary, fire the pot in a kiln to prevent it from 
falling apart. 

5) Paint designs on the pot that are inspired by the rain, cloud, and rainbow designs 
that the children may have seen. 

6) Make a display in the classroom or media center of the students' work. Write 
labels for each pot, explaining the meanings of the designs. 




Assessment: 

1) Did the students make a pot with a lid? 

2) Did they use information from the art prints in their designs or did they draw 
other images? 



bestcopv available 



10 





Rain in Life 



The Hopi People live in the high mesa country of the Colorado Plateau in northern 
Arizona where about 10 to 13 inches of rain or snow fall in a year. These relatively 
few inches of precipitation are essential to bring fertility, growth, health, and well- 
being to the Hopi people. Agriculture, especially the growing of com, has been 
important for centuries and remains important today as income from wage work 
increases in importance. Crops are planted in the spring, usually April, which can be a 
dry time between the winter snow and mid-summer thimderstorms. Through planting 
well-adapted crops in a variety of locations, Hopi farmers make the best use of 
available water. 



Average Annual Inches of Rainfall 




T T T 1 T“T 1 1 1 1 1~ 

Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr. May Jun. Jul. Aug. Qep. Oct. Nov. Dec. 



■ Hopi Reservation Average Annual Rainfall Statistics 

Rain in Ceremony 

Anything that Hopis do, it's for the rain; any kind of dances, even 
your social dances, they still have to pray for the rain or a good 
summer or good days ahead...lt's all connected. The ceremonies 
are for all the people...throughout the world; not just for 
themselves; but throughout the world, for everybody... [to] live in 
harmony...that's what it's all about. 



(C. Lomahaftewa, Hopi) 



Many ceremonies involve the Kachinas. These are the spirit essences of all things in 
the natural world that come to the Hopi in the form of rain-bringing clouds. After 
death, a Hopi person continues a spiritual existence as a life-sustaining Kachina. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

11 



Expressions of Rain 

Expressions of rain are found everywhere on things made by Hopi people. A wide 
variety of clouds: rain clouds, snow clouds, and blowing clouds are depicted, as are 
the rain-related phenomena of lightning and animals associated with rain and water. 
The representations are both realistic and abstract and are placed on things that are 
used in ceremony and daily life, and on items made for sale. 

Often, when groups of clouds are painted, they are different colors. For Hopi elder 
Clifford Lomahaftewa, the different colors on clouds express the thought that Hopi 
ceremony is for all people, regardless of color. 

The Hopi Today 

The ancestors of the Hopi people have been living in northeastern Arizona for 
hundreds of years. Visitors can still see the ruins of ancient stone villages. They look 
very much like Hopi villages today. 




Legends tell of when the Hopi first came to their land, at a place called Sipapu (SEE- 
pah-puh). From there, small groups of people went to the north, south, east and west. 
They were searching exactly the right place to make their home. After a very long 
time, and after trying life in different places, the people began to return. The first 
village they built is called Shungopavi (shung-O-pah-vih). It means "Place by the 
spring where the tall reeds grow." 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

12 



The small group of people who started this first village was the Bear Clan. Little by 
little, other groups returned from different directions. They asked the Bear Clan if they 
could make their home there, too. Each group that arrived was a different Hopi clan. 

Since the Bear Clan people were the first, they became the leaders of the village. Each 
new clan that came took on a special job in the community. Some clans would 
perform an important ceremony for the benefit of everyone. Other clans were warriors. 
Still others guarded the fields. In this way, Shungopavi grew. 

In later years, more Hopi villages were started. Today, there are twelve villages. Many 
others were built, but are now deserted. The clans that became the Hopi people still are 
very important in Hopi life. Every clan has a part to play in ceremonies or other 
community activities. 

When Hopi children are bom, they become members of the same clan as their mother. 
All their relatives on their mother's side of the family are part of that clan. [Although a 
child's maternal uncle is the same clan as the child, his children are not in his clan; 
they are members of his wife's clan.] 

The Hopi have a ceremony called "Naming a Baby." For hundreds of years this 
ceremony has been practiced by the people. When a Hopi child is bom, two perfect 
ears of com are placed beside the baby for the next 1 9 days. These ears are called 
"Mother Com." On the 20th day, the infant's grandmother gives the baby a name and 
places a pinch of commeal in the infant's mouth. She tells the baby: "I wish you a long 
life and happiness." A feast is given in honor of this special day. The women in the 
family, with the help of clan relatives, cook traditional Hopi food, such as piiki bread, 
commeal pudding, and hominy stew (nuquavi). All the people in the village are 
invited to this feast, that is how a Hopi child receives a name and is welcomed as the 
newest member of the village. 

A child's clan relatives take care to see that the child grows up strong, healthy and 
well-behaved. They also teach the child to be a good member of the clan. The child 
must learn to carry on the ceremony or other task that clan owes the whole village. 

Through the mother and her clan, Hopi children gain rights to a place to live and fields 
to tend. Through the mother and her clan, Hopi children gain a place in the 
community. 



EKLC 



13 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



The Hopi Today 2 

Growing corn is a very important part of Hopi life. 

The Hopi village is a very busy place. From sun-up to sun-down, everyone has a job. 
Farming is an important activity and com is the most important crop. Men and boys in 
particular spend a great deal of time in the fields. Once the land is cleared and ready 
for planting, they use a digging stick (a sturdy wedge-shaped stick) to make the deep 
hole for planting. Several kernels of com are put in and then covered, first with moist 
soil and then with dry soil to trap the moisture in the soil. Hopi com is uniquely 
adapted to the environment, sending out a tap root to reach water deep in the soil. 
Also, Hopi com is not tall, but it is fmitful and yields a large harvest. 

Hopi com is not planted in close, continuous rows, but is spaced out over the field. 

The field is plotted out by the men and boys. One way of plotting a field is to have the 
older men stand evenly spaced at opposite ends of the field. A boy runs back and forth 
between the elders, creating the pattern for planting. The com is planted in every third 
or fourth step the boy has taken. Elders call to the runner, telling him to run a straight 
line between them. After the com has sprouted, the pattern the boy has mn becomes 
clear. 

Even after the planting, there is always work to do in the fields, such as cleaning away 
weeds, shooing birds, and checking for bugs and worms. Men and boys spend time on 
these tasks. Sometimes, the older men will even refer to the growing crops as their 
"children." 

The Hopi use all varieties of com: yellow, white, red, and blue. Multicolored com is 
also eaten or used for decoration. Once the com is harvested (a task that involves the 
whole family), it is dried and stacked up in the storage room, ready for use. It is the 
job of women and girls to grind the com into flour for use. Today, ladies use 
mechanical and electric grinders for everyday meals. But for special times, they still 
grind the com with the stone metate and mano (hand stone). 

Blue com is one of the most important varieties for the Hopi. It is made into a paper- 
thin bread called piiki. Today, you can find blue com chips, popcorn, and blue com 
flour in the grocery stores, since blue com products are now becoming popular with 
other people too. 

In earlier times, men and boys hunted for meat. They used a bow and arrow to hunt 
deer. Rabbits were also hunted. The men beat the bushes to flush the rabbits into the 
open and then used a special stick, called a rabbit stick, to kill the game. Although the 
rabbit stick looks like a boomerang, it does not return to the thrower. The stick was 
thrown at the rabbit, catching it in the head or neck, and stunning the animal. The 
hunter then killed the animal by snapping its neck. Today, cattle and sheep are kept by 
some men. These animals are used for food on special occasions, but generally meat is 
bought in the store. 



14 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



The Hopi Today 3 



Hopi women make baskets and pottery for use at home as well as for sale. 

Hopi girls grow up watching their mothers and grandmothers weave baskets, make 
pots, prepare foods, and organize their families. As the children grow older and show 
interest, they are taught the traditional tasks of basket-making or pottery. 

Hopi women make sifter baskets of yucca to sift, sort, and wash grain. They make 
wicker trays to hold stacks of piiki. The coiled yucca plaques are made for special 
occasions or ceremonies. The bride-to-be and the other women in her family make 
special plaques from either yucca or wicker for the bridegroom and his family that are 
given as a part of the ceremony. The women of Second Mesa specialize in coil plaques 
and those of Third Mesa make wicker plaques. Many baskets are also made for sale to 
other people. Both coil and wicker baskets have beautiful colored designs: some 
women still use the old-fashioned natural dyes, while other weavers use modem 
commercial dyes to color the yucca and wicker. 

Pottery was originally made only for home use. Pots were used for storage, cooking, 
and serving. As trade goods became available, metal pots, pans, and storage bins 
began to replace utilitarian pottery. Around the turn of the century, a Hopi woman 
named Nampeyo revived the prehistoric Sikyatki pottery found in the area. This style 
of pottery became so popular that it is now recognized as Hopi pottery. Many of 
Nampeyo's grandchildren and great-grandchildren are potters today using designs 
recreated by her. Making pottery for sale is the specialty of the people of First Mesa. 

Hopi girls learn to make pottery and baskets when they are young. Women do not 
spend a great deal of time making these items because they are busy taking care of 
their families. Pots or baskets are only made for ceremonies or special occasions. 
Today, however, because a good artist can earn a living making baskets or pots, 
younger women are spending time making material for sale. 

Traditionally, Hopi men helped the women by digging the clay and painting the 
designs. Today, there are Hopi men who are potters and earn their living making 
pieces for sale. 



ERIC 



15 



BEST COPY AVAIURi E 



The Hopi Today 4 

Kachina dolls are gifts given to Hopi girls by the Kachinas to teach them about 
Hopi beliefs. 

The Hopi people recognize and respect hundreds of spiritual beings whom they call 
Kachinas. There is no literal translation of the word, but "friend" is often used. These 
spiritual helpers live on the San Francisco Peaks, but visit the Hopi people between the 
times of the winter solstice and the summer solstice. When they are visiting the Hopi 
villages, the Kachinas bring Kachina dolls for little girls and bows and arrows or 
moccasins for little boys. 

The Kachinas themselves are the spiritual essence of everything in the world and are 
the fiiends of the Hopi people. Their presence in the villages brings good things to all 
people, and they carry the Hopis request for rain, bountiful harvests, and good things 
in life to the Creator. 

Some Kachina dolls are flat pieces with only the head shown in detail. These are 
called putsqatihu or Cradle Kachina dolls and are given to baby girls. As the children 
grow older, the dolls they receive are more fully carved, with arms and legs. 

The figure is made from the dried root of the cottonwood tree and today, many hours 
are spent carving each detail on the figure. Often, the doll is painted and decorated 
with cloth, feathers, and tiny pieces of jewelry. 

Katsina Dolls and Art Projects 

Teachers and Parents 

Here are some art projects that you can do with young people: 

Colors are used by the Hopi people to indicate direction. Being able to understand the 
color references is important in identifying the Katsinas. For the Hopi, yellow is for 
the north; red is for the south; white is for the east; blue-green or tiurquoise is for the 
west; black is for up; and all colors are for down. Children can work with these colors 
to create drawings. 

As a comparative exercise, discuss colors and their meanings in American society. 
Most children will also be able to name colors and associate meaning with them from 
their own experience; red for "stop;" green for "go;" red and green for Christmas; 
orange and black for Halloween. Children can create drawings. If there are children 
from other countries in your class, ask them to share some colors from their culture. 



BEST COPY AVAILAP' >■ 



16 




The Katsinas visit the Hopi villages on a seasonal round. Children can draw the 
villages at different times of the year. Issues of Arizona Highways magazine are a 
good source of photographs of Hopi villages. 

When examining dolls, the children can learn to recognize many designs: rain clouds, 
snow clouds, falling rain, com, flowers, sun shining through the rain, a sign of 
friendship and rainbows. Some of these designs appear below. Create scenes using 
these designs. 




Using the above designs, make a stamp (using mbber or a potato). Print cards, 
napkins, placemats, etc., using the stamp. Use the stamp to decorate book covers or 
make book plates. 

The Hopi people carefully observe the changing seasons. The Katsinas visit the people 
starting around the time of the winter solstice and return home to the San Francisco 
Peaks at the time of the summer solstice. Look at other calendars from around the 
world, and then make one of your own. Look at designs used by other people to 
indicate the changing seasons and incorporate these into a universal calendar. 

Unfortunately, many popular art activities suggested to teachers fail to recognize 
the following: 

• The Hopi Katsina religion is a system of beliefs, guaranteed by the U.S. 
Constitution, equal to the Jewish faith, Lutheran, Mormon, Roman Catholic 
faiths, etc.. 

• Katsina spirits are a part of other Native American religions of the Southwest 
and appropriate references to Katsinas are even more restricted than at Hopi. 

• The word and concept of "mask" is never used in reference to the Katsinas. 

The Hopi say "friend." Using the term "mask" confuses the issue, since it 
implies play-acting with a sincere religious belief. 

• There is a difference between Katsinas (supernatural beings) and Katsina dolls 
(the figures carved from the cottonwood root). Be specific in references to 
Katsina dolls and avoid calling them "Katsinas." 

• Only an initiated Hopi adult has the appropriate knowledge and right to make 
an image of a Katsina or Katsina doll. 



17 



best copy available 



• Young, uninitiated Hopi children are not allowed to draw or otherwise 
represent a Katsina, even a color-by-number figure. 

• Katsina dolls should only be carved by certain people. A non-Hopi person 
should not be encomaged to carve, draw, or make any image of a Katsina. 

• Some suggested art projects in teacher manuals may include projects which 
have been created without asking Hopi people if they are appropriate. You can 
ask the Hopi Cultural Preservation office [520-734-2244] for advice on yom 
projects. 




Cloud with rain and lightning 



IIIIO 



Sun shining through rain Friendship 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




A 

N 




G 



Writing a Letter 



Activity: Students will write a letter containing a re-telling of an event. 

Focus Activity: Read "Field Mouse Goes to War." Discuss with the student how com 
is central to the story. Discuss how com is an important food for both the Dine' 
(Navajo) and Hopi. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will summarize information and write a letter. 

Materials: 

"Field Mouse Goes to War", vocabulary list, paper, pencils 

Procedure: 

1. Read the story "Field Mouse Goes to War" on one day and discuss the story 
with the class. Talk about the important role Field Mouse played in the story and 
what he did. 

2. On another day, ask the students to review the story and then write a letter to a 
friend telling him or her about Field Mouse. 

4. Write a rough draft. 

5. Read it to a partner. 

6. Edit or re-write parts that were unclear. 

7. Write a final copy on good paper. 

Assessment: 

• Were children able to summarize the story that they heard? 

• Did they remember the main events, the order, and could they re-tell the story? 

Extension: 

• Write a letter to Field Mouse. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



19 





Vocabulary: "Turkey's Gift to the 
People" 



Harmony - The People of the world lived and worked together in perfect harmony . 
Horizon - Suddenly Crow saw something on the horizon . 

Recede - We must wait in the hills for the flood water to recede . 

Chamber - The inside chamber of the giant reeds are hollow. 

Gnaw - Beaver began to gnaw an opening in the reed. 

Anxiously - The people looked anxiously toward the water. 

Swooped - Eagle swooped down in search of his friends. 

Sealed - Wasp quickly sealed the opening so water couldn't get inside. 

Blurted - The People blurted out, "What happened?" 

Survive - The people would need seeds to survive after the flood waters receded. 

Vocabulary: "Ma'ii and Cousin Horn 
Toad" 

Bounty - My bounty I'll share... 

Appetizer - "My, that was a good appetizer. " he said. 

Reluctance - With great reluctance. Ma'ii began to pull weeds. 

Scorched - The flames licked his stomach and scorched his hair and skin. 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



20 



Thank You! Toad and Turkey 

Activity: Writing a "thank you" note or speech. 

Focus Activity: Read "Toad Waters the Com" and "Turkey's Gift to the People." 
Review the art prints and identify seeds, com plants, and com. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will write a "thank you" letter or compose and give a speech. 
Materials: "Toad Waters the Com.", "Turkey's Gift to the People" 

Procedure: 

1. Read "Toad Waters the Com.” Discuss how clever toad is and what an 
important thing he and his sons did. Discuss why this was so important: what 
would have happened to the com if there had been no rain? What would have 
happened to the people? 

2. At another time, read "Turkey's Gift to the People." Discuss Turkey's gift and 
how clever he was. What would have happened if Turkey hadn't collected the 
seeds? 

3. After reading both stories, have children decide whether they want to thank 
Toad or Turkey. 

4. Have the children work on a rough draft of either a "thank you" letter or speech. 

5. If they are working on a letter, let them give it to a friend to read. If they are 
working on a speech, let them give the speech to a friend. 

6. Re-write or re-work the letter or speech. 

7. Speeches are presented. Letters are written in final form on good paper. 
Assessment: 

• Did students understand the importance of Turkey's and toad's actions? 

• Could students summarize the contributions and their own feelings? 

Extension: 

• Write a newspaper article summarizing the contributions of both Toad and 
Turkey. 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 



21 



Toad Waters the Corn 



"Raven," Yuku shouted, "what are you trying to steal from us today?" Although he is 
blind, Yuku's hearing is excellent. He could not see what Raven was doing, but he 
knew that it was Raven he heard. 

Raven did not answer, but filled his beak with com seeds. He flew quickly out of 
Yuku's house and straight to his fiiends, the Yoeme. 

He said, "Take a strong stick and poke a hole in the arroyo above the river. The 
women can follow behind you and put 3 or 4 com seeds in each hole and then push 
dirt over them with their feet. Be sure there is enough sunlight and enough water, and 
the com will bring you food." 

The Yoeme brought water to the com seeds and cleared away the weeds that blocked 
the sunlight. Soon plants began to grow. All would have been well, but Yuku was 
being stingy with rain. Soon there was no water for the com plants. 

Raven flew to Yuku and said, "Don't be stingy. The plants need rain. The people need 
food." 

Yuku answered, "Don't worry. Go back to your plants, and I will follow you." 

Raven hurried off toward the com plants calling, "Kraak, kraak, kraak," so that Yuku 
could follow him. Yuku came with an angry wind and strong lightning bolts. He beat 
up Raven, and then returned to his home without giving the com rain. 

When Raven returned and told the Yoeme people what had happened, they called 
Roadrunner and said, "You are fast. Perhaps you can outrun Yuku with his wind and 
lightning." 

Roadrunner flew up to Yuku. He said, "Don't be stingy. The plants need rain. The 
people need food." 

Yuku replied, "Don't worry. Go back to your plants and I will follow you." 
Roadmnner hurried off towards the plants calling, "Coo,coo, coo, coo, coo, coo" so 
that Yuku could follow him to the com plants. 

Again Yuku followed with an angry wind and strong lightning bolts. He beat up 
Roadmnner, and then returned home without giving the people any rain. 

When Roadrunner returned and told the Yoeme people what had happened, the people 
called toad. They said, "Toad, you are smart. Perhaps you can outsmart Yuku and 
bring us rain to water the com." 



22 



best COPY available 




Toad called to his many sons. He said, "Follow me, and we will bring down the rain." 



Toad spread his sons in a row along the path from the com field all the way to Yuku's 
house. Only Toad was left to talk to Yuku. 

Toad said, "Don't be stingy. The plants need rain. The people need food." 

Yuku replied, "Go back to your people, and I will bring you rain." 

Toad pretended to go back to the Yoeme, but instead he hid in the mud by Yuku's 
door. When Yuku came out of the door. Toad's First Son began to sing, "kowak, 
kowak, kowak." 

Yuku with his wind and lightning raced on toward the sound, but as he neared. First 
Son stopped singing and Second Son began, "kowak, kowak, kowak." 

Yuku with his wind and lightning raced toward the sound Second Son was making. As 
soon as he neared. Second Son stopped and Third Son began singing, "kowak, kowak, 
kowak." 

Again, Yuku with his wind and lightning raced toward the sound Third Son made, but 
as he neared. Third Son stopped singing and Fourth Son began, "kowak, kowak, 
kowak." 

Soon, Yuku reached the com fields of the Yoeme. Confused, he returned home 
listening to the laughs of the little toads scattered along his path. Fortunately, Yuku 
left enough rain behind him to water the com until it was loaded with ears of sweet 
com. There was plenty of com to feed all the Yoeme all year. 



BEST COPY available 



23 



Writing Poetry 

Activity: Students write poetry using the poem "Without Dreams" by Ramson 
Lomatewama (Hopi) 

Focus Activity: Read the poem "Without Dreams" by Hopi poet Ramson 
Lomatewama. Discuss each of the three segments: talk about meaning and form. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will learn that poems are different than narrative writing. 

2. Students will write a poem. 

Materials: poem: "Without Dreams," paper, pencils 
Procedure: 

1 . Read the poem "Without Dreams" by Ramson Lomatewama (Hopi) and discuss 
it. 

2. Discuss the rules of poetry: 

a. Poems may not look like narratives. 

b. Poems make pictures with words. 

c. Poems share feelings 

3. Read "Without Dreams" again. 

4. Look closely at the first two units and encourage the children to use these as a 
model for writing: 

o Without Dreams 

■ we would not. . . .(action) 

■ to/for/with.... (noim) 

■ ....(result) 

5. Encourage each student to create several of these units. Then select each 
person's favorite to create a book for the class; a card for a parent or relative; etc.. 

Assessment: 

• Do students see the form of the poem? 

• Do they use their imagination and feelings to create additional imits? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



24 





"Frog, Sun, Flute Player, and Bird" by 
Milland Lomakema (Hopi). In both art 
prints, the children see ears of com. If 



you harvest the ears and take the 
kernels off the cobs in order to put 
them in a stew, how many kernels 
would there be? 



Activity: How many kernels? 



Focus Activity: Look again at the 



Finding a Range 




Outcomes: 

1 . Students will experience predicting and counting. 

2. Students will find a range of predictions. 

3. Students will determine whether their prediction was "less than" or "more then" 
the actual count. Second and Third graders can determine the exact difference 
between their prediction and the actual mrniber. 

Vocabulary: Kernel, range, estimate 

Materials: Measuring cups, com kernels, *copy of the predicting form "How Many 
Kernels?", pencils. 

Procedure: 

1 . Select one of the measuring cups and fill it with com. 

2. Ask students to predict the mrniber of kernels in the cup. 

3. Work with the class to line up all the estimates, from highest to lowest. Explain 
to students that this is establishing the range. 

4. Start to count the kernels. When you are about half-way through, give all the 
students the opportunity to make a second estimate. 



25 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





5. Establish the new range with the students. 

6. When you are approximately three-quarters of the way through the actual count, 
give students a last opportunity to revise their estimate. Establish the range for the 
last time. 

7. Finish counting. 

8. Compare the actual number with the estimates. Did the actual number fall 
within the range? Discuss with the students how they would discover the 
difference between their estimate and the actual number. 



Assessment: 

1. Do the students make more realistic estimates the next time they need to 
estimate? 

2. Do students determine a range in other activities? 

3. If appropriate to the grade level, do students determine the difference between 
the estimate and the actual number? 



Extension: 

1. Use other containers for estimating. 

2. If you started this activity with a quarter-cup measuring cup, do the students 
understand that one-half a cup is double in quantity and use that information to 
arrive at a realistic estimate? 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



26 




My Guess 1 




Guesses 


Highest 


Lowest 


My Guess 2 




Guesses 


Highest 


Lowest 


My Guess 3 




Guesses 


Highest 


Lowest 


Actual 

Number 




Difference 






27 



Hopi Corn 



Activity: Hopi Com on the Cob 
(adapted from "Pumpkin Math" Math 
Their Wav’) 

Focus Activity: Look closely at 
Lucinda Palevoyonma's (Hopi) Coil 
Plaque. She has shown each kernel 
on the cobs. Discuss that you can see 
just one side of the cobs. How many 
cobs are there? 




Outcomes: 

1. Students will gain experience with multiplication using manipulatives. 
Vocabulary: Multiples 

Materials: Art print of the Coil Plaque by Lucinda Palevoyonma (Hopi), paper, 
drawing materials, mask to cover all but one com cob. 

Procedure: 

1 . Put the mask over the printout so that only one ear of com shows. 

2. Have students discuss what information they need to determine how many 
kernels of com are seen on the Hopi com plaque. (They should decide that they 
need to know how many ears of com there are, how many kernels are on one ear 
and if there are about the same number of kernels on each ear. 

3. As a class, count the number of com kernels on the ear of com. 

4. Using the information they think they need, haye them determine the number of 
kernels of com there are on the plaque. 

5. When the students haye come to a conclusion, haye some students explain how 
they arriyed at their answer 

6. Remoye the mask and count the kernels. 



28 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Assessment: 



1 . Did students use a strategy that showed an understanding of multiplication? 

2. Could students explain their strategy? 

3. If student estimates were inaccurate, could they determine what they should do 
to be more accurate in similar circumstances? 



Extension: 

1 . Wall paper samples and wrapping paper offer opportunities for the same 
activities (petals on flowers, legs on animals, windows on buildings, etc.). 

2. Fruits or vegetables can be used in a similar way. Students can estimate the 
number of peas in five pods after determining the number in one pod; or the 
number of seeds in seven apples after determining the number of seeds in one 
apple. 



BEST COPY AVAILAR! F 



Corn Kernels on the Cob 



Activity: Com kernels on the cob 
(adapted from "Activity 4 - Estimating 
Pumpkin Seeds", Carol A. Rommel, 
Integrating Beginning Math and 
Literature . Incentive Publications, 

Inc., Nashville, TN 1991) 

Focus Activity: Look at Lucinda 
Palevoyonma's (Hopi) Coil Plaque. 
Notice how she has shown actual 
individual kernels on the cobs. 




Outcomes: 

1 . Students will estimate com kernels and compare the estimate with the actual 
number. 

Vocabulary: Com kernel, cob, ear of com, estimate, compare, actual 

Materials: An ear of com, saran wrap for protecting the kernels while counting, 
marker, graph or individual sheets for recording the estimates. 

Procedure: 

1 . Have students estimate the number of kernels on an actual ear of com. These 
estimates can be on a graph or on individual recording sheets. If students are 
inexperienced in estimating, it is helpfiil to set a range. 

2. Coimt the kernels placing a mark on each kernels as you coimt it. Please wrap 
the cob in saran wrap before you use a marker to coimt each kernel. 

3. At some point stop and give all students an opportunity to make a new estimate. 
Have students give reasons for making their change. 

4. Continue until you find the exact number of kernels. 

5. Help students find the difference between their estimate and the actual number 
of kernels. 



BEST COPY AVAILABL E 






Assessment: 

1 . Were students able to use information gained by counting the first part to make 
a more accurate second estimate? 

2. Can students explain a strategy for changing their estimates? 



Extension: 

1 . This activity can be used with any plant containing seeds - peas, sunflowers, 
watermelons, or by placing seeds in a container. 



31 



best COPY AVAILABLE 



Corn on the Mat 



Activity: Com on the Mat: One Way 
to Discover How to Write Number 
Sentences (adapted from "Handfuls", 

Ron Richart, Making Numbers Make 
Sense . Addison-Wesley, Menlo Park, 

California, p. 28-29.) 

Focus Activity: Look at Lucinda 
Palevoyonma's (Hopi) Coil Plaque. 

How many cobs are there? How many 
kernels? What happens when someone 
starts eating the com? 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will be exposed to several strategies for finding differences. 

2. Students will experience connecting manipulatives to number sentences 
(equations). 

Vocabulary: Kernels, number sentence (equation) 

Materials: Com kernels. Copies of the "Com Coimting Mat" printout 
Procedure: 

1. Have students take a handful of com kernels and place them on the coimting 
mat, one in each square. 

2. Tell the students; "Raise your hand if you have more than 10 kernels of com." 

3. Ask; "How many more than 10 kernels do you have?" 

4. Ask the class: "If this person has x number of kernels more than 10, how many 
kernels does this person have?" 

5. Have the student demonstrate on the board or an overhead projector counting 
mat. The student will need to explain the strategy used. 

6. Have other students explain different possible strategies to find the same 
solution. 




32 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 





7. Have the first student write the appropriate number sentence on the board or on 
the overhead projector below the mat. 

8. Repeat the procedure asking: "Who has fewer than 10 kernels of com?" 



Assessment: 

1 . Does informal observation show improved ability to find the difference? 

2. Can the students write the number sentence imaided? 

Extension: 

1. Find the difference for numbers other than 10. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 





34 



Corn Under Your Hand 



Activity: Com Under Your Hand: 

Subtraction (Adapted from: National 
Council of Teachers of Mathematics, 

Curriculum and Evaluation Standards 
for School Mathematics . NCTM, Inc., 

1989.) 

Focus Activity: Look at Lucinda 
Palevoyonma's (Hopi) Coil Plaque. 

Talk about how to cook com-on-the- 
cob. Talk about how eating com will 
"take away" or "subtract" from the 
total number of kernels on the cob. 

Outcomes: 

1 . Students will experience problem solving using subtraction. 

Vocabulary: Subtraction 

Materials: 13 kernels of com per child 
Procedure: 

' 1 . Give students 1 3 kernels of com each. 

2. Ask students to put all 13 kernels under one hand. 

3. Tell students to remove 6 kernels with out looking. 

4. Ask how many kernels are still under their hand. 

5. Have students share strategies. They might mention using doubles, groups of 
ten, or counting on. If one of these strategies is not mentioned, the teacher should 
demonstrate it. 

6. Have students place all of the kernels under their hand again. Let one of your 
students suggest a quantity of kernels to remove without looking. 

7. Continue. 




BEST COPY available 



35 




Assessment: 



1 . Can students explain more than one strategy for determining the number of 
kernels remaining? 

2. Do students understand more than one strategy for determining the remaining 
kernels? 



Extension: 

1 . This activity can be used with other quantities and other counters. 

2. Students can work in pairs or small groups comparing responses and suggesting 
other quantities. 

3. Students can write the appropriate number sentences (equations). 



3e 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




p 

R 

I 

N 

T 

S 



Artist: Marianita Roybal 

Culture: Pueblo of San Ildefonso, New Mexico 

Size: Height 9 7/16"; Diameter 5 1 1/16" 

Media:Clay 
Date: c. 1900 

Catalogue Number:NA-SW-SI-A3-lA; NA-SW-SI-A3-1B 
Description: 

Clouds-The soft pile of arches on the side of the jar represents clouds. 

Rain-The dark arches below the cloud represent the rain in the distance. 

Arches around the rim-This is a band of clouds. 

Sprouting seeds-On the lid the artist painted seeds with tap roots growing from them. 

Turkey tail feather-On the bottom band, the diamond that is stretched out is a turkey 
tail feather. 





37 



best COPY AVAILABLE 





Seed-The oval with the dark spot in the center represents a seed. 

Rain in the distance-Below the seed you see symbols that represent rain in the 
distance. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - Curved, round, arc 

Shape - Organic, regular curving, symmetrical 

Color - Earth tones 

Space - There are three areas of design on this jar, the neck, the body and the bottom. 
Each area receives a different treatment. Possible vocabulary: outline, filled, enclosed. 

Texture -Real, smooth, shiny 

Art Principles: 

Concept: Repetition 

Ask: "What shape do you see repeated?" When focusing on the curved shapes, draw 
the students' attention to curves that are sideways and upside down as well. 

Cultural Context: 

Before 1880, it was difficult to travel to other states. People had to walk, ride horses, 
or ride in wagons pulled by animals when they went anywhere. This meant people 
seldom traveled far fi’om their homes. The completion of the railroad in 1880 changed 
that. People could ride the train to far distant places faster and more comfortably. 

Beginning in the 1 800s, the Fred Harvey Company made it even more comfortable for 
people fi’om the east to travel west on the Santa Fe railroad. This company built hotels 
called "Harvey Houses" along the train routes. People could spend the day riding the 
train, seeing the plants, animals and landscape that were all very different fi’om their 
homes in the East. At night they could have a warm meal and a bed to sleep in at a 
Harvey House. When the train stopped, they were able to buy things to take home. 
Often Native American artists sold their work directly to tourists. They would meet 
the train when it stopped and sell their artwork to the passengers. At other times, the 
artists sold their artwork to storekeepers who then sold it to tourists. 

In the late 1800s, most potters did not sign their pieces. In a small village, everyone 
the style of each village potter, so there was no need for the potter to put her name on 
it. This water jar was not signed. Jonathon Batkin, an anthropologist and museum 
director, has studied Pueblo pottery. He recognized the style of this artist of this artist 
and told the curators at the Heard Museum where it was displayed, that it was 



38 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



probably made by Marianita Roybal. 

Today, airports around the world have shops like those at the Harvey Houses that sell 
artwork from local artists. Today's artists usually sign their work. 



BEST COPY AVAII ” 



39 



Coil Plaque 




Artist: Lucinda Palevoyonma 

Culture: Hopi 

Size: Diameter 13 7/8" 

Media: Hilaria grass, yucca, dyes 
Date: 1970s 

Catalog Number: NA-SW-HO-B-81 
Description: 

White com - White com is a major crop at Hopi 

Red com - At Hopi, red com is parched. It was used for dye in earlier times. 

Yellow com - Yellow com can be a substitute for white com in both cooking and 
ceremonies. 

Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - Radiating, short, continuous 

BEST COPY AVAILAP,’ ^ 



4Q 




Shape - Ovate, round 

Color - Neutral, natural, warm, dyed 

Space - Enclosed 

Texture - Woven, smooth, ridged, bumpy 
Art Principles: 

Concept - Symmetry 

Ask: What ways can you hold this so that it is symmetrical? What ways can you hold 
this so that it isn't symmetrical? 

Cultural Context: 

Com means life to the Hopi. It is so important that, at an infant's naming ceremony, a 
taste of commeal is placed in the infant's mouth. Then the child is told, "This com is 
your life's strength. Eat this and grow strong and have a long and happy life." 

Com is Hopi's most important food crop. Hopi com is an ancient strain that can be 
planted as deep as 18 inches and still grow to the surface. This is important because 
Hopi farmers have very little water. They plant the com seed deep in the ground where 
it is closer to the water under the ground. The Hopi farmer plants his com in the flood 
plain of the river and in washes where the water underground is closer to the surface. 
He plants in many fields so that, if one field is washed away or hasn't enough water, 
another still has a chance to grow. 

Question for discussion: 

Why do you think the weaver didn't make all the com yellow? 



BEST COPY AVAILABIF 



41 



f 



r 



Ceremonial Hoes 




Artist: Unknown 
Culture: Hopi 

Size: Height 5 7/16"; Width 7 7/16" 

Media: Paint, wood, pine needles, cloth 
Date: 1960s 

Catalog Number: NA-SW-HO-I-87A «& B 
Description: 

Half circles - These three circles form a cloud. 

Red - Red is the color Hopis use to represent respect. 

Yellow - Yellow is the color Hopis use to represent knowledge. 
Blue - Blue is the color Hopis use to represent water. 



BESTCOPYAVAILABLE 





Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - Curved, straight 

Shape - Man-made, even, precise, symmetrical, rounded, curving 
Color - Primary 

Texture - Scratchy, smooth, hard 

Art Principles: 

Concept -balance 
Cultural Context: 

These ceremonial hoes were made in the 1960s. They are part of a Hopi tradition that 
has been practiced for many generations. 

During the spring and sxunmer months, crops at Hopi are very dependent on rain for 
water. At these times, the Hopis hold ceremonies that include many different 
Kachinas. One Kachina is Kuwan Heheya. In the past, Kuwan Heheya carried a 
ceremonial hoe. More recently, this Kachina carries a knife-shaped tool. This is an 
example of how change is always present in living cultures. 

Questions for discussion: 

What would be different about these hoes if they were for use in the fields instead of 
ceremonies? 

How can you tell that these hoes aren't new? 



43 



BEST COPY AVAILABI F 



"Frog. Sun. Flute Player and Bird” 




Artist: Milland Lomakema 
CultureiHopi 

Size: Height 20 13/16", Width 25 1/4" 

Media: Acrylic on illustration board 
Date: 1968 

Catalogue Number: IAC-41 1 
Description: 

Face - The face is a Hopi sun symbol. It is traditionally divided into three parts. All 
human, animal, and plant life is supported by the powers of the sun. 

Birds - Bird feathers carry prayers of the Hopi into the sky. 

Frog - Frogs are symbols of water and growth. 

Com - Com is a very important source of food for the Hopi. It is planted in flood 
plains and is very dependent upon the right amount of rain at the right time. 



BEST COPY AVAIU 




Cloud - Rain and snow of spring and winter are the source of life. 



Rainbow - The rainbow represents the beginning of life. 

Flute Player - The flute player represents the beginning of lifting the summer months. 
Figiu'e with a cane - The crooked cane represents the steps to old age. 

Vocabulary for the discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - Curved, straight, continuing, sharp, graceful, precise, outline, highlight 
Shape -Organic, natural, rounded, circular, curved, filled, simple 
Color - Warm, cool, neutral 

Space - Look at how Mr. Lomakema used space by looking from side-to-side and 
from top-to-bottom. 

Look at the illusion of depth created by Mr. Lomakema in this painting. Discuss the 
actual size of the objects, the placement of the objects on the page, and what has been 
overlapped. Explain that these are tricks the artist uses to make a drawing or painting 
on a fiat piece of paper appear to have depth. 

Texture - Smooth, rough, thick, thin, surface 

Art Principle: 

Concept - Movement 

Ask: When you look at this painting, do your eyes move smoothly from object to 
object or do they jump? 

Concept - Unity 

Ask: Mr. Lomakema has included many things in this painting. Does it feel like one 
painting or a lot of individual paintings? Do you see anything he did to make the 
painting feel like one painting? (If student don't mention the rainbow point out that it 
holds the painting together.) 

Cultural Context: 

Milland Lomakema was bom in Shungopavi at Hopi in 1941 . He signs his artwork 
DAWAKEMA which means House of the Sun. 

It was early in the 1960s when Milland Lomakema began to be noticed as an artist. He 
was working for a detective agency in Phoenix, Arizona and showing his work 
throughout the country. 



45 



BESTCOPY AVAILABLE 




In 1968, Lomakema joined the Hopi Police Force. He continued to paint. That same 
year, he painted "Frog, Sun, Flute Player, and Bird." At around this time he also 
designed decals for the Hopi Police Force and the City of Winslow (Arizona). 



In 1973, a group of artists formed, calling themselves Artists Hopid. they were artists 
with common goals and common concerns who felt they should use their talents to 
share their culture. Together they felt they were more effective in teaching about Hopi 
values and history. 

Questions for discussion: 

Find the Hopi Sun Symbol. How do you think the sun feels about what it sees? Why? 

There are many images in this painting that are symbols used by Hopis for many 
generations. Which images do you think are more realistic? 

What time of day is it in this painting? Why do you think that? What time of year is it? 
How do you know? 



BESTCORY AVAILABLE 



Basket 




Artist: Unknown 



Culture: Tohono O'odham 



Size: Height 12 3/8"; Width 14 3/8" 

Media: Natural fibers 
Date: 1960s 

Catalogue Number: NA-SW-PG-B-45 
Description: 

Saguaro - In late June, the fhiit at the top of the giant saguaro ripens. 

Woman picking saguaro fhiit - The Tohono O'odham call harvesting the saguaro fhiit 
"pulling down the clouds." 

Saguaro fruit-picking stick - This is a long saguaro rib with a cross piece tied to it. 



4 7 BEST COPY AVAILAB) P 






Vocabulary for discussion of Art Elements: 

Line - Horizontal, vertical, diagonal 
Shape - Natural, symmetrical, thin, silhouette 
Color - Neutral 

Space - Positive, negative, cylinder 
Texture - Woven 
Art Principle: 

Concept - Balance 

Cultural Context: 

The time of the summer solstice (June 21) is the beginning of the new year for the 
Tohono O'odham (formerly called "Papago", the people are now known by the name 
they call themselves, literally "Desert People"). It is the time to pick saguaro fruit, and 
the time that summer rains begin. It is a time of celebration. 

Families go out into the desert to harvest the saguaro fruit. They are careful to treat 
giant saguaros with respect. Marquita Gila, a Tohono O'odham woman said, "The 
saguaro - They are Indians too. You don't EVER throw ANYTHING at them. You 
don't ever stick anything sharp in their skin either, or they will just dry up and die. 

You don't do anything to hurt them. They are Indians." (from "The Desert Smells Like 
Rain" by Gary Paul Nabham, North Point Press, San Francisco, 1987.) 

Saguaro fruit is harvested using a long saguaro rib with a small cross piece tied to the 
end. The fruit is used to make cakes, wine and jelly. 

After the harvest, the Tohono O'odham come together to sing rain songs and give 
speeches. According to Michael Chiago (Tohono O'odham artist), the custom is to 
cover the wine with song, and everyone who accepts a drink of wine recites a poem 
relating to rain. 

Questions for discussion: 

Discuss when most people in the United States celebrate a harvest feast 
(Thanksgiving). Talk about the difference between food production (farming) and 
food gathering. 



BEST COPY Av,.... 





Seed Sprouting Sequence 



Activity: Seed germination 

Focus Activity: Look closely at the Jar 
with Lid, by Marianita Roybal (San 
Ildefonso). Identify the sprouting seeds. 
Note the first, strong, primary tap root. 

Outcomes: 

1) Students will observe the effect of 
moisture on seeds. 

2) Students will record the sequence 
of seed germination. 




Vocabulary: germinate, sprout, tap root, root hair, moisture 

Materials: "The Tiny Seed" by Eric Carle, 2 zip lock bags, 2 com seeds, 2 bean seeds, 
one dry paper towel, one wet paper towel. NOTE: If each child is doing his or her 
own experiment, you need each of the above for every child. 



Procedure: 



1) Read "The Tiny Seed" by Eric Carle 

. 2) Show students several different kinds of seeds. Ask them what happens when a 
seed is placed under groimd. Encourage as many different answers as possible. 
Truly creative answers may be used for creative writing later. 

3) Tell students that we usually can't see what is happening because dirt hides the 
seed, but we're going to do an experiment to see if we can watch a seed sprout. 

4) Place a wet paper towel flat in one plastic bag and a dry one in another. Place 
one com and one bean seed on each paper towel and seal the bags. 

5) Record what you see. This may be a class project or individual Science logs. 
(Remember this is a learning process, not a test. Model for your students how 
to decide what to write.) 

6) Observe bags daily and record as needed. 

Assessment: 

• Are students aware of the need for moisture? 

• Can students explain the sequence of events in order? 

Extension: 

• The technique can be used to germinate most seeds. A race of the seeds can be 
conducted: Which seed type will grow a 1 inch tap root first? 

• Will other liquids cause the same results? Try soaking the paper towel in oil, 
shampoo, Kool-Aid, or other liquids that the students suggest. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Corn, the Rain, and the Sun 



Activity: To show the relations between 
plant life, the rain and the sun 

Focus Activity: Look at the Jar and Lid, 
by Marianita Roybal (San Ildefonso). 
Identify the sprouting seeds. Look also 
at "Frog, Sun, Flute Player, and Birds" 
by Milland Lomakema (Hopi). Look at 
the maturing plants. Discuss the stages 
of growth that the plants have gone 
through. What does the plant need to 
grow? What does a child need to grow? 
Discuss how these are similar 
requirements. Note: This is also a time 
to view or recall the information in the 
video"Hopi: Com is Life" which points 
out the parallel between man and plant 
life. 

Read the story Yoeme (Yaqui) story 
"Toad Waters the Com" to the students. 
Use the story to lead students into a 
discussion on why rain is important to 
Native American farmers. 



Outcomes: 




"Frog, Sun, Flute Player, and Birds" 



of the importance of the rain cycle and the 



1) Students will gain an awareness 
com growth. 

2) Students will plant and observe com seeds, making records of the growth rate. 
Vocabulary: Yuku, Yoeme, roadrunner, stingy, arroyo, lightning bolts. 



Materials: "Toad Waters the Com", pitcher of water, recycled plastic cups, soil, com 
seeds, graph paper, mlers and pencils 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




Procedure: 



1) Put student's name on cup. 

2) Partially fill each cup with soil. 

3) Make a small hole in the soil. 

4) Plant a seed in each cup. 

5) Cover the seeds with soil and water— but don't drown them! It's a good idea to 
put drain holes in the bottom of the cups. 

6) After the students have planted their seeds as demonstrated, place the cups near 
a window with adequate sun light. 

7) Check the seedling every day. Keep the soil moist but not waterlogged. 



Follow-up: 

Students water the com, record the number of days it takes for the seed to sprout, and 
observe the growth of the com. The growth of the com is recorded on a graph daily. 
Note: Remember that not every seed may sprout. 

Assessment: 

After a week or two, the students share the observations with the class and discuss 
what the com needed to grow (rain, sun, and soil). The students used what they have 
observed and shared to write a short story about their planting of com. Their stories 
will show their understanding of the relationship between the rain, sun, and plants. 



BESTCOPYAVAIl 



51 



Celery Experiment 



Activity: Experimenting with celery. 

Focus Activity: Look at the "Frog, Sun, 
Flute Player, and Bird", by Milland 
Lomakema (Hopi) and the Tohono 
O'odham basket. Discuss with the 
students how plants need to "drink"' 
water. Point out that even huge saguaro 
cacti, like the one on the basket, get 
water through their roots. Roots are 
clearly shown in Lomakema's painting. 
The roots take in the water, and then it is 
distributed to all parts of the plant. 




Outcomes: 

1) Students will understand that a 
celery stalk is a stem. 

2) Students will understand that the 
tubes carry water from the root. 

Vocabulary: stem, stalk, tubes, 
nutrients, roots, leaves, veins 

Materials: Several leafy celery stalks, 
red food coloring, blue food coloring, 
jars, water, knife 




Tohono O'odham basket 



Procedure: 

The teacher will demonstrate the following, then the students will work in cooperative 
groups performing this experiment: 

1) Cut at a slant across a leafy stalk of celery near the bottom. Make a lengthwise 
cut from the bottom to within an inch of where the leaves branch out. 

2) Put a small amount of water and 1 teaspoon of blue food coloring in one glass. 

3) Put a small amount of water and 1 teaspoon of red food coloring in the second 
glass. 






BESTCOPV ' 



4) Put each section of the celery stalk into a glass. 

5) Place the glasses and the celery in a sunny spot in the classroom. 

6) Look at the stalks after a few hours. Do the stalks look different? 

7) Leave the stalk in the glasses overnight. In the morning, take the stalks out of 
the glasses and cut across each section. What colors are visible in the sections? 

8) Point out to the students that the celery stalk is actually a stem. The strings are 
the tubes that carry the nutrient and the water the plant needs from the roots to the 
leaves. 

9) Point out the veins in the leaves. The veins in the leaves connect with the tubes 
in the stems. 

Assessment: 

• Do students understand that a celery stalk is a stem? 

• Do students imderstand that the tubes carry nutrients and water from the roots 
to the leaves? 

Extension: 

• Students can do independent experiments using the same procedure but with 
stems of different plants. 



53 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 

National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 




1 DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 


SG — I 


Title: 




After the Rain: Using the Rain 




Author(s) 




Arlene Old Elk and Jackie Stoklas 
Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 




2001 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

order to disse.inate as v.c^.^^^^^^^^^^^ 

eteSte rSS ariold throughyERIc'5>cument Reproduction LrvL (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and. rf reproduction 
release is grant^, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 



If permission fe granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign 




Dooumerti w« b« pcoo®8ted as Iwficated pfwWod repcoAJCtion qualily ponnto^ 

If permission to raproduoa Is granted, but no box Is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



I hereby grant to the Educational Resounds Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to fepiodi^ 

documLtK Indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic m^abypersr^s ot^r^n ornpto^M ^ 

its system contracbxs requires permission from tin copyright holder. ExcefOm is made fr^ non-profit reproductron by libranes and other 

service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators In response to discrete IrKiuiries. 



Sign 

here, 

please 

ERIC 




TOver) 




ill. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If psrmission to roproduce is not grantod to ERIC, or , if you wish ERIC to cito tho availability of tho documont from anothor source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 



If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 



ERIC/CHESS 

2805 E. Tenth Street, #120 

Bioomingia-n, \H474QB 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution, to ERIC, return this form (and the document 
contributed) to: 



being 



ERLC 

(Re„ 2/2001) 



ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
4483-A Forbes Boulevard 
Lanham, Maryland -20706 

Telephone: 301-552-4200 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-552-4700 
. e-mail: ericfac@ineted.gov 
WWW: http://ericfacility.org 



