Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 1 


Creating a Successful Educational Environment for the Latino/a Community: Building Home- 

School Communication 


By: 

Talyha Romo 


A Thesis Presented in Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements of the Degree of 
Bachelor of Arts 
in 

Liberal Studies 


Dominican University of California 
San Rafael, California 


May 2014 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 2 


SIGNATURE PAGE 


This Capstone Thesis has been presented to and approved by the Faculty of the Liberal 
Studies/Teacher Preparation Program in partial fulfillment of the requirements for the degree of 
Bachelor of Arts, Liberal Studies 


Talyha Romo Date May 1, 2014 

Student 


Madalienne F. Peters, Ed.D. 


Date: May 1, 2014 


Faculty 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 3 


Copyright 2014-By Talyha Romo 
All rights reserved. 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 4 


ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 


I wish to acknowledge my family and friends. Thank you to my parents who helped me 
financially and helped me stay emotionally stable. They encourage me and were my own cheer 
support team, a blessing. Also thank you to my mentor, Jim Patterson, among others, who helped 
guide me in transitioning to college. My friends helped me stay focused on my goal of 
graduating and becoming a teacher. This accomplishment is not only mine, but includes the 
efforts of many other people in my life. 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 5 


TABLE OF CONTENTS 

TITLE PAGE 1 

Signature Page 2 

Acknowledgments 4 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 5 

Abstract 7 

Chapter I INTRODUCTION 8 

Statement of the Problem 8 

Significance of the Study 10 

Reasons for Building Home and School Communication 10 

Purpose of the Study 10 

Background Information 11 

Research Questions 12 

Definition of Terms 12 

Chapter II REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 13 

Teacher Preparation 13 

Classroom Setting 14 

English Proficiency 15 

Parent Involvement 16 

Summary 17 

Chapter III METHODS 19 


Research Design 


19 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 6 


Ethical Standards 19 

Participants 20 

Procedures 20 

Chapter IV Findings 22 

Themes 24 

Parents 25 

Data Analysis 25 

Summary of Findings 25 

Major Themes 26 

Community Building 26 

Accepting Diversity 26 

Chapter V DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS 28 

Discussion 28 

Limitations 28 

Implications 29 

Practical Implications 29 

Research Implications 29 

Conclusions 30 

About the Author 30 


REFERENCES 


31 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 7 


ABSTRACT 

California has a large population of Latino/a students, and for most of them Spanish is their 
native language. The problem is the miscommunication between Latino/a families and educators 
in the school setting. Teachers often do not understand Spanish and are unable to communicate 
with parents or students. Latino/a families are not aware of the ways to support their children, 
given this lack of ability to communicate. 

A review of the literature reveals the cultural and language barriers that teachers face. 
Teachers also lack support within their school in providing appropriate instruction for Latino/a 
students and in communicating with Latino/a families. 

This study follows qualitative design using classroom observations in a field placement 
and school setting as well as interviews with teachers who have a majority of students in their 
classrooms who are Latino/a. Purposively elected teachers with experience in working with 
English language learners were recruited for interviews. Parents of Latino/a students were 
interviewed about the quality of the communication between school and home that is provided 
by the school. They were interviewed for an hour responding to a series of open-ended questions. 
Interviewees were purposefully selected because they are part of the Latina/o community who 
try to create home-school communication. 

Results indicated that having home-school communication with Latino/a students 
increased their academic performance. Students felt they had support from their parents. Parents 
were also more inclined to be a part of their child’s education if they could communicate with 
the teacher. Implications from the results include the need for teachers to make home-school 
communication a priority for Latino/a students and their families. 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 8 


CHAPTER I INTRODUCTION 

Being raised in a household where only Spanish was spoken, English was not a language 
that was heard often. However, as I began kindergarten I knew I was going to have to learn a 
new language. I was placed in an all-Hispanic class with a bilingual teacher. Although it was 
helpful and I was able to understand what the teacher wanted me to do, I felt as if I was always 
behind. Students who had been placed in the English speaking classes were reading chapter 
books while we were still leaning how to translate words from Spanish to English. 

My parents were very hesitant to go to school functions because they thought that they 
would not understand discussions at school board meetings. They would go to teacher 
conferences where either my older brother or I had to translate for them. As a result of this 
experience, I still go to Back to School Night or to Open House at my fonner elementary school, 
and translate, so that Spanish speaking parents can understand and become involved in their 
child’s education. 

Statement of the Problem 

English language learners struggle to become proficient in English. It is not only that they are not 
native English speakers, but also because there is not adequate communication between parents 
and educators. A parent’s involvement is crucial in a student’s academic development. 

Having parental support in their education helps students feel supported in school. 
However, this is not the case for many Latino/a students. Many Latino/a parents are not 
proficient in English and feel limited when it comes to promoting their own children’s education. 

Miscommunication and limited teacher preparation are factors that influence the quality 
of home and school support within the Latino/a community. Many Latino/a students fall behind 
in their English proficiency. 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 9 


Educational professionals need to adequately provide infonnation for Latino/a parents in 
a manner in which they can understand. Historically education in Mexico is not as emphasized 
as in the United States in terms of the value placed on finding employment and financially 
helping one’s family. 

Information sent home from school in translated fonn, often are written in a scholarly 
fashion. Teacher who go to websites for translation tools may not understand that the Spanish 
translation does not make sense. Parents as a result are misled or confused because they unable 
to understand the school information. This results in parents feeling hesitant about participating 
in their child’s education. It is therefore important that translations sent home are at a reading 
and comprehension level that a Spanish speaking person can understand. 

In building communication between home and school, with documents that families are 
unable to comprehend, the unintended consequence, or disruption is that parents disengage from 
their children’s school. To resolve this break in communication one must try to understand the 
Latino/a culture in terms of literacy, language usage, and comprehensibility of documents that 
make their way into the home. 

School personnel take the time to learn the needs of the community in building home- 
school communication. A basic concept is to make sure that all written communication to the 
home is understandable. 

Unfortunately Latina/o parents are sometimes provided with inept translations of 
homework assignments, school newsletters, or classroom infonnation. This limits Latina/o 
parents to participate in their child’s education, creating two separate environments for the child, 
the home environment and the school environment, instead of having both blending and working 


with each other. 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 10 


School district personnel need to approach the issue of miscommunication between the 
school and Latina /o parents. A high concentration of Latino/a students in California’s public 
education implies that a change is needed in building effective home-school communication. 
School personnel need to offer educators Spanish resources whether in the fonn translators or 
Spanish courses professionals may take. Home and school communication should be an 
important factor for teachers to consider therefore, making learning Spanish a necessity. 

Significance of the Study 

The significance of this study is to help educators know how to properly and effectively work 
with Latino/a students in building home and school communication. This study is important 
because there is a large population of Latino/a students in public education. Change is needed in 
building communication between home and school. Change is also needed for teachers in their 
ability to motivate, encourage, empower and build literacy with Latino/a students. 

Reasons for Building Home and School Communication 

Allowing Latino/a students to feel parental support. 

Fostering meaningful connections between home and school. 

Increasing home school connection encourages parents to help in the classroom and 

attend school functions. 

Creating more personal relationships between teachers and parents. 

Purpose of the Study 

The Spanish speaking population is large and concentrated in California. Latino/a students 
are part of the education system. They have equal rights to education according to The Civil 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 1 1 


Rights Act of 1964 (The United States Department of Justice, 2013). The reality is that the 
Latino/a students have been considered a separate population, leading to limited efforts on 
the part of school districts to establish effective communication practices. Therefore, the 
purpose of this paper is to understand the nature of current home and school communication 
with the Latino community as well as to promote positive and effective communication 
practices. 

Background Information 

September 4, 1957 was the day that education changed. Little Rock Nine was the pathway 
for educational equality within the United States. The African American community was the 
first to integrate into a white school. This historical event mirrors similar segregation barriers 
that Jose Angel Gutierrez overcame through education. The Texas native Graduated Crystal 
City High and earned a master’s degree in political science and became a leader in the 
Chicano civil rights movement. He later returned to Crystal City were he helped students 
advocate for equality within their school (Mondale & Patton, 2001, p. 152). 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 12 


Research Questions 

1 . What improvements can be made to build communication between home and 
school for the Latino/a community? 

2. What school and community resources are available to support building 
communication skills and building teacher preparation and building English 
language proficiency? 

Definition of Terms 

As the researcher kept reading data and literature there were terms that were reoccurring 
such as communication: he act or process of using words, sounds, signs, or behaviors to express 
or exchange information or to express your ideas, thoughts, feelings, etc., to someone 
(Dictionary.com, 2014) Latino/a: a person who was born or lives in South America, Central America, 
or Mexico or a person in the U.S. whose family is originally from South America, Central America, or 
Mexico (Dictionary.com, 2014) The two definitions state the ethnic group and the factor to creating 
positive home and school communication. 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 13 


CHAPTER II REVIEW OF THE LITERATURE 

The purpose of this study is to build home school communication in the Latino/a 
community. Having access to school, the right of all students also includes access for families 
whose language is not English, for the purpose of engaging with school personnel and building 
close connections. The literature review addresses the following issues that affect home-school 
communication: Teacher Preparations; Classroom Setting; English Proficiency and Parent 
Involvement. 

Teacher Preparation 

Bilingual education uses a hybrid or combination of different languages. For English 
language learners it allows them to follow instructions and feel assertive while participating or 
working in class. In this article the author, Inbar-Lourie, (2010) looks into the different ways 
teacher teach bilingual students. The article was written using a study that was conducted in 
Hebrew and Arabic middle schools. Teachers were observed during this study. Data collection 
included observation, teacher’s self-report questioners, and interviews. The researcher found that 
in the communities in which many languages were embraced, the students had higher proficiency 
in the second language learned compared to schools with a focus on one language only. 

For this study, a sample group of six teachers from four different schools were observed. 
They were observed for about three lessons and were graded on a five-point scale. They were 
graded on their ability to teach and use English in their class. One of the observation made on a 
teacher was, “Natasha tries to cope with the disciplinary issues that she faces by constantly 
code-switching between English and Hebrew, with Hebrew definitely gaining the upper hand.” 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 14 


(Inbar-Lourie, 2010, p. ) The study showed that it was hard for students to leam a new language 
when the teacher did not have the right or sufficient experience. There is also a chart in the study 
that breaks down the language combinations of the schools and their diversity. 

Overall, the study found that teachers need to be sensitive to languages children speak in 
their classroom. Parents possibly do no feel comfortable accessing information from schools 
because it is not in their native language. There needs to be positive communication practices 
that are implemented. The results found that students that had more exposure to their own native 
language were better prepared. 

This article informs my research by looking at the positive aspects of English language 
learners who taught in their native language. It shows that students participate more in class 
because they feel secure in what they are being taught. By this they are able to follow 
instructions. However, the study also demonstrates that the teacher have to be well prepared if 
they are going to submerse their students into a new language. 

Classroom Setting 

Learning a new language is always a difficult task. However, as an educator one has to be 
prepared to guide and help students achieve success. In this article the authors state that in order 
to help English language learners they themselves must be prepared. 

Language in the English as a Second Language and General Education Classrooms: A 
Tutorial (Brice, Miller, and Brice, 2006) was written using qualitative research that was 
previously done. The studies were based on bilingual students in general education classrooms. It 
also paid attention to the discourse skills among the school professionals. They found that 
bilingual students who were immersed in English enriched classrooms were better facilitated 
while learning the language. 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 1 5 


For this study both bilingual students and educators were observed. They were presented 
with a strategy program “Planning and Communication,” (Brice at al., 2006). These strategies 
included planning lessons that allow bilingual students to use English in purposeful dialogue. 
Also establishing a pattern of communicating with other students and professionals. By 
communicating more with students and other educators they were able to help English language 
learners more. 

Overall, this study found that Bilingual students befitted by being in a heterogeneous 
class. Having English Language learners immersed in a classroom with native English speaking 
students was beneficial for English language learners. As more children who are English 
language learners enter public education they are going to need teachers who are prepared. 

This article, infonns the present study by describing different strategies that benefit 
English language learners. It shows that educators need to be informed of different ways to help 
their students. The researcher shows that bilingual students need to be placed with native English 
language learners. This way they can help each other learn and eventually move to becoming 
proficient in English. 

English Proficiency 

Conger (2010) from the University of Washington writes of the problematic factors of 
bilingual education. Conger uses the settlement known as the “Aspira Consent Decree,” which 
has been modified over the years. (Conger, 2010) This public document requires public 
education institutions with high English language learners to offer bilingual education. In the 
bilingual education students would be taught mainly in their native language. English language 
learners are therefore, thought in their native language and later transitioned into English. The 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 16 


study was conducted in New York, a state with many Spanish-speaking students. However, there 
are a variety of different languages other than Spanish that are addressed in this study. 

The issue was that other students who were not Spanish speaking did not have the same 
opportunity. In order to have bilingual education there needed to be a high percentage of students 
with the same native language. Students that do not have a high population were put into ESL 
classes. ESL students were places with English speakers and instructed in English. While 
students in bilingual education have textbooks that are both in English and in Spanish. Conger’s 
(2010) conclusion showed that students in the bilingual education program learned English at a 
slower rate. 

This article informs my research because it demonstrates that, although bilingual education 
is profitable, it also sets some English language learners behind in terms of their English 
language proficiency. This article identifies some of the problems with bilingual education. It 
also sheds light on the positive and negative aspects of bilingual education. With the infonnation 
gathered from this article, I learned that instruction in one’s native language is important to build 
a solid English foundation. In the future much information will be in English. English language 
learners experience difficulty with their own English learning according to Conger (2010). 

Parent Involvement 

Parent involvement is highly important for a child’s education. However, there are other 
factors that limit parent involvement in the Latino community. In the literature it states the 
importance to know that there are cultural differences. For example there are factors such as 
some parents feel as though they are overstepping the school’s authority if they offer their help. 
Latino families have barriers to participation due to economic, linguistic, cultural, or life 
circumstances. For example, Latino families who immigrate to the United States for economic 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 17 


reasons may be working several jobs, attempting to acquire English literacy, and just starting to 
learn about the structure of the U.S. educational system (Olivos and Mendoza, 2010). These are 
outside factors that limit Latino parents to be an active participant in their child’s education. 

In the article the researcher looks at all the factors that may play a role in the time spent 
volunteering. The data also states that Latino parents may offer moral support and 
encouragement, as those activities play to their cultural strengths and are available to them even 
if they are still acquiring English or do not understand the structure of the school curriculum. 
Therefore, instead of describing Latino parents as "not involved," a more accurate statement 
would be that their style and rate of school-based involvement may differ from other groups 
(Olivos and Mendoza, 2010). 

Data reflected the differences in effective invitations to Latino families. Parental roles 
related to home-based involvement, expand role construction to school-based involvement, and 
be understanding of barriers related to communication, transportation, time, or trust (Olivos and 
Mendoza2010). Invitations to Spanish-speaking Latino parents should be bilingual and should 
include information about access to interpreters for meetings or events . Information should be 
clear and should infonn parents what is expected of them. Latino communities are interested in 
helping and being part of their child education; however, time, linguistic and cultural 
circumstances sometimes get in the way. 

Summary 

Communication is key in creating a home and school relationship. Children who enter a 
classroom where the teacher has some background knowledge of the Spanish language, and the 
classroom setting is inviting may feel a personal connection to school. 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 18 


Latino families tend to fall under the umbrella of low-income or middle class, meaning 
that parents might need to work two jobs and might not have the adequate hours to volunteer in 
the classroom. Additionally, immigrant Latino families may not know how to navigate the 
American school system. Teamwork is what is needed from school personal and Latino families 
to create a positive home and school communication system. 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 19 


CHAPTER III METHODS 
Research Design 

This research follows qualitative design using interviews using open-ended questions and 
observations. This research study addressed the following questions: What improvements can be 
made to build communication between home and school for the Latino/a community? What 
school and community resources are available to support building communication skills and 
building teacher preparation and building English language literacy? 

The review of the literature on building home and school communication identified that 
certain factors contribute to success for students of Spanish speaking backgrounds. Teacher 
Preparation is necessary for successful home-school communication. It also indicates that the 
classroom environment and English proficiency is crucial in allowing parents to be active in their 
child’s education. 

Ethical Standards 

This study adheres to the ethical standards established by the American Psychological 
Association (2010) that safeguards participation of human subjects in research. Additionally, this 
study was reviewed by the Dominican University of California Institutional Review Board of the 
Protection of Human Subjects (IRBPHS), approved, and assigned number #10218 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 20 


Participants 

Participants include three teachers, a retired principal, and three Latino/a parents. Participants 
were purposefully selected because of the nature of the topic. Teachers were selected based on 
their background knowledge. Latino parents were interviewed based on their background and 
knowledge of the type of home-school communication that is offered at their school site. A 
retired principal was interviewed who was able to reach out to the Latino community and create 
better home-school communication system. 

The school faculty participates in the interview were two males and two females. They 
have held their position of teachers for more then ten years. They all teach in northern California, 
which is divided into many different school districts. An elementary in Marin County 
participated in the study. The elementary is located in a rural area of working class people. There 
is diversity but it is not as visible due to the small class sizes. 

The parents that participated in the interview were two females and one male. They come 
from Latino cultures and all have or have had children go through the American education 
system. They were also selected because they have been in California for a long period of time 
and witnessed the change in priority to build better communication practices with the Latino 
community. 

Procedures 

Following IRB approval the researcher contacted potential interview subjects and 
informed the participants of the purpose of the study. They were told them that their responses 
would be kept confidential. The participants signed a consent form stating their rights. 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 2 1 


Participants were contacted via email and face-to-face interaction. Participants all agreed to be 
part of the research project. 

Interview questions were designed to aid the research on factors that would improve 
home and school communication. Teachers were asked specifically about their school and how 
they felt their school site served the Latino community. Parents were asked questions pertaining 
to the type of communication that they were receiving and whether they felt included in the 
school environment. 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 22 


CHAPTER IV FINDINGS 

Through interview responses, parents and educators created a picture of the realities of 
home and school communication within the Latino community. The questions had to deal with 
Latino parent involvement and how communication could be establish from home and school to 
this community. Responses from the interviews are listed below. General themes were identified 
and labeled. 


1. Please tell me how you became interested in teaching. 

After receiving my BA in psychology with the idea of becoming a children and family 
counselor, I spent a year as a teacher’s assistant in a junior high special day class for learning 
disabled children. I began to feel I could have more of a positive impact in children’s lives by 
being a teacher, instead of a psychologist. I also found I very much enjoyed finding clear and 
creative ways to engage students in learning. I applied to the teaching credential program and 
began the coursework as I worked for one more year in the teacher’s assistant job. I took a 
fascinating course fall quarter called “The Nature of Bilingualism” and decided to obtain a 
bilingual credential. 

2. How do you structure lessons for native English speakers and Latino/a students? 

I have been trained in using GLAD strategies (Guided Language Acquisition Design) and use 
these strategies extensively with my students. I teach nearly everything around a theme (such 
as animals and their habitats, community helpers, families around the work, plants and their 
changes through the seasons) and we stay on the same theme for about 2 months. This allows 
all students to thoroughly master the vocabulary and concepts and keeps the children very 
interested in learning more. I use many gestures, songs, photographs and other visuals to add 
meaning and depth to aide in comprehension. These strategies help all children learn and make 
the curriculum accessible to children who may be learning English as a second language. 




Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 23 


What are some obstacles in having a language barrier with the Latino community? 

I speak Spanish and so don’t usually feel I have a language barrier with the Latino community. 

I meet with parents without the need for an interpreter but sometimes feel I’m seen as an 
outsider because of cultural differences and differences in socio-economics. I know teachers 
who don’t speak Spanish wish they could communicate directly with parents. 

What are the benefits for an English language learner to be in a heterogeneous class? 

The world is a heterogeneous place and all children need to learn to work together and work to 
understand and respect one another. We all need to leam to manage the dynamics of difference 
and see where we can come together. There are times during the day when I sometimes have 
the children in homogeneous groups to teach a skill all the children in the group need to work 
on. Otherwise, I use heterogeneous grouping. 

Can you describe the interaction between Latino/a students and native English language 
speakers in and out of the classroom? 

During structured work time the children are learning to work together in teams, respect one 
another and accomplish tasks together. During free choice time I see the children choose to 
play in mixed language groups sometimes and other times they play with children who are from 
their language group. There is a fair amount of fluidity in play both indoors and out on the 
playground. 

Describe your preparation in teaching English Language Learners? 

I received a bilingual-multicultural multiple-subject credential as well as a single subject 
credential to teach Spanish. I have attended the CABE conference for bilingual educators 6 
times and have received the GLAD training (a system of highly effective ELD strategies) twice. 
I have also been trained in TPR (total physical response) and TPRS Storytelling (Teaching 
Proficiency through Reading and Storytelling). Our district is also in its fourth year of a grant 
to close the achievement gap and I have been trained in Cultural Proficiency and am currently 
being trained in social-emotional literacy. 




Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 24 


How do you integrate Latino/a families into your class? 

I teach a 3-week Jump Start Program right before school begins in the fall. This program 
welcomes kindergarten student and their families into the world of school. I offer 
demonstrations in reading with your children, making healthy choices and on everyday math 
strategies. I meet with each family before school begins, in the fall and in the spring. I also 
attend nearly all ELAC meetings (English Learner Advisory Committee) and taught a math 
class in Spanish to parents last year. Next school year our school plans on increasing the family 
learning opportunities we offer and I look forward to being very involved in this effort. 

What else do you think is important for me to know? 

I think we are moving in the right direction in providing access and support for Latino/a 
students and their families, but that we have a lot more work to do. I applaud your interest in 
this topic and for becoming part of the solution! Good luck and let me know how else I might 
help. 


Themes 

In interviewing four school personal reoccurring themes were present in their answers. 
The main theme is that communication is key in creating a relationship with families. Many if 
not most schools have translators that are available for teachers and parents. The teachers 
mentioned that their school district received a grant that was given to close the achievement gap 
within the school. Part of this grant was given to close the communication gap within the 
community. The school created a Latina mother book club where childcare is provided while 
mothers talk about literature. Additionally, interviewees stated that resources to creating a 
positive home and school communication are becoming more accessible to them. 




Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 25 


Parents 

Latino/a parents who were interviewed were excited and very willing to participate in the 
interviews. Four parents were interview to explain and analyze the type of communication that is 
provided in their child’s education. I asked parents if there were any frustrations in the 
translations that were being sent home and the type of communication that was being practiced. 
M.R, said that translations and home-school communication has improved greatly over they 
years. She had three children all attend the small schools. The differences were that when she 
first enrolled her eldest son there was not much communication. She was intimidated because 
she did not feel as if she were part of the school district. Latino parents all said the same thing, 
“We came to the United States for a better life, a life were our children could have an education. 
An education that we did not have.” A.R said “I wanted to be part of my child’s education but 
work was always a priority because I had to financially support my family. 

Data Analysis 

After completeing all the interviews the researcher recored responces. The researcher 
identified for common themes including similarities and difrences among the responces among 
the responces of the three interviews. 

Summary of Findings 

Latino/a communities are hesitant when coming to school functions. The differences in 
culture play a role in the manner in which they support their children. However, having parents 
involvement and strong community support allows students to grow, work and advance 
academically. 

As the Latino community increased in size over the years there were different needs. 
Teachers and administrators have to transition their teaching communication practices. They also 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 26 


have to implement resources that were can be provided to Latino families such as translators. A 
mutual respect for diversity is also needed in today’s education. The Latino/a community is 
growing rapidly and the need for improving home-school communication is important. There 
were two themes that were reoccurring in my research, such as community building and 
accepting diversity. 

Major Themes 
Community Building 

Creating a strong and multicultural community is key in creating a positive home and 
school communication within a school. M.S stated in her interview, “Our district is also in its 
fourth year of a grant to close the achievement gap in the school.” By being awarded this grant 
their school is able to provide the Latino/a community with literacy clubs and afternoon math 
classes for parents who want to continue their education. I also learned that one needs to know 
the needs of the community and be educated and know how to respond to problems that the 
Latino/a community is facing, one of several factors includes language. I interviews two 
bilingual teachers and two teachers whom did not know Spanish. The two teachers who were 
able to communicate with the Spanish-speaking parents found that parents were more willing to 
go into their classroom and help. The parents were able to participate in their child’s education 
without feeling intimidated. 

Accepting Diversity 

Accepting that not everyone is the same is a constant that every interviewee. One teacher 
said, “The world is a heterogeneous place and all children need to learn to work together and 
work to understand and respect one another. We need to learn to manage the dynamics of 
difference and see where we can come together.” As the society becomes more global we all 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 27 


need to learn to accept everyone differences and learn to work together by communicating with 
one another. 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 28 


CHAPTER V DISCUSSION & CONCLUSIONS 
Discussion 

The purpose of the study was to research the possible factors that pertain in creating a 
positive home and school communication system for Latino families in a school setting. There 
needs to be more resources that are available to teachers and Latino/a families. Research 
questions included the following: What improvements can be made to build communication 
between home and school for the Latino/a community? What school and community resources 
are available to support building communication skills and building teacher preparation and 
building English language proficiency? 

The review of the literature identified useful methods to enhance home and school 
communication with the Latino/a community. One is creating a community environment with the 
students and parents. Also having parent involvement in a child’s education is important. Latino 
parents are sometimes described as "not involved," however, a more accurate statement would be 
that their style and rate of school-based involvement may differ from other groups (Olivos and 
Mendoza, 2010). Additionally, teachers need to have access to resources such as translators and 
professionals to create home and school communication. 

Interviews with M.R revealed that when students are in an environment where accepting 
differences is encouraged. Additionally, students are now living in a global environment where 
accepting individual differences is important. 

Limitations 

Limitation in this study included finding literature that stated how exactly to solve the 
language barrier problem with the Latino/a community. There are many factors that contribute to 
the problem of home school communication in the Latino/a community. Other limitations 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 29 


included limited teacher response to the questions. The findings also pertain to a rural school 
district that has seen an increase in Latino/a population over the years and have worked towards 
closing the gap. 

Implications 

Serious attention needs to be paid to home and school communication within a school 
setting. However, is also necessary to create positive practices with communities for people who 
do not speak English as their native language. As more Latino/a parents and students integrate 
into the public school system there needs to programs that make the transition easier and 
encourages parents to be active in their child’s education. 

Practical Implications 

There are programs that are willing to help Latino/a families in certain areas. Possible 
solutions are finding organizations that are willing to meet the community needs. It seems that a 
future teacher should look into resources that the community provides to integrate positive home 
and school communication practices. 

Research Implications 

Further researchers may find it helpful to observe a variety of different school districts 
with many ethnical differences. To compare the different types of communication practices that 
schools use in their school cite. Additionally, a future researcher may want to compare the 
Latino/a’s parent education and research the differences and notice if they are involved in their 
child’s education. Lastly, because I had limitations to interview other teachers I would 
recommend that future researchers ask a wider range of teachers from different geographical 
areas as well as interviewing the parents. 



Helping Latino/a Students and Families Integrate Into the School System 30 


Conclusions 

Building home and school communication within the Latino community is a large issue. 
Other professionals have examined the importance of creating a positive home and school 
communication with the Latino community. There are many resources that teachers can use to 
enhance the different types of communication that are sent home to Latino/a parents. In the 
process of completing my research project I gained knowledge on enhancing home and school 
communication with the Latino/a community and creating a positive school experience for the 
students and their families. 

About the Author 

Talyha Romo is a junior Liberal Studies Major at Dominican University of California. 
Born and raised in northern California Talyha Romo stayed in the area to receive her teaching 
credential. She has also been interested in ways to help the Latino/a community and enhancing 
home and school communication. Her interest started when she was elected to be student 
representative on the school board. She became aware that there were only a couple of Latino/a 
parents. This was a problem that somehow needed to be addressed because attending school 
board meetings are very important. Additionally, Talyha always served as a translator for her 
parents at teacher parent conferences and is still currently serving as a translator at her former 
elementary school. The lack of communication inspired her research possible factors and 


solutions for the lack of communication. 



Successful Educational Environment for the Latino Community 3 1 


REFERENCES 

American Psychological Association. (2010). Publication manual of the American 

Psychological Association. Washington, DC: American Psychological Association. 

Brice, A. E., Miller, K. J., & Brice, R. G. (2006). Language in the English as a second language 
and general education classrooms: A tutorial. Communication Disorders Quarterly, 

27(4), 240-247. doi: 10.1177/15257401060270040701 
Conger, D. (2010). Does bilingual education interfere with English-language acquisition? Social 
Science Quarterly, 91(4), 1103-1122. doi: 1 0. 1 1 1 1/j . 1540-6237. 2010. 00751. xon 
Dictionary.com. (2014) Retrieved May 7, 2014. 

Inbar-Lourie, O. (2010). English only? The linguistic choices of teachers of young EFL learners. 

International Journal of Bilingualism, 14(3), 351-367. doi: 10.1 177/1367006910367848 
Mondale, S. & Patton, S., (2001) School, the story of American public education. Boston: Beacon 
Press. 

Olivos, E. M., & Mendoza, M. (2010). Immigration and educational inequality: Examining 

Latino immigrant parents' engagement in U.S. public schools. Journal of Immigrant & 
Refugee Studies, 8(3), 339-357. doi: 10.1080/15562948.2010.501301 
The United States Department of Justice. (2013). Overview of Title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 
1964. Retrieved April 28, 2014 from 
http://www.justice.gov/crt/about/cor/coord/titlevi.php 



