DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 360 A33 



UD 029 368 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 
JOURNAL CIT 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Jackson* Gloria D. « Ed. 

The Mirror: A Newsletter of Multicultural Children's 

Literature, 1991--1993. 

93 

A2p. 

Collected Works - Serials (022) — Reference 
Materials - Bibliographies (131) 
Mirror: A Newsletter for K-8 Educators; nl-7 Dec 
1991-Spr 1993 

MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

American Indians; ^Childrens Literature; Cultural 
Awareness ; ^Cultural Differences ; Elementary 
Education; Elementary School Students; ^'^Ethnic 
Groups; "Fiction; ^Minority Groups; ^Multicultural 
Education; Newsletters ; Nonf iction 



ABSTRACT 

This document consists of all seven issues that were 
published of a newsletter devoted to multicultural children's 
literature that reflects the many cultures in our pluralistic 
society. The newsletter presents book reviews of fiction and 
non-fiction with multicultural themes for children in kindergarten 
through grade 8 schools. Some issues provide brief bibliographies on 
selected issues, and most issues give a summary list of works 
reviewed for ready reference. Some of the issues contain feature 
articles on the following themes: (1) holiday stories; (2) respect 
for nature in the Native American heritage; (3) ignorance of others 
brings fear; (A) reflections of a pluralistic society; and (5) 
multicultural books in the mainstream of children's literature. 
(SLD) 



^ Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

from the original document. ^ 



The Mirror: 

A Newsletter of Multicultural Children's Literature, 1991-1993 

Gloria D. Jackson, Ed. 

December 1993 



U S. OCMMTMtNT tOUCATlON 
OffC* C0 E0uc«f«n«l R«M«rch tnO irT>o<Ov«m*ni 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER <ERO 

^rtm document n«» M«n r*produc«<3 as 
'•CtTV«d from ih« o«»»on or ofgtn.xation 

C M«ftOf Ch«n9«» Mv« b««n mt<j« to .mprowe 
fM(OdtfCtK>o Quality 



• PO<n|t O* VI** or Op«nions «ta:«0 ir^ OOC o 
do not r>«':«tMriiv '«0»»»«"' Ot»«C'J' 
OCRI pMitiOn or DOi«cv 



■PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC^ - 



^ BEST COPY AVAIUBIE 




A Newsletter for K-8 Educators 

Multicultural Literature Reflecting a Pluralistic Society 



introductory Issue 
December 1991 

Crsared bv 

Gloria D. Jackson, MLS. MA 
Layout/Graphics - L-.tsi Clark 
For permission to copy contact G. 
Jackson 




"Studenls slwiild develop respect for the Unman di'^nily of 
all people ami an nnderstandin'^ of different cultures and 

WayS^ of 4ife" Ijislor^- S<Ki ^l Srimrf KmmrwoTk CDOI-: 



Holiday Time !! 

A Tree of Cranes (1991) by Allen Say, 

Allen Say is a Japanese-American anisi and writer. His books span 
rraditional and contemporary stories and his oicuires always show 
careful attention to cuitxiral detail, and have a feeling of space and 



SEW Kwanzaa (1991) by 
A.P. Porter is an easy^reading , 
how-to-do-it book covering the cre- 
ation of this festival by Maulana 
Karenga, its symbols, vocabulary, 
pr.nrlpies and purpose, i ne iiiusrra- 
*::ons are atnracnve and there is a 
ziossary with pronunciation or 
Swahiii words. 

L-:ier:::ed:a:e grade sradents 
call read and discuss Have a Happy 
/. 1989).. by Mildred Pins Walter, an 
award winning author. It is a nicely 
crafted contemporary story woven 
around Thf> A^^^^^n Amgrican festi- 
val - Kwanzaa - celebrated after 
Christmas day. Tne seven principles 
' are n:c:::v interwoven into the stor;.'. 



ERIC 



Note should also be taken of 
What a Morning; The Christ- 
mas Story in Black Spirituals 

19S7) by John Langstaff with 
vibrant iliusrations by the noted 
black artist and actinor, Ashley 
3r>-an. Tr.e vvcrds and musical 
scores for the spirituals arc fea- 
tured alongside the iilustrauons. 



^rj^lieht. In this elegant picmre book a boy tells the stor>' of his first 
J * r'j^ri^nna<s in Japan. His American mother brings i 



... ^ in? little pine tree 

2>^and decorates it with silver paper cranes and small candies - a 
remembrance of her past Christrnases in California. Ln this way she 
shares her customs with her bi-culniral child. A gentle stor>' v^-ith pictures of 
a contemporaPr' vet traditional home in Japan. Tne little boy may live and 
dress differently' but he has the same excitement about presents as any 
American child! 

EXTENDED USE - American students who have spent time in 
other counmes can use this as a model to v.Ti:e stories aoout how 
.they adapted the^j" Christmas ( or other) customs to the culture of 
their host countries ..or vice versa! 




^^^^^^^ UiWU iiUOL WWtiil LA AV J ..V,/* T *ww T ^. w*«. 

RFT.ATFD RFADTNG : Chita's Christmas Tree (1989 )by Ehzaoeth 
FitzseraldHoward. Set in trie es^ly 1900s in Baltimore this warm^AfJian 
American Christmas stor>' is a personal remembrance.. Littic Chita and her 
father (a phvsician) go out to choose a Chrisnnas tree and N^rite her name on 
it - hopins that Santa Claus will bring it on Christmas Day. Tnough in picture 
book format* there are short chapters covering various pre-Christ- 
;^a»mas activities of Chita, including a scrumptious Chrisrmas Eve 



^ family dinner, and finally the Christmas Treejaecoraied ana ugntea 
Gzz^warmth. and the red and green accents proclaim tiie houaay spint. 



An exceotionailv haoov hoiidav 'Dock. (Be sure to read the book jacket 
cxoiainiris the backsround for the story)r;ie Silver Whistle ( 1989) by Alice 
TompeTt.ls a Chrismas story set m Mexico about a boy bnnging a girt to 
the Child during the tradidonal village ceremonies. Nice story and coionul 
iUustraJons. The Bell s of Christmas (1989) by Virginia Hamilton is a 
n-adidonal storv of Christmas holiday acrivides a hundred years ago as 
shown inrough the eves of 12-vcar-old Jason Bell, whose Afncan Amvncsn 
famiiv has lived in Ohio since the eariy 1800s. Older children ^ can 
read this chapter book alone and appreciate the authendc "penod aetail " that 
is CNident m'the pictures and plot. 

A Christmas Slemory (198-1) by Truman Capote. Writicn many 
vears aso this iitcrarv 2cm has been reissued with wondenui iiiustruuons. In 
it Capote recalls with poignancy a Chnstmas season when he 'a as seven years 
old and living in the counar\- with an eccenric oid relative. Not sendmenta:, 
but cenainiv a lovins cibuie. Read it aioud to oicer children . These books, 
can make a'eood comoaradve study, and English te ;ners could also add A 
Chrismas in Wales (Dylan Tnomas) to the discusscion. 



NEW. Picture Bride (1991) NE\V-Af the Crossroads (1991)bv Rachel Isadora Author/ 
by Yoshiko Uchida, A sensitive illustrator 

Set in the segregated townships of South Africa this picture book 
focuses on the ciuidren eagerly waiting at the crossroads to welcome 
^ / home their fathers* who have been working in the city for ten months. 
/K*3J The ebb and flow of preparanon.cxcitement, disappointment, hope. 
^^^^ suspense and final happiness are shown in the pictures of adults and 
children, their activities and exi^ressions. As night falls and some 



and absorbing novel by a weii-estab- 
iished Japar7ese-,Amer:can author. 
I ne storv-" is of young Hana Otniya 
vho leaves Japan to come to Calif or- 
niain 19 17, holding the picmre of the 
man she has promised to marr>' - 
Taro Takeda. Tne book deals wth 
the harsh realities of Asian immi- 
grant life of the time - the poverty, 
discnminanon • and also with the 
srength of family and cultural des. 
Tnere is loyalty, tenderness, 
determination and hean- 



/| break in the story. Hana and 
/Taro have one child - a 
-^daughter who eiopes with a 
ycung Amencan doctor and forsakes 
he: communir>\ just before Worid 
War n breaks out. The drama in the 
stor>' picks up as it relates the trag- 
edies *cf ±e **evacuanon*\ when ail 
Japanese A^mericans ir. Caiiicmia 
were sent to internment camps where 
condirions were unhealthy and inad- 
equate, to say the least. The charac- 
ters of Taro and Hana arc weii drawn, 
and they eacii react to these changing 
•onditions differendy. Tne subsid- 
iary' characters refiec: the different 
races of Japanese .American inrimd- 
granrs of the dme, so that there is no 
stereot\'T3ins. 

RFT.ATFD READING Thou> 
sand Pieces of Gold; A Biographic 
cal Novel bv Ruthanne Lum 
McCunn (1981) v^ili allow 
older smdents to discuss the 
similarities in the experi- 
ences of young J apanese and 
Cr.in-se women as immigrants^ on 
tne West coast around the turn of the 
. Some students canrcadSara/Xj?/azn 
and Tall (1985) by Patricia 
MacLachlan to leam about Ameri- 
can mail-order brides who came out 
West to marry men, sight unseen. 
Other books relating to the wartime 
evacuation of Japanese include 
Yoshiko Uchida's Journey to To- 
paz (1911 )which ficnonaiizes her 
experiences as a child in the intem- 
r.en: camps and A Child in Prison 
".amp ( ] 97 1 ) by Shizue Takashima 
A ho :e.:s c: the Japanese intemmen: 
:amcs ;n C:inada dur.ns the war. 



fathers have sdU not rcmmcd* the bright colors give way to dark skies and 
shadowy fields, reilecting the somber mood of the few children* still wainng 
at the crossroads. At last the truck rumbles in and die joyful cr>' rings out - 
*'Our fathers are home"! 

NEW > First Pink Lisht (1991) by Eloise Greenfield. A good companion 
book, showing a young A&ican American child wanting desperately to stay 
awake to wclcoine his^father when he comes home at dawn. Even young 
children will recognize the similarides in the books, and the older children 
mav want to discuss the socio-poiidcal differences behind the stories. 



ERIC 



it IS gooa to see more cxx>ks relating 
to the Hispanic/Latino culture enter- 
ins the market. 

NEW The Gold Coin a99l)by 
,Alma Fior Ada is exceilent.Tnough 
i: is anongmal stor>' (Central America 
setting) ''it has the elements of a 
folktale and can very effec- 
/j^^^qtively be used for 
K ^ /jstorv'teiiing. Tne exquisite 
pK-3aiiiustrations give i: the 
^ ^^ Larino cultural flavor, and 
certainly enhance the 
storyline. The story is of Dona Josefa 
who spends her umc willingly help- 
ing and healing her neighbors, and of 
Juan, who pursues her to steal from 
her.But during the pursuit Juan be- 
comes a changed man, and learns to 
give rather than take. An outstanding 
book, by an educator who is knowl- 
edgeable and outspoken in her sup- 
pon of bilingual and muidcultural 
educauon. Borreguita and the Coy- 
ote (1991) by Vema Aardema is a 
trickster tale from Mexico with faint 
echoes of "The Three Billy Goats 
Grun'\ The litde lamb avoids being 
eaten by playing tricks on the coyote 
and evenmally putting him out of the 
carnivore business! Nice glossary 
aiid pronunciadon of Spanish terms. 
Good forinformai dramatization and 
class oral participation, in Abuela 
(1991) by Anhur Borros, Rosalba 
and her grandmother take an imagi- 
narv' flying trip over New York City 
and see the sights from that vantage 
point! Wondcnully colorful, realis- 
tic style pictures of ethnic neighbor- 
hoods and inner city communities. 
Can be used with manv of the cross- 



i4 



\2L 



generational picture books featuring 
grandparents interacting v»ith chil- 
dren. 

NEW Taking Sides (1991) is a 
novel by Gary Soto, a fiispanic au- 
thor who writes honcstiy and sparsely 
of life in the central California val- 
ley. His stories and poems are care- 
fully crafted ^^^th meticulous descrip- 
tive details, and yet have a touch of 
humor and gentie irony as he reveals 
the joys and fears of young 
^=3^Hispanics coming of age. As 
^ ^ ^such his stories also touch a 
J nerve with all adolescents - 
/ boys especially. In this new 
^novel, i4-ycar-old Lincoln 
Mendoza moves from the barrio to 
the suburbs, and herein lies the con- 
flict. As an ace basketball player he 
will now be playing for his new school 
against his old school - and his child- 
hood friends. Under this obvious con- 
flict lies the problem of adjusting to a 
different kind of neighborhood and 
to the predominantly white school. 
(A different, yet similar conflict that 
confronts immigrants to this coun- 
try.) Who wins in thermal play-offs? 
The resolution in the plot is satisfac- 
tory, but unfonunately not through 
Lincoln's own decision-making. A 
good exercise would be to have stu- 
dents provide their own endings to 
the story. Two other books by this 
auuior are Baseball in April (shon 
stories) and A Fire in my Hands 
(poems). Keep both books for read- 
aloud when there are spaces of time 

to fill UD. 



CREATE A DEMAND FOR MULTICULTUR.M. LITERATURE - 

ASK FOR rxiESE BOOKS IN LIBRARIES AND BOOKSTORES! 



•Aardsma, Vcma - Borreguiia and the Coyoie: A 

lait trrm Avutia. Mexicor(199l) Hius. Pctra Mathers. Knopf. 

-.Ada. .Alma Fior - Tnc Gold Coin. (1991) Illus. Neil Waldman., Aiheneum 

Don-OS. Arthur - Abucia (1991) Hlus. ElisaKlcvcn. Dunon 

-Greenfield. Eioise - First Pink Light (1991) Illus. Jan S. Gilchrist. Black Buttemy Children's Bks. (c.l976. 
Harucr) 

-Hamilton, Virsinia - Tne Bells of Christmas.(1989) Hlus. L. Davis. Harcoun 

♦Howard, EUzabeth Fitzgerald - Chita's Christmas Tree. ( 1989) Hlus. Hoyd Cooper, Bradbury 

-Isadora, Rachel - At the Crossroads. (1991) Greenwillow 

MacLachlan, Patricia - Sarah. Straight and Tall. (1985) Harper (also in pb - Harper Trophy) 

■McCunn. Ruthanne Lura - A Tnousand Pieces of Gold: A Biographical Novel. fcl981) In pb (1988 ) Beacon 

?:. 

-Poner. A.P.. - Kwanzaa. (1991) Pictures y Janice Poner, Caroirhoda 
-Say. .Allen - Tree of Cranes (1991) Houghton Mifilin 

-Takashima. Shizue - A Child in Prison Camp. (1971) Econoclad In pb (1991) Tundra Bks. 

-Tate, Eienora £. - Tnank you. Dr. Mardn Luther Kins, Jr.! (1990) 

Watts 

Tomper., .Alice - The Silver Whistle. (1988) Macmillan 
-Ucriida. Yoshiko - Journey to Topaz (c 1971) Reprint. Creative Ans Bks. 
-Uchida, Yoshiko - Picture Bride. (1991) Nonhland Pr.. Arizona 
"Waiter. Mildred Pitts - Have a Happy... (1989) Lothrop. .Also in pb -.Avon 

- Ethnic authors pb - paperback 



Publication of this multicultural newsletter was announced at the workshops I gave m Novemoer 
10Q1 at the California Readins Association conference, and the CMLEA conference. The respons 
was positive with 70^ signups" to receive the publication! The result is this Introauctory- Issue or 
THE MIRROPv. which is being sent to you free. 

I plan to issue THE MIRROR five times during the school year. 

Durin<T this ::anial vear of 1991-92 - there will bghiee more issues sent out during January, 
March? and May 1992. If you wish to receive these three issues please nil m the form below ana 
return it soon, along wirh <;iy ?.Q cent stamps to: 

Gloria D. Jackson, 45 Moonlit Circle, icsse s) 

Sacramento , C A 95831. | 

PLEASE PRINT 

Your N.AME . Position 

.Address 



ZIP 



j School - ^'^^^ ^^^^'^^s- 

ERlc^istriCl ^ p 



In this coiurnn. I-shalltn*' and... 
answer qocstions ihat you. may/will . 
have .regarding the.coaWt.oCihis: . 
Ne^,vsiencr;.and .the. general topic: of ■. 
Muiticuitural Liieratuic;- • . 

/ .Wtiatdoyoume& 
Mbldculturai Q^ildrcn's Lirefature?: 
TRireis rib"6hc deShidon. . TBis 
Newsletter, wiil CQrirIder.ch3dretf sr 
and young troilL bookSithat.posir: 
rtvely andhmestly rcflect.thc:: 
cultures in oar school popplaidons. . 
The emphasis wiil be on minority 
ethnic cuitures^ thoagh. books of 
Anglo-European ctiittires. will be 
inciuded.whcn appropriate... It. wiu. 
noi include books in. odier Ian- . 
guages. It-wiiirccoistsendbooks 
that meet the criteria.thkrwiil be 
expiaincd in fumre issues - in this 
column. Primariiy ficdon, .poecr>% 
biography and picture books wiii. 
be included under the.acabreiia of. 
"literature 



' limited:'?- coi^ 10% 
ofthe:-anntial-outptit.of. children's 
literature: • -they need-to have more 
.exppsure*v<2)Besides:dia;;:the^^ 
.;have^miiId^uses.aaoss^&^^^ 
:ncvc!s;::n[iicir.contentcaTt.be:a. 
=-^stajting pomtifordiscussio 
H^^lsuT-beyondithcir^^ 

NHddieschooI sto(kn6-shquid have 
^'/'access^^to-.t^^^ ^cir 
.;iibraiies;'Tea^ ^the 
'reading of ciilturaEydiV . 

picture books to younger siblings;. 

Older studentscan^fi^ 

th<CTesof'discrimhaaoni.;as5imiIa- 

lion^ fcecdcn:n*'cuitural:tradidons:* 

and famiiy customsusing.these-- 

books;.'^-. Teachers, can^^ 

.from novels- to rcad-to.youhg^?r ' .. 

. chfldren;:;.The:cons^^^^ 

..these:booksiyaU 

vaiiditypfthen^ ' 

him/hc3self Slid ■ 

Stream:ti:achers%%ill'get 2^ 
standrfig ofbthcr'CuUures by ■' '. 

..reading aU-1^^ 6f. thcsebooks. 



STAFF RESOURCES 

3anks, J.A. (1988) Muiuedinic eaucadon: Tneory and pracnce (2nded.) 
RocKieigh. XJ Allyn and Bacon 

Caoote, T. 1 198-) - A Christmas Memory, nius. by Bern Peck. Random 
House 

rrlere, ?. (1968) - Pedagogy of trie Oppressed. (Translated by M>Ta 

Bergman Romas. 1970) Seabury, NY; Herder and Herder 

Roilock. 3 (1988)- Black authors and illustrators of children's books: A 

biosraphicai dicdonary. New York, Garland Pr. 

Schon! I (1988)- A Hispanic Heritage. Series HI: A guide to juvenile 

books about Hispanic people and culnire. Memchen, NJ; Scarecrow Pr. 



GLORIA. JACKSON has been 

a librarian in public and school 
libraries, and an educational 
administrator for school district 
libraries.She has beenacdve in giving 
workshops for teachers andlibrarians, 
and in textbook seiecdon and wridng 
curriculum. Her recent research 
culminated in a Masters Project 
endded - Muideumic Literaure in 
the Elementary School Curriculum - 
(CSUS/1991).Sheanendeduhe White 
House Conference on Libraries and 
Informadon Sciences a:> an .\ltemate 
(July 1991). Sheis now an educational 
consultant specializing in 
Muluculmrai Literature for grades 
K-8. She will be giving a 1 unit credit 
course on K-8 Mulrlethnic Literature 
on five Saturday T^omings-starring 
Feb. 29. 1992 at California State 

University, Sacramento. 

FUTURE ISSUES 

Look for books on the .Ameri- 
can Indian culture - stories, legends, 
and how they relate :o Ecology. Books 
reladng to the new .\sian immigrants. 
There will be some emphasis on simi- 
larides in themes and folktales. New. 
recent and favorite older books will 
be reviewed. COMMENTS will in- 
clude informadon on edinic authors, 
and discussion of criteria for selec- 
tion of good books. 

Let me know wharyou ilnd most 
usefuL what you would like dis- 
cussed. We are in this togetherll 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

0 



THhie Mlnrxor 




A Newsletter fnr K-8 Educators 

January 1992 



Created by 

Gloria D. Jackson, MLS, MA 
Layout/Graphics - Lynn Clark 
For permission to copy contact G. 
Jackson 



Respect for Nature - The Native American Heritage 



This we know, The earth does not belong to us. We belong to 

the earth," 



"I never have se^n a man 
that I thought was better 
than me. I've seen em who 
had more money, sure: or 
more hook Icamin^; hut 
that don't make him better 
inside, not by a hng shot. " 
I mm /r^ O'c'iHf /V f^^JUGcf<.hy i<i^t>y 

iioodwifu 



Self Esteem 

Thank you, Dr. Martin Luther King, 
Jr! (1990) by Eleanora E. Tate, This 
delightful novel revolves around Mar>' 
Elouise, her African American family, & her 
friends in the fourth grade. The conflict 
concerns her reluctance to participate in the 
Black American History play at school 
because she lacks self esteem. Her interaction 
•jviui friends and family bring her to the 
realisation of her own value. This is an 
honest siory that sensitively explores rhe 
lack of scif-acccptance in some minority 
children, and their eventual journey to self 
esteem. Though the theme is serious, the 
plot and language abound in humor and 
reflect the experiences of pre-teens. 
Recommended for independent reading. 
Teachers will gain an increased 
understanding of minority students from this 
ook.Grades 4-7 

.127/ Amazing Grace (1991) by 
Mary Hoffman is a picture book about an 
African American child who has enormous 
self-esteem and a vivid imagination. Grace 
: ikes to act ou tand "be" all sorts of characters. 
Her friends think that she has overreached 
herself when she decides that she wants to be 
Peter Pan in the school play. But by using, 
..-nacmauon, , she gets the role and does 
well. The pictures of Grace dance through 
:;epagesjnavanety of innovative costumes. 
She IS a role model "to be what you want to 
0 * Grades K • 3 

ERIC 



Nl£ W - These words were spoken more than a century ago by Chief Seattle when ilic 
American government wanted to move white settlers into the Indian territory and was 
willing to pay for the -and. Jeffers has combined art i^-^d poetic text to give us a moving 
adaptation of this speech.- Brother Eagle, Sister ^ky : A message from Chief 
Seattle by Susan Jeffers (1991) "How can you buy the sky? How can you own the 
rain and the wind?" This message is now in the classrooms and courts. The book should 
be read aloud and discussed in history, science , language arts and speech classcs.The poetic 
text will be good for oral contests and can be easily adapted for choral reading. This is one 
of the most inspiring and elegant juvenile books in recent years. It epitomizes the legacy of 
the Native American - reverence for the earth.. Jeffers consulted with members of the 
Lakota and other tribes Grades 3 • 8 . 

- A book that speaks even more directly to the environmental issue is Keepers of 
the Animals; Native American Stories and Wildlife Activities for Children 
( 199 1 ) by M ichael Caduto and .1 oseph Bruchac( A benaki storyteller). This book of 266 
pages is definitely a teacher's resource, in fact, it has a special Teachers Guide to go 
along with iL It retells folktales about animals, birds etc. and each of the stories is followed 
by appropriate science topics (eg. migration, tidal zones, habitat etc); discussions of these 
topics and activities (art, science, drama, puppets, etc.) to use in the classroom. Use this to 
put literature in the science curriculum, and introduce scientific concepts dramatically. This 
book followed the success of the earlier bookJCeepers of the Animals by the same 
authors. 

N3W Another book championing the environmental cause is The People Who 
Hugged the Trees {l99l).Deborah Lee Rose adapted this folktale of Rajasthan which 
extols the philosophy behind the contemporary Chipko Movement in India, whose members 
are dedicated to the "conservation...of natural resources." The picture book leils of young 
.\mriui, who lived in a village and loved the trees, frequently hugging them. When a group 
of laborers come to cut down the trees. Amriia is outraged and mobilizes the villagers to hug 
each tree to prevent them being cut down. The Maharajah is summoned to deal with this 
defiance, but just as he orders the laborers to continue, a mighty sandstorm occurs. When 
itsubsidcsitisfound that though there is extensive dam.age in the area the villageand its well 
water has been saved because it was protected by the barrier of trees. The Maharajah gets 
the message • as your students will. Lovely water colors on each page, with authentic 
cultural details. Gr. 1-3 

•••••• Though there is only a very small percent of Native American children in our school 

populations, the books from this culture have value because of their strong environmcnuil 
message, their inclusion in the curriculum and also because this culture, in a sense , is the 
heriuige of all of us who now call ourselves Americans. 

Related Reading A rcccntuscful scries is ihc NATIVE AMERICAN LEGENDS 
Though these are formula books-same author and format, they have some 
special values. Each book recognizes and deals with a particular Indian nation,; 

retells its folktales , depicts its crafts, symbols etc. and then devotes 13 of the 47 

paces to factual , historical and contemporary information on that nation • including maps 
and photographs. Thouch ihc folktale illusirauons are coloriul, they are stNiised and 
faceless. These books were favorably reviewed by a Nauvc American Resource teacher. 



,::;^M©:as n3W scores 

The sudden influx of Russian refugees and 
has given rise to an interest in books on this 
culiurc.Soroc/iin/zy Fair (1991)is a 
fanciful talc of the Ukraine. It is an early 
•;vork of Nikolai Gogol .The story has been 
iianslated and adapted, and the illustrations 
impart a unique Russian cultural navor.It is 
ihe story of young Paraska, whose parents 
oppose her marriage to the man she meets at 
ilie Fair. There is a contract with a gypsy, an 
episode of the devil's visit and a magical 
resolution of ail conflicts! Grades lO 
A Song of the Stars; an Asian Legend 
(1991) by Tom Birdseyc offers an 
explanation for the Chinese Festival called 
Chi Hsi (Festival of the Milky Way;) This 
romantic legend of star-crossed lovers is 
enriched by the iridesccni,sty Used illusuntion 
s that look like exquisite suiincd glass. 
Grades 1-3 

How the Ox Star Fell from 
Heaven( 1991) by Lily Toy Hong. The 
village people in China werealways hungry, 
so the Emperor of All the Heavens decreed 
that ihey should eat "at least once every three 
days." He sent his trusted messenger, the 
not-very -smart Ox Star down to earth to give 
ihis message. What the Ox Star said was 
slightly different • "The Emperor has declared 
that you shall cat three times a day, every 
day"! The people were happy, but the 
Emperor was not! And he banished the Ox to 
earth to be a beast of burden . The illustrations 
are stylised, full of rich colors and almostail 
are double page spreads. Because of the 
style there may be some criticism of 
stereotype, but children should be told this is 
sheer fantasy - not reality. Kids love iL 
Gr.K-2 

You II love Everybody Cooks Rice 
(1991)by Norah Dooley, A young girl 
visits down the succt at supper lime looking 
for her brother, and in the process tastes rice 
dishes from Barbados, India, Puerto Rico, 
China, Haiti and Viemam. The book is 
colorfully, and realistically illusuated. 
Recipes for the rice dishes are given at the 
back. An excellent book to show the 
commonalities in culttires. Gn 1 » 7 



No culture. ..retains its 
identity in isolation; identity 
Ls attained in contact, in 
contrast, in breakthrough. 
Carlos Fuentes - '/How I 
storied to \Vritc" . In (}rjxy^'pJJ_ 
Annual h'ive MuUictiUiiml 

^ . l iteracy . 



Famous People of Many Cultures 

February is frequently the time students in elementary and middle schools are assigned to 
read and report on biographies of famous people. Here is an unusual collection of picture 
books that span all grades and arc particularly appropriate for heterogeneous classes. Older 
students can do research in encyclopedias etc. to back up the short text, adding dates, maps, 
and other details to written or oral reports. These colorful books are a good introduction to 
biographies. 

NEW...C/xingis Khan (1991) written and illustrated by Demi is a sophisticated 
picture book . .The illustrations are like a series of miniature Mogul paintings set on cool 
white walls that enhance their gilt frames and frequent gold accents. The text is simple but 
primarily facuial, relating the life of this 12th century military genius(also spelled Genghis) 
from his childhood on the arid plains of Mongolia, into the uials and adventures of 
manhood, and the eventual creation of a massive war machine that was to conquer most of 
Persia, Hungary, Poland, Russia and China and make him *'one of the greatest conquerors 
in history". Grades 4 - 7 

NEW...r/z^ Last Princess; The story of Princess Kaiulani of Hawaii 
(1991)by Fay Stanley is another biographical picture book that is written for older 
children. It is a sad story of the beu^yal of the Hawaiian people by the "haoles" (foreigners) 
during the 1890s. The first few pages read like a fairy uilc-a beautiful princess growing up 
in plush surroundings. But then the reader learns of the conspiracy to annex the islands to 
the US; the sudden death of the king; the abortive native revolt; the dethronement and 
imprisonment of Queen Liliuokalani. Kaiulani has been sent to school in England, but she 
returns to go to Washington to intercede for her people. President Coolidge,though 
sympathetic, is unable or unwilling to curb the greed of the white setders. (Some parallels 
lothefatcof Native Americans.) The story is dramatic and emotional. Kaiulani emerges 
as an intelligent and courageous young woman. Gr,4»7 

Related reading: Shaka: King of ihe Zulus (1988) by Diane Stanley 



and Peter Vennema is a picture-book biography of another military genius, who 
••took a handful ofZulufightersand turned them into an army of the finest warriors 
in Africa" daring the early 1800s. Grades 4 - 7 
Diane Stanley is also theauthor/illustrator of the award winning picture book, Pe/er the 
Great( 1986 )aboutanother military genius who dominated Russian history in the early 
1800s .Gr.4-7 

I wish there were as many books about great men and women of peace. The Wheel of 
King Asoka (1977) by Ashok Davar, is currently outof print but may be on some library 
shelves.lt is a simple picture book about an Emperor in Ancient India about 3rd century BC. 
After seeing the devastation wrought by his conquering armies Asoka proclaimed and 
followed a pol icy of non-violence, and governed by the philosophy that "justice, peace and 
love must go on.'' AManCalledThoreau {l9SS)by Robert Burleigh isanothershon 
and easy book that is beautifully written, withsaene illusuations evocative of the man and 
his philosophy (which is explained in simple language). This title will also fit in well with 
the environmental lheme.Gr.4»7 

Did you know there was a famous matador in Spain who was a Chinese- American ? His real 
name was Bong Way "Billy'* Wong, and Allen Say has told his unusual story in the picture 
book^ElChino (1990). Thefirsthalf of the book has sepia, photographic-like pictures 
with sparse facts. Billy, the son of Chinese immigrants grows up in Arizona influenced by 
his father's belief that in America you can be anything you want to be! Billy wants to be a 
basketball sor, but though he is an excellent athlete - he is too short. So he becomes an 
engineer. He visits S pain on vacation , and his ambition changes, as docs the mood of the text 
and the illusuntions ,which burst into color. He perseveres against considerable odds but 
does eventually emerge as the very first Chinese bullfighter in Spain. This story crosses 
cultural boundaries and is filled with the power of possibilities. I found it exciting. Older 
students might try to research further details of this inieresung man. Gr. 3-7 



ERIC 



I Introduce these books to teachers and students 



Titles mentioned in this Newsletter have buying information 
here.Prices have not been added since they can vary. Some additional 
titles have been added as space permitted. *Ethnic authors 

Amazing Grace by *Mary Hoffman. 1991 DialBks. ISBN 0-S037.1O40-2 
Brother Eagle, Sister Sky; A Message from Chief Scaide by Susan J^^ffers. 1 99 1 . Dial Bks 
ISBN 0-8037-0963-3 

ChingisKhan by Demi. 1991 Holt ISBN 0=8050-1708-9 
E/CWno by * Allen Say 1990 Houghion ISBNO-395-5 1028-1 
Everybody Coota«/cf by NorahDoolcy.lllus/PeierThornion Carolrhoda ISBN 0-397- 

32179-1 

His Majesty, Queen Hatshepsut by Dorothy Carter. 1987 Harper ISBN 0-397-321 79-1 
Gr. 6.8 

IIowtheOxStarFellfrGmHeavenby ''UlyToy Hong. 1991 Albert Whitman Pub. iSBN 
0-8075-3428-5 

The Last Princess; The story of Princess Kaiuiani ofHawau by Fay Stanley, iUus. by 
Diane Stanley 1991 Macmillan/Four Winds ISBN 0-02-786785-4 
A Man called Thoreau by Robert Burleigh 1985 ISBN 0-689-31 122-2 
The People WhoHuggedthe Trees adapted by Deborah Lee Rose with pictures by BirgitLi 
Sailund. 1990 Roberts Rinehart, Niwot, Colorado. ISBN 0-911797-80-7 
Peier the Great by Diane Stanley. 1986 Morrow ISBN 0-02786790-0 
Shaka: King of the Zulus by Diane Stanley. 1988 Morrow ISBN 0-68807343-3 
Soroc/:mrzyfat> by "Nikolai Gogol Illus/Gcnnadij Spirin. 1991 David Godine Pub. 
ISBN 0-87923-879-8 

Thank you Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.^ by E\canor:iT:iUt 1990 Watts ISBN 0-531- 
15151-4 

TheWheelof King Asoka by ""AiShokD^yds 1977 Follea NotmpnnL 
SERIFS 

NATIVE AMERICAN LEGENDS. Author TerriCohienc. Troll Assoc. 6 bks gr.4.8 
Sctinlibbdg-S89.70 ISBN 0-86593-000-7 Also available in paperback - WatermUl Pr, 
Clamshell Boy (Makah); Dancing Drum (Cherokee); Ka-Ha-Si and the Loon (Eskimo); 
Liiile Firefly (Algonquin) 

Easy reading biographies by Jeri Ferris. Carolrhoda Pr. Gr. 3-5 (ESL Gr .5-8) 
Arctic Explorer: The Story of Matthew Henson. 1989 
Go Free or Die; Story about Harriet Tubman 1988 
Native American Doctor: The Story of Susan La Flesche Picotte. 199 1 
Walking the Road to Freedom; A Story about Sojourner Truth. 1988 
What are youfigurin now? A story about Benjamin Banneker. 1988 



Teacher Resources 

Books without Bias; Through Indian eyes. 
Edited by *B. Slapin and »D. Scale. 1989 
Oyatc Pubs., 2702 Matthews Berkeley. 
CA 94702. ^62pp Spiral bdg. S25.00 
ISBN 1-55591-027-0 S 19.95 Tf:achers 
G aide - 39.95 (Reviews and Evaluates Native 
American children's books) 
Graywolf Five: Multicultural Literacy; 
Opening the American Mind edited by 
Rick Simonson and Scott Walker. 1988 
Graywolf Pr. St. Paul, MN 
It's Good To Be Black by Ruby Goodwin, 
pb 1976 Southern Illinois U.Pr. 
Keepers of the Animals: Native American 
Stories and WiUlife Activities for Children 
by Michael J. Caduto and *Joscp'>i Bruchac. 
1 99 1 Fuknim Pub., 350 Indiana St, Golden. 
Colorado 8 WO 1 

Keepers of the Earth; Native American 
Stories and Environmental Activities for 
Children. By Michael Caduto and * Joseph 
Bruchac. 1988 Fulcam Pub. ISBN 1- 
5559 1 -027-0 S 19.95 Teachers Guide 39.95 



Hook Middle School 
students on Biographical 
Fiction or Fictional Biography. 
Let them read, thea rcsearch 
the facts! 

/ , Juan de Pareja by Elizabeth Borten 
da Trevino* 1965. Newberr Winner. 
EconocladXross cuUuraJ|ycte2que2, 
Spanish painter* - ■ ■'^:i^$r^^■^^^^^My■■ ■ 
AnthonyBurns;theD^.fe^3timdTriumph 
of a Fugitive Slave. byrVirgmia 
Hamilton. 1988 Knopf • 
The Secret Life of Pocahontas by Jean 
Fritr 



FUTURE ISSUES - Themes will include Joumey to Freedom; Comparative Folktales; Overcoming Prejudice. Hold fast the 

Dream. Do you have other suggestions? . 

My daughter, the layout anisi, generously gifted me with the new address label that I hoped you liouccd on your 
envelope! A thousand labels! I am, ihor-^orc, committed to this Newsletter for some time to come! Sc, please get 
the word out! Interested librarians, teachers and parents can receive this i^sy? and tfig subSggySM 
March a nd Mav issues if they - 
Send their name/address and %{x 29 cents ?tamps to - THE MIRROR, 
i5 Moonlit Circle, Sacramento, CA 95831 



IS 



Name 



Position 



Address (with ZIP) 



QT hool 

ERIC 



Gr: District 

• 9 



Qi]ii®s(tfl(Q)nns:siisi.dl CdDMrneiinils'.. 

I am appreciative of the response to the i'nuoduciory Issue, and have taken into account some 
of your suggestions. I invite readers to send in comments and suggestions. We are in this 
together, to enrich reading and promote understanding. 

Skould culturally diverse books be equally represented, or represented in 
proportion to the minorities present in a school population? No. For many 
reasons. (1) These booksareno'ipublished in proportion to thccuncnt demographics. There 
are many more books,, reflecting the African American culture because this liieranire 
started being published earlier.during the push for CivU Rights in ihf 1960s. (2) A variety 
of multiethnic litcramre should be available to ail minority and mainstream students to 
promote understanding* (3)Boolcs abouiminority cultures have many themes in. common, 
and their appeal can and should be across cultures. (4) Many award- winn ing ininority- 
culture books merit a place in libraries and classrooms just because they are superior 
literature. ■ ' 

Iiismostimponantthat J/IANYbcxjks from MANY culttircs be introduced 
andavailable toM ANY studi^nts and teachers, to avoidcrearing stereotypes. 

Criteria for multiethnic children's l iterature. 



(1 ) Consider the ethnicity and/or aiithority of ilie auihOI. Ethnic auiho:3 are sensitive to and 
knowlcdgeableaboutth^irown cultures. Mainstream authorsshould show the research and 
experience that backs their writing /illustrating of these books. Read the book jacket blurbs 
for author information 

(2) Know the diSl^ of original or reprint publication. Cultural sensitivity has gradually 
emerged only after the late 1960s. Bocks published prior to this date should be examiaed 
more carefully for patronising or denigrating atUtudes and content, 

(3) Watch for stcr cotvping in characterization, settings illustrations and language. 

(4) Examine the pl ai/content tQ enstirc the veracity of historical and cultural information and 
auitude. 

(5) Look for culturally relevant and/or universal ilism^^ 

(6) These books should of course, also meet Uic guidelines fnr npprnpriatc and v/orihwhilc 
children's literature. . 

The overriding criterion is tliat these books present a positive picture of the 
culture depicted They should help to reinforce the self esteem of minority 
children, and encourage interest and respect from all children andteachers. 



GLORIA JACKSON has been a school 
librarian and library administrator during 
the last 17 years. Her recent research 
culminated in a written Masters Project * 
Multiethnic Literature in the Elementary 
SchoolCurriculum (CSUS/l991).Cun'enUy 
she is an educational consultant presenting 
workshops on this topic. 



The purpose of this Newsletter is to 
present children's literature that reflects the 
many cultures present in our pluralistic 
scoiety. 

In order for these books to reach both 
minority and mainstream students, they must 
be inuroduced enthusiastically by teachers 
and librarians. 

My goal is to provide information t 
educators so that they will use these books 
with students, and so give all children pride 
in them selves and increased respect for other 
cultures. 



COURSES & CQNfFERENCES 

Gloria Jackson will give a course on 
^^^Multiethnic Literature K-8 

One Graduate Credit Unit - S90.00 

Saturdays. 9 - 12 noon 
February 29 - Mar 28, 1992 

Calif. State Univ, Sacramento 
CaU her at 916/417-1956 for 
further information. 



"CWIdren, not yet aware that it is dangerous to look too 
/ deeply at anything, look at everything, look at each 
other, and draw their own conclusions." jamrs iiaiduin * 



Xlhie Mtaror 




A Newsletter for K-8 Educators 

March 1992 
No. 3 



Editor Gloria D. Jackson 
Layout/Graphic: Lynn Clark 
Copyright : For permission for one- 
time copying, or district 
distribution, contact: 

Editor, Mirror 
45 Moonlit Circle 
Scaramemo, CA 95831 

The Purpose of this Newsletter is to 
present new and recent muluethnic 
books .It is hoped that the 
revicws^acuvities and related 
rcadinss will encourage teachers 
and librarians to enthusiastically 
inmxiucc these books to smdents, 
and use ihem in the classroom. 



Ignorance Breeds Fear 



K:iU..... 
AllNighr^Anpayi Bryan^ 

HtreCvmts thtCat f k^th and : 

SathottielTalking / Cfreenficld* 
Pedrcioihdihe Padre I A2vdtmz*^ 
PutblaStpryuUerl Hoj t- Goldsmith 

V^a&sa /A^Beflt/r^fw/ / Wnihrop 
tiiiiYdmanwhp Outshone the Sun 
Hbv^.^lactinej* : . • ' ....... . 



^Hut I he I\as1* Inch sUwvil 
III llic luist 

in llic WW, * 
;iii(J \\\v li \s Ih^y kiii w A\u)\\t 

llic mure Ihcy iiivi iUt dl" 
Maniac Mafiee I Spinelli 



MANIAC MACEE by Jcny SpineUi 
1990 Uulc, Brown &Co. 
ISBNO-316-80722-2 Gr.6.8* 




ChSidtencfthiRher / Crew / r: - 

Here Comes She Cat! Asch 

imafcADreamf /• USGPO 

ifawflcAfcyef /Spinelli 

ThtMpmeRapI}^\}tr$' 

A Summer Life ! Soto* 

TheTewrof the Impossible Goodbyes 

RcsobrceBpoM^^ 
TheMulticaloredhUrrorJCCBC 

Ethmc auihors.^Husiraicrs 

~GradcL«vclscsn be flexible 

dcpcncfingon smdcnt ability anditachct 



This Newbcry Award book is a siory 
about icsnage bravado - both white and 
black; about homelcssncss of the young 
and aione-ness of the old; about sports; 
about families, loving or cnjcily 
dysfunctional; about looking out for 
yourself and others. 

It is a Tall Tale - of the exaggerated 
strength and unusual humanity of teenage 
Jeffrey Lionel Magee He's John Henry 
overcoming the odds and Galahad 
searching for the GraiLThey call him a 
ManiaciThe other characters serve the 
story and its theme - and arc either very 
good or very bad! But ihey are always 
interesting. 

It is an Allegory of the Lion 
sitting down with the Lamb and sharing its 
food. If the current philosophy of muto- 
culturalism promotes honest 
confrontation as the way to understanding, 
then this is the book to take the message to 
kids of ail colors. A runaway white 
teenager from the West End (Maniac), 
arrives in an East End black 
neighborhood, withstands challenges, 
enjoys hospitality, sees beyond skin color 
and tries to spread this message of 
understanding to others - with varying 
succcss.Wcaving through the staccato 
sentences, pithy paragraphs and exciting 
exploits is the message that ignorance 
breeds fear and knowledge fosien 
understanding. 



HERE COMES THE CAT by Frank 
Asch & Vladimir Vagin(anist) Scholasuc 
1989 ISBN 0-59041859-9 Gr.l- 4-1- 

Before Boris Yeltsin became a household 
name, and the fear of the red menace had 
receded -this almost*wordless picture 
book was designed and illustrated by an 
American / Russian collaboration. The 
brightly colored pictures have white 
bubbles with the message - "Here comes 
the cat in both English and Russian. 
These words of alarm are carried by an 
alert mouse who enters each picture 
iniemipting the activities of mice-people 
at play and at work,and is soon followed 
by an anxious army of mice.Then a 
monstrous shadow of a cat's head appears 
which is followed by a giganuc but docile 
cat bearing a wagon on which is an 

enormous slab of cheese for the 
mice! 

ACTlVlllLS; 
Leaxn the simple Russian 
words (pronunciauon given), 
discuss the theme, write the story, create 
a bilingual picture book. Older smdents 
can discuss the symbolism, genre, and 
relevance to current events; create their 
own fables, parables or allegories. 
Compare with THE TERRIBLE THINGS I 
Buntine 





Some book ACTIVITIES 
have been suggested 
because multiethnic books 

need to be actively infused 

into the curriculum. Librarians 
and Uachers can wnrir tnvether to 
initiatey support and implement 
these or 
other activities. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Old Stories and the Storyteller 



VASIUSSA THE BEAUTIFUL. A 
Russian folktale adapted by Eli^bcth 
Winthrop Illustrated by Alexander 
:<oshkin.HarpcrComns Pub. 1991 ISBN 
0-06— 21662'X S15.89 Gr.1-4 

It is good to see another Russian/ 
American coilaix)ration in the retelling of 
the this tradlLional Russian folktale. This is 
great for Storytelling. It has many 
familiar folktale motifs- like the wicked 
stepmother; absent father; ill-trtated 
stepchild: dangerous forest; magic object; 
impossible tasks; handsome ruler who 
marries virtuous stepdaughter - all woven 
together in a story with a nice element of 
suspense, and enough new twists to keep 
the attention of any kids!. The culture- 
specific element is Baba Yaga , as 
omnipresent in Russian stones as Anansi 
is in African tales. Baba Yaga is usually 
an ugly hag/witch who tlies around in a 
mortar and threatens to cat people. 
The illustrations, are plentiful, colonul. 
and show traditional Russian costumes. 
The notes at ihe end have good 
infonnation on the story roots and the 
Baba Yaga motif; as well as on the 
Russian illustrator. This book is a winner! 



BABA YAGA; A RUSSIAN FOLKTALE 
retold by Eric A. Kimmcl Illusoated by 
M.?gan Lloyd. Holiday House 1991 
ISBN 0-8234^854.X Gr.lO 

Add this to your list of must-have picuire 
books. The traditional Cinderella motif 
takes a twist here in that the ill-creaied, 
good stepchild. Marina* is not beautiful* 
but has an ugly horn growing out of her 
forehead* and she has only one jealous 
stepsister. By being kind« Marina not only 
escapes being eaten by Baba Yaga* but her 
horn is removed and placed instead on the 
forehead of the grtedy sister. Of cour*e 
there is more to the story, but the 
humorous illustrations and slight iwist to 
the plot lend an air of irony to a tndidonai 
:heme« Good for storytelling. 



PEDRO AND THE PADRE : An 
Ancient Mexican Tale by Vema 
Aardema Ulus. by Friso Henstia Dial 
1991 ISBN 0^037^523-9 Gr.KO 

A trickster tale about a young Mexican 
boy who is lazy and uses many excuses 
but who gets his comeuppance eventually 
and is forgiven by the Padre. A deliglttful 
picture book with humorous but posiuve 
illustrations.Though sombreros are 
plentiful I was pleased lo notice there 
were also some other kinds of hats shown. 
Good for storytelling* 



ACnvmES: 
Rt^THEBOYOFTHE 
THREE-YEAR NAP fAatn 
Say, Compare and contrast 
the two lazy protagonists. Tell stones of 
other Tricksters • Coyote f Amencon 
Indian), Anansi and Brer Rabbit (African 
American) 



PUEBLO STORYTELLER by Diane 
Hoyt-Goldsmith. Photographs by 
Lawrence Migdale Holiday House 
1991 S14,95 ISBN 0-8234-0864-7 
Gr.2^ 

The photographs in this facnial book are 
culoue-specific and show acuvides 
engaged in by young April and her 
grandparents in the Cochin pueblo near 
Sanu Fe, New Mexico • making and 
baking breads moldiny a tr^ditinnal 
"Pueblo storvrftiler^' potterv fiytro. and 
learning the Bu£fak> dance. The whole 
book is so seamlessly constructed it reads 
like literature, and it also includes the 
Pueblo legend , "How the People Came to 
Earth*'. Pronunciations of Indian words 
and terms are given in the texL A glossary 
. of definidons and an index are 
ladded. 

jAcnvrriES: 

/The deschpnons of cooking, 
pottery making, dance, encourage 
replication in a classroom. 



THE WOMAN WHO OUTSHONE THE 
SUN: Th€ Ugtnd of Lucia Zinuno. 
From a Poem by Alejandro Cruz Martinez. 
Qlus. Fernando Olivera, Children's Book 
Press 1991 

liBN 0-89239-lOM Gr.1-4 

There is a legend bom the Zapotec Indians 
of OaxacOt Mexico about a Lucia Zenteno, 
the beautiful stranger with such long, 
lustrous hair tiiat when she went down to 
the nver to baihe,the fish loved to play in 
iL Lucia understood nature and had 
migicai powers that the viila.^ers did not 
understand. So they were a&aid and sent 
her ttom their village. But the river went 
with her and there was drought Tbt 
> Uagers apologised and she brought the 
riva back again to bless them. But Lucia 
disappeared and only left her spirit to help 
them "live with love and understanding." 
Lustrous illustxadons give a non-European 
norm to feminine beauty* The last page of 
the book has the story of the nagic death 
of the poeuauthor* Bilingual/Spanish 





TAR BEACH by Faith Ringgold 
author/artist Crown Pubs* 1991 
liBN 0-517-5803^4 libbdgGr.K.2 
TAR BEACH by Faith Ringgold 
author/artist Crown Pubs. 1991 
ISBN 0-517-580304 Ubbdg Gr.K-2 
This 1992 Caldecott Honor picmre 
book depicts the imaginadve journey of 
young Cassie, flying over her favorite 
spots in New York - Washington Bridge, 
Tar Beach, and the apartment rooftop 
where her Afiican American family plays 
cards on warm nights and the children 
sleep out imder the stars. 



ACTlVrriES: Compare with 
the 1992 Caldecoa Award • 
TUESDAY by David Weisner 



(fiogs flying away on lily pads) and 
ABUEIA byAnhurDoROS 1991 



*^„jiist as the river Riv(!S WAtvt to ;ifl who arc Ifiirsly, no mnller ^vh() they arr, so >i)ii must 
Icim to treat everyone with kindness, even those who swni diffrrtnt tn)m ' / //<• 
. ::~r^r7r ' Woman Wlm Outshone the Sun 



Rap. RhYthm and Remembrance 



THE MOUSE RAP by Walter Dean 
Myers. Harper 1990 
ISBN 0-06-024343-0 

The Mouse is a smart and coimdeni 14-yr- 
old who loves to rap. He lives in Harlem 
with his mother, and hangs around with a 
cUquc of three boys and three girls. This 
is their story, and it is too long to 
condense into a few sentences! Enough to 
say thai it describes family and friend 
rciaxionships, teenage challenges, and 

the city. There is humor, suspense, nice 
charactehzaiion, good story and a rap 
poem 10 introduce each chapter. The 
dialogue and descriDtions axe colorful and 
clean.. Gieat READ ALOUD. 
UcTTViriES: 
•Small group • Introduce the 

/Mouse to the Maniac, and crtaie 

a dialogue between them. Act it out 




A SUMMER UFE by Gary Soto 
Dell paperback, 1990 
ISBN 0-440-21024^ Gr.5-9 

This author has an observant eye, an 
amazing memory and apen that 
illuminates unnoticed scenes and 
unimportant episodes to make them 
memorable. The thirty-nine brief essays 
(two or three pages each) are decepuvcly 
simple yet crafted with artistry. Soto's 
loving but unsentimental tributes to his 
childhood in a Latino comroimity in 
Fresno, are always honest and posidvc, 
frcqucnUy funny and never trite. Teachers 
should keep the book at hand for quick 
and enjoyable" readalouds" in the 
class.(Or for their own 
relaxation!) 

AcnvrriES: 

Use for analysis, modelling of 




You've heard my story, you've 

dug my show 
You've rapped the rhythm and 

felt the flow 
But now it's time for The Mouse 
to split 

*Cause the tale is ended when the 
pieces fit 

NATHANIEL TALKISG byEloise 
Greenfield, nius Jan Spivey Gilchrist 
Writers and Readers Publishing Inc. Black 
Buuerflv Children's 3ks.^nf 1988 
ISBN 6-863 16.200-2 Gr.I-S 

The reader shares nine-year old 
Naihaniers happy and sad experiences 
through his talking - -which ranges from 
infectious rap to quieter blank verse 
poems, and culminating in some twtlve- 
bar-blues lyrics. Spivey's lovely studies of 
Nathaniel make him real At the end of the 
book the African American, award- 
winning author explains the sunicuire of 
the 12-bar-blues l>Tic. 

AcrrvrnES: 

Comp'^'-s cultural poeuc styles 
Model for dnwmc self ponr;ats 



creauve writing; and telling family stones. 
Class project - WHEN I WAS VERY 
YOUNG anthology of smdent stories! 




BIG MAMA'S by Donald Crews. 
GreenwiUow Bks.. 1991 ISBN 0688- 
09951-3 Gr.K-2 

The auihor/ardst paints his memories of 
summer trips to Grandma's bouse when he 
was young.We follow the four children 
and mother as tbey take the train to 
Cottondale, greet the grandparCTts, run 
exdiedly tbroogb tbe rooms and out into 
the yard, stable etc. to make sure 
everything is tbe same as the year before^ 
The last page shows a self portrait of tbe 
artist as he looks outattbe skyscrapen 
silhouetted against the night dry. **Some 
nights, even now. I think that 1 might 
wake up in the morning and be at 
Bigmaxna*s with the whole summer ahead 
of me.Tbere is a pleasing predominance 
of shades of brown as well as many 
primary colors that make the illustrations 
active and aoxactive. A book that extols 
the sense of family and beriuge in the 
black community. 

AUNT FLOSSIE'S HATS (AND CRAB 
CAKES LATER) by Elizabeth Fitzgerald 
Howard. Paintings by James Ransome. 
Clarion Bks. 1991 
ISBN 0-395-54682-6 K-2 



ALL NIGHT, ALL DAY; A CbUd's First 
Book of African-American Spirituals. 
Selected and lUuscraied by Ashley Bryan. 
Atheneum 1991ISBN 0-689-31662-3 
All grades 

Coretu Scott King award. 

Luminous paintings illustrate this latest 
collection of spirinials. It has been 
Ashley's mission to bring into print some 
of the hundreds of spiriniais that are being 
lose or appropriated by other musical 
genres. This indigenous music reflects the 
faith, courage, and joy of the African 
American heriage. 



A happy book of memories.with realistic 
paintings of the young Afirican American 
girls - Sarah and Susan, their attracdvc. 
matnre Aunt Ftossie and her comforubb 
home. And of course, the hats -of many 
cotors. emanating from chintz-covered 
hatboxes. The girls luve trying on the hats 
and bearing Aunt Flossie tell stories about 
ihem. Their favorite is tbe time her best 

Sunday bat flew ofif, fell in the river and 
had to be rescued by a dog! After such an 
experience she went for crab cakes - and 
that is what they do again in the book. 
-Ciab ca kff taste best after stories..about 
Aunt Flossie's hats'' 




BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



IHAVEADREAM;A Cmcdou of Black Americans on U^. Pasta f€ Stamps. 

wmrS portraiu «e back.to*ack «ad the binding » not remforeed. 
Good for DlSPLAYMdEEFERENCE 



Escape from Fean.. Journey to Freedom 



THE YEAR OF IMPOSSIBLE 
GOODBYES bySookNyuiChoi. 
Hougnton 1991 ISBN 0-395.57419-6 

This harrowing uie of oppression, 
survival and eventual CSC2PC4S loidby 
lOyear-old Sookun, who lives with her 
ramiiy in North Korea during the 
l940s,The fint chapters relate the 
degrading conditions of their life under the 
Japanese occupaiion.The overlords are 
vicious in their demands and punishments 
- There is a brief, poignant description of 
a simple birthday party, but even that has a 
oagic end. In 1945, the Japanese leave but 
-ne Russians arrive with a totalitarian 
regime that becomes as onerous- The last 
'jircc chapters have good ,ipense in 
icscnbing the escape of Sookun and her 
younger brother to the South,Thcy are left 
j'>:one to endure hunger, pain, cold and nsk 
2S they make uhe dangerous journey to 
freedom and eventually scramble under 
'wHe barbed wue marking the 38th paraileU 
and so reach safety. . The story, rooted in 
ihe expcnences of the author, fosters 
respect for the Koreans- and empathy for 
'Jicir suffcnngs.U's description of the 
Japanese occupying forces has many 
parallels with Nazi oppression in World 
Warn Europe. 



"There was one of two tilings 
I h^^Q. rigbl-to. Liberty or 
Deaiii. If I could not have 
oncTwould have the other, 
for no man should lake me 
alive" HdnieJ Tubman 



If you are not already a subscriber and 
wish to receive the tlnal issue- (May-^) 
or the preceding issues -i Incroductory-^u 
January-^ Marcn-^?3 send your name, 
address and two 29 cents stamps tar each 
issue recuested :o • 
The MIRROR. -5 McontitCrcie, 
Sacramenio, CA 95S3 1 



CHILDREN OF THE RIVER by Linda 
Crew. Delacone 1989, Dell paperback 
1991 ISBN0-UO.21022 Gr.6.9+ 

A well-written romance about a young 
Cambodian refugee in a Corvallis high 
school and how she confronts the cuimre 
conflict and growing love between herself 
and the outstanding school athlete. In 
flashback it describes her desperate escape 
from Cambodia on an overloaded freigiiter 
which is not equipped with enough shelter, 
food or medical aid for the hundreds of 
refugees aboanL There is discomfort, 
disease and death. How Sundara deals 
with these memories and exorcises the 
guilt she feels, is part of the plot, and well 
resolved. 

The author sympatheucally descnbcs 
cultural convenuons and cross-cultural 
communicauons^She acknowledges the 
help of many local Cambodians. 



COMMENTS 

Even though funds are being cut there is a 
high priority for serving the needs of our 
multiethnic student popularion. Now is th? 
time of ask for monies through district 
btidyets or <>pec!al yrants to purchase yood 
VfULTTCULTU RALLITERATURH that 
can 

provide reading that is relevant to uhe 
diverse student populations and as such 
increase self esteem and reading 
moQvation (especially in at-risk snidents) 

- posidvely retlcct a variety of cultures 
and so foster understanding, balance 
negative personal experiences and 
improve school climate 

- suppon and enrich the curriculum 
with mformauon on minority 
contnbutions to American history 

- satisfy the Framework's mandate for 
wcil-written , age-appropnaw literature 
that exoiorcs worthwhile themes. 



A BOAT TO NOWHERE by Maureen 
Crane Wartski, Westmmster 1980 New 
Amencan Lib. .1981 Only paperback. 
ISBN 0451-16285-1 Gr,6-8 

if you missed this in hardback the 
paperback is available.This is a truly 
adventurous tale about the courage and 
perseverance of a family of •'boat people'* 
cscaoing from the Viet Cong in a small 
fishing vessel that doesn't even have a 
compass! It is a compelling story of 
devastating storms, desperate measures, 
lack of food,sickness , death and evenrual 
rescue and freedom. Great readaloud 1 




The Multicolored Mirror; 
Cultural Substance fn Literature 
for Young Adults* Edited by Merri 
Undgren, Cooperative Children's Book 
Center. 1991 Highsmith Press. P.CBox 
800, Fort Atkinson, Wisconsin 53538- 
0800 Paperback ISBN 0-917846^5-2 
S19.75 

This reference 'gem' contains the speeches, 
papers and panel discussion given at the 
Conference of the same name held in 
Wisconsin in 199l,plu$abibliography of 
lOl recommended multicttimral books. 
The presenters are well-known in this 
Geld - Rudine Sims Bishop, Tom Feelings, 
Elizabeth Howard, Walter Dean Myers, 
Doris Seale, George Ancona. 
It is very well wnaen and includes good 
Information on the history of these books, 
their evaluatioa, illussaiioo, value for the 
child, and publication. rk>yi'tmt<^Lhis! 



• Story is a universal mirror that shows us the truth about ourseives^ Jnside story we can 
accent pain, find justice, and experience exaitauon .. Story aerines humanity 
' Storytelling by Livo (1986) 



ERIC 



TEtue Mirror 




A Newsletter for K-8 Educators 

Mav 1992 
No. 4 



MulticultSi T.itfirature Reflecting a Pluralistic Society 



Editor: Gloria D. Jackson 
Layout/Graphics: Lynn Clark 
Copyrigtit 1991 
Subscription form enclosed 

Ibt purpose of this Newsletter is to 
present new and recent multiethnic 
books. It is hoped that the reviews 
and activities will encourage teachers 
and librarians to enthusiastically 
introduce these books to snidents and 
to ttse them in the classroom. 



TnvisWIeTHrem UcSiSa^"^' 



■ishaiimrBi^ 




^ On Uaw tried to di stroN 
' I sh.ill mil Im d 

W lu ll \<*4I ll .11 1^ -'I 

W lu II Mill Vi i, V.ivi 
\s lur int\ 

I shall nnflu- iiitiM d. 




rYgi'nr'fldfeleVels^ca n be'flexibl^ 



77f£ THET WALKED; Rosa Parks 
and the Monsgomery Bus Boycott by 
Beatrice Sic2cl Fotir Winds Pr. 1992 
ISBN (M)2-782631-7 S13.95 fillirS 

Rosa Parks, a modest black woman, was 
liie caiaiyst for ibe Civil Rights Movement 
of the sixties. Though this is not a 
biography it gives background 
irn'OToanon and explains her growing 
politicai awareness that resulted in her 
refusal 10 give up her seat on the bus to a 
white man. 

The book foUows the ensuing bus boycoc 
from its first uncenain days, through its 
gathering strength and final victory when 
the Supreme Court dedaitd the 
segregation laws of Alabama to be 
illegaLThis is a dramatic story of an 
aroused minority wielding power through 
non-violence, careful organization and 
plodding perseverance. They were 
inspired by the rallying cries of Martin 
Luther King Jr who rose to prominence as 
tbeir r h a rir^^*^^ l«der. Tliis wcU-wntten 
boot with accompanying photographs, 
concludes with information on the life, 
wockandrccognixiooof Ms. Parks after 
these events and to this day. 



ROSES SING ON A NEW SNOW: A 
Delicious Tale by Paul Yee, Illustrated by 
Harvey Chan. Macmillan 1991 ISBNO- 
02-793622-8 S13.95 QlJ^zI 

In this realistic little tale set in the New 
World a: the mm of the ccnmry wc meet 
Maylin who cooked delicious food fa her 
father' s restaurant in Chinatown-but the 
credit was given to her two'fai and lazy" 
brothers.When the Governor of South 
rhina visits Chinatown, Maylin prepares a 
delectable dish for him which is so good 
tUat the Governor wishes to meet the cook 
and learn how to make it. Read the book 
to find out what happens next! This is not 
a 'fairy-taie' endmg and has a nice wuch 
of humor, realism and poetic justice! 
A refreshing story. Its theme has 
mu*'iculuiral implications, "^ven with 
common basics there are unique 
differences that must be acknowledged." 
The illustrations dance right along with 
the plot and the expressions on the faces 
of the characters are almost a stocy in 
themselves! 



ArrrVYTT^-^: Predict an 
endingi>iscu^ the role of 
women. Discuss coiz?non- 
aiities and differences in 
cultural foods. Tic m with Everyoody 
Cooks Rice (MIRR0R#2) 




''..although it is important for 
each of us to cherish our own 
special heritage, 
IbeUeve, 
above everything else, 
we must all celebrate our 
common humanity.^* 

Yoshiko Uchida 



ERLC 




CURRICULUM: U.S.HisiOTy 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Who am I, Really ? 

^■{£ ISVISIBLE IHREAD: an 
::u:ocio2'-sshv by Yosniko Uctida. _ 
Me$sncr?«Jbs.l99l ISBN (W71-7416.-2 

•7/£ LOST CAROLS: A Memoir by 
Laurencs Ysp. Msssaer 1991 'SBNO- 
671--^159-t 
■Cir, Ht: 



Nei 




"Jrt some damaged famihts, books 
about people who love each other 
X be a child's only Ufeline to 
t hi> future." Ann Cameron 

SIGHT OS SEICHBORHOOD 
STREET by Hoise Gresnfieli Illus. by 
Jan SpiveyCHlcJuist. Dial NY 1991 
ISBN 0-803743778-9 Gr.K-3 



A Strong tbeiae ninmng irougli 
-.uiucuiiural Utcmurt is self 
.aaficauon (whicii is diffcRnt from self 
JOT). TTie first $«? in undeisunding 
je -hypbenattd-American- is to be 
sensitive to tee diciiotomy and/or culture^ 
cooilictiiut exists witbinsucb persons, it 

IS interesung to know thai tbese two 
autbon. *bose ooolcs have done muca tor 
'M scif-ideatificaoon of Asian American 
caiidrts. had the^ owu problems of 

identmcacoo. 

For most of bcr life YOSKDCO wondered 
•"Vbai was I. anywayr As a child, she 
absolutsly refused to leara to read and 
wte lao'anese. and visiting in Japan as a 
child she felt like a fcreigner..."3ui the 
sad tnim was. in America too. I was 
jcrceived as a foieigner". So - -I wasn't 
[z2ily totally American, and I wasn t 
lotaiiv Jaoanese. I was a iaixnire...and 
could never be anything else." It wasn t 
until sae visited Japan as a young woman. 
UM -thmgs began to turn anxind (andl I 
..^A,^,r^ aho I reallv was." 
'In mv neighbornood I had grown 
up thinking that I was as 
American as all the other 
children" Laurence Yep 



vrojays- "U toot me yean to realize 
tli I *^ Giiaese wbetbcr I wanted to be 
or not. .And it was somethinf I had to learn 
to accscc to know its strengths and 
-ondersiaad its weaknesses." Both authors 
new uB oefore the sixties and the ethnic 
-r.'" movement -In the I950siew people 
to be strange and different. wntes 
Yep. But even now. those dtiiens 
outside the .Amencan d.-ram - whether 
•trough race, coior. or econtxnics - cry 



Hie sbon . realistic poems and 
reassuring Ulusaations help to remind us 
tijai in a wald of erupting violence there 
are still loving families worshipping 
togeUier and nurturing their children. 
There soil are neij,bbortioods where 
children play street games together m 
saiety.and adulu work out problems at 
fficeungs. The simple words, and lyrical 
nhrases remind us of a child afraid of the 
mzht. and young men resolutely tummg 
awav tttjm "ITi* SelUr". Thai the coionui 
and positive illustratioos feaoire African 
Americans give the book added power but 
don- 1 limit its appeal. Once again eoise 
Greenfield has given us a -fambly ume 
book of hope and beauty. 
ACnvmES: 
Read aloud. Memorise 
'Fambly Tune" 

" We are here now, living in 
your midst, 
but you do not see us." 
Doris Seaie, Nanve American 




THE .MOST BEAVTIFVL PUr' IS 
THE WORLD by Ann Cameron. 
Drawic(?s by Thomas B. Allen. "Hiomas 
A. Knopf. NY 1988 57p .dr. 

This neighborhood is in San Pablo. 
Guatemala, where 7- >t old Juan Uves 
vMh his zrandmother. after having been 
abandoned bv his father, and then by his 
mother.. His grandmother makes a Uvmg 
by selling arroz con Uche - rice with milk 
. in the liiarketplace jnd she sets him up as 
a shoesbine boy so he can bring in some 
money. Juan teaches himself to read, 
eventually goes school, and is a 
very good smdent 

The neighborixxxi is described simply 
through Juans eyes- the mountains, 
volcanoes, lake, fields of com. hiU-stdes 
with coffee berry bushes, flowers, onoles. 
flocks of v-ild parrotsa few cars and 
buses jnules and people walking. At the 
end of this shon book Juan sees a colomd^ 
uxirist poster adverusing San Pablo as the 
most beautiful place in the world* ile asks 
his grandmother if this is leaUy so. She 
answers. 'The most beautiful pUa m 
the world, is »oy pUc« you can hold 
your head up-and be proud of who you 

auaor is not Lacno but Uvcs mos. or 
the year in Gaaittnaia. 

AcnvrriES: 

Use as a model for students to 
describe and ^Tiic about iheir 
own neigtibonicods* 




CUnonBks. 1992 U.95 



■«A.^o am I? ■'^Tiere do I fit m? Do i 
iave wora?" 

"^ese autobiooanhies give excsuest 
•-Iisats ;r.to th'e lives, famiiia and 
^r.isss c: acsc rwo aattcrs. ana *iil get 
you rereading tbcr books. 



DRACOSFLY'S TALE 
r-ioldandiUustratsdby Kristma Rodaaas 
ISBN 0-395-57003 ilr . K-3 

^ Zunilegend ^bicb fln.^ 

(New Me«co>who were blessed with a f^^J^^^^, them drought and 
iiiberaiely wasted much of the con and the ^°^^^.^\^o children are left 

behindbyBistakc.andthebrotherci««adfago^^^ 
relevant 00 a school campus! 




'When I talk ahnuf ciilinrr I am 
^falkiin: nhfftff a pnnif iff r/nr" 
linn I erlni}[\ 



Hot off the Press 



o o o 



ff OAiVC ASH; A VIETNAMESE* 
AMERICAN BOY, By Diane Hoyi- 
joldsmith. Photogrsphs by Lawrence 
Micdaie. Holiday House 1992 
ISBNO-8234-0948-1 S1455 Ssl^ 

HOW MY FAMILY UVES IN 
AMERICA, bv Susan Kuklin. Bradbury 
1992 ISBN 0-02-751239-8 S13.95 fii* 
hi 

There is an insistent call for multi- 
culniral liteiatuxe ibat relates to the 
coatcmporary ctbnic communities in this 
country. Photo journalists are helping to 
fill the need with attractive pictures and 
authentic accounts of the lives of new 
immigrants and ethnic families. We meet 
Hoang Ann. and learn why and how he 
r^m^ 10 America, and what bis life is like 
aow in this country. There is amap, a 
glossary and two popular legends of the 
cuimre included. A well done boolc for 
reading, browsing, or using as a resource. 



ERLC 



Through pboiograpias and text SUSAN 
KUKLIN introduces the reader briefly to 
three faiaiiies - Puerto Rican, African 
Amcncan and Chinese American. Of 
special interest are the words and terms in 
each language that relate to the family 
rclaiiooshjps and activities. Phonetic 
pronunciaaons are given. The book 
should not be dismissed as a regression \o 
the -food. fun. fiests" approach to 
muiticulrjraiismJboto essays provide 
iniormaaon and an authentic reflection of 
a minonty child giving him/her validity, 
self esteem and respect. 

ACnvmES: 

Blow*up and post the foreign 
words and tbeirproDUPnarions 
around the classroom 
walls.Create opportunities for 
all the children to use them. 
Invite a Madruuk a yay(yab- 
ec) or a Baba to visit the 
riaetT t ym to talk abut their 
family life and cultural 
pacems. Eacoorage diildren 
10 bring in 'family words'' in 
other laofiuges. Create a 
multilingual atmosphere. 
Hona biingual childreniiave 
a snack of m ma itoAg miin- 
the kids will love it and say 
Muchasgraaasl 



LUTLE BROTHER by Allan Baillie. 
Viking Pencuin 1992 
ISBN 0-670.84381-4 iii^ 

ATTENTION all teachers desperately 
looking for a good read-aloud story to 
hold the aitention of older kids during the 
last weeks of school! 

Get a copy of .this rousing escape story set 
in the aftcmaih of the Viet Nam war. 
Two brothers escape from the Khmer 
Roug?^ after being in forced labor for 
ahnostayear. They get separated and the 
younger brother, Vithy desperately tries 
alone to reach the Thailand bonier and 
safety. The author effectively explores 
Vithy's feelings of fear, exhaustion and 
growing confidence as he follows an 
arduous trail going north, meeting 
different kinds of people, who help him in 
various u-ays. When he reaches the Thai 
border, it is ctoscd.but he gets help from 
the Red Cross and the intcmanonal team 
of doctor?. There is a happy ending, which 
I will not divulgelThe author has visited 
and researched this area and its recent 
history, and acknowledges the help of on- 
scene orcanizaiions. 




AcnvmES: 

Read aloud - (short chapters). 
Enlarge the map from the book, 
and Chan Vithy' s escape route. 





/ note the obvious differences 
in the human family 
Some of us are senous, 
some thrive on comedy 

We seek success in Finland 
are bom and die in Maine. 
In minor wavs we differ, 
in major we re the same. 

I note the obvious differences 
between each sort and type 
but we are more alike, 
mv friends 
than we are unalike. 

Excerpts from poem 
"Human ramiiv 

in / Shall Not be Moved /Angtiou 



* r » 



STEAL AWAY by Jennifer Armstrong. 
Orchard Bks. 1992 Gr.5-8 

This book is a throwback to the •^good- 
white-person-belps-poor-black 
person"attimde.Itis an uzUikely escape 
story, told in confusing flashhark of two 
13 -year old girls, Susaimah axKi her 
personal slave, Bethlebem,(Sboiild one 
equate the flight of a white child from an 
over-stcict relative, with the escape of a 
black slave, where capmre means death?) 
Susannah is in control even when she 
makes foolish mistakes that endanger 
them. The acmal escape is very tame when 
compared with other novels about daring 
escapes of slaves- escapes which ihSX 
planned and executed. When Susannah 
gets very sick Bethlehem goes for help 
0oyal-slave saves-white-mastcr syndrome). 
Much is made of the sttpposed 
"friendship" of the two girls, but when 
they reach freedom, Beth decides to 
continue on to Canada, rather than go with 
Susannah to her home irr VctmonL (Her 
independence bercis a r e d eemin g feature) 
Susannah is am?^^^ axxl hurt at this 
decision! The girls don't see each other for 
fifty years, until Susannah goes to Canad a 
to visit an ailing Beth • and that's where 
the story starts in the book. I found the 
point of view patronising, the 
moralising too obvious and the 
premise improbable, 
NOT RECOMMENDED 
Written in consultation with Patricia 
Sandefur, African American librarian 

Good escape stories - 
A Girl Called Bey I Joyce Hansen* 
Ttds Strange New Feeling I Julius Lester*. 

Throughout American^ from north 
to south, the dominant culture 
acknowledges Indians as objects 
of study, but denies them as 
stdfjects of history. 



Eduardo Caleano 



COMMENTS, QUESTIONS AND OPINIONS 



Multiculturaiism is an evolving 
philosophy.The last few decades have 
seen different auitudes. strategies and 
mateiiais« embraced or 
repudiaicd-Rcccnily muiiicuitural 
ciiildren's Uicraoire is being 
acknowledged as a small pan of this 
movementlis role is in the process of 
being identified, analysed and promoted. 
With increasing atxcnuon from the 
publishers, and even from the popular 
press* new questions, and new answers to 
old concerns are arising. 
Librarians and teachers using these books 
need to be await of and involved in this . 
intcrcsung debate. 

This section will explore this dcbau. 
If you have questions or opinions, send 
them in (hut keep them brieO 

QUESTION: [)o legends and folkiaies 
from many cultures have ANY value for 
muiiicuimral cducauon?^ Shouldn't we 
use instead, picnire books.ficdon and ncn- 

flCUOn reiatmg >^ ^f^ryji^^r^^rv <>>hn!C 

groups ui tUe U.S.? OuUe Itaya. M£A 
Saoamcnio.) 

QUESTION: An: their special strategies 
to use witn inaoducing multicjinirai 
uusnoire. so that suidcnts' attimdes may 
be posiuvely aifcc'^cc? 
Think about and discuss these 
questions. Send me your opinions, and 
look for the next issues to report on 
these topics* 

THANKS to E>elorcs VinaL Disnia 
Ufaranan, Redwood Gey Bemcntary 
Scaoois for sending nc a comment by 
a teacher who noted thai there were some 
inacciraaes in the clothing of the Indians 
in Jefers' book. Brother Ea^(le Sister Sky 
(reviewed Jan. 92, She also seat in 
Chief Seattle's original speech in its 
eaiircry. Did you nonce thai Jeffcrs' book 
was on the New York Tunes aduil Best 
SeilerLisi! 

KEL? NEEDED: One reader wants to 
know if any <r^/>ol has ugd21gi Its 
^M;#y/4 ^dtt^.y ii^t to add and include 
muiticiiturai Utcraimr pubiisbed after 
1975? If sa couid you send me a list of 
such niles and I ^lil send it ca to her. 

FRir 



QUESTION: ^rrthf ^"^^ 
miiftirjifvrraj fooV< r» ift^ tHof g?| written 



The A&ican American anist/lllustrator 
Tom Feelings says 'Truly auihendc 
multicultural books are created • written 
and illustrated • by people who belong to 
'ht race, culture or nation of origin which 
is reflected in the Mr^^"^^^^^ 
y\mr) It is, of course, self evident that 
such authors and artists have the best 
insights, attimdes and knowledge of their 
own culmres. 



3ut there arc some good books in this 
field that arc act wnttcn by ethnic persons. 
Th^ f-^ril^rr ^^^"^ T.ibrarv 
To|!mai devoted a special sccuon to 'The 
Many Faces in Children's Books", and 
provided some new answers to tnis 
quesuon. 



THINK AHEADl 

Subscribe Today for Next Year. 

I invite you to use the CDC^^^^^ ^Q™ to 
subscribe to THE MIRROEL for the next 
school year. Note that the periodicity and 
format will be changed though the 
objectives and content will remain the 
same. There will be fewer issues , but 
more pages, more reviews and more 
information- More books are coming into 
this field now, and though 1 read many 1 
can only review a few in the Newsletter. 
The WINTER issue's Annouted List of 
recent Recommended Multicultural 
Literature, K-S will include these 
additional titles. 



ANN CAMERON, the author of the 
much-loved "Julian-stories'* books is of 
Scandinavian ancestry but spends most of 
the year now living in Guatemala. She 
asks "^What entides any writer to draw ihe 
poruait of a culnirc.. [or] a reader to judge 
that ponnit? \ and atiswers, **Our license 
10 creaie..is not a particular racial., 
.background. It is our humanncss.'*. She 
continues with an aniculate argument that 
decries the •^pigeonholing [of] people'Mhe 
"aiitizht radai companments" and the feet 
that such reasoning could restria ethnic 
authors to wnting only about their own 
culmres. 

MILDRED PITTS WALTER, the African 
American award-winning author says, 
aeate images for ail children within and 
outside of the black experiencc....[to 
show] thai we are, as human beings, very 
much alike, but cuinirally different...''. 

My opinion, as an evaluaior, is that a non- 
eitaic writer or illustrator should presem 
to the reader their rcseardi. expcneace or 
other authority to validate their woric. 



INDIVIDUAL SUBSCRIPTION 
Stamp out Stamps! 
I have been wjJlowing in stamps this year! 
Pretty ones too! However, I feci it is 
simpler both for you and me to use checks. 
I have made a careful evaluation and set 
the subscription to barely cover my costs 
(taking into account the limited 
membership at this time.) 



GROUP SUBSCRimON 
Easier for Me, Cheaper for You 
The purpose of this Newsletter, is to get 
the word out to teachers directly* or 
through librarians, to ti<g good 

Because I have had several requests this 
last year for permission to copy THE 
MIRROR for particular inservice 
workshops , I have created a subscription 
category where discicts etcJiavc 
pamission to copy and distribute this 
Newsletter to teachers, parents and library 
staff. 

PLEASE GET THE WORD OUT! 




Hie Mirror 




A Newsletter for K-8 educators and parents 

Fall 1992 
No. 5 



Reflecting Culturally Diverse Children's Books 



Reviewed in this Issue 

Ahyoka and the Talking Leaves J 
Roop 12-4) 

MA/ioik/ YamaielI-4] 
*Bawshou Rescues the Sun / Yeh 

*Desert Mermaid/ Desicvto lps-21 
*Elijah/s Angel I Rosen/Robinson 
12-61 

Hoang Breaks the Lucky Teapot/ 

Biccklei (ps-11 

Island Baby I Keller Ips- 1 ) 

*Just Like Martin I Davis |7-8+] 

*Kenji & the Magic Geese I 

Johnson /Tsieng [1-31 
Listening Silence I Root INRl 
Un'e Flute I Goble [3-61 
Mama, Do Yon Love Me /Joosse 

Ips-n 

*MoonUulvlTm (2-61 
Moon Rope I E\\\cxi\\-1\ 
^Neighborhood Odes I Soio (4-8+1 
*One More River to Cross I 
Husk ins 

Sami and the Time of Troubles/ 
Hcidc 13-6+1 

Saturnalia! Fleischman [7-81 
Save mv Rain Forest I Zak (2-51 
Secret of the Seal I Davis (3-51 
*Sing to the Sun I Bryan (AlIl 
*Thirteen Moons on a Turtle's 
Back I 
Bruchac (1-51 

Talking / Knighi (3-81 

You re m\ Nikki I Eisenberg [ps- 1 1 




SING 
TO 
THE 
SUM 



POFMS 

AND PICTURES 
lY 

ASHLEY BRYAN 



EMC 



* Ethnic auihovs/illusiraiors 
! I Grade levels can be flexible. 

Editor: Gloria D. Jackson 
Layoui/Grapliics: Lynn Clark 
Co pyright. 

The pin pose ol this newsletter is to 
encourage the use of culturally 
diverse books in K-8 schools.by 
reviewing new books^ suggesting 
curricular activities, and discussing 
iNSues surrounding this literature. 



SING TO THE SUN: Poems and pictures 
by Aslilcy Bryan HaipctCoIUns 1992 
ISBN O-06-O20833-3 AlLAttI 

Ashley Bryan is a well known and loved 
artist, author and scoryiclter Through the 
yearsjic has given meaning to the works of 
oUier poets tluough his inspiring and 
invigorating readings. Now, at last, he has 
penned his own poems and illustrated them 
with pictures that have Uie luminosity of 
stained gliiss windows. The sunshine and 
waicr, tlowers and Fish, birds and animals 
of tlic Caribbean islands give exuberance 
lo (lie pictures, as do the Tigures that glory 
in their color - the bouncing children, the 

THE MOON LADY by Amy Tan. 
Illusuatcd by Gretclien Shields. 
Macmillan. NY 1992 
ISBN 0-02-788830-4. r.r. 2>4 

Taken from the author's- Joy Luck Club - 
this is the story of The Moon Lady as told 
by a Chinese-American grandmother. She 
recalls lier experiences as a 7-yr-old-girl in 
China, her belief in the Moon Lady until 
she comes up againsi reality, and her 
experience of falling into the river when 
her father rented a party boat lo cetobiate 
{\K Moon Lady fesuval. This skeleton 
pkH does not do justtec to the absorbing 
Amy Tan style of narration which melds 
laniasy aixl reality skillfully, inuoduccs 
conflict and suspense gendy, weaves in 

id 



artist, the beaded lady, Uie sioryteller..Uie 
pretty girl, the man with a honi, Uie 
mother waving farewell. Tlie sensitive ;uid 
rhythmic poems are short, and in varying 
styles. They extol love for family, coimnu- 
nity and heritage. 

..."On the beach 
Other children 
Dig to China 

I dig 
To Africa". 
What a joyful experience! Ashley sings of 
his roots, and all the songs are beautiful.. 
CURRICULUM: 
LanguagiLAils- Poetry 




description and character dcvclopmeni, 
focuses on personal feelings and tlmughis, 
and provides a cultural ambience tliat is 
unobtrusive yet rich wiih dcisiil. 



Traditional Tales to Read and Tell 




ERIC 



RA WSHOU RESCUES THE SUN: A HAN 
FOLKTALE by Chun-Chan Yeh and Allan 
Baillie WiUi illusirations by Michelle 
Powell. ScholasticNY 1991 
ISBN 0-590.45453-6 C.r, 1-4 

This long I'airy tale has been ad<ipted 
collaboraiively by a professor from 
Beijing. China and an Australi^'i auUior . 
I hc King ol ihe Devils stole the Sun. Iliis 
plunged Uie l:uid into darkness and 
wiUiercd all die rice plants. Liu Chun 
embarks on ihc dajigerous journey to 
rescue Uie Sun.wiUi a golden phoenix lo 
guide him - but he never returns. Mean- 
while, his wile bares a son, Bawshou .One 
day the golden phoenix returns alone. He 
touches tJic child Bawshou who magically 
tjrows lo ihe siaiure of a giimt in a very 
shon lime, ;uid ilicn he goes in quest of die 
Sun. lliere are many hardships and 
dangers, but widi die help of diree magic 
gills, lie linds ihe Devils' home and die 
dying sun.. lie vanquishes the devils, and 
icsiorcs Ihe sun lo Ihe sky.We never Icani 
il he leuinied home! But "diat's die way it 
was, a dioiisand years ago" and now the 
West Uike ill I'-astem China has a pagoda 
called Bawshou. "Tliat is die way it is". 
I he illtisirations are colorful, but not 
overpowering even Uiough diey envelope 
Ihe lexi on double page spreads.llie people 
tlcpicicd are realislic and non-stercotypic. 
I he devils seem to be wearing devil 
masks, which will delight ralher Uiaii scare 
children! It is die familiar mydi motif of 
i!(Hxl vaiu|Uisliiiig evil, but is grounded in 
Ihe geography ajid cullure of China. Our 
I c view commitiee gave diis high marks. 
i\y 1-4 

( 1 lURK n II .1 iM: - liingjiagfi Arts - 

Diamahsc (kids will clamber to play the 
devils.) M - Miike devil masks! SciCllCC - 
Why we need sunshine. 
Al .S( ) Ki: Al>: Drni^onjly's tale I Rodaiias 
Anow lo (he Sini i Mcdcnnott 
O jcck inyih - Pvrsvphone 



LOVE FLUTE . Story and illustrations by 
Paul Goble. Bradbury Pr., N.Y. 1992. 
ISBN 0-02-736261-2. 3>6 

Paul Goble has impeccable credentials 
for writing and illustrating traditional 
stones of die Plains Indians and the 
Lakoia naUon. Yet, recognising the 
current mulUcultural emphasis on 
auUienticity, he provides an impressive 
list (40 lines) of references he consulted, 
and gives informaUon on where to 
purchase audio-cassette tapes of u^di- 
tioiial Lakota flute songs. The long 
introduction explains die audientic 
courtship u^iUons from dieir heritage, 
and die role of die love flute 

The story itself, is simple - 
A young man, too shy to 
approach die girl he loves, 
goes on a journey and is 
given a cedar flute by two 
Elk men. On die return 
home he gadiers die sounds 
of the birds and forest into 
his flute and creates his 
own beautiful music by 
which he woos his girl, 
when he returns to die 
village. Goble*s illustra- 
tions are stylish and 
attractive..This is a picture 
book for young children, 
but since the content deals 
widi love and courtship 
traditions it could be 
effectively used widi older 
students. 
CURRICULUM: . 
Ijingnaye Arts - Research and tell 



folktales and legends diat center on 
musical instruments. (Mydi - Orpheus; 
etc) 

Mn<;ic -Get audio cassette tap(e s of flute 
music to play in class. 




CATCH THE WHISPER OF THE WIND by 
Cheewa James, Illustrations by David and Jean 
Villasenor. Horizon 2000, 3330 Union Springs 
Way, Sacramento, CA 95827. 
lliis paperback book of tnspiratk>nal quotes 
from Ihe American Indian heritage and people 
is allraciively packaged wiih an audk> cassette 
of ethnic songs and music. Tht American 
Indian quotatlont tcattcrcd In thit Iwuc arc 
from this book. 



KENJl AND THE MAGIC GEESE 
by Ryerson Johnson. Illustrated by Jean 
and Mou-sien Tseng. Simon and Schuster 
Bks. for Young Readers, NY 1992 
ISBN..0-671-75974-4 Gr. K.3 

Children will fmd diat this folktale from 
Japan has an unusual twist. The double- 
page illusu^Uons are realisUc and culture- 
speciflc showing young Kenji, his family, 
their home 

and village, and die wild geese diat fly 
overhead Tlie plot centers on die beautiful 
wild geese painted on die special scroll in 
dieir house. Read die tale to And out why 
die number of geese on die scroll magi- 
cally change from Ave, to fotur and then to 
seven! Children will enjoy the sHght 
suspense and satisfying resolution. Kenji 
is a resourceful litde guy, who diinks and 
acts independently and creatively. Our 
review conunittee gave this an endiusiastic 
**diumbs up". 
CURRICULUM: 

Kanyuaye Arts - Stop die story and have 
children predict what will happen next. 

SUKEY AND THE MERMAID by Robert 
San Souci. lUusuated by Brian Pinkney. 
Four Winds Pr., 1992 
ISBN 0-02-778141-0 14.95 GxJScl 

A weil*crafted retelling of an African 
American folktale widi unusual illustra- 
tions. Widi rhydimic language and some 
Mocal* dialogue die auUior tells a story 
that has many twists and tums.lt is about 
Sukey, who was ill-treated by her step- 
fadier , ran away and met a mermaid - 
Mama Jo - who befriends her, gives her 
gifts, shelter, advice. Protects her from die 
evil stepfadier and punishes him, so diat 
Sukey lives ha^ oily ever after. At die end 
of the book tht audior traces his search for 
die roots of diis folktale. (Such details 
give validity to a mainstream audior 
writing an edinic book.) 
CURRICULUM: 
I ^nyiiay^ Artn - Storytelling and 
dramatisation. 



stories of the Here and Now 



rommentarv: 



Recognition for multicultural children's literature is 
increasing and now there is a cry for more contempo- 
rary stories about ethnic minority children and their 
communities* In the May issue of THE MIRRORt I 
asked readers to think about the relative merits of 
contemporary stories as against the traditional 
folktales that abound in children's literature. Since 
then 1 have received input from the Review Commit- 
tee. 

Trnditionnl Tales > 



There is a feeling that folktales provides roots for 
ihe understanding of a culture - both for the minority 
and mainstream readers. 

In comparing such stories from different ciiltures it 
is also worthwhile to see the uncanny similarities in 
theme, motif, character or plot. So that, even as these 
books clothe the uniqueness of a heritage in geo- 
graphical and visual roots, yet they can show a com- 
monality that encourages understanding between 
cultures. 



ContfrinporarY stories . , ^. , , , 

These frequently lack the depth in plot, the color r 
character, the intensity of conflict and , of course, the 
aura of magic that is so attractive in traditional tales. 
Adult "ethnic** novels and short stories abound in these 
elements.Of course adults have a larger canvas of 
experience to draw on, but children of color are not 
strangers to reality. Teachers know that many of their 
young students live with hunger and poverty, wiuiess 
violence and discrimination,and feel hopeless and 
rejected. Many arc anchored by family support, rejoice 
in cultural festivals, nourish dreams and achieve impos- 
sible goals. We need this drama in children's stories of 
the "here and now*\ The recent Summer Olympics 
showed many, many persons of color who have over- 
come obstacles and risen from defeat to become win- 
ners. So - the s*- ies are there! TTiey need to be written. 
They will give relevance to reading. 



ELIJAH'S ANGEU A Story for Chanukah 
and Christinas by Michael Rosen, Illus. by 
Aminah Brcnda Lynn Robinson. Harcouit 
Brace Jovanovich, San Diego 1992 

ISBN 0-1 5-225394.7 fijULa 

Tliis sensitive picture book has a story Uiai 
reconciles religious differences and extols 
frie!idsbip between an eighty-year-old 
black man and a young Jewish boy. Elijali 
is a barber,and docs primiUve wood 
carvings.He gives Michael one of his 
wooden angels as a gift. "It*s an angel of 
friendship" says Michaels father. Michael 
then takes Elijah a gift - it is a menorah. 
A Jewish parent noted lhai some explana- 
tions about Chanukah had been omitted* 
but felt this a minor point, and that the 
overall message was important.. The art is 
colorful and aowded, and in primitive 




style, reflecting , 1 feel, Elijah's barber- 
shop. Very young children may find the 
pictures confusing. There really was an 
Elijah Pierce He lived from 1892-1984.. 
The Columbus Museum of Art new owns 
300 pieces of his work. 
Curriculum: 

^Sfndtes ! Religions, their origins and 

festivals 

Ail Children can opt to dmw and explain 
symbols from their religion. 



EMC 



ASHOK; By Any Other Name 

by Sandra W. Yamate, Illus. by Janice 

rohinaka. Polychrome Pub. Coip. 

4509 North Francisco Ave, Chicago IL 
60625-3808 1992 ISBN 1-879965-OM 

Ashok is a winsome boy of East Indian 
culture. His name sets him apart and he 
iries to citange it to Tom then Walter then 
Francis but there is always some hitch that 
causes the kids to laugh at him.When the 



school librarian tells of his own "ever-so- 
great-grandfather*' who came here as a 
slave and was not allowed to keep his own 
name Ashok realises that he should keep 
his name and make it count for something. 
There is an end note on the life of the great 
King Asoka, who ruled India wisely for 37 
years during the 3nl century BC. 
This is a charming book,wiih a relevant 
theme and simple illustmions that could 
be aspired to by a good student artist. 

2± 



SAM I AND THE TIME OF TROUBLES 
by Florence Parry Heide and Judith Heide 
GiUiland. Illustrated by Ted Lewin. 
Clarion. NY 1992 ISBN 0-395-55964-2 
«r, 3-6+ 

Judith GiUiland spent some years living in 
Lebanon and knows the "(roubles" she 
narrates. Listen to the words of 10-yr-old 
Sami, telling about the "time of guns and 
bombs... that has lasted all my life". The 
expressive illustrations show Saini 
huddling in !he dark basement with his 
family during the bombardment or playing 
on the street on "quiet days". Life goes on 
in the sporadic spaces of peace - adulu 
smoke in the outdoor cafes, children play 
at waft a bnde picks her around the 
bombing titter. They remember the day in 
Ihe past when the children paraded for 
peace, and Sami hopes they will do that 
again - and that peace will come. The 
illusuations are culture-specific yet 
realistic, showing most of the people 
wearing Western clothes. This is an 
'illustrated" book for older children that 
honestly looks at the kct of war.lt docs 
not name or blame political factions but 
concentrates on feelings.Discussions 
should include how chiMren in oUwr parts 
of the world (Ireland, Israel, Africa, South 
America) are also being scared by 
continual war. 



Books for the Very Young Child 



The Edilor serves on a committee tor the Child Development Division of 
the California Slate Department of Education, which is devising a pre- 
school program guide that uses multicultuml literr.ture. This has brought 
about an awareness that thei^e are not many such books, and the demand is 
increasing. Here thercforc, arc a few titles that can move into this segment 



YOU'RF. MY NlKKl by Phyllis Rose 
I'jscntx^rg, pictures by Jill Kastiier. Dial 
B(X)ks lor Young Readers, NY 1992 
ISDN 0-8037- 1 1 29-8 Cr. I>s-1 

Nikki, a preschool child, needs reassur- 
iuice lhat her inoUier will remember who 
she is when slie starts a new job. . SI)C 
dresses up as her brodier, Uien her sister etc 
and continually asks her moUier if she 
recognises her in these disguises! She tests 
her mother with - '*what's my favorite 
hick.. .dance... Iriend.. etc." Her mother 
passes all die tests! But when slie returns 
trom work Uic next day, she is too busy 
with fixing dinner to play Uie same game 
with Nikki - wtio is discouraged. **! knew 
you*d forget nie" she says disconsolately 
and goes to her room. But Mama makes 
everything right before bedtime.The 
single-parent. African American family is 
winsomely poruayed in text and picture. 
(Iiiklren will identify witli tiiis story. 

UOANG BREAKS THE LUCKY TEAPOT 
by U.K. Breckler Houghton, NY 1992 

Very sweet little picture book, lliough the 
illustrations scc;n somewhat blurred. 
Yonng lloahg breaks die lucky teapot 
j!ivcn to die family by grandmother before 
they lelt the old country. I le and his 
lamily believe very strongly in its power lo 
bring good or bad luck and now lloaiig 
(eels responsible for bringing on this bad 
luck. During the night he gels up and tries - 
quite skillfully - to mend Uie teapot. Tlie 
next morning his motlier is smiling as she 
uses it. and he feels forgiven. 
The value of this b(x>k is in it being a "here 
and now" experience of a Vietnamese 
ininii«jrant familv. 



MAMA, DO YOU LOVE ME by 
Barbara M. Joose, illustrated by Barbara 
Lavallee. 1992 Chronicle Bks. San 
Francisco, CA Gr. Ps«l 

Exquisite art, attractive layout and fine 
paper make Uiis an aesilietic treat - Uiis is 
what Chronicle Books does very well.. 
11ie story is set in die Eskimo/Inuit 
community in Uie Arctic region. It has 
many cultural details in Uie story and 
illusu^tions and is similar to Uie traditional 
Runaway Bunny in motif. The child asks, 
"MoUier will you love me if and Uiere 
are many specific actions, including 
breaking Uie best plates, becoming a big, 
scary polar bear.." etc. Mother says she 
will be - at various times - sad, angry, 
scared, confused .... but 'i will always love 
you.*' 




ERIC 




THE DESERT MERMAID; La Sirena Del 
Desierto Story by Alberto Blanco. 
Pictures by Patricia Revah. Children's 
Book Press, San Francisco 1992 
ISBN 0-89239-106-5 fiiuL? 

Iliis original story by Uie Mexican poet 
Blanco is set in Uie Sonora Desert.It tells of 
a mermaid, lonely in a pool Uiat is drying 
up t)ecause slie sings no more. An old 
Indian comes by and gives her his magic 
horse to go and Tind Uie songs. She visits 
tlie Songbirds to learn the music, the 
Lizard to learn Uie words, the Turtle to get 
a guitar and eventually reaches Uie Sea, 
where she gets Uie rhyUim. As she sings 
her songs she enchants Uie menacing 
alligators, and sees hundreds of menmaids 
rise from the sea and welcome her home. A 
simple story, whose main merit r. in its 
cultural setthig, its bilingualism, and in Uie 
imuswil and lovely illustraUons set in 
cross-sticli patterns and created by Patricia 
Revah. a Latino tapestry artist of interna- 
tional fame. ,v - 



ISLAND BABY by Holly Keller, auUior 
and illustrator. GreenwillowBks^N.Y. 
1992 ISBN 0-688-10580-7 Gr, Ps>l 

Set on a Caribbean island, Uie piaures in 
this book are saturated wiUi tropical colors 
• and saUsfactoriiy anchored in basic 
shapes . The short text is set in sun-bright 
white rectangles, bordered by mulU- 
colored panots, pink flamingoes etc. The 
faces of young Simon and his grandpa. 
Pops, are brown circles;vertical and 
horizontal lines ouUine structures while die 
oval shapes of fruit, , and sleeping cat add 
contrast. The story brings to pre*school 
level the experience of rescuing, nuttuiing 
and releasing an injured wild animal; Uiis 
time a baby flamingo Uiat young Simon 
Tinds, nurtures, and reluctantly itleases.But 
old Pops makes him feel proud of what he 
has done. Later Simon asks bis mother * 
"Mama, when 1 start going to school will 
you miss me?" 

•*0f course I will" Mama said, "But Til be 
proud of you too." 

The message is subde but comforting. 

MOON ROPE: UN lAZO A LA LUNA by 
Lois Ehlert. Translated into Spanish by 
Amy Prince. Harcoun Brace Jovanovich, 
San Diego, CA ISBN 0-15-255343-6 

This bilingual picture book is arresting! 
Full color pages are dominated by over- 
sized, stylised animals, worms,and birds in 
bright primary colors including shiny 
silver. The Peruvian folkule is short • 
about Uie The Fox, resplendent in silver on 
a double-page spread - and his friend Uie 
Mole, who climb up to the Moon on a 
grass rope.The mole slips back to earUi, but 
who knows if Uie Fox made it! The artist 
was "inspired by ancient Peruvian textiles, 
jewelry, ceramics, sculpture and architec- 
tural detail** and Uie result is outstanding, 
and particularly suitable for large group 
viewing. 



Picture Books that make you think 



Commentary: 

Multicultural children's literature is "in"! Most So how can we get middle school kids to read these 
publishers have a Multicultural List. The majority of books? How can teachers overcome the "Fm not a 
these cultural books are picture \ ooks, or large format dummy! I don't need a piciure book!" reaction of the 
books with lots of pictures. There seems to be a older student. Here are some suggestions, 
general trend towards publishing more **picture 

books'' that have critical thinking content, abstract l.Why not a new literary category that gives adult 
symbolism, factual base and sophisticated illustra- dignity to these books! (After all "coffee-table" books 
tions - books that are actually more suitable for older are sorta inflated picture books, and even men read 
students. I can see some reasons for doing this, but them!) The only term I can think of is ILLUS- 
many of these excellent books will fall in the TRATED BOOKS, but I feel there must be somethmg 

cracks - under*used by young children, and not better. Ask your older students to think of a catchy 
used by older students because ( 1 ) they are usually term that will attract their peers, 
not III middle school libraries, (2) thev art; classified 2. Middle school librarians can purchase, display and 
"E" in most libraries and kept in the juvenile section introduce these multicultural "illustrated books' to 
where no teenager would be caught dead! students aM to teachers, and distribute a list from 

These books are an excellent source of cultural which students can make choices 
information not only through the illustrations which 3. Teachers can give an option for book reports, 
give visual validation to minority children, but also in Instead of the sacred one- hundred- pages rule, they 
the historical, contemporary and folk stories that will accept a combined total of 100 pages from two, or 
pn de cultural insight for all students.The fact that at the most, three, "illustraied books" that are 
ihe.^-^ books are attractive, shorter and easier to read "multicultural." 
alsu make them more accessible to reluctant readers. Other ideas out there? Let's share them! 



SAVE MY RAINFOREST by Monica Zak. 
Illusu^tions by Bengt-Arne Runiiersuoin. 
English version by Nancy Schiinmel. 
Volcano Press,P.O.Box 270, Volcano, CA 
95689 1992. $14.95 ISBN 0- 
912078-94-4 Teachers Guide 4.95. 
Aviiihible in Spanisli from laconi Press 
under Uie title Salven Mi Selva 

Iliis is a true story of a young boy in 
Mexico undertaking an exhausting journey 
to see tlie rain forest, and try to save it. 
Omar, is seven years old when he sees, on 
television, tliat tlie forest is being cut down 
mid tlie beautiful wild birds are being sold 
in tlie city. He waiUs to prevent this. He 
and his fatlier walk 870 miles to see tlie 
last rain forest in Mexico (Lacandon 
Rainforest), Subsequently they journey to 
tlie governor of the province and the 
President of Mexico, taking letters begging 
iliem to stop the cutting and burning of tlie 
timber and the selling of the exotic tropical 
birds, riie President promises to pass laws 
to siccomplish tliis, but a few years later 
Omar is disillusioned to see wild birds still 
being sold in tlie marketplace.. The 
statement at the end of the book stows tliat 
Omar, now eleven years old, is still 




visiting governors (by bicycle tliis time) to 
ask them to put pressure on the President 
to save the rain forest. 
I am not in favor of using children's stories 
as a cloak for propaganda, but this is not a 
fairy tale or fable, but a true story of what 
one small boy believed in and woiked 
towards. 

CURRICULUM: 

Srignge . Ecok>gy. Biology (tropical 
birds) 



TALKING WALLS by Mary Bums 
Knight, Illustrated by Ann Sibley O'Brien. 
Tilbury House Pubs.ME 
ISBN 0-88448-102-6 Or. 3-8 

''Before I built a wall, Td ask to know 
What I was walling in or walling out..** 
Robert Frost 
This is an interesting topic. Tlie autlior 
discusses fourteen historic walls from 
many countries and religions.Each has a 
double-page illustration and about fifteen 
lines of explanation to give the location, 
time and reason for building tlie wall.This 
is more tlian "just" a picture book! The 
subject dematxls some knowledge of 
geography and history, and certainly cries 
out to be furtlier researched by older 
students. Besides the Berlin Wall, Great 
Wall of China, Vietnam Memorial, tlie 
book includes lesser-known walls in South 
America, Mexico, India and Africa. 
CURRICULUM: 

.Social Studies - Identify locations on 
maps. Maih : Compare their measurements. 
Make comparative graphs 



Biographies. • • Poems. . . and Novels 



( MORE RIVER TO CROSS; The 
Stones oj Twelve Black Atnencans. 
ScIiDlaslic. NY 1992 ISBN 0-590- 
428%-9 

<;r. 4-6 Rcadaloud QiiiA Self-read 

Jim Ihiskins, a prolific "young-adull** 
aiilhor IiJis excelled himself in ihis book, 
which includes biographies of twelve 
Black Americans who overcame consider- 
able odds to achieve their goals. The 
format is biogniphical, with dates and 
chronologiccil sequence in each story, yet 
there is enough adventure, courage, 
heartbreak, suriving and success to rival 
any good adventure yarn. The men and 
women represent science, exploration, 
business, art, aeronautics, sports and 
politics and most of tliem lived in this 
century. Ihe author documents the 
prejudice and poverty tliey encountered 
but tlie emphasis is on tiie contributions 
they made. Tlie biographies run about 16 
pages each and llie writing is easily 
comprehended and fast-paced.Tliere is a 
bibliography of resource books and articles 
for student research and also an index. 
CURRICUI.UM: 
H S History Kangnaoe Arts. Have 
students assume tiie roles of some 
characters. Present a classroom "Meeting 
of the Minds" program, or have presenta- 
tions/discussions, 

YANG THE YOUNGEST AND HIS 
TERRIBLE EAR by Lensey Namioka. 
llusuated by Kees de Kiefte. Little, 
Brown 

1992 ISBN 0-316-59701-5 r.r, 4>7 



NEnHBORHOOD CDES by Gary Soto. 
Illustrated by David Diaz. Harcourt Brace 
Jovanovich, San Diego, CA 1992 
ISBN 0-15-2568794 r.r,4>8 

A delightful volume of poetic memories 
from Soto's youth in Fresno.Each poem 
covers about two pages.The lines are short- 
modestly hiccupping their way down the 
page, poking fun at Senor Leal's goat or 
extolling the joys of eating los 
chicharrones. 
Solo's gift is in making the banal 
lieauliful! Read his Ode to Pablo's Tennis 
Shoes tliose... 

."twin pets 
That snuggle his toes". 
Or one in praise of the Sprinkler, that, 
"helicopter of water 
Slicing our legs/" 
Among tliese odes to the ordinary is the 
tragic figure of La Llorona, that archtypal 
figure in Hispanic folklore. La Llorona, 
"..the mother 
Of drowned children. 

Beware a woman 
Dripping water in Juiy 
When no rain has fallen." 
There are many Spanish phrases and 
words that are included,(and listed in a 
glossary). Tlic poems encourage us to be 
more observant of daily happenings, and 
to see humor and beauty in them. 
CURRICULUM: 

f i^nynage arts - Explore Poetry forms. 
Compile a class book of original neighbor 
hood odes. 



Yingtao is ilie youngest of the four Yang 
children who have recently emigrated to 
Seattle witli tlieir musician parents. The 
action of the story centers round the string 
qujirtet die children are to play for the first 
recital of their fatlier - who teaches die 
violin. Hveryone acknowledges Uiat 
Yingtao is tone deaf, but • he luis a natunil 
aptitude for baseball. His red-haired 
NClUK)lmate, MatUiew, on die oUier hand, 
phiys the violin well, but HIS failicr is bent 
on making hitn a good baseball player! 
riiis confiict is Uie commonality between 
the two culiurcs, and weaves itself around 
ilie dialogue, ftunily a^ifrontations, 
, chanictcr revelations, humorous iiKidcnts, 




{uid final resolution. With 134 pages, short 
chapters, snappy dialogue Uiis is a perfect 
"book-rcpoit-book"! Could be great for 
reading aloud also, but the action takes 
you into the personal lives of an immigrant 
family, and this may embarrass some 
students in your class. Teachers can be 
sensitive to this. 

CURRICULUM: f^nfiiao^ Amt 



JUST LIKE MARTIN by Ossic Davis. 
Simon & Schuster, NY 1992 
ISBN 0-671-73202-1 r.r.7>Adult 

Now here is a book you can't put down! 
Ossie Davis, actor and playwright, gives an 
emotional inmiedtacy to the stirring civil 
rights events of the early 60s • the March 
10 Washington; the impact of Dr. King's "I 
have a Dream" speech; the tragedy of the 
church bombing. It explores these from the 
view and through the actions of Stone, a 
14-year-old black student, who is commit- 
ted to the cause. It uses his father, a bitter 
Korean War veteran, to dramatise the 
debate within the black community about 
non-violence. The personal and political 
actions build towards a logical, and 
satisfying resolution. Though there are a 
few expletives duown in, in keeping with 
the explosive situations faced, diis is an 
excellent book for mature middle school 
students, and excerpts can be effectively 
read al oud in class. 

SATURNALIA by Paul Fleishman. 
HarperKeypoint paperback (HarperCollins 
NY) C1990 ISBN0-06-447089-Xpbk 
Gr.7.8 

The value of diis book is die fine literary 
style that describes and personalizes die 
people and activides of a colonial town. 
There is die nosy tiOiingman, die vicious 
eyeglass maker ,Uie haunted woodcarver, 
die "penny a peep" vendor setting up his 3- 
ft long telescope, die honest printer and 
odiers. There are also indentured servants, 
some of which are Indians captured during 
King Philip's War (1675). WiUiam/ 
Weetasket is one of Uiesc - a young man 
whose acUvides pull together diese various 
lives. By day he is apprenticed to die 
printer, and by night he furtively wanders 
die streets, playing long-ago tunes on his 
flute to find his lost twin brodier. There is 
conflict, suspense and even a murder. Like 
all good literature the book raises questions 
not answered in a first quick reading. Just 
issued in paperback, diis could be consid- 
ered for a classroom set of literature. 



CURRICULUM: 5;r^iai Suidies Ameri- 
can history. 



1992 - The Year of the American Indian 



7 



Cc^mmentary: Stamp Out Stereotypes! 



Recently I heard about a new children's play in 
which some of the humor is provided by the children 
playing bashfuU giggling Indian maidens or mim- 
icking Indian dancing or folding their arms in mock 
seriousness, and saying UGH. All this as a trigger 
for laughter. Why is this old image being rein- 
forced in the minds of children? Instead of perpetu- 
ating this stereotype we should be using books to 
teach al! kids about the achievements of great Indi- 
ans - like Sequoyah. (More than a century ago the 
Cherokee nation had its own newspapers, contain- 
ing thousands of words* of which UGH was not 
one!) At a time when decent society i-efuses to 
encourage ethnic jokes or racial parodies , the 



Indian stereotypes are still fair game in entertainment 
We should stop laughing; stop tolerating it as innocent 
fun; and give American Indians respect 

In children's literature there are many beautiful books 
on Native American legends and folktales. But too 
frequently their pictures present exotic, violent or 
mystical "Indian*' people from out of the past As such 
they reinforce the primitive images implanted through 
early textbooks. What we need ate stories about 
American Indians as they live and work here and now - 
in our schools and communities; in pueblos and on 
reservations; in cities, in universities and offices.It is 
time to open our minds and Stamp Out Stereotypes. 



AHYOKA AND THE TALKING LEAVES 
by Peter and Connie Roop. Ilusuaied by 
Yoshi Miyake. Loihrop 1992 60p 
ISBN 0-688-10697-8 Gr. 2>4 

Tliis easy-reading, book provides insight 
tnto the formidable task of creating a 
wriiien language. By 1821 Sequoyali, of 
Uie Cherokee nation, had "accomplished 
someilnng no one person had tiver done 
before - (creatingl a written language from 
a spoken language/* History acknowledges 
Uiai he did this "by the aid of his daughter, 
wiio seemed to enter into the genius of his 
clabors." With a simple vocabulary, the 
auUiors Imve crafted an interesting book 
fleshing out (lie character of this girl • 
Aliyoka and describing how they spent 18 
years, under difficult conditions, devising 
a syllabary of 86 signs for tJie Tsalagi 
language. The story also follow tlic 
"coming of age" of Ahyoka. The black and 
white illustrations have interesting depti) 
;uul attractive, non-stereotypical people. 
An excellent epilogue and bibliography 
document this work. 
CURRICULUM: 

5sncial ?;ttidies ! llow did languages start? 
Have students bring in written scripts of 
foreign languages they speak or read. 



The Lakola thought of air 
much the same way 
as the white man docs of water - 
something cleansing 
something to bathe in. 
Catch the Whisper of fhe mud/ James 




SEQUOIA 



ERIC 



THE SECRET OF THE SEAL by Deborah 
Davis. Illustrated by Judy Labraska 
Crown Pub. NY 1989 57p ISBN 0-517. 
56725-3 

Kyo, an Inuit (Inuk) boy takes his 
harpoon out to hunt a seal. He cuts an ice 
hole and waits patiently, but when the seal 
appears he makes friends with it, calling it 
Tooky. When his uncle comes to the 
village with a snowmobile to capture a seal 
to put in the city zoo, Kyo finds ways to 
steer him away from Tooky* s ice-hole. 
Inevitably his uncle huntt down Tooky. 
But wait - All Is not lostKLet the children 
predict an cnding.)A gentle, contemporary 
story» with enough conflict to hold 
intertst. lias ciilliiral details about living 
on tite luiKira 

Ciood for reading aloud Short chapters 
CURRICULUM: 

yimncM > llnw do seals live. Slinnlil 



THIRTEEN MOONS ON TURTLE'S 
BACK; A Native American Year of Moons 
by Joseph Bruchac and Jonathan London. 
Illustrated by Thomas Locker. Philomel 
Books. NY 1992 

lSBN.399-22141.7 Gr. 1-5 

There are thirteen scales on a turtle's back, 
explains a grandfather to a child .just as 
there are thirteen moons in each year. The 
storyteller, poet and artist collaborate to 
carefully craft, in beautiful words and 
pictures, stories from thirteen Native 
American culuires to explain the natural 
events surrounding each "moon". Each of 
these has a double page spread, with die 
legend or story (brieO at left and the 
corresponding scene of nature overflowing 
from the facing page into the poetic text. 

The illustrations evoke the mystery of 
nature and are true to the areas represented. 
Nowhere is there a stereotypical feathered 
headdress r tepee! The stories have the 
cadence and content of autlicntic Indian 
folklore. Especially good for storytelling. 

CURRICULUM: ScicncC - Seasons, 
weather, animals etc. 

Kacifll Siudtcs - Native American customs. 



animals be kepi in roi>s i 



What slinuld It matter that one bowl is 
dark 
and th€ other palc« 
if each is of good design 
and serves Its purpose well. 
ratch the WhUperofthe Wind/ .fames 



8 



Vttcria tor Kvatuatin^ MtiltictiUura l Children's Literature 



riic criicria I have developed from 
lescard) and experieuce apply 
pariiciilaiiy lo books recommended 
lor use in tlie classroom 
I lere •liieraiure*' is used as a 
generic lerm - not in the ^'classics • 
great wri ag** sense, though good 
writing is always consideix^d. 

The following is a simple evalua- 
tive formula. The books should 
have all of these elements 
andshouid be: - 

APPROPRIATE • in language, 
cuniciu and illustration for the 
iirade level recommended. 



ATTRACTIVE - representing the 
culture and community positively in 
characterization, plot, and illustra- 
tion. Encouraging self-esteem and 
respect. Enjoyable. 
AUTHENTIC - true to the culture 
reflected - avoiding stereotypes in 
personalities, plots and pictures - 
being culture-specific but not 
extolling the exotic. The creators 
of the book should have ethnic 
roots of that culture, or should show 
their research or experience in that 
field. 

APPLICABLE - have value for 
classroom activities and / or 
curriculum impact. 



ERIC 



Not Rccoiiiniended 

niLUSl ENlNG SILENCE by Phyllis 
UiH)t (ll;irpcr(\)llins 1992) is a well 
wi ittcii . hauiuitig novel of a young 
Aincncaii indiati girl whose destiny is to 
he a hciikr lor tier people. It reads like 
hisioiical ficiioti or legend and includes a 
tot ol italicised, itnlatniliiir terms that seem 
lo !^ive cultural validity/fhere is also a 
glossary ot these teitns. I had to read the 
l>tihlishci \s hitttb on tl)e jacket lo find that 
ilic hook IS actitally a "lyiical fantasy'* that 
was itispiied 'by Native Americiu) 
mythology. As a reviewer I find tliis 
conluMoti disconcerting. 

Wuliout the tlltistmtions (a mix of hulim) 
costumes from various uibcs), this story 
could be set m an ancient time, in any cold 
icgioti My leehng that the " special" 
woids were fictional was com)borated by 
an Ainciican Itulian reviewer . 

Conferences 

AnaTican li ulian Kdticatton 
<"onferoncc CA Slate Dept. ol 
pAliicaUon. 

Fchniary I I-I4« Sacraiueiito, (\\ 

Workshops on ctiltttrally tclcvant 
and tiihally specilic inronnation to 
include 

in v iassu)om aciiviitcs. 

(MUO(i!>7-M^)2 lo i mioinia 



My problem witli tlie book is tliai it 
appears to be multicultural literature when 
it is not. It gives a false impression of 
cultural validity. It is not rooted in Ameri- 
can Indian history but reflects rather the 
vague "mystical Indian lieriiage" that we 
have overplayed in literature. In tltis day 
of awakened mulUculturalism, when there 
is a demand for children's books with 
cultural autlienticity, the ambivalen* genre 
of tins b<X)k is misleading to the young 
reader and a disservice to (his heritage. 

litis could be remedied somewhat, if tlte 
publisher would make very clear in tlte 
hiM\y of the b(H>k * foreword, sub-title, 
autlior's note etc - that the story is fantasy, 
does not represent iuiy particular tribe; and 
that the strange viKabulary is not of Native 
American origin. 



YOSHIKOUCHIDA. 192?- 1992 

It was with real sadness that I 
heard of ^he sudden death of Yoshiko Uchida. 
She was an early pioneer in multi-cultural 
literature , and an exemplary writer. Many 
years ago I invited her to speak to my class of 
ch ildren and I have never forgotten her gentle 
manner. 

Yet she had the courage to break the wall of 
silence on the internment of Japanese citi- 
zens and to write about tl>is without bitter- 
ness. Her many books on traditional Japa- 
nese folktales, and about contemporary 
Japanese-American life are a legacy for all 
children. 

*\Mlthough it is important for each 
of us to cherish our own special 
heritage. I believe, above evefy- 
thing else, we must all celebrate 
our common humanity. ' 
Y'oshika Uchida 



Third Ann iiiil Nationnl Confer- 
tincc of The Multicultural Pub- 
lishers Exchange^ San Francisco, 
October 15-18^1992. RegisUation - 
$75.(M» to 1 50.00. Call f608^ 244- 
56.^3 

Workshops lor people WRITING 
ami iniHLISIIINri culturally 
iliversc hooks 



REVIEW COMMIT! EE 
This multiethnic group of 
educators and parents meets 
informally for reviewing and 
discussing new lKioks« I want 
to thank them for their input. 
Joan Ainslie, Rosa Hocauegra 
Lisa Delflno, Kate Farrell, 
Carmen Hernandez, A uuis 
Huang, Julie Itaya, Jiuuule 
Johnson, Kathy 
Orihuela,Barble Ross aud 
Sudesh Singhal. 



The MIKKOK will be issued three Utnes 
this year. The Fall '92 and Spring '^J^ 
issues will review new hiN)ks. 1Ih: 
Winter *92 issue will be an annouitcd. 
recommended listol' K-8 muUicuUural 
literature. 
Stihscfiptions are > 
Individual - $5.00; (iroup - $25.(K). 
Group subscription includes permission 
to copy all or parts of the Newsletter tor 
distribution within a non-proHt cdttca- 
tional institution or program. Subscrip- 
tions may be sent to: 
Gloria Jackson, 45 Moonlit Circle, 
Sacramento, C A 9583 K 



Hie Mkrm 



A Newsletter for K-8 educators and parents 

Winter 1993 
No. 6 



Reflecting on our Cultural Diversity through Children's Books 




Love... Letters ... Languages 

Adotesccntt enjoy that ait ma 



Michael Dofm, a membo of tbe Modoc 
tribe, has given us a book of pristine 
beauty in MORNING GIRL. It leads 
easily, yet has naturally exquisite 
language that abounds in metapborst 
unhackneyed description and universal 
insights. Set in a Taino community befoie 
the arrival of ColumbuSt it expkxes the 
loving relationships and individual 
growth of a family of four. Tbe chapters 
alternate between the voices of Morning 
Girl, and her younger brother - Star Boy. 
There are cultural details but tbe focus is 
on the love, loyalty and sharing between 
the parents and children. At tbe end of 
the story. Morning Girl swims out to 
welcome a canoe bearing overclotbed men 
who speak a strange language! Tbe 
Afterword gives a brief reminder of the 
bcuayal that followed, and the fate of this 
peaceful community. 
CURRICULUM: Language Arts/ 
Literature - Excellent for classroom study 
READ ALOUD 



A. 



^letter"* or diary fonnat because tbey focus 
00 inner feelings and mocivatioost^cb 
is what young people are wrestling with as 
tbey mature. 

In LETTERS FROM A SLAVE GIRL 
students (gr.7-»-) will read about Harriet 
Jacobs, who , against the odds, learned to 
read and write. Her letters, from a young 
age, to absent family members are never 
sent, but serve to release be r feelings. To 
escape tbe sexual barassment from ber 
white master, she goes into biding for 
seven years! When sbe is able eve»toally 
to escape north, she becomes an ardem 
abolitionist, writes her auioblogr^riiy, and 
geu ber freedom through tbe aid of some 
generous friends. An inside look at 
slaver)' 

I^TTERS FROM RIFKA, (a shorter and 
easier book) is about a Jewish girrs 
Odyssey to freedom after ber family 
escapes tbe persecution in Russia in tbe 
19201. Because of sickness Rifka is left 
behind in Holland for a year when ber 
parents leave for America, aiKl when sbe 
arrives at Ellis Island, sbe still has a kmg 
wait in hospital before being permitted to 
enter the country. Through all the 
hardships and loneliness she 
communicates ber thoughts to her friend 
on the pages of a Pushkin book of poems. 
(Full buying details in LIST ) 



in SONG OF THE BUFFALO BOY an 
Amerasian girl in Vietnam faces prejudice 
and rather than being forced to marry 
against her will flees to postwar Saigon 
and has to live in dire poverty among the 
large community of homeless Amerasians 
who desperately wait for a chance to go to 
the US. In the end she is joined by ber true 
iove • the buf fak> boy - and she decides to 
O c a life in Vietnam. 




alef-bet 

A roacw Airuscr VMC 




akf-bet uses the Hebrew script, phonetic 
pronunciation, and English tmslatkn for 
each of tbe letters of tbe Hebrew alphabet, 
and the words that accompany them. The 
simple illustratiocis built around one family 
provide the definitk)QS.(One of tbe children 
is in a wheelchair.) 

A TOZEN;isz colorful alphabetbook 
which reads from back to from and right 
to left! The attractive Japanese scripi is 
used, along with tbe English translation. 
Tbe pictures and brief English text provide 
the definition for the 22 words,iumy of 
which will be familiar. eg.ORIGAMI 
(See List for buying infonnatkn) 
Use - Teachers can bk>w up, cutout, 
mount and display some of the scripts and 
words. 

Editor: Gloria D. Jackson 
Layout/Graphics: Lynn Qark 
Copyright 

The purpose of this newsletter is to 
encourage the use of culturally 
diverse books in K-8 schooli«by 
reviewing new books* suggesting 
curricular activities* and discussing 
issues surrounding this litenuire. 



ERIC 



1 2 



COMMENTARY 

'hit tlic jAcccnt on Jlcce^s • A Letter to LiBrarians 



1 low c:i^v IS u U) tiiul muiticulturol 
litLTuturc m vDur lihr:ir> 

You can l(x)k in ihc catalog, but in most 
libnu^ics novels arc noi given subject 
headings. Generally speaking picture 
books are not given cultural subject 
headings by Dewey, LC or in CIP. 

Even when subject headings are assigned, 
the frequent changing ot cultural labels 
gives rise to contusion and frustration. 

Also, multicuhurai ficuon books are not 
usually kepi together or identified by spine 
label 



A teacher wanting to infuse 
cultural literature into the 
subject curriculum needs to And 
books that apply • and And them 
in a hurry! 



Here are some suggestions for librarians to 
clear the patii so access to multicultural 
tKH»ks is made easy. I/se a multiethnic 
committee of parents.teachers and students 
to help you decide and work on any of liie 
following 
ideas. 

Not Recommended 

TEX IJTTIJ: rabbits by Virginia 
(jrossman. illus. Sylvia Lonp.. Chronicle 
Bks. 1992 Though this counting book is 
handsomely illustrated and has already 
gamcrcd some awards I am not alone in 
disliking it. Rabbits dressed up in various 
arucles of Native American clothing and 
engaged in traditional acuvtties count their 
way through the pages. If the cultural 
intent was to improve on the stereotypical 
• ten little Indians" then the publishers 
must he commended. But is it progress to 
replace tiie human stcreoiy'pe with animals 
Surely not! Tliere i\xt detailed notes at the 
back descTibing the traditional weaving 
patterns shown, but will young children 
understand their significance? Will 
jinmnry teachers try to c:^plain ihcm .' And 
what's the use ot auUientic costumes it the 
obiect wearing them is not authentic - for 
Indiaas are not rabbits - and it is a parcxly 
to ituike them so! 



For the Catalog 

1 . Create an "authority list*' of cultural 
labels that are in use currently by the 
students and community. 

2. Decide on the one you will use or 
have used in your catalog and refer all 
other terms that may be used, back to this 
one. eg. the EUREKA online computer 
has this* 

[LATINOS US is not used in this catalog 
HT.SPANYr AKTFRTrANS is used instead] 

3. Don't just depend on CIP 
(cataloging in publication) but assign a 
cultural subject heading to ALL 
multicultural picture books and fiction. 

4. Create your own cultural labels. 
Don't be tied down to LC or Dewey which 
still use outmoded terms like INDIANS 
OF NORTH AMERICA, and AFRO- 
AMERICANS. 

5. For libraries with online cataloging, 
examine descriptive sununaries to be sure 
they include cultural labels, so that these 
can be caught in "keyword searches*'. 

6. Post a large sign on/near the catalog 
listing the cultural headings that are used. 



For Shelving 

I. Discuss the value of putting all 
picture books and easy reading fiction that 
has cultural content in a separate, highly 
visible, well marked shelving area. 
Involve the teachers and students in 
making the area attractive with cultural 
artifacts, posters. map$,childreQ*s 
drawings etc. 

2 .Put a generic multicultural 
identification on all novels with cultural 
content, (eg. spine label with a picture of a 
globe) 

In 1 & 2 remember to include ALL 
ethnicities ( including Anglo-European) and 
global cultures. 

3. Put the year of publication on the 
spine label of all multicultural fiction and 
picture books. This is important since 
recent books are more sensitive to cultural 
facts and nuances than the old pauonizing 
and stereotypical books. (Actually, pre- 
1970 titles should be examined for 
i^ssible discard!) 

Send in other ideas you have used. 



ENCOUNTER by Jarie Yolen. Illus. David Shannon HBJ 1992 

It is unfortunate that this brave venture into revisionist history should be so 
overlaid with feartul messages that negate its value for young children. 

The picture book tells the story of the arrival of Columbus, the greed of his party, 
and the beuayal of the Indians, as seen through the eyes of a Taino boy. The full page 
illustrations arc very beautiful, but emphasise the color differences between the 
fairskinned, blue-eyed strangers, and the darker skinned black-haired Taino Indians. The 
scary dream of the boy forebodes the evil actions of the strangers - and it comes true! 
Children will recognise how the generosity of the Tainos were exploited by the greed of 
the visitors, and they will feel the betrayal as the Spaniards took slaves and sailed away. 

This is all true, historically. But the message to young children - for whom the 
picture book is intended - is one of fear. Be afraid of anyone who is of a different color 
to you! Watch out. your worst dreams could come true! Don't trust your friciHls, they 
can betray you! The final picture of an old. ncculiuratcd Indiim in torn western cloches, 
situng dejectedly on a stump and looking out to sea sends a message of hopelessness. 

A long Author's Note at the end gives Uie history regarding ihiS "encounter''. But 
how much of it can be explained to young children ? Because Jane Yolen has such 
excellent acdenuals as an author, and because of its cultural content, this book will 
probably he widely purchased. But teachers should weigh all factors judiciously when 
consificring tts use. 



Recommended List of Recent K-8 Multicultural Literature 



No list of books stands alone. Please use this along with other 
published lists and publishers catalogs etc. This list represents 
recent titles (almost all 1992) that I have received from publishers 
and sought out from other sources. Some titles have been 
critically reviewed in previous issues of THE MIRROR and all 
tiilrs have been reviewd by mc and/or advisory committee 
mcmbers.There are, of course, many oa«r recent books *out 
there;' thai I have not been able to get or review. And there are 
some that I have read but couid not recommend. 

Non-fiction books are generally absent not only because of time 
limitations, but mainly because I feel thai "literature * is most 
effective in reaching emotions and teaching attitudes and this is 
how multicultural communications can best be affected. 

The Lisi reflects the marketplace in that African American books 
oumumber any other single minority. But it shoukl be 
remembered that minority culture books have themes that are 
common to masi Uisadvaniaged groups as well as universal 

themes. 



NOTES: 

Fthnir authors & illustratOTs havc been marked » when their 
ethnicity is known 

Prices have not been included since these can vary accofding to 
binding and sotirce 

PrfaiV iftvgl appropriateness for reading and content shoukl be 
stretched according to teacher use and student need. 

Flhn r ^^'^^^^^^^^^^^ is provided [sec -AbbreviaikmsT but shooW 
noc be the only criterion for purchase. Try not to lii^t your 
selections only to the cultures represented in your school or 
classroom. 

The Index at the end provides thematic entry to encourage using 
these books within teaching units. 



1. AGAINST THE STORM Hicyilmar, 
Gaye: Little Drown 1990 
Contemporary novel set in Turkey about a 
boy's tough experiences when his family 
moves from the village to the city. Gr.7/ 
MidEast 

2. AHYOKA AND THE TALKING 
LEAVES, Roop, Peter and Connis Dlus. 
Yoshi Miyake: Lothrop 1992 
Easy reading, fact-based story of how 
Ahyoka helped her father Sequoyah to 
create the Cherokee written languages 
Gr J-S/Amlnd 

3. AJEEMAH AND HIS SON 

Berry, James authorAUus. HaipcrCollins 
1992 

Well-written short book revealing the 
feelings and experiences of father and son 
as they were kidnapped in Africa and 
spent their lives as slaves in Jamaica. 
Gr.6^AA 

4 aleM>et: A HEBREW ALPHABET 
BOOK. Edward, Michelle: Lothrop 
1992 

A simple introduction to Hebrew script, 
words and some traditions. BILINGUAL 
Gr.l*3/Jcwish 

ALICE »Goldbcrg, Wboopi Dlus. 
John Reeves: Bantam hardcover 1992 
A take-off on Alice in Wonderland, set in 
New York city and told in tnie Whoopi- 
style! Good READALOUD.Illustrated 
O ;r, 3+/AA 



6. AMAZING GRACE. Hoffman, Mary: 
Dial Bks/Young Readers; 1991Colorful 
and expressive studies of young Grace 
wfto believes she can do whatever she puts 
her mind to..and..she does get the part of 
IVter Pan in school production! 
Gr.K*3/AA 



7. ASHOK; BY ANY OTHER NAME 
Yamate. Sandra. Illus. Janice Tohinaka 
:Polychrome Pub. 1992 

East Indian boytries to change his name to 
ftt in with American peers, but eventually 
realizes he should be proud of it instead. 
Gr.l*3/EJnd 

8. AUNT FLOSSIE'S HATS I AND 
CRAB CAKES LATER>>Howard, 
Elizabeth Fitzgerald and James 
Ransome: Qarion 1991 

Attractive pictures of two sisters and their 
Aunt Rossie, who tells stories about the 
hats she likes to wear. Gr.K-2/AA 

Dr^^gonhys 




9. CHINGIS KHAN Demi* author & 
iUus. Holt: 1991 PB 

Sophisticated illustratioiis and text tell the 
true story of Chingis Khan* from 
childhood to his rise to powerful ruler. 
GrJ*4/AS 

10, DANCING WITH INDIANS 
»Medearis, Angela; Bins. Samud Burd: 
Holiday 1991 

Black family visits the Seminole pow- 
wow and recalls bow sUve ancestor was 
befriended and lived with this tribe in 
1862. Gr.K*2/AmInd/AA 

1 1 DIEGO RIVERA; ARTIST OF THE 
PEOPLE. Neimark, Anne E; 
HarpeiCollins 1992 
Excellent biography of this Mexican 
muralist from inferesting childhood 
through intematiooal fame* political 
activity and personal relationships. 
Illustrated with pictures of soore murals 
and list of their kKations. Gr«6-8/Lat 

12. DRAGONFLY'S TALE. Rodanas, 
Kristinaautbor/iUus. ClarioQ 1992 PB 
Zuni legend of village that was stricken 
with drought because of wasted com, and 
bow two cbiklren helped the land to 
bk)ssGm again. 
Gr.l*3/Andnd 



ERIC 



Recommended List of Recent K-8 Multicultural Literature 



13. DRYLONGSO »Hainaion, Virginia 
xllus.»Jerry Pinkney. Harcourt Brace 
JovanovichfHBJ) 1992 
Well-illustrated longer picture book about 
the drought in the midwest in the 70s. and 
the boy who uses a divining rod to bring 
relief to a family. 

Gr3-5/AA 

14. EL CHINO »Say, Allen. Author/ 
iUus. Houghton 1990 
Outstanding picture book based on the 
tnie story of Am-Chinese immigrant who 
bet^ame a famous matador in Spain. 
Exciting illustrations. Gr.2-5/AS 

15. ELUAirS ANGEL; A STORY FOR 
CHANIJKAH AND CHRISTMAS 
»Roscn. Michael illus.»Aminah 
Robinson HBJ 1992 Contemporary 
picture book about friendship between a 
black wixxlcarvcr and Jewish boy. who 
exchange gifts. True life story. 

Gr- 2-5/AA/Jcwish 

16. E\^RYBODY COOKS RICE 
Dooley, Norah and Peter Thornton; 
Carohfaoda 1991 (non-fiction) 
Simple piaures follow a child visiting 
homes in a multi*ethnic neighborhood at 
dinner time and tasting the different rice 
dishes. Recipes given. 

Gn 1-5/Cross cultural 




1 7. FINDING MY VOICE »Lee. 
Marie; Houghton 1992 High school 
Korean* American gri come$ to grips with 
culture-conflict at borne, discrimination at 
school and adolescent independence. 
Gn 7+ /AS 

1 8. THE FORTUNETELLERS 
Alexander. Lloyd; illus. Trina Schan 

O lyman. Dution 1992 

ERIC 



Well-illustrated, hilarious picture book 
about a poor carpenter in Africa who 
bec<»nes a rich fortuneteller « by default! 
Gr. 1-3/African 

19. THE GIRL WHO CHANGED HER 
FATE. Marshall Laura, author/illus. 
Atbeneum 1992 

Greek folktale tells of adventures of 
youngest daughter who takes the 
responsibility of removing the bad fate 
that was dealt to her family. Gr2*4 

20. THE GIRL WHO LOVED 
CATERPILLARS; A 12TH 
CENTURY TALE FROM JAPAN. 
Merrill. Jean adaptor: illus. lloyd Cooper, 
Pbilomen/Putnam 1992 Independent 
young woman is more interested in insects 
than m marrying a nobleman! Nice 
science slant. Cfr2-5/J«pan 

21. THE GOLD COIN »Plor Ada, 
Alma, illus. Neil Waldman: Atheneum 
1991 Original story showing how a 
thief. folk>wing a helpful ok^ womaa is 
transformed by her goodness ;cnd in the 
end assists rather than robs her. Gr. 1*3/ 
Lat 

22. THE GOLDEN BEAR. Young, Ruth 
illus. Rachel Isadora; Viking 1992 
Raures of winsome child and same-size 
teddy bear, make this little rhyming song 
(with music score included) a big hit with 
preschoolers. Gr.ps-1/AA 

23. THE GOLDEN DEER Hodges. 
Margaret; illus. by Daniel San Souci; 
Scribner 1992 Classic Jataka tale of the 
Banyan Occr willing to sacrifice himself 
for the good of the herd. Gr.l-4/EInd 

24. GOODBYE VIETNAM Whelan, 
Gloria; Knopf 1992 

A harrowing talc of a teenage girl and her 
family escaping from Vietnam to Hong 
Kong where they board a plane for the US . 
Gri^/AS 

25. THE HEAVENLY HORSE 
Hassali^Neil illus. Maureen Hyde; 
Green Tiger /SS 1992 PB 

Poor Chinese boy travels to improve his 
life and teams bow to discriminate 
between real and transitory values 
Gr.K*3A:iiliui 

4 



26. THE INVISIBLE THREAD; AN 
AUTOBIOGRAPHY »Uchkia, 
Yoshiko Messner 1991 

Life and work of Yoshiko and how she 
expl(M€d her J<v>anese roots. 
Gr3-8/AS 

27. ISLAND BABY KeUer. Holly 
Greenwillow 1992 

Bright colors, strong shapes grace this 
simple piamt books about a toung child 
rescuing and nunuring an ininired 
flamingo. Gr4>s-2/AA 

28. THE JOURNEY OF MENG 
Rappaport Doreen. illus. »Yang Ming 
Yi; Dial 1991 PB Story tied to Great 
Wall of China telk of how brave wife 
embarked on a tragic quest to ave her 
husband.. Gr«2*4/Cbina 

29. JUST LIKE MARTIN »Davis, 
Ossie Simon & Schuster 1992 
Exciting *i-was*there** novel reliving the 
civil rights events of the early 60s; 
narrator is 14*yr-old African American 
boy 

Gn 7-9/AA 

30. KEEPERS OF THE ANIMALS; 
NATIVE AMERICAN STORIES AND 
WILDLIFE ACTIVITIES FOR 
CHILDREN. Caduto« Michael 
»Bnichac, Joseph Fukrum 
Pubs.Colorado. 1991 

Good resource book with many science 
activities. Companion books with 
additional folktales. RESOURCE/ 
Amlnd 

31. KISS THE DUST« Laird, Elizabeth; 
Dutton 1992 

Exciting, contemporary novel of wealthy 
Kurdish girl and family*s hazardous 
escape from Iran, to Iraqi refugee camps 
and finally to London. GrJWMidEast 

32. THE LAST PRINCESS; THE 
STORY OF PRINCESS KAIULANI 
OFHAWAH. Stanley, Fay and Diane. 
Four Winds 1991 

Long pictiiic book ties in the life of 
Princess Kaiulani with the betrayal of her 
country by American business and 
government Historical coatent.Gr«4^ 



Recommended List of Recent K>8 Multicultural Literature 



33. LEAVING FOR AMERICA 

Bresnick, Peny iUusJMiia Retsberg 

ChUdrcii'sBk.Pr. 1992 

Autlx>r remembers ber childhood in 

Russia (1920s) before she came to the US 

to join ber father. H^y story. Simple 

pictures. 

GnK«a/Riissian 




35. LETTERS TO RIFKA »Hesse, 
Karen Holt 1992 

Letters reveal the experiences of Jewish 
girl esaq>ing Russia* being held in Europe 
for a years, and then at Ellis Island for 
months before being allowed to enter the 
US. Gr.5-8/Jewish 

36. LETTERS I iOM A SLAVE GIRL. 
THE STORY OF HARRIET JACOBS 
Lyons, Mary; Scribners 1992 

Based on Jacob*s autobiography (1861] 
the fictional letters tell her experiences 
starting when she was 12. and include her 
seven years in hiding and eventual escape 
to freedom. Gtj&^/AA 

37. LFTTLE BROTHER. Baillic, Allan: 
Viking 1992 pbk 

Rousing story of young Vithy;s escape 
from the Khmer Rouge labor camp after 
the Vietnam war. Gn 54/AS 



38. LONG IS A DRAGON; CHINESE 
WRITING FOR CHILDREN. 

(joidstein. Peggy; ChinaBks& 
Ptriodicals^SF; 1991 
Introduces 7S Chinese characters 
explaining how pictures influence the 
word forms. GnM/CUnese 

39. THE LOVE FLUTE. Goble,Paul 
autboifillus. Bradbury Pr. 1992 
Plains Indian legend showing why the 
love fliie is so impodam in courtship 
customs. Good badcground notes. 
Stylish & authentic illustrations. 
Gr3-6/AmIiid 

40. MAMA DO YOU LOVE ME? 
Joose, Barbara M. iUus Barbm LavaUee 
Chronicle Bks. 1992. Inuit child asks 
mother • Would you love me IF...with 
realistic but reassuring answers from 
mother showing unrestrictive love. Lavish 
art Ethnic alternative to the RUNAWAY 
BUNNY. Gr.ps^l/Amlnd 






41.MARU;A CHRISTMAS STORY. 
Taylor. Theodore HBJ 1991 Inthis 
short book we read about the GoQzaga 
family Christmas float which was bora in 
envy, nurtured with pride, produced in 
desperation, and remembered for a 
genemtion. Tbeir Mexican- American 
Nativity scene won the prize against all 
odds and is re-enacted each year in 
remembrance, at the San Lazaro 
f>f iftmAft parade. This small gem of 96 
pages brings smiles and tears and an 
understanding of ethnic pride. 
Gr*4*7/Lat READALOUD all ages 
HIGHLY RECOMMENDED 



42. A MILUON USH MOKE OR 
LESS»McKissack, Fatrida iOus,. Dena 
Scbutzer. Knopf 1991 PB 
Tall tak from the South is loU in 
storytelling style. Young boy maidies the 
Tub stories** of the old timers! 
Illustrations encourage an activities. 
Gr.K-2/AA 

43 MORNING GIRL »Dorris. Michael 
Hyperion 1992 

Simple life of a Taino family and 
community is toU through the eyes of two 
chiIdren.[SEE REVIEW in this issue] 
Gr.4-7/Ambid 

44. MY NAME IS SAN HO. Ptttit, 
Jayne; Scholastic 1992 

Realistic story of young bov*s dtCBcult 
escape from a wartom Vietnamese village 
and his experiences making anew life 
with an American stepfather in the . 
Grj6-9/AS 

45. NEIGHBORHOOD ODES »Soto, 
Gary HBJ 1992 

Short and long poems reflecting author* s 
Latino youdi, and toudiing everyday 
experiences with humor and beauty. 
GrJ-a/Ut 

46. NIGHT ON NEIGHBORHOOD 
STREET »GreenfiekL Ek)ise. illus Jan 
Spivey; Dial 1991 PB 

Short, realistic, reassuring poems abo;H 
living with love and trust in a black 
cooununity. Gr.K«3/AA 

47. ONE MORE RIVER TO CROSS; 
THE STORIES OF TWEl BLACK 
AMERICANS. »Haskias, 
Scholastic 1992 

The biographies (about 16p each) have a 
lot of action, good description and 
confront discrtminatinn bonesdy. 
Gr. 541/AA 



Recommended List of Recent K-g Multicultural Literature 



l*.witic ( .rossiiu 

...Ml V..-.. 




i 



48. PACIFIC CROSSING »Soio, Gary 
»BJ 1992 

Two Latino boys from California go to 
Japan on an exchange visit, have new 
experiences and share their own culture. 
Gr.5-7/Lal/Cross cultural 

49. PASS IT ON; AI RICAN- 
AMERICAN POETRY FOR 
CHILDREN. Hudsoo^Wade 
illus.»Floyd Cooper. Scholastic 1993 
Selected poems by top black pof ts - 
Hughes. Giovanni. Dunbar etc. 

Full and double page illustrations reflect 
the content and feeling of the words. 
Gr.K-3^/AA 

50 A PICTURE BOOK OF SIMON 
BOLWAR. Adler, David illus. Roben 
Casilla; Holiday House 1992 
Biography of the Ci& ^le often called the 
Second Washington oi the New World 
because he spent bis life in wars to liberate 
South American countries from Spain. 
Factual, well-illustrated - with maps, 
chronology. GrJ-6/Lat 

51. ROSES SING ON NEW SNOW; A 
DELICIOUS TALE.»Yec, Paul illus. 
»Harvey Chan; Macmillan 1991 PB 
Assertive girl cook in Chinatown, early 
1900s. shows thai even when two people 
use the same ingredients the resulting 
dishes can be differentiSbows the value of 
uniqueness. Gr.2-S/AS 

52. THE ROUGH FACE GIRL. Martin. 
Rafe illus.David Shannon; Putnam 1992 
Picture book with Cinderella motif but 
culture 

speciftclndependent girl overcomes 
physical ugliness and wins the prize, 
emerges as beautiful as the person within. 
^ ^'-ood for storytclling.Gr J-4/AinInd 

ERIC 



53. THE SABBATH LION. Schwartz. 
Howard & Barbara Rush illus. Stephen 
Fieser. HarpeiCoUins 1992 PB 

Yosef keeps the Sabbath despite being left 
alone in the desert but a Lion is sent to 
guard and help him achieve his goal. 
Gr. K-a/Mideast/Jewish 

54. S A^« AND THE TIME OF 
TROUBLES Heide. Florence and Judith 
Gilliland illus. Ted Lewin; Clarion 1992 
PB Piaures show children and families 
in Lebanon living under war conditions. 
There is danger and anxiety, but life goes 
on in the spaces of peace. Gr.3-S / 
Mideast 

55. THE SAMURAFS DAUGHTER 

San Souci. Roben illus. Stephen Johnson; 
Dial 1992 PB 

Set in medieval Japan the story tells of a 
young woman who uses her skill as a 
diver to save her father. Gr.l-3/Japan 

56. SAVE MY RAIN FOREST. Zak, 
Monica and Runnerstrom. Volcano Press. 
CA 1992 PB True story of young 
boy's amazing joimiey to try and save 
Mexico's last rain forest Well illustrated 
and documented. Gr. 2-5/Lat. 




57. SENEFER; A YOUNG GENIUS IN 
OLD EGYPT. Africa World Press 
IncTrenton.NJ. 1992 

Pictures and text describe the childhood of 
Senefer. one of Egypt's greatest 
mathematicians and builders. 
GrA^AMcM 

58. SHORTCUT »Donald Crews 
Greenwillow 1992. Colorful double-page 
pictures and few words give a strong 
safety message about not walking or 
playing on railroad tracks. Gr.ps-2/AA 

59. THE SLEEPING BREAD. Czemecki. 
Stefan and Tunotby Rhodes; Hyperion 
1992 PB People in a Guatemalan town 

6 



banish a poor old man, and then fmd that 
the bread at the bakery won't rise. When 
the invte the old man back all is solved! 
Gr. K.2/Lat 



61. SONG OF THE BUFFALO BOY 

Garland. Sherry HBJ 1992 
see review (page 1) Gr. 7+/AS 




62. THE STORY OF YURIKAWA; A 
JAPANESE ODYSSEY. Haugaard, Erik 
and Masako illus.Birgitta Saflund 1991 
Well-written tale, parallel to myth of 
Odysseus, but with cultural and historical 
flavor of medieval Japan. Gr4«7/Japan 

63. TALKING WALLS. Knight, Margy 
Bums illus. Anne Sibley O'Brien; Tilbury 
House 1992. PB 

Brief texts and illustrations of old and new 
walls around the world, and their 
signiflcance. Pictures show children of 
many cultures. Fosters research activities. 
Gr3-6/Cross cultural 

64. TEARS FOR ASHAN»Marie, 
D[pseud] illus. Norman Childres 
Creative Press Works. Memphis, TN 
1992 2ndpng. PB Simple pictures and 
text tell of \illage life in Africa and bow 
young Kumasi felt when hL^ friend Asban 
was kidnapped and taken away to be a 
slave. Gr. 1-3/AA 

65. THREE WISHES »CIifton, Lucille 
iUusMichael Hays; Doublcday 1992 PB 
Nobie flnds a lucky penny and unwittingly 
makes three wishes that come true. 
Contemporary story with values. Good 
alternative to traditional *three wishes' 
tales. Lovely art. 

GrJ-4/AA 

66. TIGER. AUen,Judy illus. Tudor 
Humphries; Candlewick Pr. 1992 

A local hunter stalks a tiger that is 
menacing a Soutb China village and 
shoots it - with bis camera! Culture- 
specific and k>vely illustrations setting, 
people and tiger. Gr. 2-4/AS 



Recommended List of Recent K-8 Multicultural Literature 



67. A TO ZEN; A BOOK OF 
JAPANESE CULTURE. Wells, Ruth 
illu»Yoshi; Pktufe BL Studio 1992 
Unusual and infonnative picture book 
introducing Japanese script and words 
(kimono, origami etc.) and reading back to 
front and right to left 
Gr.l-3/BUingual/Japan 

68. TONGIJES OF JADE »Yep. 
Laurence illus. David Wiesoer 
HarpeiCbllins 1991 A collection of 
Chinese folktales transplanted to and 
affected by the New World. Yep enriches 
the book with his explanations. GrJ^-S/ 
CUna/AS 

69. TREE OF CRANES. »Say, Allen. 
Houghton 1991 PB Good "reverse- 
culture** story of American mother living 
in Japan, importing her California 
Cbrisunas customs for her bi-racial child. 
Excellent Japanese culture-specific 
pictures. 

Gr.l-3/CroM cidtiiraKiapMi 



70. WHAT iOND OF BABY-SITTER 
IS THIS? Johnson, Dokxes autborAllus. 
1991 Young Kevin does not want 
another babysitter, especially the 
graomother who shows up • imtil he finds 
out she loves baseball as much as be does! 
Gr. K-2/AA 





71. WOMAN WHO OUTSHONE THE 
SUN; THE LEGEND OF LUCIA 
ZENTENO. »Martinez, Alqaodro Cruz 
ChOdren^sBkPr. 1991 PB A beautiful 
stmger with unusual powers is banished 
£rom the village, then the river dries up. 
The people invite her bade and the river 
flows again. 

Gr. 1-4/Lat 

72. THE YEAR THEY WALKED; 
ROSA PARKS AND THE 
MONTGOMERY BUS BOYCOTT, 
SiegelBeauice; Four Winds Pr. 1992 
Well written book showing Rosa Parks* 
coouibution to the Civil Rights 
movement. Gr,5-7/AA 



73. YOU'RE MY NKKL Eisenberg, 
Phyllis Rose, iUusJiUKascner; DialBks 
for Young Readers 1992 Young chikl 
needds assurance when her mother starts a 
full time job. Conienqx)nry, 
cultural alternative to RL AWAY 
BUNNY. Gr.ps.l/AA 



34. MOON ROPE; UN LAZO A LA 
LUNA Ehlert, Lois. Translator Amy 
PiDoe; HBJ 1992 Arresting art 
dominated by oversized, s^lised animals 
in primary colors and silver, tells the story 

the friends Fox and Mote who 
attempted to climb to the moon. 
Gr. pd^l/BIUngual/Lmt 



Now Available in Paperback 

THE DEFEAT AND TRIUMPH OF 
A FUCmVE SLAVE by Vsriinia 
Hamilton. Knopf Boizoi Sprinter Jan. 
1993 ISBN 0^79-83997-6 
$iS9 This biognpby, first published in 
19S8, explores die slavery issue and bow 
the Fugitive Slave Act of 1850 galvanized 
public and legal opinkm in the free states 
agahist slavery. Recommended for 
dasooom study in literatnre/Social 
Studies • grades 7-8.^ Send for the 
exceUent Teachers Guide written by Dr. 
Stanek, that appeared in PapertMCk Power, 
Winter 1993.* Random House, Inc., 225 
Park Ave.,South, New York, NY 10003 
Gr,5*8/AA U.S. History 



Subject Index Recommended List 



Art 11 

Civil rights 29 
Coming of age 1,17,29 
Conununity 46,41, 
Cross cultural 10,15.16,48 
Cultuie conflict 17,26 



"Different" 

is OK 
Ecology 
Escape to 

freedom 
Family 

Friends 

65 
Humor 
^;«'nigrants 



7,11,14,17,19,20, 
41,44.48,52,59,71 
27,56,66 

24,31,33,35,37,44 

40, 41,43,44,54,61, 
69,70,7273,75 
22,33,34,35,61,64, 

5,8,18,42,51 
7,14,17,24,33,35,44 



Languages 

Music 

Math 

Poems 

Science 

Self esteem 

Slavery 



2,4,38,67 
22,39 
57 

45,46,49,59 
12,13,20,27,30,56,66 
6,7,14 
3,36,64 



Strong Wcmien 17,19,20,24,28„51,55 
U.Si«story 2,3,10,13,29,32 

36,43,47,72 
Values 21,23,25,52,53,58,60,71 

World History 9,24,37,54,63, 
31,37,50,57 



33 



Biographical stories - Total 10 
Contemporary stories - Total 29 
Folktales & Legends - Total 20 



ABBREVUTIONS : 
AA • African Amtrkan 
AS-Arian 

Amlnd • Anwrkan Indian 
EInd> East Indian 
Lat- Latino 

MidEatt -Middle Eastern 
PB • Papcrbadi 



ERLC 



Resource Books 



LANGUAGE ARTS THROUGH 
CHILDREN'S UTERATURE byHor 
Ada* Alma and Rosalma 2Uibizarreta. 
Ctuldren*s Book Press 1989 

Latina author and university professor 
introduces "creative dialog", an effective 
and unique approach to teaching 
multicultural and bilingual children's 
books. 

OUR FAMILY, OUR FRIENDS, OUR 
WORLD: An annotated guide to 
significant multiculmral books for 
children and teenagers. 710p. Bowker 
1992 ISBNO-8352-3025-2, 
Excellent source for fiction and non- 
fiction K-12 books, most of which were 
published within the last five years. 
Arranged by ethnic minority categories 
(African Americans; Asian Americans; 
Hispanic Americans; Native Americans) 
and by countries of the world (including 
Europe etc.) Good introductory chapters 
on multicultural literature - use, publishing 
history, evaluative aitenx Books have 
annotations and critical reviews • 12-20 
lines each title. Well indexed. Lists 
publishers addresses, including small 
presses. 



Mnitf mittiral Rgview (periodical) 
Greenwood Publishing Group Inc. 88 Post 
Rd. W.,P.O.Box 5007, Westpoit, CT 
06881-5007 Annual subscription $59.00 

Hie issue I reviewd had over 100 
pages and was filled with excellent articles 
relating to multiculuual books,magazines, 
media and issues for adults and children. 

KMIRRT Buiutin. OBthnic Materials and 
Infonnitioo Exchange Round Table) 
Issued (2uarteriy. Order from ALA/ 
EMDERT, SO East Huron St., Chicago, IL 
60611 

$10.00 Individual subsrciption for non- 
ALA member. 

Information ,events, reviews of ethnic 
materials. 

Intgrradal pnnkc for Children 
Bnlktin. 8 times a year, $28.00 
Instimtional subscription $20.00 
Individual subscription. 
Council on biterradal Books for Children 
1841 Broadway, New Yoric NY 10023. 
Critical reviews, and relevant articles. 



Many thanks to^ 
^ucators aiid 

jprovidcd^doab^ 




WHAT'S IN A NAME? 
The terms used for ethnic categories change frequenUy,but catalog systems and 
government reports are slow to respond. Here is some informaUon that may help you 
decide on your entries. 

Though LC Caulogs use - AFRO-AMERICANS, fflSPANICS, AND INDIANS OF 
NORTH AMERICA, the favored terms in the community at this time seem to be- 
AFRICAN AMERICANS, LATINOS, AMERICAN INDIANS or NATIVE 
AMERICANS, ASIAN AMERICANS, PACIHC ISLANDERS, or Ai>' AN PACmC 
AMERICANS. The Canadian term INDO-AMERICANS may be coming into use for 
East Indians j\nd does anyone have an umbrella term for immigrants from the Middle 
East? 

The ••Definitions of Subject Characteristics" in the 1990ran?iUSRcPQn gives a detailed 
breakdown of ethnic groups that fall under various categories. 




P,^^ iMtmtion Uken from THE STORY OF YURIKAWA/ Havg^rd 



NOTES 

THE MIRROR has increased its 
membership across the country • thanks to 
the generous publicity through BOOK 
LINKS, BOOK REPORT, LIBRARY 
TAUCandCMLEA Newsletter, 
Individual and Group subscriptioiis have 
been received from 22 states, including 
Hawaii, and also from Canada! The 
Editor feelsthat this is evidence that the 
Newsletter is speaking to a very present 
need in the schools. 

BACK ISSUES 
A few requests have come in for back 
issues of THE MIRROR. Four 
Newsletters were issued last year - 
December 1991, January *92, March *92, 
May *92. Each issue is four pages. If you 
are interested send your request, labeled 
BACK ISSUES, along with a chedc for 
$4.00 to the editor. Address below. 

SUBSCRIPTIONS 
THE MIRROR issues three newsletters 
annually.. New subscriben will receive 
tlie FALL 92 and WINTER 93 iff ues as 
well as the upcoming SPRING 93 Issue. 
SMh«grintlonsare> 
Individual • $5.00: Group • $25.00 
Group subscription includes permission 
to copy all or parte of the Newsletter for 
distributicn within a wnn^profit 
^iig^tinnal institution or program. 
Subscriptions should be sent to: 
Gloria Jackson ^Editor 
THE MIRROR, 45 MoonUt Circle, 
SMTamento^CA 95831 



34 



The Mirror 




A Newsletter for K-8 educators and parents 

Spring 1993 
No.i7 



Reflecting Culturally Diverse Children's Books 



Reviewed in this Issae 



JHultlcultural books enter the mainstream ! 



Abuela's Weave I Castcnada 

Africa brothers and sister^ ^ Kroll 

Aunt Elaine does the Dance from 

Spain I Komaiko 

Baseball saved us I Lee 

Boy becomes a Man at Wounded 

Knee/^ood 

Chevrolet Saturdays I Dawson Boyd 
Echoes of the White Giraffe I Choi 
Feast for /0/Falwell 
Get on Board I Hasidns 
Havelil Staples 
Honey Hunters I Martin 
If it hadn't been for Yoon Jun I Lee 
Jonathan and his Mommy I Smalls- 
Hector 

Lost Children I Goble 

Lotus Seed I Garland 

Manx Thousand Gone I Hamilton 

Nev ShalomJWahat Al-Salaam I 

Dolphin 

Real McCoy I Towie 
Red Thread I Young 
Rifihteous Revenf^e of Artemis 
Bonner I Myers 

Sparrow Hawk Red I Mikaelsen 
Sunita Experiment I PtrVins 
Vejigante Masquerader/Dclacrc 
Walls of Pedro Garcia I McColley 



>e:|: 



Editor: Gloria D. Jackson 
Layout: LynnGark 
Copyright 

The purpose of this newsletter is to 
encourage the use of culturally 
diverse books in K-8 schools, by 
reviewing new books, suggesting 
cunicular activities, and discussing 
issues surrounding this literature. 



Here it tome good newt! 
More multicultural booht are being publithed by national publithert. 
Some new publithert are concentrating on minority culture bookt. 
Multicultural literature it entering the mainttream! 
Thit it what I mean - 

Though these tooks have charactcre and/or sellings thai relate lo a specific culiurc or more 
ihan one culiure, iheir main auraciion lies in a siory ihai appeals to all readers. Candy 
Dawson Boyd was an early proponent of this pi>int of \ iew, and her books bear this out This 
diffusing of cultural priority should not be confused with the kind of generic books that were 
written a decade ago to pay lip service to multicuituralism. In evaluating the integrity of 
such books the ethnicity and research/experience of the author is t>f great importance. 

When I asked the award- winning black authw Patncia McKissack what she thought about 
cross-cultural 0r mainstream- multicultural books she immediately replied, "But there is sull 
so much I need to know about my own culture!*There will always be a great need for books 
whose pnority is to give specific information on and insight into a particular culture. This 
is the kind of fiction and non-fiction that McKissack, Hamilton, Soto, Uchida and others 
have wntten so well. 

The books reviewed in this issue include both kinds ol multicultural literature Many of them 
are set in the United States with attractive main characters belonging to minority cultures, 
but their appeal is in their plots. Attention is still paid to the internal and external culture 
contlicis, but as part of the common coming-of-age expcnence. I feel this trend will make 
multicultural books more accepted by teenagers. Through this avenue of story, they will get 
a bener understanding of their own and other cultures. 



qfih is t/ie last issue of 'B('EMI'R^% 
It is with mi^dfutings that t announce this. 
Because it has Been a wontUrful ctiaUenge to cttau this ^wsUtur. 
^However, the u/orl^is too arduous to continue alone successfuUy, 
I am most graufui 

for the support of the many librarians who encouraged me to start this service 
for the response from around the country in the form of your suBscriptions - 
for the e^karating discussions with my local multicultural review committee • 
for the generosity of puBlishers who sent Booties to review - 
for the patience and understanding of my husBand - 
and for the ei(cellent technical services provided By my daughur. 

t will continue my interest in this exciting field of literature 
By wruing some articles and freelance reviews, 
and By using these bool(s with children. 



ERIC 



Olfider staiidlfiq . Q vcr comiaq, Jlcccotinq 



CHEVROLET SAirRDAYS b> 

Candx DawMmBiAd Macmillan 1993 
I76p* [SBN(M)2 711765-0 

The aiith(U has t>licn piunlcd oui lhal her 
noM'is alt; piinutiiK prnd sloiics lhal itlkcl 
and appeal UK the average >i)un^ teenager. 
The\ alvi nappen Ut he peopled by Alrican 
American characters, and as such pr(>\ ide 
idcntitication with and respect for that 
culture. 

In this slorv Joc\. is unhappy that he has 
not been accepted lor the gillcd program at 
schin)l though he is a g(X)d student. (The 
classtoom scenes aic \er> authentic.) He is 
.ilsfi having trouble accepting his molhei s 
diNtircc. and his new sieplalher i\\hi>is a line 
i h*raclci 1 1 Ic ge ls ,kJ\ ICC Irom the old 
pharmacist. uho tells him that he must 
learn to uoik out his problems il he wants 
'lohteomc .J s4)|kI All lean American man 
w ho Ihis world uilh his head on 

sii.ii^'hr 



shahLOM 



sah-LAHM 



HAVELI by Su/iinnc Fisher Staples. 
Knopl 1993 ISBN 0-679-84157-1 

This sequel to Shahbanu is on adult b(X)k. 
but high school and mature middle school 
readers will enjoy it. At the end of the first 
b^x)K. Noung Shahbanu submitted lo 
tradition and rcluctanil) mamcd Rahim, a 
nch landholder, forty years her senior. 

In this sequel we see Shahbanu settled as the 
lourth witeul Rahim. She has a daughter 
Mumiaz, to whom she is devoted. Life with 
boih lei'i \eais t»ld. who aie cm/ens ol Israel, ihc extended lamily of wi>es and children is 



SEV SHALOM t WAHAT AL- 
SXLAAMi OASIS OF PEACE 
b> Laune Dolphin; photographed by 
Ben Dolphin. Scholastic 1993 
ISBNO-59(M5799.3 

Attractive color photographs and simple 
text tell the true stones ol a Jewish bo>. 
Shiomki. and a Muslim bo> .Muhammad, 



and li\c in separate ullages noi lai liom 
each other Their parents w?5nt peace 
between the iwu races, and lhe\ send the 
childien each da\ to a s^iccial schin^l in the 
^>asis ol Peace \ illagr 

The teachers and students ol this bilingual 
grade schix»l include Jews and Mv»s|eins 
The purpt)se is lo delusc the lear between 
ihc races through inloimaimn and 



Inendship. B> the end ol the biiok Shhunki 
A tiiinuH' |x.mt ineiiis when Joc> loses his and Muhammcd are \ isiling ineacholhers 

Mcpl.illu I ^ He lakes the resp^msibility homes, and their p;irents are gelling lo know piii\ei | limiting o\ei cii\ . the slight tap-tap 



lull ol jealousy, intngue and inherent danger. 

As ihc siorv unlolds ihe incidents. 
aispiciiHis and relationships incxorabl> build 
to a le\^l ol suspense, which is mure 
Mnistei b\ not king explicit or exploding 
Staples has the sharpened scnsibilites ol an 
e\)xMienced jouiniUist and carefully reports 
nn w hat IS seen . heaid and felt ...releasing 
knsion Itequenllx with the sights ol the 
iiKiikeiplace. Ihe sense ol Ihe oppressive 
heal, the sound ol the muezzin jcull to 



ill tindin(i the do^* and p.ismg lor its 
injiiiics MeiinwhilcMi Johnson buss a 
I \iv\ lolt I li* f'cl his i onsiuichon business 
giMjig .Mui gi Is .l^tv inlercsied mil, B> 
llu enditl ihi iht\el Ji»e\ aeeepls his 
'.ti-ptiitht I 

i [lis IS a iiiH l.iiiiiU am) coinmg ot age 



each other. 

The Alten\ord coniains laeuial mlonnalion 
abtiut the Milage, recent lacLs aUuU the 
Israel; a glossary ; and a Hebrew Arabic 
Language compaiison ol Ihirlcen common 
words.This is a \cr\ worlhw hilc bin»k lo 
read and discuss in class. 



shii\ Il IS ih»i sieitohpical. but prcsenis an Gr, 4-8 Middle East 



"agaiiisl tile grain" inotlrl l(»f Alrican 
\mciu .in l> »\s \\\\\ \ .lie ollcii piessuied b\ 
peels lo mm then backs on school which is 
the "white nuins world" I realK hwed this 
bt»i»k and Ihc kuK will Un\ 
<;r 5-H 

KfvifWfd h> Harharii Koss. Middle 
School lihrarimi. 



Cunicular: World Hislorv 



iHou/ do you (qww whethtr a 
person you futven^i met is 
good or Bad, 
- Arn Chorn* 



o! the )K*i deci lollowing Mumta^. 

i he \illains in ihc b<M>k aje Amina. the 
lifsl wile ol Kahim. and Na/jr his vicious. 
})owet hiingi) brother Shahbanu endures 
iheii ofvii haired w iih n igilancc. She also 
wicsiles wilh an inner conflict when she 
lo\cs \et resisis a man near her own age. 

The explosion comes near the end of the 
book w iih \ lolence and death. Finally she 
■ hnds a measure ol peace at her bcloxcd 
hdveli, the ancestral home that once knew 
grandeur and is n<w\ ralher decrepit. Il is not 
a lair\ tale end . but this time the 
compr(»mise is ol her own making. 
c;r ll*adult Pakistani 



UASLUXLL S.WLU iS WnlUnhv Km 
\|tHhi/uki. IIIus In \ Mmi\ I ec 

i AC and 1 4m lUioks P^'M 

ISHS I HHOIKK) 01 

»nc da\ in> ilid l»*'keil oiil .il ihe eiulU ss 
dtscn .iml tkcuUd In hiiild a luselMll In UV 
S4» sians ihis loiichinj! pulure I lu 

|i>i«iiinn IS a J,ip.inese miermnen! i.Kn|> in 
lililu). iuul It takes .i lot o! work ami ingeitmu 
IkIoiv iIk- field IS eompleled and uiiilotnis in.uti 
^••••11 ilMllless cmeis'i 

ERIC 



h IS hiie ihi >oiin>! Iieri» hones his skills, and 
in.ikis Ihe liii.il winning s>*ing lhai hnnps him 
In honu pUli ami ihe "Ihumbs up sign" liom 
ih( \nu man jju.nd on ihe watch lower When 
he iclniiis tt» iIk* eil> aller Ihe war. he Mill finds 
disiiinunaiH^n hin his skill at biischiill wins 
hiin us|inl and IriemLs 

Ihis'lMscluir sn>rx introduces children to 
iht hisiomal iealil\ oi discnminaiu>n ami 
inuiniiuiil Ihi itlMslrations are in shades ol 
hiowns lelUeling llR and dcsen liKaUon. hul 



lhe\ Liune to iitv with the baseball action 
depleted 1 he author's ivirenis weie in an 
inicrnitKni camp in ULiho in 1*>42 
Gr. 3*S<f Japanese American 
Curricular I S UisiorN Read also 
l(H4nw\- to Topa: / I chida 



School *Daus ... School /^fiends 



THE SUNITA EXPERIMENT by 
MiUli Perkins. Little Brown S993 
I79p ISBN 0-3 16^69943-8 



MOON BRIDGE by Marcia Savin 
Scholastic 1992 231p ISBN(>-59(>- 
45873-6. 



Middle schix>I students struggle w ilh Marcia Sa\ in presents an honest Ux)k at the 

creating their ou n identit\ , and this is hosiihi) aimed at Japanese Aniencans al icr 
especially so for children w ith dual cultures, the bombing ol Ftarl Harbor, which resulted 

in their e\ acuataon from the West Coast and 
Sunita Sen is a typical Amencan teenager mtemmeni in concentration camps. The 
preoccupied with friends, school, homework, story is told from Ruthie Fox's perspective 
and a budding romance w ilh the school as she relates her feelings and expcnenccs 
tennis star. Her pleasant world erupts in hen she becomes friends w uh a Japanese 



conflict w hen her middle class grandparents 
arrive from India for a prolonged visit Her 
East Indian mother then reverts to weanng 
sarees instead jeans and coc4ang cumes 
instead ol' sending out for pizzas! 



American classmate, Mit^i Fujimoto. 

On another le\el this is a story of schixil 
friends - their joys and mishaps,and the 
el feet ol politics and prejudice on that 
fnendship over the years. 



The ctilture conflict w ithin Sunita is 

realistic. This excellent first no\el explores The Alterword gj\es the facts about the 
the deferences in the cultures presented, but e\ acuation and internment, and is one of the 



emphasises the g(XHi quahiies in the 
minont) and mainstream characters that 
o\emde and unite the cultures. There are 
some teenage villains, faini w hiffs of 
prejudice, and many signs of adi>lesceni 
impatience and rebellion. But there is also 
humor, friendship and famil> lo\e that 
allow s Sunita to appreciate her famil\ 
rotMs. This carefull) a)nstrucied no\cl 
can be enjoNcd by teenagers ol all cultures. 
Gr. 6*8/ East Indian 



lew btxjks that has the acknowledgment by 
the US government of the \ lolations of 
basic ci\il liberties and constitutional nghts 
to indi\ iduals of Japnese ancestry. 
Gr. 4*S4> Japanese American 
Currieular: S(Kial Studies, Language Arts 
Aetivities:!- Wnic Icitcrs from Mit/.i and 
Kuthic 2 Report on lift- in an inicrnnicnt 
camp 3 Research news articles describing 
events of thai lime 4-C'reale a Treasure l^>\ of 
significant items from ihc siory 
Reviewed by Ruth Seo, teaeher 



IF IT HADN'T BEEN FOR YOON 
J UN b> Mane G. Lxe. Houghton 
1993 134p ISBN 0-395-6294M 

The tw o main characters of this easy-reading 
no\cl about middle schix>l friendships, 
boN fnends, football and parties were both 
bom in Korea, but are culturally quite 
different! 

Alice Larsen was adopted as a baby by an 
American family and is now a t>pical, 
attractive, middle class teenager. Yoon Jun, 
is a new immigrant - pudgy, shy, lives with 
his mother in subsidized housing, and does 
not speak English well. Through most of 
the bcK>k Alice repudiates this common 
heritage and avoids Yoon Jun. When they 
are paired by lottery to work on a report 
they choose Korea, and she becomes 
interested m its history. 

Later Yoon Jun saves her from being hit by 
a speeding car. She is grateful to him and he 
becomes a campus hero!. {This wrap>up 
incident seems forced!} 

The no\el recognises the peer pressure to 
ainJixm and re\ cals the senous differences 
that can exist within a culture. 
Gr. 5*8 Korean-Ameriean 
Activity * Discuss "accepting differences' 



ECHOES OF THE nHITE GIRAFFE b\ S<H)k N>ul Choi. Houghton 
1993 I37p ISBN 0-395-64721-5 

This sequel U> The Year of Impossible Goodbses fixruscs more on the pcrst^nal 
expenence ol the heroine Sookan. than on the political conditions in Korea. She is 
now fifteen and w ith her mother and young briHher she is a refugee in Pusan for two 
and a half \ears while the Kt>rean War still rages. She li\es high on a rather sleep 
hill ctnered with hundreds of makeshili huts. In rain\ weather access is \er> difficult. 
Yet she is happ\ to go Jrcel) to schix)l and church. It is here she finds her firsi lo\e 
- Junho Unlike Amencan teenagers she is not free to date, or e\en show special 
atlention 5o the \oung man Bui their aiiraclion is mutual , and the\ challenge 
tradition b\ meeimg secret!) sometimes lo talk together. 

The war is o\er in 1953 and tens of thousands ol refugees return to their homes 
Sookan's tamih returns to Seoul to see their house in rums. Her three older brothers 
are there but her father has died in the bombing. She enier> college and gets a 
scht>larship lo Mud\ in the US. One da\ Junho comes lo see her. Thc> tall ol limes 
past and the future. He is planning to enier the seminar\ to become a pnesi She is 
sad to sa\ goodb\e, but he says, 

**Nothing filll ever end; nothlni ever does. 
Everything good that touehes our lives heeomet part of ut rorever..." 
This IS a tender lo\e stor>\ of teenage romance in an^>iher culture, another countr> - 
different in custom, but alike in the depth of j(>> . longing and heartbreak 
,9^-S4 Korean 





ERIC 



Don't Miss This! 

ITS OUR HORLD: Stories of 

yov**g people who are making a 

difference b> Phillip Htx)se. Joy 

Street Liltle Brown 1992 166p ISBNO- 

316-37241-2 

This album-si/e bcxik tells the stones of 
fourteen \oung teenage acti\ists, of man\ 
ethnicities, who took nsky stands against 
racism and sexism; reached out to help 
others in the community; initiated projects 
to save the earth and create a safer future. 
Each stofN runs about eight pages and has 
photographs. A third of the book is a 
handbook on planning these projects. This 
attracti\e and informative book will be 
indispensable to teachers marshalling the 
idealism ol youth The starred* quotes in 
this newsletter a:c from this book. 
Gr.6^ Cross eultural 



Jlround tlic ^ofld and "Rack Jlaaln 




THE LOTUS SEED by Shcrr> Garland, 
illus. bvTatsuroKiuchiu Harcourt 
1993 ISBN 0-15-249465-0 



In a Hashback, an immigrant grandmother 
tells ol her youth in Vietnam.how she stole 
a lotus seed from the impenal gardens of the 
lasl Emperor, hem she Hod after the war 
Icavmg everything but savmg the lotus 
seed. Her young grandson has never seen a 
lotus Howcr so he steals the seed and plants 
It socreiJv The grandmother is very sad, but 
m ume it emerges as a beautiful flower. 
Then the grandmother gi\es each child one 
of the seeds. The story is beautifully told and 
provides insight to the lechngs of 
immigrants 

There is a goixl Author's Note at the end of 
the b(iok bnefly traang the history of 
Vietnam dunng this century. 
Gr. 1-3 Vietnamese immigrant 
Aetivltles: Science - plant seeds in class. 

FEAST FOR 10 by Caihr>n Falwell, 
author/illus. Clanon 1993 
ISBN a>39S62037-6 

Most young children love the supermarket, 
so here is a counting lxK)k with mama and 
five children under 8 years old] doing iheir 
grocery shopping. There is one cart, two 
pumpkins, three chickens in packets, five 
kinds of beans, six bunches of ga'ens etc. 
Then when they return home there is one 
car. five empty cans, six pots and pans,, 
nine chairs around the ubie and ten hungry- 
people to feed 

The Wack family is portraved very 
positively and all children will feel 
comfortable with the iSlustruuons uhich are 
large and distinct. This is a pre-school 
winner! 

Gr. pa*K Afriean Araeriean 
Read alio /0„9.8 by Molly Bang. 
Aellvtty - Have parents bnng in grocery- 
items (ict a child's wagon, re-enact the b(X)k 



AFRICA BROTHERS AND 
SISTERS by Virginia Kroll pictures by 
Vanessa French Four Winds Press 
1993 ISBN 0^-751 166-9 

In a simple question and ansv,-c: format 
(between father and young son )this colorful 
picture book reviews the accomplishments 
of various African tnbes. The Ibo grow the 
best yams, the Ashanti weave exquisite 
cloths, the Gucre carve marvelous masks, 
the Djerma make gold and silver 
jewelry ,etc.Many Africans are also 
teachers, engineers and businessmen in the 
cities. 



in the class, letting children take turns. 



ERIC 



The pastel illustrations reflect the work of 
the tnbes, and include pictures of father and 
son enjoying this game of learning. 
Included IS a lull page, color map noung the 
locations of the tnbes, and a glossary. An 
author's note lists additional tnbes and their 
oocupations.A book of information and pride 
that should be shared with all children. 
Gr. 1-34- Afriean 
Currleular - Social Studies 

SUufBody can Be great 
fBecause any Body can serve. 
* Martin Luther KingJr* 



JONATHAN AND HIS MOMMY by 
Irene Smalls-Hector Illustrated by Michael 
Hays 1992 Little Brown 

A hean-warming picture book that will be a 
favonte with very young children. Jonathan 
and his Mom go for a walk in the city - only 
they don't just walk! They hop, jump, 
daiKX, walk backwards, take BIG steps 
then little steps - all the while imagining 
another world arni enjoying themselves 
regardless of how they Icxik to others! Then 
they come home to bed. 

The pictures zxt perfect for class ch small 
group readaloud. The young mother and child 
are African American but the streets they 
walk through shou many ethnicities, 
occupauons and activities that children will 
rca>gnise. Highly recommended. 
Gr. PS*2 Afriean Amerlean 
Aetlvttlet; Take Jonathan's kind of walk 
around the class. Good exercise! 




ABUELA*S WEAVE by Omar S. 
Castaneda, Illus. by Enrique O. Sanchez 
Lee & Low ISBN 1-880000-00-8 

In this attfacuve picture book Esperanza, a 
young girl, is being Uught by her abuela 
f grandmother] how to weave the intricate , 
jaditional Guatemalan patterns into the 
Upesthes and huipiles (long blouses) they 
will take to market. 

**PuIl baek hard** says 
Abuela, ''Make ...the tlirrads 
stay elosf, like family'' 

Espcranza has the responsibility of taking 
the goods by bus to the market in Santa 
Cruz . This is not easy for the young girl. 
But by the end of the day her handwoven 
goods have outsold the machine made 
clothing in the competing stalls. 

The picture book has large, coloiful 
illustrauons, which positively reflect the 
Gtiatemalan culture in clothing, nir^ 
homes, city market scenes and especially in 
the gentle faces of Esperanza and her obuekL 
The author was bom in Guatemala City, and 
the illustrator grew up in the Domincan 
Republic. 

Gr. 1*3 Latino 

Currleular - 1- Simple weaving activity 
2 - Ask parents to bring in hand woven 
pieces of clothing or linen from their own 
culture. Noucc the similahties . 



5folktalgs and /Tcitliiatg 



THE LOST CHILDREN : the boyt 
who were neglected, by Paul Goblc. 
Bradbury 1993 

This siory trom ihc Blackicx>i nauon is 
abiiui the Pleiades • the Bunched Stars. 
In the legend sc\en orphan boys uere 
starved and ridiculed by their tribe. Sothe\ 
went to the Abo\ e World and asked to 
become stars. When Sun Man heard their 
story he punished the tribe by withholding 
rain - causing thirst, hunger and death. But 
the dogs - who had been the only friends the 
orphans had on earth - pleaded Tor rain to 
sustain the animals and flowers. Sun Man 
relented and sent the rain. 



THE RED THREAD b\ Bxl Young 
author/illus. Philomel Bks. 1993 

Ed Young's art is ne\er tnic, and these 
exquisite illusU^lions will loslcr caret ul 
obser> auon. The red thread of the iille nins 
through all the pages • most obviouslv in 
dividing the printed words, but more sublh 
throughout the pictures. The colors arc 
luscious. They fill the pages in bold 
splashes reflecling the emotions or recede to 
reveal delicate ouUincs of crowded ba/aars. 
opulent palaces, milling people, horses, 
soldiers - amongst w hich a careful reader cai. 
obser\e a young man w ho is kx>king for a 
wife. 



Or. 1-3 AfHcan 

Read also • Bringing the The Rain to 

Kapiti Plain /Aardema 

Aetlvlties : Cumulative, participation, 

act-out stor> . Science Animals of Afnca. 




VEJIGASTE MASQVERADER by 
Lulu Oclacre author/artist Scholastic 1993 
ISBN 0-590-45776^4 

In Februar> during the vejigante carnival in 
Puerto Rico people dress in colortui 
costumes,wear masks and carT> inflated cow 
bladders {vejigas) that are painted. 

Young Ramon desperately wants to be part 
of this celebrauon, and schemes to make a 
costume secretly and bu> a mask. Howe\ er, 
on the fir^t day of the festival he is attacked 
by a goat, w ho teai^ his costume. He is 
despondent, but the old men respect his need 
to participate, and his mother mends his 
costume - rx> he can enjoy the festivities 
again. 

This is a bilingual (Spanish) book . The 
illustrations are attractive and contemporary . 
Information on masquerade festixals in 
other Hispanic coumnes is included at the 
end of the book.along w ith illustrauons and 
instructions for making masks. 
Gr. t-4 Latino 
Activities - Ma..k making 



I wtHtCvmu peace (m your firings and 
- Sadako Sasaki* 



Now the stars, bunch together in the sky, 
as the Retades. Annind tlicm are hundreds 
of smaller stars (\ isible only through a 
telescope). These arc their friends the dogs! 
Coble's tllustraUons and retelling are backed 
by research 

Gr. I**4 American Indian 
ActlvMIci: Older kids can search out 
stones from other culiurcs abnui the stars . 



THE HONEY HUNTERS; A 
traditional African Tate told and 
illustrated by Francesui Martin. Candleu ick 
Pr. 1992 ISBN I -56402 -086.x 

In the Ngoni folktale the honeybird llies 
through the leal y forest and o\ er the v\ ide 
plains calling, 

•Che, Che, Cheka, Che, 
If ycu want honey follow me!" 
She IS followed by a Ngoni lad, then a 
cock, then a cat, then an antelope, leopard, 
zebra, lion and elephant. They are all 
friendly until the honey is found and the boy 
breaks the hive to share with all. Then the 
animals fight among each other - as they 
have d(Xie ever since! But the stor\ ends 
hopelulh, when the honey bird beckons 
again lor the smaller animals and insects to 
follow her. 

The colors in the illustrations rellecl the 
greens of the forest and the yellow s ol the 
hot plains; againsi these are the authentic 
forms and colors of the animals, birds, 
insects and flowers. As illustrated the Ngoni 
boy could just as easily be a girl, w hich 
gives a nice non-sexi«» touch to this 
bcauuful biK>k. 



Tradition said that, "this red thread links 
together a a)uples' feet when they arc bom.' 
They w ill exentually marry the person to 
whom they are ued at birth. It is forecast 
that Wei will marry a giri who is at present 
only three years old. and li\es in poverty. 
Wei ref uses to accept this match as the girl 
IS M^/v! (Oh my! w hy this again?) He sends 
a sen ant to murder her . But she surMves and 
later, when she is restored to her rtoble 
family he falls in love and mames her. not 
realising who she is. 

Many of the pictures arc Uxy faint and 
detailed lor class rcadaloud. However, older 
children will enjoy examining them. 
Gr.1-3 Chinese 





Commentary ... SLih^faUon JUteratUTE 



In ihc Horn Bti)k Maga/jnc ol Nm Dec I^w2 AIncan Amcnum auihor, Virginia 
Hamiluxi defines a ncu genre Un muluculiural bix»k.s ihe iileraiure ol libcralion'. The 
rotlowing ihoughis and quotes arc lakcn Irom il 

LiberatKW literature includes talcs ol lrecdt)m • v% hciher liclion or m>n-ricuon thai "pi>rtray 
an individual's and a people's ..sul lenn^ and a)uragc. and iheir grovs ing awareness of self 
in the pursuit ol rrcedom. |The biK»Ls| d<icumenl the evidence cither through biogniphy or 
rcconsuiicicd factual narration...|ln them) ihe pusl and the prcseni arc revealed through the 
viclim and us as one and the same . (They show how J fugilivcs from slavery , through 
acts of will and coumge determined the oulcome of their own lives." 

•n general, sch^iol textbooks have failed lo gi\c importance to ihe political impact of 
avcr> and the courageous a^ls of indiv idual slaves - men and women. 
Now Hamilton and Haskins . with careful research, 
factual objectivity and easily understood prose. have 
substantiated the premise that black Americans through 
their own ingenuity, courage and intelligent planning 
have been involved , through the years, in gaining 
freedom for themselves and their race. 




MANY THOUSAND GONE; 
African Americans from Slavery to 
Freedom by Virginia Hamilton, 
illustrated by Leo and Diane Dillon Knopf 
1993 ISBN 0-394-92873-3 

The author structures her book around the 
■ peiMMial stones of African Amcricaas - both 
slave and free through the lasi 250 years. 
Each vignetie is from 2-4 pages only, but 
includes dates, statistics and dialogue w oven 
scamJessl\ into the histoncal pattern. The 
language of fiction gives warmth u> the 
fiftiLs. and the dramatic black and w hiie 
illustrations provide impact. 

Besides providing new insights into familiar 
names, like Crispus Attucks. Sojourner 
Truth etc., Hamilton inuoduccs many 
unknow n faces. Gabncl Prosser planned an 
abortive rebellion in 1800. Jenny Slew 
successfully took her case on unlaw ful 
capuvily all the way to the Massachusclts 
Supreme Court. Josiah Henson. a fugiuve 
slave, had an audience with Queen Victona. 
And there arc more! 

This bock should be required reading for all 
students to eradicate the old images of 
discmpow erment and msu!' self esteem and 
respect for the mx. 
Gr. 3*t4> Afriean American 
O Ttcular: Social Studies, US Hisii>ry 



ERIC 



GET ON BOARD; The Story of the 
Underground Railroad 

by Jim Haskins. Scholastic 1993 152p 
lSBNO-59(M54l»-8 

The pnntsi/e and wnling style makes ihis 
book easy to read and comprehend. It is a 
chronological hisuvy of the Underground 
Railroad, illustrated with pencxJ black and 
white photographs and maps. It includes 
pictures and anecdotes about the Quaker and 
other w hilc men and women w ho supported 
the "railroad** , but it gives importance to 
the courageous n)le pla>cd by Irce blacks 
and escapet? slaves who also were 
'stationmasiers'. 

The author reminds us that it was 
only the blaek men and women 
who made the dangerous Journeys 
Into slave territory to bring out 
those who wanted freedom badly 
enough to undertake the risks. 

There is a good index, time line, and 
bibliography for further reading. Like 
Haskins' other excellent biographies on 
Afncan Amencans, this history gives new 
dignity to the black slave. 
Gr. 5*S'f African American 
Currieular: US Histor>'. 



THE REAL MCCOY; THE UFE OF 
AN AFRiCAN^AMERICAN 

tNVENTOR by Wendy Towle. 
Paintings by Wil Clay. Scholastic 1993 
ISBN 0-59043590-5 

Children need successful role models, 
especially within their ow n culture. This 
biographical picture bcx>k tells the storN of 
Elijah McCoy, bom sn 1844 as a free black 
m Canada. He w as educated as an engineer in 
Scotland, but when he came to the US after 
the Civil War, he still found discrimination, 
and could only get a menial job on the 
railmods. 

He used this circumstance to invent ihe 
automauc oil cup to grease the axles and 
t)canngs of the trains. It was so effecuve, 
that when imitations crept into the market, 
the engineers would declare they only 
wanted "the real McCoy*. 

In 1975 his home tow n of Detroit named a 
street after this black engineer and inventor. 

The author is a teacher w ho developed this as 
a unit for her class. The illustrator is a black 
sculptor and painter. 
Gn 

Currieular • Science - Research other 
black inventors and scientists. 
Read also • A Ijong Hard Journev: The 
Siory of the Pullman i^orter by McKissack 



Jl Ikiu becomes a Man... 



SPARROW HAWK RED b\ 

Ben Mikaclscn Hvpcnon 1993 
ISBN l-56»2.388-4 



Al firsi the reader nia> be pui off b> ihc 
tlambtnani aJ\eniurc but i Iccl that the 
authi>r puil^ it i^ll 

Ritk> Dia/ can ll>. allhi^ugh he is Ux> 
>oung lor a piU>i's hcence. His faiher, 
Benito, u OS a jet pilot, then in the US Drug 
Enforcement Agency, but he quit after his 
w ife died. As the book opens the DEA 
uanis him to go into Mexico and steal an 
airplane with sophisticated radar equipment 
from a drug cartel Beniti> feels sure this 
cartel was rcspiHisiWe lex his uife's death • 
and he refuses. 

Rjck> o\cr hears ihe discussion and decides 
Ihut he will j\enge his mother's death He 
runs a\\a> iM:xoss ihe border, merges w iih ihc 
ratero |ht)mcless children |, c\penences their 
hard life, and in ihis disguise is able lo 
infilirale ihc drug lord's eompt>und. li's noi 
fair to give awa> ihe rest of the storv ! 



Mikaclson tells a gnpping yam. Once you 
arc aWe to accept the premise that a teenager, 
M ho flies airplanes, is uking on a ruthless 
drug cartel b\ himself. >ou are draun into 
the action. Ricky's life as a ratero is 
explored w iih empathy - the hunger. 
\iolcnce. humiliation, constant vigilance 
and abject pi>\ert\. A spunky ratero girl, 
Stiledad. bclnends him and adds humor and 
pathos with her pranks and her despair. He 
realises that street people actually work \cr\ 
hard all da>. jusl al surviMng!. The Ihmg 
sequences are cvhilaraiing and sure to please 
ad\cnture seckerN 

Is this a mainstreain*inulticultural 
novel? 1 think so. The characters 
and setting is noticeably Latino. 
Ricky and Soledad are courageous 
but human. The raiero culture is 
sympathetically introduced, %%ith 
respect for the sheer hard iwork and 
understanding for the petty crime It 
takes to survive on the streets. 
But the sheer adventure of the plot 
is predominant. The final ruse to 
reach the heavily guarded airplane is 
very unusual, but t%ill appeal to 
the humor of pubescent boys! 



I85p The author is not Laiino but ' sr ent some 
time among the homeless children of 
Mexico and also drew upon his ow n 
childhood experiences grow ing up in 

Boli\ la." There are many Spamsh w ords and and expencnccs in the Canbbcan and middle 
phrases used, bul skilllully integrated so that Amcncan counincs lo wntc this short but 



THE WALLS OF PEDRO GARCIA 
by KcMn McColley Dclacrotc Pr. 1993 
ISBN 0-385-30806-X 

Kevin McCoilcv has drawn on his tra\cls 



there is no need for a glossary. This book 
will sell itself • and happily appeal also to 
boys. The reader cannot help but feel 
admirauon for the LaUno hero, and 
sympathy for the raieros of Mexico. 
Gr. ^-t-f Latino 
Revk yed with Barbara Ross. 




impressive first novel. The book presents a 
disturbing, mysucal tale centered around 
Pedro and his ahiiflo (grandfather). Even 
though the orphaned boy is twelve years old. 
this unpredictable , eofrung-of-age story is 
more suitable for older teens because the 
underl>ing theme cuts deep. 

Pedro and Miguel, his ahuelo, Iwe in a hui 
on the estate ol Senor dc Lupe, and serve 
him The siory re\ol\es around the wall 
that the Senor is building around his estate. 
Pedro wants to protest against it. The wall 
also scr\ es as a metaphor presented by the 
book • that the desire to be a man {control 
one's own destiny 1 is confrixited by soaety's 
stubborn view of one's station and value m 
life. Pedro wishes to feel that his life matters 
' that he is special. His ahufio disapproves 
and tnes to convince him, in a variety of 
ways,that pnde in one*s self is bad - that 
being a man means letung go of dreams and 
accepung the realities of one's life. 

"You are not a boy, but that does 
not mean that you are a man** says 
the grandfather to Pedro. 

The language is poetic, the dialogue sincere, 
and there is evident pndc in the Latino 
heritage. The b(¥>k offers no solutions but is 
an excellent caial\s( lor discussions on the 
cssemial worth of the underpnvilegod in a 
MXict> w here one's \ aluc is based on wealth. 
C;r.t4^ Latino 

Activities: Compare vviih Sparrow Hawk 
Red / Mikaclscn 

Revletved with Rose Bocanegra 



A BOY BFXOMH^ A MAN AT BOUNDED KNEE h> ltd nilh NVanbli Numpa 

Mraidofllav^k Walker & Co \W 42p IsRN 0 8027 HI74 K 

There should be more books hkc this - linking the heroic Indian of the past to Ihc prcscni 
pct>plc ofthib culture This picture bcwk presents Ihc hislontal fads oflhc massacre al 
Wounded Knee ( rcck.(l»X)) then relates them to an ciphi >iar old Uki>la bt>> who loins a 
^oup of abtnil 20() liikola horsemen in a commcnKualu e nde ihal retraces the ill faled trek of 
the Oglala people The modem six da> joumc>, in sub zero weather is difficuii for the bi>>. 
hut he km>ws tl is to honor his forbears and to heal the past 1 his is his C4>ming of age 
( olor phtHographs of this 1990 trip illuslratc Ihis \er> inh>rmaihe txH»k 
Gr,2*5 American Indian 
Currieular • Social Studies. I S llistor> 



Leave 'Em Lauahina! 



THE RIGHTEOUS REVENGE OF 
ARTEMtS BONNER by Waller Dean 
Myers. HarperCollins 1993 I44p 
ISBN 0060208465 

This IS Myers ans\icr to Mark Twain - and ii 
IS great fun! It is in I8H0 that the 15-ycar- 
old African American bov, one Artemis 
Bonner, sets out U) find the man who shot 
doH n his uncle. Ugly Ned Bonner! Frolic, 
an American Indian boy joins him.Thc two 
of them embark on Extensive Journeys to 
find the gold that Ugly Ned Bonner had 
discovered, and to do Justice to his Killer, 
who is one Catfish Grimes, a black man of 
Fiendish Imagination. 

The tv*o adventurcre make many Diabolical 
Rans to capture Cadlsh and his Lady - but 
lo no avail! They travel all over the US 
including, Sacramento and up to Alaska. 
There is an ongoing balance of po\*'er 
between the two adversarial groups (for 
Catfish's Lady is almost as Reprehensible as 
he is!) Artemis gets the worst of many 
exploits, but he bounces back to execute 
even more Outlandish Punishments. 

He and Frolic eventually end up home, 
without the treasure, but thankfully with 
their Lives. 

This Is Myers at his eomie best, 
with his tongue firmly Imbedded In 
his cheek. 

It would make a delightful read aloud and 
will surely spur some spontaneous re- 
enactments (which, of a>ursc, should be 
supervised!!) 
Gr. 5-S 

Activities > Readers Theatre . 
Dramatisation. Comparison w ith Huck 
Finn. Have small cooperative groups write 
episodes for a sequel - using the same 
writing style. Ctnnpile ytnir class btK>k. 
Research the black cow boy in history. 




AUNT ELAINE DOES THE DANCE 
FROM SPAIN by Leah Komaiko, 
illustrated by Pctra Mathers Doublcday 
1992 ISBN 0-385-30674-1 

Lilung rhyme, large pictures in primary- 
colors peopled by sophisticated, but happy 
people of many complexions and centered 
around the oddities of an Aunty Mame 
character , make this a winner for the 
primary kids. Aunt Elaine is an attractive, 
unconventional, slightly ditsy lady who 
belongs to a Spanish dance club (hat is 
putting on a show. She takes her niece Katy 
to see it, but somehow, Katy ends up on 
stage w ith her aunt! 

This delightful book es also cross cultural, 
pro\ iding a glossary of Spanish words along 
with the Yiddish phrase - Oh vey (oh 
Imther!) which sutHly shows what Katy's 
parents think of Aunt Elaine's antics! 
Gr. K-3 Cross eultuml 
Activities: Get out the castanets, sew on 
the fnlls, learn a Spanish dance, give a 
show, in\ ite Katy and me! 

The following persons baive been most 
genemus in providing me books, advice, 
valuable discussion and reviews for this 
issue. I thank thew. 
Rose Bocanegia, Terry Cbekon, 
Jud> Green, Moonyene Lew , Nancy Ortiz 
Jackson, Barbara Ross, Ruth See 



goodSye Sa%ionara.....J\dios Umigos 

The "World is Ours toSfiare 



0000000000000000000000^00000^ 




SEND FOR THESE: 

The Children's Small Press 
Colleetlon Catalog 719 N. Fourth A\e 
Ann Arbor, Ml 48104 
70p catalog of "hard to find, well-chosen 
books and music for tots to teens.. .Also 
resources for parents and professionals...* 
Includes a good amount of multicultural 
books from small presses, also books on 
self esteem, values c*arirication,etc. 

List of b(x>ks from 

Polychrome Publishing 

Corporation. 4509 North Francisco. 

Chicago, Illinois 60625 

A new publishing house dedicated to 

producing Asian American children's stories. 

AWAIR Catalog of materials and study units 
Arab World and Islamic Resources 

2095 Rose St, Suite 4 
Berkeley, CA 94709 

HarperCollins announces that its 
Center for Multicultural Children's 
Literature is now accepting applications 
from talented writers and illustrators to be 
considered for participation in a new mentor 
program. There are over 40 multicultural 
authors and/or illustrators with established 
careers in children's literature who will act as 
mentors. To encourage these new writers 
they announce the HarpcrColhns 
Nlultieultural Children's Book 
Awards - three cash awards, and two grants. 
For further information and for applications 
send a SASE to: 
Center for Multicultural Children's 
Literature. HarperCollins, 10 £. 53rd St, 
30lh Roor, New York, NY 10022 

TALKING WALLS: ACTIVITY 
GUIDE by Margy Bums Knight and 
Thomas Chan 1992 $9.95 

Tilbur> House Pub. 
132 Water St, Gardiner ME 04345 

Good 65p guide of activities and units based 
on the book of the same title (reviewed in 
MIRROR, Fall ^2] The acu\ities have 
been tested in K-9 classrooms by the authors 



0000 




