OOCUKEKT RBSUKE 



EO 318 067 CS 507 139 

AUTHOR Killer, Bernard A- 

TITLE native American Rhetoric and the Pre-Socratic Ideal 

of ^'Physis*" 
PUB DATE Mar 90 

NOTE 13p.f taper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 

conference on College Composition and Communication 
(4l5tr Chicagor XL, March 22-24, 1990) • 

PUB TYPE Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Viewpoints (120) 

EDRS PRICE MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS American Indian Culture? ^American Indian Literature? 

^Discourse Analysis? ^Language Role? Literature 
Appreciation? Novels? Rhetoric? Rhetorical Theory 

IDENTIFIERS Native Americans? Rhetorical Effectiveness? Words 

ABSTRACT 

"House Made of Dawn" hy N. Scott Momaday is about 
language and the aacredness of the word and at>out what can be 
understood as a peculiarly Native American theory of rhetoric. All 
things are hinged to the physical landscape, nature, and the 
implications nature bears upon language. In Momaday *s bookr language 
does not represent external reality but is given precedence^ such 
that there is no external reality except in terms of a primordial 
spirituality that embraces the individual's oneness with nature. 
Momaday tells readers about an idea lost to post-Socratic rhetorical 
theory # that of "physis," as being one with "nomos," where nature is 
an entity or activity that constitutes the "creative surge" of Being, 
and language p ever as much as nature, is an indigenous field where 
people dwell and discover the source of their being. Running through 
a sermon made by one character is the idea that truth lies in 
language. Truth is verbal, and to say there is something behind or 
beyond language that it symbolizes is to burden and obscure the 
truth. The focus is on words as a source of creation. Momaday defines 
racial memory as the commitment of a community of believers to a 
perfect integration of an individual's mind and spirit with that of 
his people, most concretely manifest in the rituals, legends, and 
beliefs of the oral tradition. Through this perspective, community is 
established and preserved through story^ and song, creating by means 
of language the cultural landscape through which being is 
acknowledged and identity is achieved. (MG) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 



NATIVE AMERICAN RHETORIC AND THE 



•TEf^MtSSfON TO REPRODUCE THIS ^pw cnroa«rTf^ TnPUT nP T>«VOTa ^.S.Dei^T¥EfiroreoucATiON 

MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY ^ SSjk^ OUWXUi X AW XI<li:i#U« Ul? ■'^^J^ff 4S? ^* ecfuottionai Research and (mpfOvecn©nt 

EDUCATIOMAl resources fNFORMATlOM 
CENTER tERlO 

Tftfs document has been reproducest as 
fecofvoa *rom the person or organtrafion 
orf9»nating ft 

D MtF\op c?^af^Q6S t^ave b^n made to improve 



BSf^K^AKOft.M^U ^ Bernard A. Miller 
Eastern Michigan University 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



• Poirtts of v»ew OF opinions stated tn tms docu 
ment do not necessaruy represent otttcial 
po$»T(0« Of poi»Cy 



N. Scott Momaday*s Pulitzer winning novels Hou^ e Made og 
Qd^suif has become a classic of Native American literature. It is 
the story of Abel# a young Pueblo Indian estranged from the 
traditions of his own community and yet unable to adhere to 
anything new in white culture. In fact? with the exception of 
the book's prologue and closing pages r Abel's presence throughout 
the no el is marked only by an ill'defined pathos. In one sense 
he is precisely the "wooden Indian" one character in the novel 
suggests him to be. In another r more clinical sense^ he seems to 
be schizophrenic r his personality utterly smashedr forcing a 
complete loss of ego. Momaday identifies the source of Abel's 
amisX, by saying his relationship with the land has been severed, 
and he is therefore inarticulate, no longer attuned to the "old 
rhythms of the tongue" (57). 

In the end Abel is brought back to bis tribal roots. 
Central to his deliverance is the Navajo Night Chant, a rite of 
excorism and restoration, a healing ceremony meant to return the 
communicant to a harmonious relationship with the natural world. 
The Night Chant restores Abel's voice? he enters into what 
Momaday calls the "racial memory" of his people — the shared and 
inherited lore and rituals of the oral tradition. 

That's the basic plot of Pqus^ {iadfi. OL UOMXLt but more 
essentially the book is about language and the sacredness of the 



^ 2 



word — and what can be understood as a peculiarly Native American 
theory of rhetoric. Here^ all things are hinged to the physical 
landscape^ to naturet and the implications nature bears upon 
language. 

To introduce the substance of the idear I begin with a 
statement from Walking Buffalo^ a Stoney Creek Indian quoted by 
Vine OeLoria in his boo- / Sfid. IS. Bsd.: 

"Did you know that trees talk? Wellr they do. They talk to 
each other # and they'll talk to you if you listen. Trouble 
iSf white people don*t listen. They never learned to listen 
to IndianSf so I don*t suppose they'll listen to other 
voices of nature. But I have learned a lot from trees; 
sometimes about the weather^ sometimes about animals^ 
sometimes about the Great Spirit." (104) 
Statements such as these^ indicative of the Native 
American's reverence for the land# are familiar enoughr but 
neverr I thinks as fully appreciated as they might be. At worsts 
we take them as mystical insinuations that we should be careful 
about wherf we put our toxic waste dumps orr more banal yet# that 
we shouldn't litter. At bestr we take them as elaborate and 
beautifully constructed metaphors that say something abstract in 
terms of what is concrete^ reflecting in this case something to 
do with the Indian's closeness and unity with nature. But the 
trouble with metaphors is that by their very nature we can never 
take them at their wordf so that we can never believe in any 
literal way that Walking Buffalo is indeed listening to the voice 
of nature — which is precisely what he is claiming to do and 



whicbr through Mosiadayf is the idea I propose to present in a 
rhetorical context* 

At least from the time of Plato we have been diligent to 
make critical distinctions between nature and language^ between 
things and words r C£S. and Xfi£ii&. But in Squsa Qt Uami the 

two are never conceived as distinct thingsi indeed # they are so 
closely intertwined that to consider them separately is to lose 
the meaning of each. In Momaday*s bookf language does not 
represent external reality but is given precedence # such that 
there is no external reality except in terms of a "primordial 
spirituality" that embraces our oneness with nature — a 
spirituality that language creates and then invests with meaning. 
The book tells us about an idea lost to post-Socratic rhetorical 
theory, that of p^ysis — not as we customarily understand it in 
contrast to nomoa . as nature is opposed to words, but as being 
one with nomo^* where nature is an entity or activity that 
constitutes the "creative surge" of Being, and language, ever as 
much as nature, is an indigenous field, where we dwell and 
discover the source of our being. Here, ph ysirS is understood in 
its purely Sophistic, pre-Socratic sense. 

Specifically I focus on a sermon delivered by a character in 
gfiusLS. Sliadfi. sit HaMHi ironically named the "Priest of the Sun." Be 
also figures in Abel*s salvation, though it is never entirely 
clear whether it is for good or ill. You see, the Priest of the 
Sun conducts his services in the cold, damp basement of a 
warehouse and never sees the sun, except as a reddish yellow 
cardboard cutout he has fixed to the wall. He bears all the 
earmarks of Coyote, a trickster figure in Native American 



stytboXogieSf especially those of the Southwest. The Priest of 
the Sun is "shaggy and awfuX-Iookin9..*big; lithe as a cat, 
narrow'-eyed," wears the black of a cleric, and has "the voice of 
a great dog" (85) • His real name is the "Right Reverend John Big 
Bluff Tosamah" and as a trickster, we had best be wary of hisi* 
He shatters decorum, is a bit treacherous, and sometimes plays 
the dolt or fool, but we ignore or disbelieve him at our peril. 
So this figure. Big Bluff Tosamah, offers a sermon in Abel*s 
presence, taking his text from the gospel according to Saint 
John. In it, he talks about the Word, and Rhetoric: 

"la pginciPiO erat 5£fiJ±aiai.*.In the beginning was the 
Word.. .Now what do you suppose old John meant by that? That 
cat was a preacher, and, well, you know how it is with 
preachers; he had something big on his mind. Oh my, it was 
big; it was the truth, and it was heavy, and old John 
hurried to set it down. And in his hurry he said too 
much. ..It was the truth, all right, but it was more than the 
truth. The Truth was overgrown with fat, and the fat was 
John's, God, and God stood between John and the Truth. 

"In the beginning was the word ...Brothers and sisters, 
that was the truth, the whole of it, the essential and 
eternal Truth, the bone and blood and muscle of the Truth. 
But he went on. Old John, because he was a preacher. The 
perfect vision faded from his mind. ..Be couldn't let the 
Truth alone. He couldn't see that he had come to the end of 
the Truths smd he went on. He tried to make it bigger and 
better than it was, but instead he only demeaned and 



encumbered it* He made it soft and big with fat. He was a 
preacher r and he made a compXex sentence of the Truths two 
sentences^ three^ a paragraph. He made a sermon and 
theology of the truth. He imposed his idea of God upon the 
everlasting Truth. 

"He went on to lay a scheme eibout the Word. He could 
find no satisfaction in the simple fact that the word was; 
he had to account for it/, not in terms of that sudden and 
profound insightr which must have devasted him at once# but 
only in terms of the moment afterward r which was irrelevant 
and remote; not in terms of his imagination but only in 
terms of his prejudice. 

"Now, brothers and sisters, old John was a white man, 
and the white man has his ways, Oh gracious me, he has his 
ways. He talks about the Word. He talks through it and 
around it. He builds upon it with syllables, with prefixes 
and suffixes, and hyphens and accents. He adds and divides 
and multiplies the Word. And in all of this he substracts 
the Truth." (85-89) 

That is the essence of the tone and content of the better 
part of Tosamah's sermon, but he rambles on and on in the 
reiteration of a theme, and in apt measure of his role as a 
trickster, he commits in his verbosity the same sin he accuses 
John of committing. However, running through Tosamah's sermon is 
the idea that the Truth, the sum total of it, lies in language, 
and in this and other matters, Tosamah is no doubt Momaday's 
mouthpiece. Truth is verbal, and to say there is something 
behind or beyond language that it symbolizes — say, some realm of 



ideal £onDs# Godr or any world or idea that precedes our words — 
is to burden and obscure the truth* As Tosamah says, it is the 
fat of Saint John's God standing between John and the truth that 
renders life opaque to those experiences that Momaday would say 
enrich and enoble life. 

It would seem that Tosamah indicts as prejudicial everything 
that is discursive or reflective in language, yet in the context 
of the "profound insight" afforded by the Word, he might well be 
justified in doing so» The Western tradition is based on the 
fundamental distinction between body and soul, and as Pierre 
Bourdieu says, our understanding of nature is the product of a 
"long labor of disenchantment" (167). This attitude reaches its 
apotheosis with the existentialist movement, and is particularly 
pronounced in Albert Camus, whose works accentuate premises in 
place from the time of Plato. In his severance of language from 
nature, Camus achieves the most violent contrast to the Native 
American view, claiming that our salvation lies in metaphysical 
revolt against the "human condition." Here, external reality is 
indeed "external," fixed and final, and does not owe its being 
and nature to our awareness of it, and that — for what truly 
typifies the existentialists — external reality acts as the 
material restraint on the spirit of man, setting absolute limits, 
and man lives as a result pitted against the world inasmuch as 
his consciousness gains realization only in opposition to it. 
The world is perceived, then, as a "brute existent," revealing 
its "primitive hostility" at every turn* Thus, to achieve the 
vindicating mode of consciousness celebrated by Camus, we live by 



a series of failed attempts to bridge the gap between nature and 
ourselves by means of language; we live» as a resultr "inevitably 
as blasphemers in verbal assult "against the whole of creation" 
(fiei2£l 24), screaming our outrage in the confrontation between 
"human need and the unreasonable silence of the world* f Sisyphus 
41) . 

Tosmah's sermon not only challenges this position, but it 
has a positive side to itr a restitution that follows the rebuke 
of the white man's language* The focus is on words, not as a 
means of reflection, but as a source of creation, for nothing is 
pre-existent or prior to words in the Native American world view, 
certainly nothing in the sense of the "primitive hostility" of 
the world described by Camus. "A word has power in and of 
itself," Momaday says. "It comes from nothing into sound and 
meaning; it gives origin to all things. By means of words can a 
man deal with the world on equal terms. And the word is sacred" 
f Rainy Mountain 42). Indeed, the "silence" that pervades fifiUSfi. 
Made q£, UmmHi in stark contrast to the "unreasonable silence" 
that Camus confronts, becomes the backdrop to the creative agency 
of language* central to the novel. It is here that Tosamab 
functions most ably as Momaday's mouthpiece. At long last, 
Tosamab renders the precision and imaginative clarity of the Word 
as compellingly as we would expect it to be rendered: 

"There was a voice, a sound, a word — and everything 
began. ...At the distance of a star something happened, and 
everything began. The Word did not break upon the silence, 
but i^!]ia&ftXdfixl;hJjaLlUi& Silence and. JLI1& silence tta&iaaile. 
Qt it." (Hfius& naAs. QJL Haita 91) 



On the basis of this silence a dialogue is establishedr 
where listening is given the emphasis r a dialogue not between two 
sentient centers that was Plato's wont to call our soulsr nor yet 
a dialogue established with a text — ^but with the land, so that 
both man and nature are appropriated by words. It is 
fundamentally a pre-Socratic form of perception, whereby 
particulars are woven into the whole, into the perfect oneness of 
an undivided sphere. And the world, rather than rearing in 
primitive hostility, circles back upon itself, redundant with the 
life that embraces man, for man discovers its references within 
himself. Like Walking Buffalo, we hear nature speak to us. As 
Momaday explains the matter in Ths. Ito tfiL Bainy. g^ountain: 

"East of my grandmother's house the sun rises out of the 
plain. Once in his life a man ought to concentrate his mind 
upon the remmembered earth, I believe. He ought to give 
himself up to a particular landscape in his experience, to 
look at it from as many angles as he can, to wonder about 
it, to dwell upon it. He ought to imagine that he touches 
it with his hands at every season and listens to the sounds 
that are made upon it. He ought to imagine the creatuces 
there and all the faintest motions of the wind. He ought to 
recollect the glare of noon and all the colors of the dawn 
and dusk. (113) 

In Homaday's conviction there is indeed a fusion of 
consciousness with the landscape. And when he speaks of the 
landr the earth, or of nature, what he invar ibly has in mind is 
the concrete actuality of the physical world, the land and the 

8 9 



landscape as a visibler tangible thing. Thusr the land is 
neither a symbol nor a metaphor referring to something beyond 
itsel£f but the timeless source of the mystery of being that is 
at hand in che immediate and concrete. 

There isr then^ an "indissoluble unity" between word and 
referentf "a complete congruence between 'image* and 'objects' 
between the name and the thing so that^ as Cassirer tells us of 
such a mentality^ "the conscious experience is not merely wedded 
to the wordr but is consumed by it" (58). In this context^ 
language, like the iagiJSL of the primordial first word, is 
creative; but creative only in terms of a consciousness that, 
being sacred, provides a means of imagination that enables us to 
look at the world, see it, and realize it, thus giving it new and 
spiritual existence within ourselves. Reality, or the world, is 
not comprehended as lucidity, reason, or reflection informs us of 
reality, but is apprehended in an act of creation. 

This unity of language, nature, and ourselves is 
-ipecif ically apparent in the early Greek conception of physi^ . 
Here, nature is not understood as a formless mass, brute 
existent, or in its "primitive bostility"i rather, it is rife 
with a life force expressing the coalescence of man and nature, 
for this life force is fundamentally the source of each. Given this 
perspective, apprehension, and more specifically language, is not 
a faculty belonging to man but a process that engages him, 
"happens" to him, through his reciprocal bond with physla . As 
the example of Walking Bear attests, language gives utterance to 
itself; we 'dwell" in language; it constitutes an abode no 
different and as pervasive nature itself, for in the deepest 




sense nature is. the Word. Bence# having no independent existence 
apart from ghy^^^. our being is determined and defined only in 
terms of the corporeal manifestation of language. We would live 
in a House Made of Dawnr and given Momaday*s rendering of the 
cipher f language is, as Heidegger has so often claimed r the House 
of Being. 

The essential harmony of man and the earth on which he 
livesr as it is apparent in phys|s . is closely aligned to another 
Greek term pivotal to our understanding of the of the pre- 
SocrdticS'*~that of djQiis^* The term is usually translated — very 
inadequately, I think — as ''opinion," to perhaps distinguish it 
from the eternal verities present in Platonism. However, 
Bourdieu*s translation is more pertinent to our discussion: Pox a 
expresses the "quasi-perfect fit" of the natural and social, 
where the world of tradition is experienced as the natural world, 
their concordance thereby taken for granted. Here, physis and 
dfi&& cannot be distinguished in any qualitative sense. And here, 
as well, there is an equivalent in Momaday's world view. Momaday 
calls it "racial memory," and it means the commitment of a 
community of believers — by means of a consciousness that is 
sacred, communal, and linke.^ to an affirmation of the land — to a 
perfect integration of one's mind and spirit with that of his 
people, most concretely manifest in the rituals, legends, and 
beliefs of the oral tradition. It is through this perspective 
alone that community is established and preserved through story 
and song, creating by means of language the cultural landscape 
through which we come to acknowledge our being md achieve our 



" 11 



identity* It iSr a£ter all, through the language of the Night 
Chant that Abel obtains his deXiverancer has his racial memory 
restored r and achieves his place and purpose in the world. 
Insofar as he is part of the landscape r he shares in the racial 
memory of his people; and insofar as he achieves that^ he dwells 
in language* He iSr then, as Momaday sayst "a man made of words." 

In the end# what we have in Momaday is a contemporary writer 
dealing with a still vital and thriving culturer yet invoking 
many of the attitudes and perspectives of the pre-Socraticsr 
serving almost as an emissary from their world to ours* As X 
have attempted to relate here^ the pre-Socratic ideal of phyais 
is a case in point* Thus, we need not rely solely on scattered 
fragments, and the often jaundiced views of Plato and those who 
function within his inheritance, to come to a more cogent and 
honest appreciation of the Sophists* 



12 

11 



WORKS CITED 



Bourdieu, Pierre. Outline Qt a !Sh£Q£^ OL Practiige. Trans. 
Richard Nice. Hew York: Cambridge DPr 1977. 

Camus r Albert. Xb& Myth q£. Sisyphus stn^ Qthsx. £s£a:^* Trans. 
Justin O'Brien. New Yorks Vintage # 1955. 

• Th& ISshsli. ho. S&sax. ^ ^an. in Eeimlt* Trans. Anthony 

Bower. New Yorks Alfred A. Knop£r 1956. 

Cassirerr Ernest. Languag e aod. M^th.. Trans. Susanne Langer. 
New Yorks Dover # 1946. 

Momadayr N. Scott. SiUl&s. Madfi. Cam* New York: Signet, 1968. 

• Ihfi. Has. fif. Bainx: Mountain* New York? Bailantine, 1969. 

. "The Man Made of Words." fciterature Qt thfiL Affierican 

Indian SI views and. Interpretations* Ed. Abraham Chapman. 
New York: Meridian, 1975: 96-110. 



13 

12 



