I ivm MATE RART1MER VI OLENCE I N AMERI CAN I NDI AN AND/ OR 
ALASKANAT1 VE COMMUNIT1 ES: ASOCIAL ECOLOGI CAL 
FRANEWORKOFDETERM NANT5ANDI NTERVENHONS 


John Oetzel, Ph.D. and Bonnie Duran Dr. PH. 


Abstract: This essay synthesizes the research on intimate 
partner vioience (IPV) in American Indian and/or Aiaska 
Native communities using a sociai ecoiogicai framework. The 
review of iiterature demonstrates that American Indian and/ 
or Aiaska Native women are at an eievated risk for IPV 
compared to non-American Indian women and thus this 
essay describes muiti-ievei interventions that are cuituraiiy 
appropriate for American Indian and/or Aiaska Native 
communities. The interventions address a variety of 
determinants inciuding gender, age, socioeconomic status, 
aicohoi, European coionization, and infrastructure. 


The annual economic victim- related costs of intimate partner violence 
(IPV) in the U.S. have been estimated at $67 billion (Miller, Cohen, & 
Wiersema, 1996). These costs are associated with the severe and negative 
health and social consequences of violence to victims of IPV. These 
consequences include lower physical health (Brokaw et al., 2002; Hathaway 
et al., 2000; McNutt, Carlson, Persaud, & Postmus, 2002; Silverman, Raj, 
Mucci, & Hathaway, 2001), lower mental health (Hien & Bukszpan, 1999; 
Roberts, Williams, Lawrence, & Raphael, 1998; Woods, 2000), and lower 
employment status (Browne, Salomon, & Bassuk, 1999; Byrne, Resnick, 
Kilpatrick, Best, & Saunders, 1999). Additionally, there are significant effects 
on child witnesses to IPV (Carlson, 2000). 

Although still understudied, an increasing number of studies about 
IPV in American Indian and/or Alaska Native (AI/AN) communities have 
appeared in the literature in recent years (e.g., Fairchild, Fairchild, & Stoner, 
1998; Norton & Manson, 1995). These studies indicate that IPV is more 
prevalent in Al /ANs than other ethnic groups and that effectively addressing 


49 



50 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


I PV involves unique cultural aspects. However, this literature has not been 
integrated at this time (see Williams, 2002 for a compendium of literature on 
related topics). Further, the literature often fails to recognize the 
multidimensional nature of the determinants of I PV. Thus, the purpose of 
this essay is to complete a narrative literature review for research on the 
prevalence, determinants, and interventions for I PV in Al /AN communities. 
After reviewing the prevalence of IPV, the determinants and risks will be 
organized using the social ecological framework. The essay concludes with 
a discussion of how to integrate the various dimensions of the ecological 
model to better address I PV in AI/AN communities. 

Prevalence of I PV 

Prevalence estimates of I PV are affected by several factors that are 
important for comparison across studies: Did the study include emotional as 
well as physical abuse? Did I PV occur in the past year or lifetime (i.e., the 
time frame)? Did the study include a clinical, shelter, or representative 
sample? (Carlson, 2000). Carlson explained that prevalence is elevated in 
studies that included emotional and physical abuse, referenced lifetime 
violence, and occurred in clinical or shelter settings. The review presents a 
variety of studies that illustrate prevalence and make relevant comparisons 
between non-American I ndian and AI/ANs given the above factors. 

Several studies report data from clinical/hospital samples and allow 
for a comparison of non-AI to AI/ANs. Bauer, Rodriguez, and Perez-Stable 
(2000) surveyed 734 primary care patients (31% White, 31% African 
American, and 36% Latina) in the San Francisco area about physical, sexual, 
and psychological abuse. They found that 15% of the women had experienced 
abuse in the past 12 months and 51% had experienced abuse in their lifetime. 
These findings are consistent with Wilt and Olson's (1996) review of a number 
of studies examining I PV in emergency rooms. I n these studies, they found 
that I PV ranged from 4 to 30% of women seen in emergency rooms (ERs) 
for current I PV (i.e., for the current visit to the ER) and 11 to 54% for lifetime 
IPV. In comparison, Fairchild et al. (1998) surveyed 341 women at an Indian 
Health Service hospital on the Navajo Reservation about physical, sexual, 
and psychological violence. They found that 16.4% reported violence in the 
past 12 months, while 52.5% reported any type of violence in their lifetime 
(40.5% reported verbal, 41.9% reported physical, and 12.1% reported sexual). 

Given that IPV rates are higher in clinical and emergency room 
settings (Carlson, 2000), it is also important to examine rates in population- 
based surveys. Wilt and Olson (1996) included a review of population-based 
studies for severe and lifetime domestic violence. They found a range of 0.3 
to 5% of women experienced severe violence in the past year, while 8 to 
22% of women experience any type of violence in the past year. Over their 
lifetime, 9 to 13% of women experienced severe abuse and 7 to 30% 
experienced any type of violence. 



I NTI MATE PARTNER VI OLENCE 


51 


There are four studies of AI/AN women in the community. Lee, 
Sanders Thompson, and Mechanic (2002) displayed data from the National 
Violence Against Women Survey (Tjaden & Thoennes, 2000) and found that 
61.4% of AI/AN women reported physical assault in their lifetime compared 
to 51.8% of women overall. Additionally, 34.1% of AI/AN women reported 
rape and 17.0% reported stalking compared to 18.2 and 8.2% of women 
overall respectively. However, the sample of AI/AN women was very small 
relative to the overall sample. Second, Norton and Manson (1995) surveyed 
198 Al women from a reservation in the Rocky Mountain region. They found 
that 46% of the women experienced physical assault in their lifetime. Third, 
a study of a Southwestern Al community found that 31% of women reported 
any type of intimate violence in the past year, while 91% reported any type of 
intimate violence in their lifetime (Robin, Chester, & Rasmussen, 1998). Finally, 
a study of Al s living on or near seven Montana reservations found that 3% of 
women experienced physical violence and 18% experienced emotional abuse 
in the past year (Harwell, Moore, & Spence, 2003). The variation in these 
four studies can partially be accounted for by the nature of the questions 
asking about I PV. For example, Harwell et al. only utilized two broad questions 
about I PV, while Robin et al. used a modified version of the Conflict Tactics 
Scale (Straus, 1979) to capture a wide range of violent behaviors including 
emotional, physical, and indirect (e.g., witness of violence). 

Finally, it is also important to compare the rates of homicide due to 
IPV in non- Al and AI/AN women. Arbuckle et al. (1996) completed a 
retrospective analysis of female homicides in New Mexico from 1990 to 1993. 
They found an overall homicide rate of 4.3 per 100,000 with 46% of those 
victims being killed by a male intimate partner. The rate of female homicide 
among American I ndians (4.9 homicides per 100,000 people) was significantly 
higher than that of Hispanics (1.7) and Whites (1.8). 

In summary, AI/AN women are at greater risk for violence than are 
non-AI women. AI/AN women are almost three times more likely to be killed 
by an intimate partner than Hispanics and Whites and have twice the 
prevalence rate of rape. Further, in population-based surveys the lifetime 
prevalence of any type of I PV for AI/ANs ranges from 46 to 91% compared 
to a range of 7 to 51% for non-Native women (see Table 1 for a summary of 
any type of violence in clinical and population-based samples). The range in 
estimates of prevalence is attributed partially to the instrument used. The 
majority of studies utilize the Conflict Tactics Scale (Strauss, 1979), but 
certain studies with low and high estimates utilize instruments that capture a 
limited (Harwell et al., 2003) or wide (Robin et al., 1998) range of behaviors 
indicative of intimate partner violence respectively. Finally, the estimates for 
AI/ANs are based on limited research and thus it is important for future 
research to provide baseline information on the prevalence of physical and 
emotional abuse. 



52 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


Table 1 

Range of Prevalence of Any Type of I PV in Population-based 
and Clinical Samples 


AI/AN Non-AI/AN 


Setting 

Past year 

Lifetime 

Past Year 

Lifetime 

Clinical 

16.4% 

52.5% 

4-30% 

11-51% 

Population-Based 

18-31% 

46-91% 

8-22% 

7-51% 


Note: Percentages illustrate ranges found in previous studies. Single percentage indicates 
only one study. 


Social Ecological Framework 

This review draws on the social ecologic framework as a way to 
organize the literature. From a public health perspective, the social ecological 
framework provides guidance to factors at multiple analytic levels that may 
influence IPV vulnerability and coping (Bogard, 1999). The social ecological 
framework identifies proximal and distal factors related to I PV victimization 
at five levels (Bogard, 1999; Heise, 1998; Little & Kaufman Kantor, 2002). 
The first level, intrapersonal or individual, refers to the most immediate 
determinants of victimization. The second level, interpersonal, refers to the 
interactions between couples, families and other small groups. The third 
level, institutional or organizational, refers to factors having to do with the 
culture or practices of specific institutions such as local hospitals, clinics, and 
multi-national corporations. The fourth level, community, focuses on the 
current and historical relationships of members of a specific physical or 
psychological community. The final level, policy, emphasizes the governmental 
laws and statutes (federal, state, and tribal) about violence. 

A foundational principle of the social ecological framework is that 
I PV causes and outcomes reflect interplay of factors at multiple levels. While 
an individual's vulnerability to IPV may be easily traced to causes at the 
individual and interpersonal levels, these more immediate causes may in 
turn be traced to factors operating at the higher levels of institutions, 
communities, and social policy. Hence, the contemporary IPV prevention 
field is rich with targets for change that include not only individual criminal 
justice and psychotherapeutic activities but also advocacy, organizational 
change efforts, policy development, economic supports, environmental change 
and multi-method programs (Bogard, 1999; Heise, 1998; Little & Kaufman 
Kantor, 2002). Within this framework, these five levels are used to organize 
the following two sections on the determinants and interventions of I PV in 
AI/AN communities. 





I NTI MATE PARTNER VI OLENCE 


53 


Determinants of I PV 


I ndividual Level 

At the individual level, five determinants are associated with IPV: 
biological sex, age, social economic status (SES), substance use, and cultural 
identity. Biological sex is the primary risk factor for I PV in AI/ANs (and all 
ethnic groups) . Women are 5 to 8 times more likely to experience I PV than 
men (Rennison, 2001; Rennison & Welchans, 2000; Schafer, Caetano, & 
Clark, 1998). Rennison and Welchans (2000) found that women were the 
victims of I PV at a rate of 7.7/1,000 women in 1997. I n contrast, there were 
1.5 male victims per 1,000 for the same year. Eighty-five percent of all I PV 
victims were women in 1997. Finally, male-to-female violence has more 
serious consequences in that it is more often repeated and is more likely to 
result in injury or death then female-to-male violence (Schafer et al., 1998). 

Studies for women in the U.S. in general demonstrate that the age 
range at the highest risk is 16-24 (Rennison, 2001). Two studies on AI/AN 
women found similar results, but did not break down the age range as much 
as did national studies because of smaller sample sizes. Kunitz, Levy, 
McCloskey, and Gabriel (1998) found that AI/AN men and women who were 
below 50 were more likely to strike or have been struck by a partner than 
men and women aged 50 or above. Fairchild et al. (1998) found that Al 
women aged 40 or less were 5.6 times more likely to experience I PV than 
women aged more than 40. 

SES as measured by employment, education, and income has found 
to be determinants of IPV. The general literature on IPV illustrates that 
being unemployed is a risk factor for sexual and physical abuse for women, 
while less education is also a risk factor for physical abuse (Black, Fleyman, 
& Slep, 2001; Schumacher, Feldbau-Kohn, Slep, & Fleyman, 2001). 
Additionally, lower income and education are risk factors for being a 
perpetrator of IPV. For Al women, Fairchild et al. (1998) found that women 
receiving government assistance were 2.3 times more likely to be a victim of 
IPV than women not receiving assistance. Lower income also reduces a 
woman's access to victim services for I PV, especially in rural areas where 
transportation and phones can be limited resources (McEachern, Van Winkle, 
& Steiner, 1998). 

Alcohol is often used by either perpetrators or victims in cases of 
I PV. Chester, Robin, Koss, Lopez, and Goldman (1994) argued that the pattern 
of alcohol use in I ndian Country has accompanied a sharp increase in I PV. 
Kunitz et al. (1998) found that alcohol dependence is an independent risk 
factor for both being a perpetrator and victim of IPV. Finally, Norton and 
Manson (1995) found that 94% of cases of women who entered treatment 
for I PV involved alcohol (husband, wife, or both). Further, in a community 
sample of Al women, Norton and Manson found that a significantly greater 
percentage of victims of I PV (64.8% ) involved alcohol problems compared to 
Al women who did not experience I PV (39.2% ). 



54 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


In addition to these risk factors, individual protective factors have 
been postulated. Walters and Simoni (2002) identified cultural buffers as 
protective factors of negative health and social outcomes resulting from 
trauma including I PV. Specifically, they posited that cultural practices serve 
as coping mechanisms to mediate the impact of I PV on negative health and 
social outcomes such as those noted earlier in this essay. The cultural buffers 
include having a strong ethnic identity, enculturation (process of identifying 
with one's minority culture), spiritual coping, and immersion in traditional 
health practices (e.g., sweat lodge ceremonies and traditional healers). 
Walters and Simoni argued that women who maintain a traditional cultural 
identity and engage in traditional practices are better able to handle traumatic 
events. 


I nterpersonal/ Family Level 

Two risk factors at the interpersonal level include gender roles and 
family bonds. Gender roles refer to the social constructs of men's and women's 
social roles that are historically shaped, culturally contextualized, and class 
specific (Hamby, 2000). Gender roles involves looking at how women's 
social roles and social situations differ from men's, how women are treated 
publicly and privately, how I PV affects women's lives in different ways from 
men, and how I PV affects the relationship between men and women. Gender 
roles is usually taken to be synonymous with women in part because women 
continue to be subordinate in all spheres of economic, social, political and 
family life globally (Saltzman, Green, Marks, & Thacker, 2000). Hamby (2000) 
explained that the primary cause of I PV in AI/AN women (and for all women) 
is the gendered nature of power and control. Specifically, the goal of male 
batterers is to maintain male dominance, which is reproduced through gender 
socialization. Further, Hamby (2000) argued that SES is not a direct factor 
for AI/AN women, but lower SES creates stress that can result in IPV if 
gender domination is also present. However, Anderson (1997) found support 
for both sociodemographic factors and gender domination in her analysis of 
data from the National Survey of Families and Households. 

The strength and nature of family bonds is an additional interpersonal 
factor. Stephens (1999) identified a key barrier for battered mothers leaving 
abusers is that they feel they should stay for the sake of the children. Further, 
children often bond with an abuser, which makes it even more difficult for 
women to leave. As Little and Kaufman Kantor (2002) explained, "Many 
battered women, if faced with a choice between the current family situation 
and an unknown future, including questions of where she will live, how she 
will support herself, or how she will cope with her children, will choose not to 
leave the relationship" (p. 136). 



I NTI MATE PARTNER VI OLENCE 


55 


Organizational Level 

At the organizational level two-factors contribute to the continued 
experience of I PV: lack of routine screening in health care settings and lack 
of infrastructure for addressing I PV. Lack of routine screening for I PV in 
health care settings results in an unintended consequence of continued I PV. 
Because of the confidentiality inherent in medical care, victims may feel 
more comfortable reporting their I PV experience than in other settings. 
Unfortunately, there is a breakdown in transmission of assistance (Little & 
Kaufman Kantor, 2002). Many health care providers are uncomfortable 
addressing I PV and do not feel that health care settings, including emergency 
rooms, are appropriate for such intervention (Ramsay, Richardson, Carter, 
Davidson, & Feder, 2002). However, Rosenberg and Fenley (1991) found 
that 43 to 85% of women (especially those who are I PV victims) believe that 
screening in health care settings is appropriate. Further, primary care 
identification and intervention efforts could reduce IPV incidence by 75% 
(Rosenberg & Fenley, 1991). 

Many AI/AN communities are located in rural areas, which do not 
have adequate victim or legal services for victims of IPV. If the services are 
available, transportation is an issue. McEarchern et al. (1998) described the 
conditions of three Navajo women experiencing I PV in the western part of 
the Navajo reservation. These women lived far away from any of the victim 
services and did not own a phone or a working car. Thus, they were isolated 
from all other people. There were also only five police officers patrolling 
4,100 square miles of land and thus they could not rely on legal system 
support. The rural and isolated nature of many Al /AN women places unique 
constraints in responding to I PV and thus the absence of infrastructure likely 
results in repeated violence for victims. 

Community Level 

A key community or societal risk factor, and one that is unique to Al/ 
ANs, is colonization. While a few researchers argued that I PV existed in Al/ 
AN communities before the arrival of European colonizers (e.g.. Durst, 1991), 
most authors noted that I PV is a relatively new phenomenon (Chester et al., 
1994; E. Duran, Duran, Woodis, & Woodis, 1998; McEachern et al., 1998). 
Hamby (2000) illustrated that even if I PV existed prior to colonization, it has 
escalated in the last 150 years. European colonizers introduced Western 
patriarchy, rapid transition from hunting/farming to cash-based economy, 
removal of children to boarding schools and foster homes at rates 5-20 
times the national average, and relocations to less desirable areas (Chester 
et al., 1994; McEachern et al., 1998). These factors produced cataclysmic 
changes in spiritual, social, and economic structure and drastically changed 
traditional lifestyles, thus creating historical trauma (B. Duran, Duran, & Brave 
Heart, 1998; E. Duran et al., 1998). Historical trauma is "unresolved trauma 
and grief that continues to adversely affect the lives of survivors of such 
trauma" (E. Duran et al., 1998, p. 99). Historical trauma is passed from one 



56 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


generation to the next such that events that happened many years ago still 
impact people today. 

These changes and the resulting historical trauma altered the way 
that AI/AN men and women related (Brave Heart & DeBruyn, 1998; E. Duran 
et al., 1998). E. Duran et al. (1998) argued that these influences created 
antagonistic relationships between AI/AN men and women. For example, 
traditionally within Navajo culture, men and women shared equal rights and 
status. Navajo common law emphasizes reciprocal relationships between a 
husband and wife (McEachern et al., 1998). Further, the influences of 
European colonization robbed most Al /AN men of their traditional roles and 
they lost status and honor (E. Duran et al., 1998). To regain honor and 
control of their lives, some AI/AN men mirrored the European model of 
control and power over their intimate partners. Thus, women's subordination 
or gender inequality among AI/ANs is largely a consequence of European 
contact and colonialism (Chester et al., 1994; E. Duran et al., 1998; Hamby, 
2000; McEachern etal., 1998). 

Policy Level 

At the policy level, there is limited research identifying the direct 
relationships between laws and the occurrence of I PV. Rather, most of the 
determinants at this level are offered as the result of anecdotal evidence or 
speculation. Specifically, the consequence for perpetrating I PV is relatively 
minor and thus protection for victims is minimal. The monitoring of defendants 
(i.e., perpetrators) is minimal and in some cases violating protection orders 
results in a misdemeanor rather than a felony (Newmark, Rempel, Diffily, 
Kane, 2001). For example, two reports by the New Mexico Intimate Partner 
Death Team Review (Crandall, Worthington, & Wilson, 1999; Olson & Crandall, 
1998) found that 19% of 73 women killed by intimate partners from 1993- 
1998 had an order of protection. Further, in 42% of these cases, the order 
of protection had been violated. 


Intervention Strategies 

Mainstream interventions are an important part of the response 
system for AI/ANs. Groginsky and Freeman (1995) noted that AI/AN women 
have many of the same needs and should have the same referral for services 
that women from other ethnic groups receive. Further, Groginsky and Freeman 
argued one cannot assume an AI/AN woman will want traditional cultural 
services or AI/AN advocates just because she is AI/AN. However, it is 
important to note that the economic resources for many AI/AN women are 
limited and thus they cannot rely completely on mainstream services (Hamby, 
2000). Furthermore, mainstream interventions were not uniquely designed 
for AI/ANs and thus they are not necessarily consistent with their cultural 
values. In this section, we focus on culturally specific interventions for 
addressing I PV. 



I NTI MATE PARTNER VI OLENCE 


57 


I ndividual Level 

E. Duran et al. (1998) discussed the importance of repairing 
antagonistic relationships between AI/AN men and women with culturally 
sensitive therapy. They argued that traditional psychotherapy has the potential 
to reinforce antagonistic relationships and thus create epistemic violence. 
Epistemic violence occurs when the "production of meaning and knowledge 
fails to capture the truth of Native and tribal lives" (E. Duran et al., 1998, p. 
97). For example, epistemic violence might occur when a well-meaning 
therapist only addresses individual-level factors for violence in a relationship, 
especially encouraging mainstream behaviors to address the problem. 
Epistemic violence is overcome when a therapist can (a) help a Native patient 
connect to the role history and colonization has contributed to the current 
social problems, (b) help re-connect the patient to traditional indigenous 
healing methods, and (c) help the patient reach out and see the commonality 
of his/her problems with others in the community and contribute to community 
through narratives of both wounding and healing. 

E. Duran et al. (1998) advocated an approach called hybrid therapy. 
Staff is trained in Western and AI/AN treatment systems and Western-trained 
AI/AN and other psychotherapists work alongside traditional AI/AN healers. 
Non-native practitioners should be provided a network of traditional healers, 
but they can make their own networks by contacting traditional healers and/ 
or tribal programs on their own to form hybrid teams. The bicultural approach 
is designed to acknowledge historical roots of trauma, moves the patient 
towards culturally-appropriate sanctions, and allows individuals to redefine 
themselves in culturally appropriate ways. Hybrid therapy is theoretically 
and culturally grounded in the historical relationships and experiences of Al/ 
ANs, particularly related to historical trauma from colonization. There are 
three steps in the protocol: (a) assessment about overall mental health 
functioning, level of acculturation, spiritual functioning, and general health; 
(b) implementation of psychotherapy and traditional ceremonies as 
appropriate; and (c) evaluation and further recommendation for ongoing 
therapy and/or participation in traditional ceremonies as warranted (B. Duran 
etal., 1998; E. Duran etal., 1998). E. Duran etal. (1998) and B. Duran etal. 
(1998) described why hybrid therapy should work, but no direct empirical 
evidence is available. Thus, future research will need to investigate the 
benefits of hybrid therapy and whether it is more beneficial than mainstream 
psychotherapy. 

I nterpersonal Level 

I nterventions at the interpersonal level include counseling both the 
victim and the perpetrator together (and possibly other family members). 
While there are examples of this intervention in mainstream psychotherapy 
(e.g., Dunford, 2000; O'Farrell, Van Hutton, & Murphy, 1999), there are no 
studies that focus specifically on AI/AN couples. One study reported the 
benefit of a traditional aboriginal healing ceremony, called the Healing Circle, 



58 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


in a cognitive therapy group of three Ojibway and two non-aboriginal survivors 
of sexual abuse (Heilbron & Guttman, 2000). The ceremony contributed 
positively to the healing process. However, the benefit of family-level 
interventions for AI/AN couples is unknown. 

Organizational Level 

I ntervention at the organizational level includes two settings: domestic 
violence shelters/programs and traditional health care centers. Norton and 
Manson (1997) described a successful domestic violence program for urban 
Al women. The program had trouble with Al women stopping therapy after 
a few initial office visits. The program set up a more flexible program that 
included home visits to build trust in a familiar environment (and also alleviate 
transportation problems). After the success of home visits, the program 
began a weekly domestic violence group in an informal setting (a potiuck 
dinner). Outcome data from this program was not available, but the anecdotal 
evidence of maintaining scheduled appointments and building trust provides 
a promising strategy for other domestic violence programs serving urban Al 
women. 

Health care intervention is usually confined to the identification of 
I PV victims. Unfortunately, the identification rate of I PV in patients is poor in 
mainstream populations. For example, Martins, Holzapfel, and Baker (1992) 
found that physicians' files documented only 1% of possible cases in a 
population with an I PV prevalence of 30% (including physical and emotional 
violence). Ideally, health care providers would have a policy of routine 
screening to detect cases of I PV. Clark (2001) examined the screening rates 
of I ndian Health Service facilities and found that facilities with policies and 
procedures for domestic violence were more likely to screen than facilities 
without policies. Additionally, having a domestic violence committee increased 
the likelihood of screening. These findings suggest the importance of having 
policies for screening for IPV and services to treat IPV in a culturally 
appropriate manner. Additionally, health care providers need training on 
how to screen and talk about IPV with patients since, from the patient 
perspective, shame, fear of criminal justice involvement, and fear of more 
violence also may prevent honest disclosure (Chester et al., 1994; B. Duran 
et al., 1998). 

Community Level 

A critical first step for AI/AN communities is to have the infrastructure 
to address IPV. It is important that communities have mental health services 
(e.g., therapy and shelters) integrated into the health-care system (Chester 
et al., 1994; Groginsky & Freeman, 1995). These services especially need to 
emphasize confidentiality because many AI/AN communities tend to be small 
and "everyone knows everyone else." 

However, the infrastructure is not sufficient in and of itself because 
infrastructure does not address historical trauma caused by colonization. 



I NTI MATE PARTNER VI OLENCE 


59 


Researchers (B. Duran etal., 1998; Durst, 1991; McEarchern etal., 1998) 
argued that the services provided to address IPV need to emphasize 
community-level responsibility and not simply individual responsibility. They 
argued that the community-level is most appropriate in AI/AN communities 
to not only respond to I PV, but also to prevent it from occurring in the first 
place. Durst (1991) studied two Alaska Native communities and their 
responses to I PV. He found that both communities increased active response 
toward IPV, but that active response included both privatization and 
communitarian. Privatization is the approach found in most social work 
approaches such as having a professional therapist privately and separately 
counsel the perpetrator and victim. Communitarian responses involved the 
larger community, for example, by involving the tribal leaders to go to the 
family and "counsel" them in the manner of an elder. Durst found that social 
work interventions that focused on the community at large have a positive 
impact on changing attitudes about I PV and thus encourage community- 
based action. Steps need to be taken to protect confidentiality of the family 
in order for the communitarian approach to be effective. For example, the 
tribal leaders would need to maintain privacy of the specific couple, but can 
involve the larger community in discussions about violence and how to prevent 
future violence. 

McEachern etal. (1998) advocated a similar approach to addressing 
IPV. They argued for a Freirian approach to overcoming the oppression 
faced by AI/ANs as a result of colonization. Freire (1970) illustrated the 
importance of critical awareness and reflection through dialogue or "liberating 
education" for allowing people to escape the bounds of oppression. McEachern 
et al. argued that dialogue groups could help women come together and 
explore their lives. They were careful to note that we must trust women to 
have the answers to improve their situation. They also noted that men can 
be helped to understand how various forms of oppression have contributed 
to their place in life and help them move beyond violence in the household. 
McEarchern et al. explained that the use of dialogue is appropriate because 
of its fit with cultural values (Navajo in particular), but also because it does 
not require outsiders to come in and try to "fix" the problem. 

A third community-level approach involves the use of healing rituals 
for addressing historical trauma in general, which helps to prevent I PV (Brave 
Heart, 1999; B. Duran et al., 1998). B. Duran et al. (1998) described an 
approach used in the Lakota community that they feel have some application 
to other AI/AN communities. The Lakota intervention model included a 
memorial for the massacre at Wounded Knee and "catharsis, abreaction, 
group sharing, testimony, opportunities for expression of traditional culture 
and language, ritual, and communal mourning." (p. 72). The purpose of the 
model was to help the community members facilitate mourning, tolerate 
effects that accompany the trauma, and validate/normalize the traumatic 
response. The authors also noted that all participants felt better about 
themselves after the intervention with 75% expressing high agreement that 



60 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


the intervention helped them overcome feelings of cultural shame. However, 
direct evidence about the effect on violence is needed with future research. 

A fourth community approach is the Kanuhkwene project (Hagen & 
House, 1995). The project was developed by Oneida women to address 
critical social issues including domestic violence. The women created an 
organization of women based on Oneida values of community and connection 
with the social and natural world. The project integrates mainstream and 
traditional social services and has restored some of the balance in gender 
roles. Although the evidence is anecdotal, the Kanuhkwene project 
demonstrates the possibilities for women creating a network of support for 
themselves to address important social issues in a culturally appropriate 
manner. 

These four approaches are all culturally appropriate responses for 
responding to and preventing I PV. However, while all four may be appropriate 
for AI/ANs in general, each is contextually bound to a particular AI/AN 
community. Hamby (2000) argued that interventions for I PV have to be 
created specifically for each AI/AN community because each community has 
different gender roles resulting from patriarchy/matriarchy, matrilineal (line 
of descent or clan membership is passed through the mother), or matrilocal 
(living and social arrangements focused on the women's family of origin) 
relations. These three factors result in different authority, restrictiveness, 
and disparagement of women (Hamby, 2000). Thus, while there are some 
common features for AI/AN communities (e.g., colonization and historical 
trauma), it is important to not overgeneralize any intervention and to make 
sure it is appropriate for a given community before implementation. 

Policy Level 

There are three types of legal measures that are designed to prevent 
further I PV: civil legal sanctions (i.e., protection orders), arrests, and domestic 
violence courts. These measures have mixed success in mainstream settings. 
For example, protection orders serve as a deterrent for some male 
perpetrators, but half reabuse and a few even kill their intimate partners 
(Fagan, 1996). Additionally, arresting perpetrators of I PV has the following 
results: (a) arrest is associated with less repeat offending; (b) the reduction 
in repeat offending associated with arrest is modest compared to other factors 
(e.g., batterers age and prior criminal record); (c) regardless of whether the 
batter was arrested, less than half of the suspects committed a subsequent 
offense; and (d) a minority of suspects continued to perpetrate I PV regardless 
of whether they were arrested (Maxwell, Garner, & Fagan, 2001). However, 
these findings have not been established specifically in AI/AN communities. 

Conclusions: I ntegrating Levels of the Social Ecological Model 

The impact of mainstream interventions at any given level is small 
to moderate. The likely reason for this limited impact of any given intervention 



I NTI MATE PARTNER VI OLENCE 


61 


is that it does not address determinants at multiple levels. For example, 
therapy for perpetrators appears to reduce I PV and may address some 
individual and perhaps couple-level determinants (e.g., substance abuse and 
control issues). However, the therapy likely does not adequately address 
historical trauma associated with colonization, or policies that have limited 
consequences for perpetrators. Additionally, providing adequate infrastructure 
for victim services does not address legal concerns if these agencies are not 
coordinated. Multi-level interventions for I PV have rarely been addressed in 
the literature, especially for Al /AN communities. I n closing, we discuss one 
model of multi-level interventions for I PV in mainstream communities, and 
then summarize culturally appropriate and multi-level interventions for Al/ 
AN communities. 

The Services-Training-Officers-Prosecutors (STOP) Violence against 
Women Formula Grants program provides funding to stimulate the growth 
of programs serving women victims of violence. Federal funding for the 
STOP program between 1995 and 2000 totaled $672.2 million and supported 
over 9,000 subgrants (Zweig & Burt, 2003). Zweig and Burt recently completed 
an evaluation of the STOP program and how it influenced women's services. 
The authors included both a community sample (1,509 women in 26 
communities) and a victim service sample (500 women from nonprofit victim 
services and 390 from legal system agencies) to assess women's attitudes 
and behavior regarding I PV interventions. I n general, they found that women 
reported benefiting from the services especially when victim services agencies 
worked in collaboration with the legal system and other relevant services. 
Women reported that coordinated agencies were more helpful and were 
more satisfied with the legal system. Further, arrests and convictions occurred 
more frequently when community agencies worked together. Thus, the STOP 
evaluation helps to illustrate that the multi-level interventions are more 
effective than interventions at any single level. 

The STOP evaluation did not target Al /AN communities in particular 
and thus we are left to speculate what an effective multi-level intervention 
would look like for these communities. These interventions will need to be 
culturally appropriate and focus on universal as well as selected and indicated 
prevention. Universal prevention is broad efforts to educate, inform, and 
address the public in order to encourage non-violent behavior. Selected 
prevention involves intervening with the perpetrator before violence becomes 
an entrenched pattern, while indicated prevention focuses on interventions 
after violence occurs. The common thread in selected and indicated 
prevention is that I PV has already occurred. Unfortunately, most resources 
have been targeted to indicated prevention to the exclusion of universal 
prevention (Gundersen, 2002). We suggest that a multi-level intervention 
can address both universal and selected/indicated prevention. 

Table 2 illustrates a social ecological approach to interventions to 
address I PV in AI/AN communities. We reiterate that specific interventions 
need to be tailored to each particular tribe in order to be culturally appropriate 



62 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


Table 2 

Social Ecological Framework for Prevention of I PV 


Level 

Primary 

Secondary/ Tertiary 

Individual 

Hybrid Therapy 


X 

Interpersonal/Family 

Communication Skills Training for Families 

X 


Hybrid Family Therapy 


X 

Organizational 

Screening by Health Care Providers 


X 

Coordination of Agencies 


X 

Community 

Healing Rituals 

X 

X 

Community Dialogues 

X 


Policy 

Encourage policy makers to provide 
resources for infrastructure 


X 

Encourage policy changes regarding 
economic development 

X 

X 


(Hamby, 2000). One way to approach tribal specificity is to engage in 
Community Based Participatory Research (CBPR) that ensures that local tribal 
members and their representatives will have a prominent voice in the research 
and intervention process (Chavez, Duran, Baker, Avila, & Wallerstein, 2003). 
At the individual level, prevention efforts focus on hybrid therapy and are 
predominantly selected/indicated (B. Duran et al., 1998; E. Duran et al., 
1998). The therapy applies primarily to perpetrators, but also could be 
applied to victims of violence. The advantage of hybrid therapy is that it 
combines both mainstream and traditional approaches to address violence. 
This approach is inclusive rather than assuming all AI/ANs want to be treated 
with only mainstream or traditional healings. 

At the interpersonal/family level, universal prevention can be 
addressed with communication skill training. One aspect that contributes to 
IPV is the lack of communication skills to address conflict when it arises. 
This intervention can focus on culturally appropriate conflict management 
skills for intimate partners. The type of training may also be appropriate as 
selected prevention if victims and perpetrators decide to remain in their 
relationship. The skill training should include a focus on communicating 





I NTI MATE PARTNER VI OLENCE 


63 


emotions. Umberson, Anderson, Williams, and Chen (2003) found that violent 
men are less emotionally reactive (i.e., repressed emotions) to stress and 
relationship dynamics than nonviolent men. This skill training would likely be 
accessed at the organizational level via agencies such as shelters and 
community centers. Selected/ indicated prevention can be addressed through 
family therapy that addresses complex factors associated with violence such 
as attachment, complicated bereavement, and multigenerational family issues. 
The family therapy will need to include culturally appropriate values and 
likely hybrid therapy can be applied at this level. 

Selected/indicated prevention is the main focus at the organizational 
level. Assessments by health care providers are a critical component at this 
level. Indian Health Service, tribal, and private health care providers will 
need to have training in cultural competence in order to obtain accurate and 
complete information in interactions as well as develop useful screening 
instruments. After diagnosing I PV, health care providers will need to 
coordinate with victim service agencies to provide adequate treatment. Finally, 
victim services will need to integrate their efforts with the legal system to 
provide protection for victims. 

At the community level, healing rituals provide the opportunity for 
universal and selected/indicated prevention. Healing rituals (Brave Heart, 
1999, 2003; B. Duran et al., 1998) provide an opportunity to address historical 
trauma. While historical trauma can be addressed on an individual level, the 
public health benefit is greater at the community level. Additionally, community 
dialogues provide an opportunity for universal prevention (Durst, 1991; 
McEachern et al., 1998). These dialogues provide a proactive approach 
from the community members themselves to address their own problems. 

Finally, at the policy-level great focus needs to be placed on increasing 
resources to address IPV. The coordination of agencies and provision of 
services is only possible if the tribe has adequate resources. On a more 
global level, policy changes are needed to stimulate economic development. 

I ncreasing employment opportunities will help reduce the stress in families 
that can be a determinant at the individual level (Little & Kaufman Kantor, 
2002 ). 

I n conclusion, AI/AN women have a greater prevalence of I PV than 
do non-AI women. I n order to adequately assess this health disparity, it will 
be necessary to utilize culturally appropriate multi-level interventions that 
adequately address determinants that occur at individual, interpersonal, 
organizational, community, and policy levels. While the social ecological 
framework makes intuitive sense, there are few multi-level interventions to 
address I PV and none in AI/AN communities. Further research is needed to 
better understand how interventions at different levels work together to reduce 
IPV (both universal and selected/indicated prevention). If we are to reduce 
I PV in AI/AN communities, we will have to overcome several barriers including 
the lack of funding for AI/AN communities and the lack of practitioners of 
Western psychotherapy and traditional AI/AN practices. 



64 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


Bonnie Duran, Dr. PH. 
Family and Community Medicine 
MSC09-5040 
University of New Mexico 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 
Phone: (505) 272-4794 
Email: bonduran@unm.edu 

J ohn Oetzel, Ph. D. 
Dept, of Communication and J ournalism 

MSC03-2240 
1 University of New Mexico 
Albuquerque, NM 87131 
Phone: (505) 277-1941 
Fax: (505) 277-5206 
Email: joetzel@unm.edu 


References 

Anderson, K. L. (1997). Gender, status, and domestic violence: An 
integration of feminist and family violence approaches. Journal of Marriage and 
the Family, 59, 655-669. 

Arbuckle, J ., Olson, L, Howard, M., Brillman, J ., Anctil, C., & Sklar, D. (1996). 
Safe at home? Domestic violence and other homicides among women in New 
Mexico. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 27, 210-215. 

Bauer, H. M., Rodriguez, M. A., & Perez-Stable, E. J. (2000). Prevalence and 
determinants of intimate partner abuse among public hospital primary care 
patients. Journal of General Internal Medicine, 15, 811-817. 

Black, D. A., Heyman, R. E., & Slep, A. M. S. (2001). Risk factors for male- 
to-female partner sexual abuse. Aggression and Violent Behavior, 6, 269-280. 

Bogard, M. (1999). Strengthening domestic violence theories: Intersections 
of race, class, sexual orientation, and gender. Journal of Marriage and Family 
Therapy, 25, 275-289. 

Brave Heart, M. Y. (1999). Oyate Ptayela: Rebuilding the Lakota nation 
through addressing historical trauma among Lakota parents. Journal of Flu man 
Behavior in the Social Environment, 2, 109-126. 

Brave Heart, M. Y. (2003). The historical trauma among natives and its 
relationship with substance abuse: A Lakota illustration. Journal of Psychoactive 
Drugs, 35, 7-13. 

Brave Heart, M. Y., & DeBruyn, L. M. (1998). The American Indian holocaust: 
Healing historical unresolved grief. American Indian & Alaska Native Mental Fieaith 
Research, 8 , 60-82. 



I NTI MATE PARTNER VI OLENCE 


65 


Brokaw, J., Fullerton-Gleason, L, Olson, L., Crandall, C., McLaughlin, S., & 
Sklar, D. (2002). Health status and intimate partner violence: A cross-sectional 
study. Annals of Emergency Medicine, 39, 31-38. 

Browne, A., Salomon, A., & Bassuk, S. S. (1999). The impact of recent 
partner violence on poor women's capacity to maintain work. Violence Against 
Women, 5, 393-426. 

Byrne, C. A., Resnick, H. S., Kilpatrick, D. G., Best, C. L., & Saunders, B. E. 
(1999). The socioeconomic impact of interpersonal violence on women. Journal 
of Consulting and Clinical Psychology, 67, 362-366. 

Carlson, B. E. (2000). Children exposed to intimate partner violence: Research 
findings and implications for intervention. Trauma, Violence, & Abuse, 1, 321- 
342. 


Cassidy, K. (1999). How to assess and intervene in domestic violence 
situations. Home Healthcare Nurse, 17, 664 - 672. 

Chavez, V., Duran, B., Baker, Q. E., Avila, M. M., & Wallerstein, N. (2003). 
The dance of race and privilege in community based participatory research. In 
M. Minkler & N. Wallerstein (Eds.), Community-based participatory research for 
health (pp. 81-97). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Chester, B., Robin, R. N., Koll, M. P., Lopez, J ., & Goldman, D. (1994). 
Grandmother dishonored: Violence against women by male partners in American 
Aboriginal communities. Violence and Victims, 9, 249-258. 

Clark, D. W. (2001). Domestic violence screening, policies, and procedures 
in Indian Health Service facilities. Journal of the American Board of Family 
Practitioners, 14, 252-258. 

Crandall, C. S., Worthington, A., & Wilson, L. (1999). Getting away with 
murder II. Report: The New Mexico Female Intimate Partner Violence Death 
Review Team. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico. 

Dunford, F. W. (2000). The San Diego Navy experiment: An assessment of 
interventions for men who assault their wives. Journal of Consulting and Clinical 
Psychology, 68, 468-476. 

Duran, B., Duran, E., & Brave Heart, M. Y. (1998). American Indian and/or 
Alaska Natives and the trauma of history. In R. Thornton (Ed.), Studying Native 
America: Problems and prospects (pp. 60-76). Madison, Wl: University of 
Wisconsin Press. 

Duran, E., Duran, B., Woodis, W., & Woodis, P. (1998). A postcolonial 
perspective on domestic violence in Indian Country. In R. Carrillo & J. Tello 
(Eds.), Family Violence and Men of Color (pp. 95-113). New York: Springer. 

Durst, D. (1991). Conjugal violence: Changing attitudes in two northern 
Native communities. Community Mental Health Journal, 27, 359-373. 

Fagan, J. (1996). The Criminalization of Domestic Violence: Promises and 
Limits. Washington DC: National Institute of J ustice. 



66 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


Fairchild, D. G., Fairchild, M. W., & Stoner, S. (1998). Prevalence of adult 
domestic violence among women seeking routine care in a American Indian 
and/or Alaska Native health care facility. American Journal of Public Health, 88, 
1515-1517. 

Freire, P. (1970). Pedagogy of the oppressed. New York: Continuum 
Publishing Co. 

Groginsky, L, & Freeman, C. (1995). Domestic violence in American Indian 
and/or Alaska Native I ndian and Alaskan Native communities. Protecting Children, 
11, 13-15. 

Gundersen, L. (2002). Intimate-partner violence: The need for primary 
prevention in the community. Annals of Internal Medicine, 136, 637-640. 

Flagen, J. W., & Flouse, T. (1995). Kanuhkwene: An empowering concept 
by and for Oneida women. Journal of Humanistic Education & Development, 
33, 123-130. 

Flamby, S. L. (2000). The importance of community in a feminist analysis of 
domestic violence among American Indians. American Journal of Community 
Psychology, 28, 649-669. 

Flarwell, T. S., Moore, K. R., & Spence, M. R. (2003). Physical violence, 
intimate partner violence, and emotional abuse among American Indian men 
and women in Montana. Preventive Medicine, 37, 297-303. 

Flathaway, J . E., Mucci, L. A., Silverman, J . G., Brooks, D. R., Mathews, R., & 
Pavlos, C. A. (2000). Flealth status and health care use of Massachusetts women 
reporting partner abuse. American Journal of Preventive Medicine, 19, 302- 
307. 


Fleilbron, C. L., & Guttman, M. A. J. (2000). Traditional healing methods 
with First Nations women in group counseling. Canadian Journal of Counseling, 
34, 3-13. 

Fleise, L. L. (1998). Violence against women: An integrated, ecological 
framework. Violence Against Women, 4, 262-290. 

Flien, D., & Bukszpan, C. (1999). Interpersonal violence in a "normal" low- 
income control group. Women & Health, 29, 1-15. 

Kunitz, S. J ., Levy, J. E., McCloskey, J ., & Gabriel, K. R. (1998). Alcohol 
dependence and domestic violence as sequelae of abuse and conduct disorder 
in childhood. Child Abuse & Neglect, 22, 1079-1091. 

Lee, R. K., Sanders Thompson, V. L., & Mechanic, M. B. (2002). Intimate 
partner violence and women of color: A call for innovations. American Journal of 
Public Health, 92, 530-533. 

Little, L., & Kaufman Kantor, G. (2002). Using ecological theory to understand 
intimate partner violence and child maltreatment. Journal of Community Health 
Nursing, 19, 133-145. 

Martins, R., Flolzapfel, S., & Baker, P. (1992). Wife abuse: Are we detecting 
it? Journal of Women's Health, 1, 77 - 80. 



I NTI MATE PARTNER VI OLENCE 


67 


Maxwell, C. D., Gamer, J. H., & Fagan, J. A. (2001). The effects of arrest on 
intimate partner vioience: New Evidence from the spouse assauit repiication 
program. Washington DC: National Institute of Justice. 

McEachern, D., Van Winkle, M., & Steiner, S. (1998). Domestic violence 
among the Navajo: A legacy of colonization. Journai of Poverty, 2, 31-46. 

McNutt, L, Carlson, B. E., Persaud, M., & Postmus, J. (2002). Cumulative 
abuse experiences, physical health and health behaviors. Annais of Epidemioiogy, 
12, 123-130. 

Miller, T. R., Cohen, M. A., & Wiersema, B. (1996). Victim costs and 
consequences: A new iook. Washington DC: National Institute of Justice. 

Newmark, L., Rempel, M., Diffily, K, & Kane, K. M. (2001). Speciaiized feiony 
domestic courts: Lessons on impiementation and impacts from the Kings County 
experience. Washington, DC: The Urban Institute. 

Norton, I. M., & Manson, S. (1995). A silent minority: Battered American 
Indian women. Journai of Famiiy Vioience, 10, 307-318. 

Norton, I. M., & Manson, S. (1997). Domestic violence intervention in an 
urban Indian health center. Community Mentai Heaith Journai, 33, 331-337. 

O'Farrell, T. J., Van Flutton, V., & Murphy, C. M. (1999). Domestic violence 
after alcoholism treatment: A two-year longitudinal study. Journai of Studies on 
Aicohoi, 60, 317-321. 

Olson, L. M., & Crandall, C. S. (1998). Getting away with murder. Report: 
The New Mexico Female Intimate Partner Violence Death Review Team. 
Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico. 

Ramsay, J., Richardson, J., Carter, Y. FI., Davidson, L. L., & Feder, G. (2002). 
Should health professionals screen women for domestic violence? Systematic 
review. BMJ, 325, 315- 318. 

Rennison, C. M. (2001). Intimate partner vioience and age of victim, 1993- 
1999. (BJS Publication No. 187635). Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
J ustice. 

Rennison, C. M., & Welchans, S. (2000). Intimate partner violence. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of J ustice. 

Roberts, G. L, Williams, G. M., Lawrence, J. M., & Raphael, B. (1998). Flow 
does domestic violence affect women's mental health? Australian Women's 
Health, 28, 117-129. 

Robin, R. W., Chester, B., & Rasmussen, J. K. (1998). Intimate violence in 
a southwestern American Indian tribal community. Cultural Diversity and Mental 
Health, 4, 335-344. 

Rosenberg, M., & Fenley, M. A. (1991). Violence in America: A public health 
approach. New York: Oxford University Press. 

Saltzman, L. E., Green, Y. T, Marks, J. S., & Thacker, S. B. (2000). Violence 
against women as a public health issue: Comments from the CDC. American 
Journal of Preventive Medicine, 19, 325-329. 



68 


VOLUME 11, NUMBERS 


Schafer, J ., Gaetano, R., & Clark, C. L. (1998). Rates on intimate partner 
violence in the United States. American Journal of Public Health, 88, 1702- 
1704. 

Schumacher J. A., Feldbau-Kohn, S. Slep, A. M. S., & Heyman, R. (2001). 
Risk factors for male-to-female partner physical abuse. Aggression and Violent 
Behavior, 6, 281-352. 

Silverman, J. G., Raj, A., Mucci, L. A., & Hathaway, J. E. (2001). Dating 
violence against adolescent girls and associated substance use, unhealthy weight 
control, sexual risk behavior pregnancy, and suicidality. Journal of the American 
Medical Association, 286, 572-579. 

Stephens, D. L. (1999). Battered women's views of their children. Journal 
of Interpersonal Violence, 14, 731-746. 

Straus, M. A. (1979). Measuring intrafamily conflict and violence: The Conflict 
Tactics Scales. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 7, 75-88. 

Tjaden, P., & Thoennes, N. (2000). Prevalence and consequences of male- 
to-female and female-to-male intimate partner violence as measured by the 
National Violence Against Women Survey. Violence Against Women, 6, 142- 
161. 


Umberson, D., Anderson, K. L., Williams, K., & Chen, M. D. (2003). Relationship 
dynamics, emotion state, and domestic violence: A stress and masculinities 
perspective. Journal of Marriage and the Family, 65, 233-247. 

Walters, K. L. & Simoni, J. M. (2002). Reconceptualizing Native women's 
health: An Indigenist' stress-coping model. American Journal of Public Health, 
92, 520-524. 

Williams, L. A. (2002). Family violence and American Indians/Alaska Natives: 
A report to the Indian Health Service office of women's health. Washington, 
DC: Indian Health Service. 

Wilt, S., & Olson, S. (1996). Prevalence of domestic violence in the United 
States. Journal of the American Medical Women's Association, 51, 77-82. 

Woods, S. J. (2000). Prevalence and patterns of posttraumatic stress 
disorder in abused and postabused women. Issues in Mental Health Nursing, 
21, 309-324. 

Zweig, J. M. & Burt, M. R. with Van Ness, A. (2003). The effects on victims 
of victims service programs funded by the STOP formula grants program. 
Washington, DC: The Urban Institute. 


Author's Note 

The writing of this article was made possible, in part, by grants 
K01MH02018, from the National I nstitute of Mental Health (Nl MH) as well as 
1 UOl AA14926 from the National I nstitute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism 
(Nl AAA). Points of view in this article are those of the authors and do not 
necessarily represent the official views of the NIMH or Nl AAA. 



