DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 309 



CS 212 007 



TITLE 



Common Ground 1989: Suggested Literature for Alaskan 
Schools, Grades 7-12. 

Alaska State Dept* of Education, Juneau* 

May 89 

153p. 

Guides - Classroom Use - Guides (For Teachers) (052) 
— Guides - Non-Classroom Use (055) 



INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRT.CE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



MF01/PC07 Plus Postage. 

Alaska Natives; Ethnic Groups; *Literature; 
^Literature Appreciation; *Reading Materials; 
*Reading Material Selection; Secondary Education; 
State Curriculum Guides 
* Alaska; Whole Language Approach 



ABSTRACT 



Intended to assist Alaskan school districts in their 



own selection and promotion of reading and literature, this guide to 
literature for use in grades 7-12 has five purposes: (1) to encourage 
reading and the use of literature throughout Alaskan schools; (2) to 
promote the inclusion of Alaska Native literature, and minority 
litera^re, in addition to the traditional Eastern and Western 
classic; (3) to help curriculum planners and committees to select 
books and obtain ideas for thematic units using literature; (4) to^ 
stimulate local educators to evaluate the use of literature in their 
schools and consider ways to use it as core material and as 
recreational reading; and (5) to accompany the state's Model 
Curriculiun Guide in Language Arts, K-12, supplementing the references 
to literature, and to promote the reading of literature as an 
expectation for all Alaskan students. Contents include: Foreword; 
Preface; Acknowledgments; Introduction and Overview? Basic Intent of 
This Document; Criteria for Selection of Books; Questions for Local 
District Selection; Local Decision-Making Policies; Format of This 
Document; Alaskan Literature; Implementation Ideas; Common Agreement 
Statements from Professional Associations; General Genre Listings; 
Alphabetical Listing of Suggested Literature, Grades 9-12 (with 94 
pages of listings) ; Anthologies of Alaska Literature by language 
groupings; Anthologies of Native American Writers and of Alaskan 
Writers; Alaskan Poets; Drama/Plays; Poetry; Short Stories; Role of 
Literature as a Source of History, Values, and Identity; The P.ight to 
Read; Library Bill of Ric^ts; Source for Alaskan Literature; 
Description of Alaskan Associations; Book Selection Guides; and 
Feedback Form* (SR) 



********* ****** ********************************** ************* 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 



******tA*x*********ft**^***********A******************************jt***** 



* 



from the original document* 



89 



Suggested 
Literature 
for 

Alaskan Schools 
Grades 7-12 



<5 
> : 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)/' 



us DEPARTMENT OF EO. TION 
OKic« oi Educationat Research anc provement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATlOfJ 
CENTER (ERIQ 

r This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it 

C M»nor changes have been made to improve 
reproduction quality 

• Po.n»s oJ *fiew or opinions stated in ihisdocu- 
ment do not necessarily represent oidcial 
OERl position or policy 



i 



COMMON GROUND 



1989 



SUGGESTED LITERATURE 
FOR 

ALASKAN SCHOOLS 
GRADES 7-12 



ill 

Alaska Department of Education 
May, 1989 



Steye,C()r?r]p€r 

'■' GQVERKbiEir ' ^ ■ ■ ' 

DlREGfok/EDUdA'nQNAL 
Barney GdUsfeiii 

Jack Chenoweth 
CatherineBishop Herrosteen 
Cora Sakeagak 
Sue?Wilken 
Lt. Col;,M«ttbew P.Kenney 
RaychelleBahier^ 



Litmtm h no one's pr/Vafe smnd; litmtm 
h mmn imni Ut us trnfim free/y a/irf 
kfU^ a/irf M our om m) for omslm. 
II is tks tM f/ijfol) liMm vjill sm'm .... 
if m teBcti omelm tiovj to read a/id liov/ to mite, 
tiovj to prmnjdi tio^ tomte 



COMMON GROUND 
1939 



Contents Page 



Foreword 1 

Preface 2 

Acknowledgements 4 

Introduction and Overview 5 

Basic Intent of this Document 5 

Criteria for Selection of Books 5 

Fiction 5 

Non-fiction 8 

Questions for Local District Selection 9 

Local Decision-making Policies 10 

Format of This Document 11 

Alaskan Literature 11 

Implementation Ideas 11 

Common Agreement Statements from Professional Associations 13 

General Genre Listings 14 

Alphabetical Listing of Suggested Li terature,t^Grades 9-12 15 

Anthologies of Alaska Literature by Tanguage groupings 109 

Anthologies 112 

Native American Writers 112 

Alaskan Writers 112 

Alaskan Poets 113 

Drama/Plays 115 

Koetry 133 

Short Stories 134 

Role of Literature as a Source of History, Values and Identity 135 

The Right To Read 139 

Library Bill of Rights 142 

Source for Alaska Literature 143 

Description of Alaskan Associations 144 

Book Selection Guides 145 

Feedback Form 147 



ERiC 



6 



FORWARD 



It is my pleasure to introduce "Common Ground," a guide to helping Alaska teachers and 
students at all grade levels reap the beneifits of knowing and enjoying fine literature and 
writing. This work was prepared by a dedicated panel of educators representing major 
professional associations in language arts, teachers, administrators, university professors, 
curriculum coordinators, librarians, authors, and editors. Each invested long hours for 
more than a year to identify titles, develop rationales and devise strategies so that 
Alaska students grasp the rich heritage that is their birthright as Alaskans. 

The books listed in "Common Ground" will guide Alaska's teachers in helping their 
students learn through reading. They represent the finest of national and world literature 
for each age group, including the distinc^ti^ve contributions of Alaska Native and other 
Alaskan writers. ' 



In addition, "Common Ground" is part of Alaska's; response to a thriving national 
movement to make reading, writing and literature a vital part of student growth and 
learning. 

"Common Ground" is being published in the same spirit with which the Department of 
Education developed the Alaska Model Curriculum series. Neither the reading list nor the 
model curriculum is mandated. Both, however, are highly recommended as a solid 
foundation upon which to build local school programs that mirror both our common 
heritage and the special qualities that distinguish Alaska's richly varied communities. 

The Department of Education plans future editions of "ComvTion Ground" to reflect the 
growth and change of our mutual heritage. The Department is open to suggestions for its 
improvement ~ we welcome them. And I invite all Alaskans to use this publication as 
yet one more tool to provide our young people with the best education we or they can 
imagine. 




PREFACE 



As the ideas of a whole language approach rooted in literature began spreading to Alaska 
in 1987, we at the Department of Education were eager to see to what extent literature 
was already being used. Early in October, 1987 the call went out to all districts, asking 
for listings of literature adopted or recommended in schools, grades K-12. Of the 55 
school districts, only 17«responded that they had any such listing. Those responses 
included several districts whose only response was 'The Battle of the Books" listing, or 
selected lists for remedial or gifted students. Only two Alaskan districts indicated any 
Alaskan Native literature references. Many districts replied they were very interested in 
obtaining recommendations and suggestions from other districts as well as from the 
Alaska State Department of Education. 

This publication is a direct response to that need and was prepared to 

1) encourage reading and the use of literature throughout Alaskan schools; 

2) promote the inclusion of Alaska Native literature, and minority literature, in 
addition to the traditional Eastern and Western classics; 

3) help curriculum planners and committees to select books and get ideas for thematic 
units using literature; 

4) stimulate local educators to evaluate the use of literature in their schools and 
consider ways to use it as core material and as recreational reading; 

5) accompany the state's Model Curriculum Guide in Language Arts, K-12, 
supplementing the references to literature, and promote the reading of literature as 
an expectation for all Alaskan students. 

This publication is not intended to act as a mandate to Alaskan districts in any way, but 
rather to assist them in their own seiecMon and promotion of reading and literature. 

The Alaska Literature Panel has worked for over a year offering suggested titles, 
Jebating philosophical rationales, developing strategies for implementation and generally 
becoming enmeshed in the complexity of the task. This listing is by no means exhaustive 
- schools are encouraged to go beyond this list to discover new and interesting titles and 
add them to their local listings. 

The Panel wishes to acknowledge the ground breaking work done by the state of 
California. The Framework for Language Arts , the Handbook for Planning An Effective 
Literature Program and the Recommended Reading lists provided a model and a guide for 
the Alaskan work. After several meetings in Anchorage, audioconferences and individual 
work assignments, this document was "ratified". The titles included represent classical as 
well as contemporary works in a variety of genre. It includes only' works in the English 
language, though a number of the "Literature of Alaska and the North" selections are 
bilingual publications. The Panel does promote bilingual reading and the inclusion of 
bilingual texts. They hope that future editions of Common Ground will contain a greater 
variety of works in languages other than English. 

The joI> of the Literature Panel is by no means complete. The committee views this 
publication as the starting point, the first bi-annual COMMON GROUND. The committee 
intends that it be reviewed on an annual basis and re-printed on a bi-annual basis. The 
elementary version will be re-printed one year and the secondary one the following year. 



We gratefully acknowledge the hard work and dedication of the Literature Panel members 
and other contributing Alaskan educators. We salute the reality of this first step, and 
look to the time when a common ground unites us as literate, thoughtful and creative 



Annie Calkins ^ 
Language Arts Specialist 
Office of Basic Education 

Toni Kahklen-Jones 
Director 

Division of Educational Program Support 




Darby Anderson 

Administrator 

Office of E3asic Education 



ERiC 



9 

-3- 



ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 



This document was prepared by a dedicated group of Alaskan educators representing the 
major professional associations in the area of Language Arts. They inclndau teachers, 
administrators, university professors, curriculum coordinators, librarians, authors and 
editors. The Department of Education is grateful for their energetic efforts and the 
perseverance with which they stuck to a very complex task. The members of the 1988 
Alaskan Literature Panel included: 

Annie Calkins, Facilitator Felicia Leipzig 

Language Arts Specialist President 

Department of Education Alaska State Reading Association 

Mary Lou Purvis Katherine Wilson 

Past President Reading Coordinator 

Alaska Council of Teachers of English Anchorage School District 



Beverley Fonnesbeck 
Alaska Association of School 
Librarians 

Pat Wamsley 

Alaska Association of School 
Librarians 

Dr. Richard Dauenhauer 
Author, Poet, Lecturer 
Sealaska Heritage Foundation 



Jo Morse, Coordinator 
School Library/Media 
Alaska State Library 

Alice Taff 
Past President 

Alaska Association for Bilingual Education 
Edna MacLean 

Special Assistant to the Commissioner 
Department of Education 



Nora Dauenhauer 
Author, Poet, Lecturer 
Sealaska Heritage Fcundation 

Rebecca Bowers Sipe 
Language Arts Coordinator 
Anchorage School District 

Lynn Thomas 
Board Member 

Alaska State Writing Consortium 



M&rlys Henderson 
, Language Arts Specialist 
Fairbanks School District 

Dr. Katy Spangler 

Associate Professor of Education 

University of Alaska Southeast 

Dr. Marilyn Buckley 
Professor of Education 
University of Alaska Anchorage 



The Department also wishes to sincerely thank those Alaskan educators who offered 
advice, counsel and ideas to the Panel: 

Jean Stockburger, Russian Mission School 

Ruth Dishman, Kenai Peninsula Borough School District 

Brita Rice, Centralized Correspondence Study 

Roz Goodman, Bering Strait School District 

Jim Villano, Fairbanks North Star Borough School District 

Molli Sipe, Alaska Association for Bilingual Education 

Martha Jacobson, Southeast Island School District 

Frances Moore, Nikolaevsk School, Kenai Peninsula School District 

Jean Ann Alter, Centralized Correspondence Study 



In addition, the Department acknowledges the signif igant effort of: 
Scott Foster, Consultant and Editor, Juneau 

Doreen Shaw, Clerical Support Staff, Alaska Department of Education 



ERIC 



-4- 10 



INTRODUCTION 



Literature is enjoyable for people of all ages and has lifelong importance for all people. 
Through fine works of literature we may come to know ourselves and the world around us, 
before us and perhaps, the world only our children and theirs will know. It should be the 
goal of all Alaskan schools to produce lifelong readers and writers, equipped to deal with 
a complex world and inspired to lead a graceful life by works of literature as well as by a 
comprehensive, rich education. 

This document contains suggested readings for students in grades 9-12, along with ideas 
for using literature in a variety of classes and suggestions for teaching thematic, 
comparative literature units. We urge local districts to use these recommendations as 
they review their English/Language Arts curriculum, when selecting literature to 
implement that curriculum, and as they consider ways to improve Alaskan students* 
competencies in language arts and their familiarity with significant works of literature. 



BASIC INTENT OF THIS DOCUMENT 

This publication is designed only as a guide for local district administrators, curriculum 
planners, teachers and librarians; it is not intended to be prescriptive in any vvay . Local 
educators may use it when reviewing their local curriculum guides, materials, and 
resources. Numerous selections listed in this publication are also referenced in the 
state's Model Curriculum Guides in Language Arts. We actively encourage parfentc to 
become involved in the local selection of texts which may serve as core literature for 
students, as extended texts which are supplemental, or as recreational texts which 
students may choose at their leisure. 

It is the intent of the Alaska Literature Panel that this publication be a dynamic, working 
document that reflects a widespread use of literature. To that end, it is our intent to 
publish an updated version of "Common Ground'* every year , alternating between the 
elementary and the secondary versions. We encourage teachers, librarians, 
administrators, local uoard members and parents to respond to the document, using the 
Feedback Form included in the end, or by directly contacting any of the Panel members. 



CRITERIA FOR SELECTION OF BOOKS 

The development of this publication actively involved members of the Alaska Literature 
Panel. They represent professional educational associations in the language arts whose 
memberships number over 4,500 teachers and librarians. They used national and state 
reference lists as well as their own professional experiences to select the works included. 
The criteria for selection of books placed on the list include: 

Fiction 

In general, fiction books are determined to be of superior quality if the basic elements of 
(1) theme, (2) style, (3) characters, (4) plot, (5) setting, and - if applicable - (6) 
illustrations - are constructed thoughtfully and imaginatively. Whether fiction is 
excellent, mediocre, or poor depends on the depth and authenticity of these elements and 
their elegant integration into the coherent whole which is, of course, the book itself. 

If only the best is good enough for our students, teachers must select fiction which meets 
the criteria of the highest quality of theme, style, characters, plot, setting and 
illustrations. 



-6- U 



(1) Theme: 



The theme is ths basic truths or messages or values which underlie a story In excellent 
books. -the universal ties of the human struggle for meaning are presented' Not on^y a?^ 
the basic tensions of life revealed - love vs. hate, courage vs. cowardice truth vV 
dishonesty generosity vs. greed, etc. - but the insights of a basic truth oV value are 
original and particular to the book. The theme is not conveyed in s ogans fo mulas or 
chchss; nor is it pronouncsd in bold print or shouted at the.r^ader formulas, or 

Readers grow and gain their own truths about life from reading quality books During and 
after reading, there is much to think about. After the reader closes he bCok the book 
stays with the reader. In books of merit, the search for meaning is dignified whethe? it 

whTthp?- ' "T." °^ °^ 'vents of per onal crisi • 

whether it is wr. ten tor very young or older students. In good books, the complexity of 
the human experience is never trivialized nor romanticized. Values or truths are 
pre anted to the readers for their acceptance or rejection. In mediocre or poor books 
values are presented as dogmas, propaganda or explicit moral lessons. In quality books 
readers are not told what to believe; they are invited to do their own tanking The 
va ues m books are implied rather then staled. They are honestly presenS Is the 
authors' persona expressions of their dlscoverincj some meanings, bf ten tenta ive 
meanings, for living life with a reasonable sense of dignity. tentative 

(2) Style: 

Quality literature for children and young adults is similar to quality adult literature in 
hat It IS recognizable by its language. Good books, in a word, are wNtten we I The 
language IS carefully crafted, precise, clear, imaginative, with vivid images I vely werbs 
variety of sentence structures, and rich, diverse Vocabulary. The tone is aulhentic and 
hones ; not contrived, maudlin, nor condescending. If dialects are used the inherent 
nobility and worth of a particular cultural group's language is reflected. 

The voice of literature is an eloquent voice, and if read aloud, flows with grace ?nd =>ase 
This IS true in books of imited wgrds for young readers as well as in longef books The 
anguage is memorable in that it stays with the readers, influencing C they mi ah t use 

L'nSnSp- """f"'- f the author's style. Through the frequenrreading of fine 
languaye, readers internalize a model of excellent prose or poetry. 

(3) Characters: 

With exception of folk tales, - where characters are deliberately one dimensicial - the 
centra characters in quality books are fully developed, with recognTzabre pe sonalit es 
honestly and realistically delineated with both strengths and weaknesses Readers a e 
able to sympathize or empathize with characters. Even the villains, who like all hurian 
beir^-s are comp ex and not one dimensional, provoke as much pity as censure Throuah 
character identification, many readers befriend characters w.-C serve as role mode'^^^^^ 
IUh r7' eve;y [s^der, there are some book characters who become pTrt o the 
urpr se he read^?s predictable; their beh'aviors of ten 



-6- 12 



Literature reflects the values of a society. In our pluralistic society, commendable books 
include a variety of central characters, including f'='males and minorities who have 
individual, rather than stereotypic roles. Characters, both noble and flawed, derive from 
every socio-economic class and geographic region. 

(4) Plot: 

In better books, the plot is an important, significant problem that is resolved through 
credible complications and trials and errors. (The exceptions, of course, are fantasy, 
science fiction, tall tales and other literature deliberately written to enchant or amaze.) 
A significant problem is not necessarily a tremendous problem. What to do about the 
small and ordinary things of daily life constitutes, in many instances, important problems 
to readers. In all books, the plot or problem is resolved through a series of actions. In 
quality books, the actions reveal the characters and deepen the complexity of the theme. 
In poor or mraaiocre books, action is for the sake of action. To be sure, the reader is 
hooked into turning the pages, but when the book ends, it is quickly forgotten. 

Good literature promotes interpretations, suggesting that the readers accept 
responsibility as the final judges of the dignity of the book's problem and the authenticity 
of its solution. In literature, the authors do not do the readers' thinking and feeling for 
them. Quality books are usually identifiable by their serious respect for young readers' 
intelligence and imagination. 

(5) Setting: 

Setting is integral to the story, shaping time and place, providing a rich and accurate 
frame for characters and events. Readers learn valid information about times, dress, 
customs, architecture, mores, living styles, and so forth from reading books with well 
developed settings. Usually much research into time and setting is done W authors and 
illustrators. Readers can assume cultural, historical, and geographic ac acy in quality 
books. Poor books are dangerous in that they misinform the reader. Bt^cause people, and 
especially students, believe what they read in books, the criterion of accuricy is never 
compromised. 

(6) Illustrations: 

Many children's books are picture books or are highly illustrated. It is, therefore, 
important to judge the quality of illustrations when selecting books. The language in 
literature is the child's first lessons in rhetoric; the illustrations in literature are among 
the child's first lessons in aesthetics. Illustrations, of course, are included in many books 
for older students. In quality books, there is an integrity between the text and 
illustrations. Both enhance, support, and clarify the other. Illustrations are appropriate 
to audience and subject, evoking mood, establishing setting and time, delineating 
characters, and recording the sequence of action. There is a storytelling quality to the 
picture which assists beginning readers in "reading" the book from the illustrations alone. 
Illustrations attract and hold the readers' attention as well as provide much information 
which extends the text. In quality books, art techniques may vary from realistic to 
impressionistic styles, but do not vary in their excellence of craft. 



53 



Non-Fiction 

Quality non-fiction books educate the imagination, develoo the inteiio^t i 
values as powerfully as quality fiction. ^ intellect, and provoke 

(1) Topic: 

Topics are significant and important, providing an education about the world thp ro.H. 
•s filled with a sense of wonder, respect, and curiosity about ?he world 

(2) Style: 

The complexity of language - vocabulary and sentence structure - is aDDroDri;,tP tn fh. 
age range of intended audience. If a subject has comolex terminninL^o^ ? ° 

(3) Accuracy: 

Information is complete and accurate. Careful study, research, and preparation are 

(4) Appropriate Amount of Information: 

An appropriate amount of information for particular readershin i<! nU,an i* . u i • x 
young readers, a comprehensive overview provide the main idC^^^^ ^^thP inU-°^ " 
complicated and lengthy, a complete and easy-to-use index is Included " " 

(5) Format: 

(6) Bias: 



14 



QUESTIONS FOR LOCAL DISTRICT SELECTION 



After determining the fiction and non-fiction books which meet the general criteria, 
teachers may wish to select specific titles for classrooms by answering the following 
questions: 



Suitability : kre the books suited to students' general emotional and 

intellectual maturity? 

Books included in the 1989 Common Ground are generally 
appropriate for elementary or high school students. It is up to 
individual schools and teachers to match the needs, interests and 
abilities of individual students. 



Does your list contain works by and about women and minorities? 



Serious consideration was given to include books by and about 
women as well as men, and to investigate and select appropriate 
titles by minorities including Blacks, Native Americans, Asians, 
Hispanics, Eastern Europeans, and other minority writers. 

Alaskan Titles : Does your list include books by and about Alaskans? 

One of the prime motivations for developing this publication was 
the absence of Alaska Native and Alaska literature in all but 
two of the Recommended Readings lists of Alaskan school 
districts. Using Alaska specific bibliographies prepared by 
University of Alaska professors, the Alaska Native Language 
Center, the Sealaska Heritage Foundation and others, Alaskan 
titles are listed separately for consideration by local districts. 

Language : Do the books on youi listing represent the language diversities 

of your students? 

Though the Literature Panel encourages the reading of texts in 
their original language, and thus the active collaboration 
between English teachers and foreign language teachers, most 
books on this list are printed in the English language. Some of 
the Alaskan books have both the original language and English 
translation. 



ERLC 



15 

■9- 



General Acceptance: Do your titles correnond io what ether elementary and 

l.igh school students In this country are reading? 

Books listed in this publication come recommended from the 
California Department nf Education, from the American Librar-' 
Asscciatt'on and the National Council cf Teachers of English 
listings of selected books for adolescents, from "Books for the 
ColJegt Bound" listings and a number of other publicly produced 
anc5 distributed listings. These inclusions reflect the extensive 
energy, effort and funding put forth by others in a similar 
attempt to promote the use of literature. 

Thefnatic Selo ptions : Do any of your titles lend themselves to teaching thematic 

units or comparative literature? 

The Literature Panel feels strongly about encouraging the use of 
thematic units and comparative literature. They also encourage 
cross disciplinary approaches so that works of literature may 
enliven and enrich social studies, science or other courses. To 
give local districts an idea of thematic possibilities, we have 
reprinted the listing of California's themes and of the 
Ax-Handle Curriculum, a comparative literature model 
developed for Alaskans by Richard and Nora Dauenhauer and 
Ron and Suzanne Scollon. 



LOCAL DECISION-MAKING POLICIES 

This publication reflects the ideas of thoughtful educators from across Alaska. Howeve 
the most important decisions about local programs, materials and resources and their 
selection and review must always be made at the local level. Each district should invol 
parents, teachers, administrators, librarians, specialists, cur '-im planners, communii 
representatives and students in the development of literatu! .^rams and policies 



ERIC 



-10- 



FORMAT OF THIS DOCUMENT 



It is the hope of the Literature Panel and the Department of Education that this 
document is flexible and easy to use. It is our intention that a wide variety of audiences 
may refer to this publication and to that end we have made the following decisions 
regarding its format: 

1) All titles are listen., alphabetically, by title . 

2) "Literature of the North and Alaska" is contained in a separate alphabetical 
listing by title and also is cross referenced in the general listing. In addition, a 
listing of Alaskan poets has been included, along with titles of their works to be 
included in any course on Alaska literature. 

3) Dramatic literature has been assembled into one listing and follows the General 
section. 

4) Rather than including individual poems or short stories, a list of various poets 
and a listing of anthologies of short stories have been suggested, to be included 
in any literature unit developed at the local level. 

6) In order to assist teachers :n their selection, each literary work has been 
identified by the genre or type of literature. 

6) All titles include the most recent hardback and paperback publishing information 
and appropriate ISBN listing. 



ALASKAN LITERATURE 

The Literature Panel stror.;Jy believes that the contributions of Alaska Native and other 
Alaskan writers enrich our own common ground. They represent our common cultural 
heritage and distinguish our life in the Great Frontier from that of every other citizen in 
our country. The Panel chose to include only those titles that are generally available and 
and are noteworthy books for libraries and interested schools in the state. In an eloquent 
paper included in this publication, Edna MacLean speaks of our mission clearly: 

"If we do not succeed in transmitting the knowledge of our ancestors to our children 
here in Alaska, there is no other place for them to go to learn them. Alaska is their 
ancestral home. If Alaska Native languages and cultures die here in Alaska, they die 
forever. We cannot let that happen." 



IMPLEMENTATION IDEAS 

Thoughout the hours of hard work, members of the Alaska Literature Panel constantly 
reiterated the urgent need for training educators in the effective use of literature in 
their classrooms. Though many Alaskan teachers may have theoretically embraced the 
theories and ideas of whole language based in literature, a resounding cry through many 
of the associations is "But how do I do it?" An accompanying document will contain 
vignettes written by Alaskan teachers and librarians, detailing how a literature-based 
classroom might look. We invite new and more detailed vignettes as more Alaskan 
teachers become skilled in ways of incorporating literature. 



i7 

-11- 



We strongly urge all local districts to support a variety of professional development 
opportunities for teachers, librarians and administrators, including: 

Academy workshops 

Summer institutes 

Local district inservices 

Teacher reading clubs 

Videotapes of teachers using literature 

Articles/resource collections 

Newsletters 

National and regional conferences 

And in the end we encourage all local districts, as strongly as we can recommend, that 
they buy books! By building strong school district and co .imunity libraries and having a 
wide and diverse variety of books available for students, we can begin to cultivate a 
generation of active readers, creative thinkers and contributing citizens. 



ERIC 



18 

-12- 



COMMON AGREEMENTS 



The following statements were ratified by members of the Literature Panel on behalf of 
the associatfons they represent. Together, they create a common rationale for the use 
of literature in Alaskan schools. 

Goal 

Literature is enjoyable for people of all ages and has lifeling importance for all people: 
therefore it should be the goal of Alaskan schools to produce lifelong readers and writers. 

Learning to Read 

a. People learn to read by reading, by being read to and by writing and discussing 
literature. 

b. Reading instruction, particularly initial instruction, should be based on literature. 

c. Students at all grade levels should be read to every day. 

d. Parents are a child's first teachers and should be encouraged to be models and active 
partners in the child's learning to be a lifelong reader. " 

Integration of Literature in the Curriculum 

a. Literature should be integrated across all subjects of the curriculum.. 

b. Reading, writing, listening and speaking should be taught as integrated processes at 
elementary and secondary levels. 

c. Students should read representative comitiunity, Ideal, regional, national and world 
literature. 

Plurality 

a. All languages, cultures, and geographic areas have noteworthy oral and/or written 
literature. 

b. Literature exists in many languages and, when possible, should be read in the original 
language, as it was written. 

c. A culture teaches through its literature. 

d. Literature helps us better understand the human condition and our communal lives. 

e. American literature is multi-ethnic and must be recognized as such. 

f . A given text can support many interpretations. 

Individualization 

a. Specific grade level designations attached to primary literature recommendations 
are relative. The suitability of selection depends on a child's development, and on 
individual differences; therefore, students should be given the opportunity to read 
books at various grade levels and in various interest areas. 

b. Teachers must provide regular opportunities for students to read self-selected 
materials. 

Professional Development 

a. Professional development must be provided for Alaskan teachers on teaching and 
using literature in their classrooms. We must teach teachers in the same way we 
want them to teach the students, modeling ongoing collaboration and inquiry, reading 
diverse pieces of literature, discussing and writing about their meaning and intent, 
discovering ways to enrich the reading and lives of the students they teach. 



-13- I' 9 



GENERAL GENRE LISTINGS 



American Literature 


Novel 


British Literature 


Biography 


Literature of Alaska and the 


Folk Tale, Legend, Myth 


North 


Essay 


Pacific Region Literature 


Science Fiction/Fantasy 


World Literature 


Sports 


Multi-ethnic American 


Historical Fiction 


Literature: 


Mystery 


• Black 


Young Adult Literature 


• Hispanic 


Non-Fiction 


• Asian 




• American Indian 





20 

-14- 



Alphabetical Listing of Suggested Literature 



1787 

Anderson, Joan 

HBJ/Gulliver, 1987, ISBN 0-1 5-200582-X 

A blending of fact and fiction set in Philadelphia during the summer of the writing 
of the U.S. Constitution. Events are seen through the eyes of an aide to James 
Madison. Text of the Constitution is appended. 



1919 

American Dos Passos, John 

Non-f i ction Amoreon, ISBN 0-8841 1 -345-0 

New American Lib., paper, ISBN 0-451-51508-0,CEl508 

A chronicle of life in America through the war years as seen through the lives of 
five young Americans— a low caste sailor, a girl from Texas, a radical Jew, a poet, 
and the daughter of a Chicago minister. This is a "slice of fife" showing the 
intensity of the period. 



1984 

British Orwell, George 

Novel Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1983, ISBN 0-15-166038-7 

New American Lib. 1983, paper, ISBN 0-452-25426-4 

The definitive look inside totalitarianism. 



Science Fiction 



20,000 LEAGUES UNDER THE SEA 

World Verne, Jules 

Raintree Pubs, 1980, ISBN 0-8172-1652-9 
Penguin, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-14-035053-5 

Exciting adventures of Pierre Aronnax, his servant and a Canadian harpooner who, 
while searching for a large sea monster that plagues sailors, are captured by 
megalomaniacal Captain Nemo. The "monster" turns out to be a submarine, the 
Nautilus, and while on board Nemo shows these men a part of the sea they have 
never explored before. 



2001: A SPACE ODYSSEY 

British Clarke, Arthur 

Science Fiction New Am Library, 1972, paper, ISBN 0-451-13469-9 

A space craft in the 21st century is traveling to a planet on the edge of our solar 
system. Two astronauts are guided by the computer, Hal. But the computer is not 
perfect and problems develop when it breaks down. 



ERLC 



.4 



ABOUT DAVID 

American Pfeffer, Susan Beth 

Young Adult Delacorte, 1980, ISBN 0-385-28013-0 

Dell, 1882, paper, ISBN 0-440-90022-0 

Lynn doesn't believe her neighbor and friend could have murdered his parents and 
then committed suicide. Although scared and confused, she uses entries from 
David s secret journal to try to piece together his past life. Yet even with this 
information, Lynn finds it hard to face the truth. 



ACCIDENT 

American Colman, Hi la 

Young Adult (no ISBN listed) 

A motorcycle accident leaves Jenny paralyzed. Afterwards both Jenny and Adam 
struggle with their feelings. ^ 

* 

ACE HITS THE BIG TIME 

American Murphy, Barbara Beasley and Wolkfoff, Judie 

Young Adult Dell, ■?982, paper, ISBN 0-440-90328-9 

The Purple Falcons are a tough gang who beat up anyone they think looks funny. 
Horace looks funny with a big sty in his eye as he leaves for his first day at high 
school. But Horace decides to face the Falcons. A series of crazy and funny 
adventures follow when Horace tangles with the gang and with a beautiful girl. 

ADVENTURES OF AUGIE MARCH 

American Eellow, Saul 

Novel Viking, 1953, ISBN 0-670-1 0602-X 

The story of Augie March growing from child to man. ^he son of poor but honest 
Russian-Jewish immigrants who settled in Chicago, March grows up and aquires an 
easy dishonesty, a film-star wife, a residence in Paris and even a certain 
understanding of himself and other people. 



ADVENTURES OF HUCKLEBERRY FINN, THE 
American Twain, Mark 

"o^'el Univ. Calif. Press, ISBN 0-520-0533b-9 

Penguin, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-14-039046-4 

Huck escapes from the lonely cabin in which his drunken, brutal father had 
imprisoned him. He meets Jim, a runaway slave, and together they raft down the 
Mississippi During stops ashore Huck sees corruption and moral decay, but learns 
of dignity from Jim. 



ERIC 



-16- ^2 



ADVENTURES OF TOM SAWYER, THE 

Twain, Mark 

Western Pub, 1986, ISBN 0-307-17110-8 
Penguin, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-14-039048-0 

Tom lives in two worlds: the respectability of Aunt Sally and the independence of 
Huck Finn. After witnessing a murder the two boys, helpless with fear, hide on an 
island. Later at the murder trial of an innocent man, Tom reveals his knowledge. 
Then Tom and his girl friend get lost in a cave where the real murderer is also 
hiding. 



ADVENTURES OF SHERLOCK HOLMES 

Doyle, Arthur Conon 

Buccaneer Books, 1982, ISBN 0-89966-385-0 
Bantam, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-553-26772-8 

This collection includes six of the author's most popular Sherlock Holmes stories 
originally published between 1887 and 1927. The cases begin with trivial matters, 
but quickly become complicated and dangerous. For example, a harrriless family 
ritual becomes the basis for a mysterious crime; a strange organization whose 
membership is all red-headed men deals in bizarre operations; and a lost Christmas 
goose is related to a jewelry robbery. 



AENEID 

Virgil 

Bantam, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-553-21041-6 

The first six of the twelve books of the Aeneid are an imitation of the Odyessey, 
the last six of the Iliad. The Trojan hero is led to Italy, but tarries at Carthage and 
tells Queen Dido the story of Troy. Finally arriving in Troy, he seeks the 
underworld and comes under the protection of Sibyle of Cumae before emerging to 
overcome his enemies. 



ArRr-AN QUEEN, THE 
Forester, C.S. 

Amereon, 1977, ISBN 0-89244-C65-1 

Little, Brown, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-316-28910-8 

An English spinster resolves to carry on against a German commander after the 
death of her brother in an African mission. Teaming up with the captain of a 
dilapidated steam launch she plans to blow up the German boat on the lake. But to 
get there requires a long and perilous trip on the river. During the many hardships 
the admirable traits of these two very different people comes out. 



AFTER THE FIRST DEATH 
Cormier, Robert 

Pantheon, 1979, ISBN 0-394-94122-5 
Avon, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-380-48652-0 

International intrigue involves a school bus of preschool children, four terrorists, 
the military, a general and his son, and a top-secret organization known as Inner 
Delta. Readers are asked to decide how far they feel it is right to go, in fighting 
for a cause. 

:T?3__ _ 



Aneri can 
Novel 



World 
Novel 



North 

Nan-fiction 



World 

Non-fiction 



AGE OF INNOCENCE, THE 

Wharton, Edith 

Scribner, 1968, ISBN 0-684-71925-8 
Macmillan, paper, 0-02-059890-4 

New York society of the 1870's is the age of propriety. A woman who has incurred 
scandal is loved by a man who has enough vision to penetrate the crust of 
convention, but not quite the courage to break it. In the process, the destructive 
powers of social codes are laid bare. 

AGONY AND THE ECSTASY, THE 

Stone, Irving 

Doubleday, 1961, ISBN, 0-385-01092-3 

New American Lib, paper ISBN 0-451-14692-1, AE2643 

Michelangelo's career is traced from his promising boyhood apprenticeships through 
the many years of his flowering genius. Florence and Rome serve as the background 
for the developlment of the artist's life and work. 

ALASKA WILDERNESS: EXPLORING THE CENTRAL BROOKS RANGE 

Marshall, Robert 

University of Call.' Press, 1970, paper ISBN 0-52-0711-0 

The book records the author's trips by foot, boat, and dogsled into the wilderness 
areas north of the Arctic Circle during the late 1930's. Illustrations, maps, and 
photos are included. 

ALIVE: THEY STORY OF THE ANDES SURVIVORS 

Read, Piers Paul 

Harper/Lippincott, 1974 

Avon, paper, ISBN 0-380-00321 -X 

En route from Uruguay to Chile for a rubgy competition, 32 people survived the 
crash of their plane in the high Andes—but only 16 survived their long postcrash 



British 
Non-fiction 



ALL CREATURES GREAT AND SMALL 
Herriot, James 

St. Martin's, 1972, ISBN 0-312-0196-2, A20000 
Bantam, paper ISBN 0-553-25229-1 

The first of three books by an English country vet who writes with humor and 
poignancy for his practice, combining animal and human Interest with clinical detail 



ERIC 



Pi 

-18- 



ALL QUIET ON THE WESTERN FRONT 
World Remarque, Erich 

Novel Little. r BN 0-316-73992-8 

Wm. C. 3rown, 1988. paper. ISBN 0-697-02605-1 

Paul Baumer. a young German soldier forced to fight in World War I. experiences 
pounding shellfire. hunger, sickness, and death. Written after his war experiences, 
he expresses his hate of war and love of humanity. A classic story about tne 
senselessness of war. 



ALL THE KING'S MEN 

American Warren. Robert Penn 

Novel Buccaneer Sks, 1 981 . ISBN 0-89966-290-0 

Barron. 1985. paper. ISBN 0-8120-3500-3 

The story of Willie Stark, who ruthlessly trampled on others in his climb to the 
governorship. He is finally killed by one of the many he betrayed. 



ALL THE PRESIDENTS MEN 

American Bernstein. Carl and Woodward Bob 

Non-fiction Simon & Schuster. 1974. ISBN U-671-21781-X 

Simon & Schuster. 1987. paper. ISBN 0-671-64644-3 

Two correspondents for the Washington Post recapitulate their investigation into 
behind-the-scenes politics that precipated the Watergate scandal and the 
resignation of President Richard Nixon. 



ALMOST TOO LATE 

North Wortman. Elmo 

Biography Random House. 1981 

(no ISBN listed) 



This is the author's account of a sailboat wreck with his three children in J979 in a 
winter storm off Dail Island in Southeast Alaska. They survived for nearly a month 
before being rescued. 



AMERICAN REVOLUTIONARIES: A HISTORY IN THEIR OWN WORDS 1750-1800 

American Meltzer. Milton 

Non-fiction Crowell. 1987. ISBN 0-690-04641-3 

The author selects primary source material to capture the meaning of the American 
Revolution to those who lived through it. Each diary or journal entry, ballad.^ 
newspaper article, or other source is introduced with brief explanatory materia!. A 
fine social history. A note on sources is included. 



ERLC 



?5 

-19- 



Aneri can 
Novel 



AN AMERICAN TRAGEDY 

Dreiser, Theodore 

Robert Bfentley, 1978, ISBN 0-8376-0424-9 

New American Lib, 1973, paper, ISBN 0-451-52043-2, CE1696 

This is the modern equivalent of the Fates of Greek tragedy. Clyde Griffiths comes 
East to find success after being brought up in simple piety. One lova is a co-worker 
in the collar factory; the other comes from the country club set. When the socially 
inferior girl becomes pregnant, Griffiths plans to resolve his dilemma by killing 
her. He is caugh and convicted. 



World 
Noval 



AND QUIET FLOWS THE DON 
Sholokhov, Mikhail 
Knopf, 1934 

Random, 1965, paper, ISBN 0-394-70330-8 

The story of a group of Cossacks living along tb.e Don River. The story of these 
primitive, virile, brutal people centers on Gregor Melekhov. His home life, 
unhappy marriage, impassioned love affair, military adventures, and experiences in 
the Revolution are told with frank naturalism from a Bolshevik point of view. 



AND YOU GIVE ME A PAIN, ELAINE 

Aiserican Pevsner, Stella 

Young Adult Houghton Mifflin, 1978, ISBN 0-395-28877-0 

^-icket Books, paper, ISBN 0-671-49763-4 

Andrea at thirteen is the youngest of three children in her family. And she's the 
one who has special problems. 



British 

Science Fiction 



ANDROMEDA STRAIN 

Crichton, Michael 

Knopf, 1969, ISBN 0-394-41525-6 

Dell, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-440-10199-9 

A contaminated space capsule drops to earih and all the residents of the small 
nearby town suddenly die. Four scientists gather at an underground laborator to 
search frantically for an antidote to the threat of a worldwide epidemic. This' tale 
of the world's first space-age biological emergency may seem uncomfortably 
believable. 



Ameri can 
Novel 



ANGLE OF REPOSE 
Stegner, Wallace 
DoLbleday, 1971 

Hallwalls, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-936739-01-0 

This 1972 Pulitzer Prize winner is set in the West in the late 1800's. A husband and 
wife .nugh it in mining camps and desolate irrigation project camps. Their difficult 
lives strain their marriage past saving, but their victories and failures offer a 
strength. 



ERIC 



-20- 



British 
Novel 



ANIMAL FARM 

Orwell, George 

Buccaneer Bks, 1982, ISBN 0-89966-369-9 

New American lib, 1983, paper ISBN 0-452-25428-0 

This frightening fable tells of animals capturing Manor Farm from their human 
masters and then attempting to create a society based on equality. Despite these 
efforts, the pigs become rulers, and the other animals find themselves in varying 
degrees of slavery. 



World 
Novel 



ANNA KARENINA 

Tolstoy, Leo 

Imported Publications, 1978, ISBN 0-8285-1057-1 

New American Lib, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-451-51935-3, CE1870 

Written between 1873 and 1877, this long novel with ad le plot presents 
upper-class Russian society of the nineteenth century, nna Karenina becomes 
involved in a love triangle which ends in her suicide. Konstantine Levin, the hero of 
the alternate tale, learns to appreciate the values of the peasants who toil on his 
estate. The novel contrasts these character's moral values. 



World 

Non-fiction 



Native American 
Novel 



ANNE FRANK; THE DIARY OF A YOUNG GIRL 
Frank, Anne 

Doubleday, 1967, ISBN 0-385-04019-9 

Washington Square Press, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-671-61760-5 

The moving journal kept by teenager Anne during the two years that she, her 
family, and other Jews were hiding from the Nazis in a secret annex in Holland 
during World War II. 

ANPAO: AN AMERICAN INDIAN ODYSSEY 

Highwater, Jamake 

Harper and Row, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-06-131986-4 

Anpao (meaning dawn) is the son the Sun and a human mother. He falls in love 
with a beautiful Indian girl who is promised to the Sun. She agrees to marry Anpao 
if he brings proof of her betrothed's permission. The book is the epic story of 
Anpao's discovery of his mysterious origins on his journey to reach the house of the 
Sun. Anpao is the author's creation, but his adventures represent a selection from a 
wide range of American Indian traditional stories. This was a 1978 Newberry Honor 
Book. 



Ameri can 
Science Fiction 



ANTHEM 

Rand, Ayn 

Caxton Ptrs, 1966, ISBN 0-87004-124-X 
New American Lib, ISBN 0-451-14086-9 

A short novel about a heroic dissenter in a future monolithic and collectivized state. 



ERIC 



P7 



-21- 



ARM OF THE STARFISH 

American L'Engle, Madeleine 

Young Adult Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1965, ISBN 0-374-30396-7 

Dell, 1980, paper, ISBN 

A summer spent with a marine biolog.st turns Into a time of international intrigue 
for Adam Eddington. ^ 



APRIL MORNING 

American Fast, Howard 

Young Adult Crown, ISBN 0-517-50681-5 

Bantam, 1962, paper, ISBN 0-553-25681-5 

The familiar story of Lexington and Concord takes on immediacy and deeper 
meaning as it is related by 15-year old Adam Cooper. He's the son of a 
Massachusetts farmer who is catapulted from childhood to maturity on that fateful 
oay m April, 1775. 



North 

Non-fiction 



American 
Novel 



ARCTIC WILD 

Crisler, Lois 
Harper & Row, 1973 
(n6 mN listed) 

Ihil^D \l^t'}P. Range wilderness and the animals observed 

there. Previously published in 1958. 

ARRC/VSMITH 

Lewis, Sinclair 

Buccaneer Bks, 1982, ISBN 0-89966-402-4 
Signet Classics, paper, ISBN 0-451-52054-8 

This was the 1926 Pulitzer Prize winner. Martin Arrowsmith turns from his 
HloT^'fhlr'^^-*^ *? general medicine and then to public health, but is unable to 
deal with the political aspects of the job. He returns to research and his hope of 
demonstrating an antitoxin against bubonic plague is invalidated when he fails to 
adhere to specific research controls. Feeling he is a failure, Arrowsmith turns down 
a prestigous position and joins a rural laboratory searching for a cure for pneumonia. 



American 
Novel 



AS I LAY DYING 

Faulkner, William 

Garland Pub, 1987, ISBN 0-8240-6809-2 
Randon, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-394-74745-3 

After their mother dies, six children and their dazed father load the coffin into a 
wagon and begin a journey lasting several days across the rain-swept country to the 
n™h'^' a y V''^'''' ^ decaying corpse, buzzards and a demented small boy 
overwhelm the reader's senses. The book is a pyschological jigsaw puzzle 



P8 

-22- 



World 
Essay 



ASCENT OF MAN, THE 

Bronowski, Jacob 

Little, Brown, 1974, ISBN 0-316-10933-9 

Linking 13 essays from the text of a BBC television series, Brownowski informally 
traces the development of science. It's regarded here as a cultural evolution by 
which humans from age to age have remade their environment. 



North 
Folklore 



ATHABASCAN STORIES 

Brean, Alice 

Alaska Methodist University Press, 1975 
(no ISBN listed) 

The importance of animals are evident in these ten myths from Tanacross with 
maps showing the locations of the stories. 



North 
Folklore 



ATHABASCAN STORIES FROM ANVIK 

Chapman, John 

Alaska Native Language Cntr, UAF, 1981, paper ISBN 0-933769-12-1 

Contains 16 stories written down by the Rev. Chapman from elders in Anvik 
between 1887-1905. 



AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MALCOLM X 

Black Malcolm X 

Biography Amereon Ltd, 0-89190-216-3 

Ballantine, 1977, ISBN O-345-33920-7 

The revealing story of the man who rose from a teenage dope peddler to become a 
Black Muslim and dynamic political leader—and was still changing and growing 
when he was murdered. 



AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF MISS JANE PITMAN 
Black Gaines, Ernest J. 

Biography DoLbleday, 1971 

Bantam, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-553-26357-9 

The story of a courageous Black woman who began life as a slave on a Louisiana 
plantation, was freed at the end of the Civil War, and lived to take part in the civil 
rights demonstrations of the 1960s. 



ATKAN HISTORICAL TRADITIONS 

North Snigaroff, Cedor 

Folklore Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1986, ISBN 0-933769-16-4 

This is a collection of stories from Atkan told by Cedor Snigaroff in 1952 about 
memories of nineteenth and twentieth century events in the Aleutian Islands. The 
page with the original Aleut language version faces the English version. The story 
titles include "Life in the Russian Period", "The End of the Russian Rule and the 
Coming of the Americans", and "The Ancient Life." 



ERLC 



.'>3. ^9 



Anieri can 
Young Adul t 



AUTUMN STREET 

Lowry, Lois 

Houghton Mifflin, 1980, ISBN 0-395-27812 
Dell, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-440-40344-8 

Because her father is off to war, Elizabeth, her mother, and older sister are forced 
to move into the large, gloomy home of her grandmother. The only times Elizabeth 
looks forward to are when she goes adventuring with the cook's grandson, Charles. 
When they decide to try out her new sled one winter day, tragedy awaits. 



B 



North 
Folklore 



BACK TO THE TOP OF THE WORLD 

Ruesch, Hans 

Ballentine, 1973, paper, SBN 345-23884-2-150 
(not listed in Books in Print) 

The sequel to Ruesch's book, "To the Top of the World", about the far-Northern 
Eskimo people and their way of life. 



Anieri can 
Novel 



American 
Novel 



Ameri can 
Young Adult 



BABBITT 

Lewis, Sinclair 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1949 
Barron, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-8120-3504-6 

This story is a satire on American middle-class life but is told as a universal drama 
about the tyranny of conventions. George Babbitt is a successful real estate man, a 
regular fellow, booster, Rotarian, Elk, Republican who uses all the current 
catchwords and molds his opinions on those of the local paper. 

BARTLEBY THE SCRIVENER 

Melville, Herman 

Mardi Press, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-686-34559-2 

One of Melville's most famous short stories, this is about Bartleby, a scribe, who 
"would prefer not to" when asked to do just about anything. 

THE BEAUTY QUEEN 

Pfeffer, Susan Beth 
(no ISBN listed) 

Coerced by her mother, a young girl enters the local beauty contest. After much 
thought, and after winning two contests, the girl realizes that being a beauty queen 
has no real meaning for her, and she rejects the titles and values they represent. 



ERIC 



-24- 



30 



BEING THERE 

Kozinski, Jerzy 

Bantam, 1980 ISBN 0-553-26780-9 

A gardener named Chance is forced for the first time to enter the real world 
following the death of his employer. Although he is unable to read or write, Chance 
meets and impresses businessmen, diplomats and the President through a series of 
circumstances. In a short time. Chance captures the world with his reduction of 
serious problems to gardening analogies. This novel may be read on various levels 
of fiction, fact, fantasy and contemporary history. 



BELL FOR ADANO, A 

Hersey, John 

Knopf, 1944, ISBN 0-394-41660-0 
Random, paper, ISBN 0-394-75695-9 

The newly appointed civil affairs officer for the Allied Military Government 
Occupied Territory works to bring order to the small Italian town of Adano. Major 
Victor Jappolo, after learning the town's 700 year-old bell has been lost, works to 
replace it. In the process of trying to bring prosperity and happiness to the people 
of Adano, Jappolo meets many odd characters. 



BELL JAR, The 
Plath, Sylvia 

Harper Row. 1971, ISBN 0-06-013356-2 
Bantam, 1975, paper, ISBN 0-553-26008-1 

Esther wins an assignment on a New York fashion magazine. Once she returns 
home, she feels enormous pressure to live up to her potential. First she avoids life 
by lying to her mother and others, but finally tries a larger escape—in the form of 
suicide. Esther's treatment, including counseling and electroshock, is sometimes 
horrible, sometimes funny. 



BEOWULF 

Anonymous 

St. Martins, 1982, ISBN 0-312-07561-8 
Cooper Square, 1988, ISBN 0-19-272184-4 

Written by an unknown poet, this epic of a dragon-slaying hero is the earliest, still 
existing, writings of such length in English. It is based on Norse legends that were 
merged with historical events of the early sixth century in Denmark. This oral 
tradition was carried by mid-sixth century invaders to England where they were 
merged with the Christianity they absorbed there. 



BIBLE, THE 

Chelsea House, 1987, ISBN 0-87754-720-3 

The sacred book of Christianity including the Old Testament and New Testament. 



-25- 



Ameri can 
Young Adult 



BIG RED 

Kjelgaard, Jim 

Holiday, 1956, ISBN 0-8234-0007-7 
Bantam, 1972, paper, ISBN 0-553-15434-6 

Red, Mr Haggin's champion Irish setter, is taken care of by Danny, and together 
they go huntmg, f ishmg, and trapping. Red becomes lam° and can't compete as a 
show dog, but he does father a line of champion Irish setters and starts Mr. Haggin's 



Ameri can 
Novel 



BIG SKY, THE 

Guthrie, A.B., Jr. 

Houghton Mifflin, 1947 

Bantam, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-553-26683-7 

The story follows the adventures of 17-year old Boon Caudill who leaves his 
Kentucky home after a fight with his father. After working his way to the 
headwaters of the Mississippi, Boone works as a mountain man. During this time he 
witnesses the degredation of the Indian, the death of wildlife, and the destruction of 
the life he loved. 



World 
Novel 



BILLY BUDD 

Melville, Herman 

AMSCO School Pub, 1969, ISBN 0-87720-703-8 

Billy is a handsome Spanish sailor who strikes and kills the hated petty officer" 
Claggart. Billy is condemned by Captain Vere even though the latter senses Billy's 
spiriiual innocence. This was written in 1891 and was an "unfinished" manuscript 
when Melville died. 



Ameri can 
Novel 



Black 
Novel 



BIRDY 

Wharton, William 

Knopf, 1979, ISBN 0-394-42569-3 

Avon, 1979, paper, ISBN 0-380-47282-1 

Alternative narratives trace a friendship that is tested when a Vietnam veteran is 
called upon to help his buddy overcome a longtime obsession with birds that has 
f inallv pushed him over the edge of reality. 

BLACK BOY: A RECORD OF CHILDHOOD AND YOUTH 
Wright, Richard 
Harper, 1969 

Harper-Row, paper, ISBN 0-06-083056-5, P3056 

This classic autobiography gives a moving and harrowing account of qrowinq ud in 
the racist pre-World War II South. a a k 



Hispanic 
Novel 



ERIC 



BLESS ME ULTIMA 
Anaya, Rudolfo 

Tonatiuh-Quinto Sol International, 1976, paper ISBN 0-89229-002-1 
This book recalls the spiritual relationship between a young boy and his grandmother. 

-26- 



BLESS THE BEASTS AND CHILDREN 

American Swarthout, Glendon 

Novel Doubleday, 1970 

Pocket, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-671-50710-9 

A group of unhappy teenage boys, the outsiders at a summer camp, find self-respect 
and freedom when they work together to free a herd of buffalo about to be brutally 
slaughtered. 



BOOK OF THE HOPI 

Native American Waters, Frank 

Non-fiction . Penguin, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-14-004527-9 

Hope spiritual beliefs are documented in this book. 



BOY WHO DRANK TOO MUCH, THE 

American Greene, Shep 

Young Adult Viking, 1979, ISBN 0-670-18381-4 

Dell, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-440-90493-5 

Drinking is the greatest problem facing Buff Saunders who is a superb athlete. 



BRAVE NEW WORLD 

British Huxley, Aldous 

Science Fiction Buccaneer Bks, 1982, ISBN 0-89966-423-7 

Harper, 1979, paper, ISBN 0-06-083095-6, P3095 

Feelies, the drug Soma, and "orgie porgies" replace learning and real happiness in 
the dehumanized world of the future. 



BRIAN'S SONG 

American Blinn, William 

Sports Bantam, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-553-26618-7 

Brian Piccolo faces death from cancer while he continues his professional football 
career. The book also deals with racial issues. 



BRIDGE OF SAN LUIS REY, THE 
World Wilder, Thornton 

Novel Boni,1927 

Harper-Row, 1986, paper ISBN 0-06-091341-X 

This book won the Pulitzer Prize in 1928. Nearly two centuries ago a wooden bridge 
built by the Incas collapsed and five Peruvian travellers fell into the abyss. The 
story retells and interweaves the minute inquiry into the secret lives of the victims 
by a Franciscan Brother, to prove that this was not an accident but rather the 
culmination of the finite pattern of each life according to God's pian. 



ERLC 



33 

-27- 



World 
Novel 



Ameri can 
Young Adult 



Native American 
Folklore 



Ameri can 
Young Adult 



BRIDGE OVER THE RIVER KWAI 

Boulle, Pierre 

Amereon Ltd, ISBN 0-89190-571-5 
Bantam, 1970, paper, ISBN 0-553-24850-2 

During World War II, a British colonel almost drives 500 enlisted men to death in the 
process of bui ding a bridge over the River Kwai on orders of his Japanese captors, 
and then resists British saboteurs who come to blow it up. ^' » 

BRIDGE TO TERABITHIA 

Paterson, Katherine 

Harper & Row Junior Books, 1987, ISBN 0-690-04535-9 
Harpe-- & Row Junior Books, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-06-440184-7 

Until Leslie moves nearby, Jess Aarons feels lonely and discouraged. But with 
Leslie comes Terabithia, a magical land where they reign as king and queen. Jess's 
confidence grows as they battle imaginary enemies and talk about real ones. The 
real test of his courage comes when Jess faces the reality of death. This book is a 
Newbery Award winner. 

BUFFALO WOMAN 

Johnson, Dorothy 

Bradbury Press, 1984, ISBN 0-02-737720-2 
Macmillan, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-689-71109-3 

A fictionalized account of life with the Oglala Sioux from 1820 to 1877 as seen 
through the eyes of the woman Whirlwind. 

BUILDING BLOCKS 

Voigt, Cynthia 

Atheneum Pubs, 1984, ISBN 0-689-31035-8 

After hearing yet another argument between his nagging mother and quiet father 
over whether to sell the Pennsylvania farm his father loved as a child 
twelve-year-old Brann hides In the basement where he falls asleep among his 
father s boyhood building blocks. Brann awakens 37 years earlier durinq the 
Depression in his father's boyhood bedroom. Brann better understands his own 
mn^hlr -I f.xperiencing what he went through with a brutish father, an insensitive 
mother, and five fighting brothers and sisters he had to care for. 



BURY MY HEART AT WOUNDED KNEE 

Native American BrOWn, Dee 

Non-fiction Holt, 1971, ISBN 0-03-085322-2 

Washington Square Press, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-671-49412-0 

Drawing from diaries, pictograpahic records, autobiographies, and other primary 
sources Brown affords a vivid look at the decades from 1860 to 1890, when the 
Indians fought for but lost their ancestral lands 



ERIC 



-28- '34 



BUS RIDE 

American Sachs, Marilyn 

Young Adult Dutton, 1980, ISBN 0-525-27325-5 

Riding to school on the bus is boring for Judy until she meets Ernie at the bus stop 
one morning and is flattered by his attention. Judy becomes hurt, however, when 
she realizes Ernie is really interested in getting to know her popular friend Karen. 
Judy and Ernie do become f rifinds and are able to prove to themselves that neither 
is a loser. 



c 

CAINE MUTINY, THE 

Wouk, Herman 

Naval Institute Press, 1987, ISBN 0-87021-010-6 

On a U.S. minesweeper in the Pacific during World War II, the officers take over 
from their mentally unbalanced captain and face a dramatic court-martial on their 
return. 



American 
Novel 



CALL OF THE WILD 

American London, Jack 

Novel Buccaneer Books, 1903, ISBN 0-89966-473-3 

Star Rover, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-932458-39-4 

Buck, a large, friendly dog, is stolen from his California home and sold to a cruel 
master. Although suffering from bad treatment. Buck makes an outstanding sled 
dog in Alaska. Near death. Buck is saved by a kind man and then must choose 
between his loyalty to the new master and a strong desire to run free with the wild 
wolves. 



CANCER WARD 

World Slozhenitzyn, Alexander 

Novel Modern Library, 1984, ISBN 0-394-60499-7 

Tells the stories of patients who pass through the men's cancer ward in a Soviet city 
hospital in 1955. This universal story is a protest against senseless cruelty and the 
Imprisonment of the spirit and is also an affirmation of the residual goodness that 
sometimes remains in the souls of victims. 



CANDIDE 

World Voltaire 

Novel Bantam, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-553-21166-8 

This book satirizes the optimistic creed that "all is for the best in this best of all 
possible worlds." Misadventures begin for Candide when he is kicked out of the 
castle for making love to the Baron's daughter. Then Candide, and others in various 
parts of the world, endure a long succession of the most unfair and appalling 
calamities conceivable. 

ERIC ■ 35 



CANTERBURY TALES 
British Chaucer, Geoffrey 

Poetry Lothrop, 1988, ISBN 0-688-06201-6 

Oxford Univ. Press, 1986, press, ISBN 0-19-281597-0 

A collection of twenty-four stories written in the late 1300s related by members of 
a company of pilgrims who agree to tell stories to and from the shrine of St. 

n?f Hnf-n ^f^^^^l^uf^y- The stories present a remarkable picture of English social 
life during these times and represent every class. 

CANTICLE FOR LEIBOWITZ, A 
American Miller, Brian 

Science Fiction G.K. Hall, 1975, ISBN 0-8398-2309-6 

Harper & Row, paper, ISBN 0-06-091321-5, PL 1321, PL 

Snr^h '^';*'2"u°^u"^n"^^^ ^estruction centers around the 

T^u ^ American New Rome. The story is 

hM h J^! ""Ti^ ^" °^ "^edieval-type scholars whose founder and followers 
h d books and documents from the mobs who were intent upon destroying any trace 
of the technology that destroyed their world. ^ 

CAPTIVES OF TIME 
American Bosse, Malcolm 

Non-fiction Delacorte, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-385-29583-9 

Set in the Middle Ages, this is the story of 16 year-old Anne and her mute brother 
SlfcfTn K ^ savage murder of their parents. Their journeys through Europe ' 
besieged by plague are harrowing. The author explicity depicts the struggle for 
survival and the casual acceptance of violent actions and brutalities. 

CAT WHO ATE MY GYMSUIT, THE 
American Danzier, Paula 

Young Adult (no ISBN listed) 

Marcy is overweight, bored by school, and tyrannized by her father An 
Mi;Trf'°"^' helps Marcy conquer many of her insecurity feelings. Then 

of he^behavio'r^^"'^^ '""^^"'^ °^ ^i^ed because 

CATCH 22 

American Heller, Joseph 

Novel Simon & Schuster, 1961, ISBN 0-671-12805 

Dell, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-440-1 1 1 20-X 

wnrM lir°n P^'''^l^\es this savage attack on war in which Captain Yossarian, a 
l^lieveTof dulr* ^ ''^ 



ERIC 



CATCHER IN THE RYE, THE 
Salinger, J* D. 

Little. Brown, 1951, liJBN 0-316-76953-3 

Wm. C. Brown, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-697-02265-X 

Three days and nights are spent in the New York City underground by Holden 
Cauf ield after he leaves his Pennsylvania prep school. Sensitive, intelligent, and 
honest, the 16-year-old Cauf ield confronts the false values of the adult world* 



CAT'S CRADLE 

American Vonnegut, Kurt 

Science Fiction Dell, 1970, paper, ISBN 0-440-11149-8 

This is a satire on religion, research, government and human nature. A free-lance 
writer becomes the catalyst in a chain of events that discovers the secret of an 
element potentially more lethal than nuclear fission. The search also leads to a 
mythical island and the discovery of the leader of a new religion. 



CENTENNIAL 

American Michener, James 

Novel Random House, 1974, ISBN 0-394-47970-X 

Fawcett, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-449-44522-4 

Written to celebrate the U.S. bicentennial and Colorado centennial, this book is 
centered on a fictional Colorado town. It describes the area beginning in 
prehistory, and progressing through the arrival of Indians, traders, settlers, the 
search for gold, railroads, cattle ranching, sheep, drought and concludes with the 
social and environmental problems of the 1970's. 



CEREMONY 

Native American Silko, Leslie 

Novel Signet Books, 1978 

Penguin, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-14-008683-8 

A young American Indian returning to his tribal reservation after World War II finds 
that drinking and sex are not the answers to his search for new meaning in his life. 
Instead Tayo finds the answer in the past rituals of his people. 



CEREMONEY OF INNOCENCE 

Native American Highwater, Jamake 

Novel Harper and Row Junior Books, ISBN 0-C -\ ^'?302-2 

This is the second book in the Ghost Horse Cycle series. After the death of her 
husband, Amana is alone and destitute. She finds friendship, love and 
disillusionment, and eventually moves to a trading post town where she strives to 
give her daughter and grandchildren a sense of pride in their Indian heritage. 



ERIC 



.^7 

-31- 



North 
Folklore 



American 
Bi ography 



FROM CHF^Zak'^^^'^^''^ QULIRAIT-ILU: ESKIMO NARRATIVES AND TALES 
Woodbury, Anthony 

Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1984, ISBN 0-933769-09-1 

?hTJit''*Al' t^ditionial tales and historical accounts told by elders from 

CeZf Y^S "^'"^ "'9^^^" P^^°t°^ °f Chevak and its people. 

Central Yupik Eskimo and English appear In parallel columns. 

CHAPTERS: MY GROWTH AS A WRITER 

Duncan, Lois 
(no ISBN listed) 

Irff in"*^cK ° T^^^"" ""^"y articles, answers questions about 

TnH She begins a age 13 and describes her successes and failures as a writer 
and stresses that a writer needs many personal experiences to influence his or her 
AmPnV^nlT d^^'^^'be^.both her good and bad experiences. This book was a^ 
American Library Association Best Book for Young Adults. 



American 
Non-fiction 



CHARLEY SKEDADDLE 

Beatty, Patricia 

Morrow, 1987, ISBN 0-688-06687-9 

Twelve-year-old Charley Quinn, a street brawler in New York's Bowery, enlists in 
mdnP m" f f ^""^ °f battle. Taking refuse n fhe Blue 

a'n&Ss^ ^'"^ -9-^ --tain pe^p?e. 



CHEAPER BY THE DOZEN 

wZnl^tH If G'Ibreth, Frank and Carey, Ernestine Gilbreth 
Young Adult Amereon Ltd, ISBN 0-8841 1 -289-6 

Bantam, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-553-27250-0 

This lighthearted book with some serious overtones is the biographical portrait of 

l^-?h ?hTf fJ''' °J !-^'''^ 9'^^''^^ ^^"d^^"- 't includes ^hei'^^^Idventures 
with their father who applies to domestic life his time and efficiency studies 

CHEYENNE AUTUMN 

Native American Sandoz, Marl 

Non-fiction Hastings House, 1953 

Avon Books, 1964, paper, ISBN 0-380-01094-1 

i™8ll^Vt*?rnml^r/n T ^ ^'°"!:"'^ ^ 9''°"P ^^^V^^^^ Indians who in 
lii/ii set out from Inaian Territory, where they had been sent by the American 

army, to return to their native lands in the Yellowstone. The author uSi?ect 

speech and other fictional devices that are frowned upon by his?orrans but she 

justif.es their use by the keeness of her ear for the rhythms^ Ind an^^^^^^^^^ 



ERIC 



38 

-32- 



CHIEF HENRY YUGH NOHOLNIGEE: THE STORIES CHIEF HENRY TOLD 
North Jones, Eliza (editor) 

Biography Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1982, ISBN 0-933769-13-X 

Chief Henry of Husila tape-recorded these autobiographical sketches which relate 
subsistence activities and ways of life in older days. His niece, Eliza Jones, 
translated the late chief's comments. The English translations are arranged phrase 
by phrase on pages facing the Koyukon. An appendix of place names is also included. 



CHILD BUYER, THE 

American Hersey, John 

Novel Random, ISBN 0-394-75698-3 

Educational shortcomings, materialism, mental manipulation, misguided patriotism 
are parts of this book about efforts to "buy" a poor boy of exceptional intelligence. 
Officials in a Urge corporation want to train the boy to use his brains for the 
benefit of the company. 



CHILDHOOD'S END 

British Clarke, Arthur 

Science Fiction Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1963, ISBN 0-15-117205-6 
Ballantine/Del Rey, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-345-34795-1 

In the near future. Earth is invaded and ruled by a beneficent superior species that 
is preparing humanity for a giant evolutionary step forward. A fascinating . 
portrayal of human-alien contact. 



CHILD'S CHRISTMAS IN WALES, A 
British Thomas, Dylan A. 

Short Stories Holiday, 1985, ISBN 0-8234-0565-6 

Godine, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-87923-529-2 



A lyric memory of the author as a young boy in Wales in the 1930's. 



CHINA MEN 

Asian Kingston, Maxine Hong 

Biography Knopf, 1980, ISBM 0-394-42463-8 

Ballantine, 1981, paper, ISBM 0-345-34407-3 



The writer's male, Chinese-American family members are richly painted in this 
book which also intersperses fascinating bits of historical data. One such addition is 
a chronology of legislation affecting the Chinese in America. 



THE CHOCOLATE ,#mR 

American Cormier, Robert 

Novel Pantheon, 1974, ISBN 0-394-82805-4 

DpII, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-440-94459-7 



A young man in a private school is more thinking, sensitive and determined to 
establish his own identity than his classmates. After refusing to take part in the 
annual chocolate sale to earn money for the school, he pays a tremendous physical 
^ and emotional price for being different from his peers. 

ERIC .33. .•:?9 



CHOSEN, THE 

Aniericfo Potok, Chaim 

Hovel Simon & Schuster, 1967 

Ballariiine/Fawcett, paper 

(No ISBN listed) 

A relationship that starts in the fierce rivalry of a baseball game grows to stro 
friendship between two Orthodox Jewish boys. Reuben become involved in the 
conflict between Danny and his austere Hasidic rabbi father. 



CHRISTINE 
American King, Stephen 

Science Fiction Viking, 1983, ISBN 0-670-22026-4 

New Am. Library, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-451-15069-4 

Teenager Arnie Cunningham has never fit in. He buys a beat-up '58 Plymouth 
"Christine", from the broken-down Roland LeBay who dies soon afterwards Both 
the car and LeBay have unusual regenerative powers. The car, for example, repairs 
Itself. Arnie becomes obsessed by the car and possessed by the previous owner In 
the process he loses his girlfriend and best friend as they work to save h'm from 
Christine's clutches. 



CHRONICLE OF A DEATH FORETOLD 
woi'ld Marquez, Gabriel Garcia 

Novel Knopf, 1983, ISBN 0-394-53074-8 

Ballantine, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-345-31002-0 

A detailed account of a murder and its effect on the lives of people in a small town 
m South America. 



CIMARRON 

American Ferber, Edna 

Novel Doubleday, 1930, ISBN 0-385-04069-5 

Fawcett, paper, ISBN 0-449-24114-9 

This novel deals with the spectacular land rush of 1889 in Oklahoma, beginning when 
the country was still Indian Territory, and continues through the oil boom and 
beyond. The book follows the degeneration of Yancey Cravat and the evolution of 
his wife Sabra into a congresswoman. 



CITY AND THE STARS 
British Clarke, Arthur 

Science Fiction Harcourt, 1956 

New American Lib, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-4i51 -14822-3 

In the future, a young man becomes impatient at the inactive life in an enclosed 
Utopian city on Earth Eventually Alvin makes his way to another Utopia stressing 
closeness to nature. After finding an alien spaceship left behind millennia ago, he 
V lis the stars and discovers the true nature of the cosmic perspective which has 
been hidden from the two Utopias. 



ERIC 



-34- ^0 



CIVIL DISOBEDIENCE 

American Thoreau, Henry David 



Essay 



An early 19th century essay on political beliefs. 



COLLECTOR, THE 

British Fowles, John 

Novel 1 Little, Borwn, 1963, ISBN 0-316-29096-3 

Dell, 1981, paper, 0-440-31335-X 

An obscure clerk and butterfly collector becomes obsessed by a pretty art student 
he has never met. After winning a fortune in football pools, he buys a remote 
cottage, kidnaps the girl, and holds her prisoner in the basement hoping to make her 
love him. The story is told from the demented view of the man and then from that 
of the increasingly desperate girl. 

CLAUDIA WHERE ARE YOU? 

American Colman, Hila 

Young Adult Archway, 1976, paper, ISBN 0-671-60108-3 

This is the story of Claudia who runs away to live in Greenwich Village. 



COLOR PURPLE, THE 

Black Walker, Alice 

Novel Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1982, ISBN 0-15-119153-0 

Washington Square Press, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-671-52602-2 

Celie writes letters to God about a life you won't believe she could have survived. 
The love of another woman finally convinces her that she is worth something and 
can become someone. 



COMING INTO THE COUNTRY 

North McPhee, John 

Essay Strause & Giroux, 1977, ISBN 0-374-12645-3 

Bantam, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-553-25527-4 



A detailed, vivid narration of Alaska's wilderness, rural and urban life with many 
interviews of the people and comments about conflicts such as the capita! move. 



COMPLETE SHORT STORIES OF MARK TWAIN, THE 

American Neider, Charles (editor) 

Short stories Doubleday, 1957 

Bantam, 1984, paper, 0-553-21195-1 

Sixty of Mark Twain'? ^ ories are gathered in this collection and cover the entire 
span of his writing ft , n. ^865 to 1916, six years after his death. The stories are 
arranged chronolgoicall) acccording to the year of first publication. 



ERLC 



41 

-35- 



Amen" can 
Novel 



CONNECTICUT YANKEE IN KING ARTHUR'S COURT A 
Twain, Mark v-vuni,M 

Morrow, 1988, ISBN 0-688-06346-2 

Univ of Calif Press, paper, ISBN 0-520-05109-2 

Hank Morgan is hit on the head In nineteenth-rpntiirw r«r.«« f ^ 

find himself in King Arthur's EnglanS w?th heTn qK^^^^^^^ tr^^:' *° 

question is whether the American can use his advanced scienti^i^ 

c ange h.story for the better. His efforts to adjust to t ^n^ew wo'r ^a^^elm °d with 



World 
Novel 



COUNT OF MONTE CRISTO, THE 

Dumas, Alexander 

Dodd, 1984, ISBN 0-396-08255-6 

New American Lib, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-451-52195-1 

A young sailor unjustly accused of helping the exiled Nannlpnn in iqic u 
arrested and imprisoned. He escapes after fifteen vears^^^^^^^^ 
cavern on Monte Cristo to dig up the fabu ous treasurS h^^^^ ^i^'^l 
dying^f riend in prison. He the^n Sses the l^y'trp^u^^h^e^^^^^^^^^^ 



World 
Novel 



CRIME AND PUNISHMENT 

Dostoyevsky, Fyodor 

Buccaneer "Bks, ISBN 0-8b966-397-4 

Norton, 1989, paper, ISBN 0-393-95623-7 

Raskolnikov, a young Russian student who commits robber and murder !<; hnnnWoM 
by guilt and a suspicious police inspector. murder, is hounded 



Ameri can 
Novel 



World 
Novel 



CROW KILLER 

Throp, Raymond W.and Bunker, Robert 
Amereon Ltd, ISBN 0-88411-078-8 

CRY, THE BELOVED COUNTRY 
Paton, Alan 

ABC-Clio, Inc, 1987, ISBN 1-55736-004-9 

Wm. C. Brown, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-697-02598-5 

otrurrciali/r^"dSrS^^^^^^^ '°' '-'^ - "-^o is accused 



er|c 



42 



-36- 



CRYSTAL CAVE, The 

British Stewart, Mary 

Novel Morrov/, 1970 

Fawcett, 1984, paper, ISBN, 0-49-20644-0 

The f irst episode in Stewart's Arthurian trilogy follows Merlin's adventures and 
education in the magic arts from childhood to the year of Arthur's birth. 



D 



DANDELION WINE 

American Bradbury, Ray 

Science Fiction Knopf, 1975, ISBN, 0-394-49605-1 

Bantam, paper, 1969, ISBN 0-553-25236-4 

This is the story of one summer in the life of twelve-year-old Douglas Spaulding in 
1928. Doug and his brother wander among their elders, living and dreaming, 
sometimes aware of things, other times just having a good time. The big discovery 
for Doug during this summer is that he is alive. 



DANGLING WITNESS, THE 

American Bennett, Jay 

Young Adult (no ISBN listed) 

After Matthew witnesses a murder, organized crime threatens him. 



DARKNESS AT NOON 

World Koester, Arthur 

Novel Macmillan, 1941 

Bantam Books, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-553-26595-4 



This story is set in an unnamed dictatorship and is about the arrest, imprisonmment, 
trail and execution of N.S. Rebashov. Koestler describes the main character as "a 
synthesis of the lives of a number of men who were victims of the so-called Moscow 
trials". This novel did much to draw attention to the nature of Stalin's regime. 



DAUGHTER OF TIME 

British Tey, Josephine 

Mystery Macmillan, 1952 

Macmillan, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-02-054550-9 



To pass the time while in the hospital, a man turns his investigative prowess toward 
unraveling the mystery associated with Richard II! of England and the deaths of the 
two young princes kept in the Tower of London. 



ERLC 



43 

-37- 



British 
Novel 



Ameri can 
Novel 



Ameri can 
Young Adul t 



Ameri can 
Science Fiction 



British 
Novel 



DAVID COPPERFIELD 

Dickens, Charles 

Dodd, 1984, ISBN 0-396-08256-4 

Longman, 198c, paper, ISBN 0-582-54160-3 

tllVn!^!^^^ mother David is sent by his harsh stepfather to London 
where he pastes abe Is on bottles in a warehouse by day and by night is a single 
lodger. He f mally runs away and finds a welcome at a relative's home whe?e he 
attends school and settles down to work and marriage. 

DAY LINCOLN WAS SHOT, THE 

Bishop, Jim 
Harper, 1955 

Harper & Row, 1964, paper, ISBN 0-06-080005-4 

A dramatic reconstruction of the minute by minute events surrounding the 
assassina .on of President Lincoln. The book profiles many of the people involved in 
the planning, execution and aftermath of the crime. mvolved m 

DAY NO PIGS WOULD DIE, A 

Peck, Robert Newton 

Knopf, 1972, ISBN 0-394-4835-2 

Dell, paper, ISBN 0-0-440-92083-3 

life ajfn r^fh"'' n°'' ^"'P 'earns the truths of birth, 

life, and death Drawing upon these resources he accepts the responsi"^ilities bf 
growing up with courage and dignity. Rob sacrifices his pig for the faS's food 
and realizes this loss is really a stepping stons to accepting the death of his father. 

DAY OF THE DRONES 
Lightener, A.M. 
Norton, 1969 

belipf t'hat''th°o^''Jrp'J^ ^J^'""" "'f ^'"9^^ radioactive wastelands. Their 
peiiet that thoy are the only humans who survived a nuclear disaster caused bv the 
maus rial nat.ons of the world is shattered when a bird with ^'je rope of a snare 

t^^t U^'-'^Sed'" 'IT'^' ^"9'-^ KscoJera 

wniie race tiiat has t tablished a society worshiping larae bees. 

DAY OF THE JACKAL 

Forsythe, Frederick 
Viking, 1971 

Bantam, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-553-26630-6 

ourtri^sl?n'ate"c^^^:^d1 ^'^^ '''' ^"9"^^-" is 



ERIC 



44 



-38- 



DEAD SOULS 
World Gogol, Nikolai 

Novel Norton, 1985, ISBN 0-393-01736-2 

Norton, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-393-95292-4 

The gambits of a quixotic opportunist in provincial. Russ Chichikov requires 
evidence of "property," since he wishes to marry an heiress, and is able to amass the 
"souls" because their owners must pay taxes on them until they are officially 
declared dead in the next census. 



DEATH COMES FOR THE ARCHBISHOP 

American Gather, Willa 

Novel ' Knopf, 1927, ISBN 0-394-421 54-X 

Random, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-394-60503-9 

Two French priests come with faith and zeal to the Indians of New Mexico. While 
influencing many to accept the Christian way of life, they must themselves adjust 
to the people they meet. 



DEATH IN THE FAMILY 

American Agee, James 

Novel Bantam, 1971 , ISBN 0-533-23392-0 

AMSCO Sch, paper, (SBN 0-87720-750-X 

The father's death shatters the world of the close-knit Follet family. As the point 
of view shifts, the reader see the tragedy through the eyes of the loving mother, 
relatives, young Catherine, and most often through the troubled mind of 
six-year-old Rufus. 



DEATH IN VENICE 

World Mann, Thomas 

Novel Buccaneer Bks, 1983, ISBN 0-89966-455-5 

Randon-J, 1970, paper, ISBN 0-394-30999-5, T99 

The hero is a successful author who is proud of the self-discipline with which he has 
ordered his life and work. However, on a trip to Venice he becomes aware of 
mysterious decadent potentialities in himself. He finally succumbs to a consuming 
love for a frail Polish boy. Though there is a dangsr of a cholera epidemic in 
Venice, he cannot leave and eventually dies of the disease. 



THE DEATH OF JIM LONEY 

Native American Welch, James 

Novel Penguin, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-14-010291-4 

A contemporary story of a young "half-breed" man in Montana and his battles with 
alcohol and suicide. 



ERLC 



45 

-39- 



Amen can 
Young Adul t 



Ameri can 
Novel 



North 
Fol kl ore 



American 
Young Adult 



OEENi 

Blume, Judy 

Bradbury Pr, 1973, ISBN 0-02-711020-6 
Dell, 1974, paper, ISBN n-440-93259-9 

Deenie Fenner is almost thirteen, pretty, and really doesn't want to be a model 
even though her mother is set on it. Deenie would rather be with her airlTriend. 
tZlnV°°''''Vfr ^^P*^'"' °^ *° another friend play he d urn 
aSj^sUo^^"d7Lacr '""^"^^ *° ''''' now 

DEERSLAYEa, THE 

Cooper, James Fenimore 

Buccaneer Bks, 1984, ISBN 0-89966-490-3 

Penguin, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-14-039061-8 

Tales, introduces 

the youthful Natty Bumpo and his adventures, conflicts, and romance as he enters 
mannood. He travels through the frontier of New York stateTring the 1740's w^^^ 
a frontier scout, an Indian friend and the Hutter family. ^ the 1740 s with 

DENA'INA SUK DU'A: TANAINA STORIES 
Tenenbaum, Joan 

Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1984, ISBN 0-933769-15-6 

This book contains 24 examples of the Tanalna art of storytelling: stories told at 
any time of the year, raven stories, mountain stories, and war stt es The Tanaina 
people regard these slories as descriptions of the wa^ the world was and events 
before the world came to be like it is today. English and Tanaina ^re on facTng 

DICEY';, SONG 
Voight, Cynthia 

Macmillan, 1982, ISBN 0-689-30944-9 

^^^nT °l^^u-!i^'^^,^'y continues "Homecoming", about three 

abandoned children's journey from Connecticut to Maryland. In th s s?orv the voun. 
heroine faces many problems in the process of growing up ^ ^ ^ 



World 
Poetry 



DIVINE COMEDY, THE 

Alighieri, Dante 

Norton, ISBN 0-393-4472-6 

Regnery Gateway, paper, ISBN 0-89526-665-2 

Completed in 1321 , this epic poem describes the poet's visionary spiritual iournev 
through Hell. Purgatory and Paradise. The characters Dante on hi Cnev 
are largely drawn from ancient Roman history and from contemporary Ital an ^ 



ERIC 



46 

-40- 



DON FLOWS HOME TO THE SEA, THE 

Sholokhov, Mikhail 
Knopf, 1941 

Random, 1965, paper, ISBN 0-394-70331-6 



This book covers the period after the Revolution of 1917 to the end of the civil war 
in 1921 and traces the fortunes of a group of Cossacks as they alternately fight with 
the Red and the White Russians. It is a tale of misfortunes combined with the 
Cossacks* earthy humor, intense individualism, love of the land, and pride. 



DON QUIXOTE 

World Cervantes Saavedra, Miguel de 

Novel Farrar, Straus & Giroux, 1986. ISBN 0-374-14232-7 

Farrar, Straus & Giroux, paper, ISBN 0-374-51943-9 

This classic tale of lost chivalry is about a romantic warrior, his trusting servant 
and their adventures. 



DOOR INTO SUMMER 

American Heinlein, Robert 

Science Fiction Doubleday, 1957 

Ballantine Bks, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-345-33012-9 

An inventor is projected some 30 years into the future by means of a "cold sleep". 
He sees the results of human error and takes the opportunity to go back and correct 
them. His efforts include a inventory of scientific gadgets-to-be. 



DR. STRANGELOVE 

British Gsorge, Peter 

Science Fiction (no ISBN listed) 

"How I learned to stop worrying and love the bomb" — a satiric chronicle of the end 
of the world by nuclear destruction. 



DR. ZHIVAGO 

World Pasternak, Boris 

Novel Pantheon Bks, 1958, ISBN 0-394-42223-6 

Ballantine Books, paper, 0-345-34100-7 



The broad epic picture of Russia is developed as the background to the account of 
the life of Dr. Zhivago, a Russian Intellectual, doctor, and poet during the first 
three decades of the 20th century. Zhivago's family life, his creative ecstasies, and 
love for another man's wife are the center of the story. His decline and death is 
the result of the dehumanizalion of the post-revolution years. 



DRACULA 
British Stoker, Bram 

Novel Unicorn Pub, 1985, ISBN 0-88101-020-0 

Random, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-317-66897-8 




Count Dracula's nasty practice of drinking the blood of his victims is finally ended 
by a group of stalwart Englishmen who hunt him throughout dreary castles and open 
graves. 

^4 



American 
Fantasy 



DRAGONDRAMS 

McCaffrey, Anne 

Bantam, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-553-25855-9 



American 
Fantasy 



Ameri can 
Fantasy 



Ameri can 
Fantasy 



Ameri can 
Science Fiction 



Piemur becomes an apprentice to the great master of drums and soon knows the 
basics of reading and sending drum messages. In addition Piemur must do political 
work and undertakes many dangerous and unusual missions. They include stealing 
fire-lizard s eggs and miner's valuable gems. In the process he must also escape 
from the pursuit of dragon-riders. 

DRAGONSINGER 

McCaffrey, Anne 

Bantam Books, paper, ISBN 0-553-23459-5 

Another of the stories that take place on the plant of Pern which was settled by 
human colonists who have long been out of contact with earth. Riders of winged 
dragons protect Pern from deadly Threads which fall periodically from the Red 
Star. Young women and girls star in these books as often as men. 

DRAGONSONG 

McCaffrey, Anne 

Macmillan, 1976, ISBN 0-689-30507-9 
Bantam, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-553-23460-9 

i^mP T?-® °" ^^'■y careful during Threadfall, when the spores that could 

kill all living things, fell like rain. Huge dragons were developed to fight the ' 
spores. Menolly also has other problems. She loves music and wants to be ^HarDer 
but her father won't allow it. Menolly discovers new directions for her lii:. such as 
fire-lizards and the fact that she can sing. 

DRAGONWRITERS OF PERN 

McCaffrey, Anne 
(no ISBN listed) 

Another in the series of stories set on the planet of Pern. (See above descriptio.ns.) 
DUNE 

Herbert, Frank 

Putnam, 1984, ISBN 0-399-12896-4 

Ace Books, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-441-17266-0 

In the first novel in Herbert's ongoing epic series, young Paul Atreides, trained from 
birth in desert discipline, becomes the prophet Maud'Dib, who leads the savaqe 
Fremen of Dune ag?,inst the Empire. 



ERIC 



48 

-42- 



DURANGO STREET 

American Bonham, Frank 

Young Adult Dutton, 1967, ISBN 0-525-28950-X 

Dell, 1972, paper, ISBN 0-440-29183-X 

There is always trouble in the run-down Los Angeles neighborhood where Rufus 
Jones, a Black teenager, lives. To protect himself from one gang, he joins another 
but is thrown out of school for fighting. Rufus expects trouble from the rival gang 
when the sponsor of his gang helps the members organize a neighborhood dance. 
The trouble almost occurs. 



World 
Novel 



DWARF, THE 

Lagerkvist, Per 

Hill and Wang, 1958, paper, 0-8090-1303-7 



A well known book by one of Sweden's foremost novelists. 



E 



EAGLE HAN HUCHMNK- HODOK: STORIES IN EAGLE HAN HUCH'INN 

North Ridle> Ruth 

Folklore Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1983, ISBN 0-933769-14-8 

Personal accounts of local life and fictional children's stories are included in this 
first book ever published in Han Athabaskan. The introduction addresses the Han 
writing system and provides pronunciation examples. English translations are 
provided. 



EARTH ABIDES 

American Stewart, George R. 

Science Fiction Archive Press, 1974, ISBN 0-910720-00-2 

A young geologist emerges from the California mountains to find that a plague has 
wiped out most of the world's population. Ish Williams joins with half a dozen other 
survivors, and, as children are born, the community assumes a pattern. Ish, as the 
only highly educated member of the group, worries about handing on civilization. In 
his old age, Ish knows his people will survive through the primitive but satisfying 
culture they have evolved with his help. 



ELFSTONES OF SHANNARA 

American Brooks, Terry 

Fantasy Ballantine, 1983, ISBN 0-345-30253-2 

Ballantine, paper, ISBN 0-345-28554-9 

Two strong, believable women characters are substantial, important figures in this 
book where hordes of demons threaten the Elves. When the Ellcrys Tree dies, the 
demons will be released for the final Dattle. Even with the help of the last Druid, 
the Elves are hopelessly outnumbered. It is up to Will Ohmsford and Amberle to 
carry an Ellcrys seed to the blood fire so a new Ellcrys will result undi banish the 
9^- demons. 



ERIC 



Ari_ M ^ 



British 
Novel 



EMMA 

Austen, Jane 

Buccaneer Books, ISBN 0-89966-2420 
Longman, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-582-33153-6 

Emma Is arpretty girl of sterling character and more will than she can properly 
manage. Thinking she knows what is best for everyone, she is prey to many 
decepNons. She is imposed upon and imposes upon herself. It takes a while before 
Emma sees things as they are and recognizes where her own happiness lies The 
book IS rich in humor, vivid characterization, and a delight of human absurdities 



American 
Non-fiction 



American 
Essay 



North 
Poetry 



American 
Novel 



ERiC 

Lund, Doris 

Harper-Row, ISBN 0-397-01 046-X 
Dell, 1979, paper, ISBN 0-440-94586-0 

In a tribute to her son, Lund write poignantly of Eric's battle with leukemia which 
eventually ended with the teenager's death. 

ESSAYS OF RALPH WALDO EMERSON 
Emerson, Ralph Waldo 

Harvard Univ. Press, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-674-26720-6 

A collection of writings by one of America's most influential authors and thinkers. 
Emerson, 1803-1882, along with others made Concord, Mass. the center of 
Transcendentalism, the philosophy that emphasizes individualism, self-relience. and 
rejection of traditional authority. 

ESKIMO POEMS FROM CANADA 

Lowenstein, Tom 

University of Pittsburgh Press, 1973 
(no ISBN listed) 

Unadorned translations of the poems of people who live intimately with the 
environment. The poems are of basic situtations such as hunting, fishing, dancinq. 
loneliness, lovemaking, childbirth. ^ 

ETHAN FROME 

Wharton, Edith 

Macmillan, ISBN 0-02-426690-6 
Scribner, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-684-18906-2 

Ethan tries to escape the stultifying world of Starkfield, Mass., but is prevented 
from doing so by his obligations first to his parents, then to his hypochondriac wife, 
and t many by an accident which injures him and a young cousin Mattie to whom he 
IS attracted. In an ironic twist, Mattie becomes the querulous invalid and Ethan's 
wife cares for both Mattie and Ethan. 



ERIC 



50 

-44- 



Native American 
Novel 



EYES OF DARKNESS 

Highwater, Jamake 

Lathrop, Lee and Shepard, ISBN 0-688-41993-3 



Yesa is a Santee Souix v\^ho at age 16 is taken to live among whites, and he 
eventually becomes a doctor. Later he returns to live among his people. The 
massacre at Wounded Knee couses him great concern, and he struggles with the 
earlier life and what he knows must be in the future. 



EYES OF THE AMARYLLIS 

American Babbitt, Natalie 

Young Adult Farrar, Straus, Giroux, paper, ISBN 0 M2238-9 

Jenny helps her grandmother search for some trace of her husband who has drowned 
at sea in this haunting sea story. 



F 



FAHRENHEIT 451 

American Bradbury, Ray 

Science Fiction Simon & Schuster, 1967, ISBN 0-671-23977-5 
Ballantine, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-345-34296-8 

Books are for burning in this future society in which thinking and reading are crimes. 



FANTASTIC VOYAGE 

American Asimov, Isaac 

Science Fiction Houghton Mifflin, 1966, ISBN 0-395-07352-9 

Bantam Books, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-553-27151-2 

Five people are sent on a rescue mi&sion in a miniaturized submarine moving 
through a man's blood vessels to reach and break up a blood clot in his brain. 
Unfortunately the miniaturization only lasts 60 minutes so they must complete their 
work in that time before they return to normal size. 



FAR FROM THE MADDING CROWD 

British Hardy, Thomas 

Novel Longman, 1988, paper, U 3N 0-582-00263-X 

The theme contrasts a patient, generous love with unscrupulous passion. Bathsheba 
Everdene is courted by three men~a young farmer, a neighbor farmer, and a 
handsome young adventurer. Through a series of incidents Bathsheba marries each 
of the three. 



ERIC 



51 

-45- 



World 
Novel 



Asian 
Novel 



Ameri can 
Science Fiction 



World 
Novel 



British 
Fantasy 



FAREWELL TO ARMS, A 

Hemingway, Ernest 

Scribner, 1929, ISBN 0-684-15562-1 

Macmillan, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-02-051900-1 

A love affair is conducted against the background of the war in Italy. The book 
conveys a sense of the impermanence of the best human feelings, the force of the 
mountains and plains, and the vast scope of war. 

FAREWLL TO MANZANAR 

Houston, Jeanne W. 
Houghton Mifflin, 1973 

Bantam Books, 1974, paper, ISBN 0-553-26216-5 

The psychological impact of being Japanese in California during World War li is the 
subject of this book. The author tells of the three years she and her family spent at 
Manzanar, a Japanese internment camp. 

FARTHEST SHORE, THE 
LeGuin, Ursula 

Bantam, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-553-20430-0 

This is the third book in the Earthsea Trilogy of high fantasy. The springs of 

^""^ P'''"'^® °^ En'ad. and Ged, the Archmage of 

Roke set out to meet unknown dangers. On the journey they carry all the hopes of 
Earthsea, now moving into doom or into a new age. ' 

FATHERS AND SONS 

Turgenev, Ivan 

Amereon Ltd, ISBN 0-88411-444-9 
Bantam, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-553-21259-1 

This book portrays the conflicts between the older aristocratic generation and the 
new democrajdtic intelligentia in Pussia during the 1860's. 

FELLOWSHIP OF THE RING, THE 
Tolkien, J.R.R. 

Houghton, 1988, ISBN 0-395-48931-8 
Ballantine, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-345-33970-3 

Up ml'- ^^-^ the Lord of the Rings Trilogy. Frodo, a young hobbit, has inherited 
the magic ring. In his book, Frodo makes a valiant journey to prevent the ring from 
tailing into the hands of the powers of darkness. Elves, dwarfs, hobbits, men and 
various evil beings populate an allegorical tale that shows how power corrupts 



World 
Novel 



ERIC 



FIXER, THE 
Malamud, Bernard 

Pocket Books, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-671-46075-7 

Based on an incident that took place in Czarist Russia, this tragic portrayal of 

n? Jfh-M ^^T-*^"^- °^ ^ ^^^'^"^ "1^" falsely accused of the ritual murder 

or a child and is unjustly sent to a Russian prison. 



-46- 



American 
Drama 



Horth 

Non-fiction 



FLOWERS FOR ALGERNON 

Keyes, Daniel 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1959, ISBN 0-15-131510-8 
Bantam, 1970, paper, ISBN 0-553-25565-3 

Mentally retarded Charlie tells in his own words how experimental brain surgery 
gives him superior intelligence—and then how the experiment begins to fail. 

FLYING NORTH, THE 

Potter, Jean 
Macmillan Co., 1947 

Comstock Editions, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-891 74-01 8-X 

This is about the bush pilots of Alaska and includes chapters on nine of the most 
well known ^iviation pionsers including Noel and Sig Wien, Bob Reeve, and Ben 
Eielson. This book has been called "a great saga of pioneer aviation." 



Asian 
Folklore 



FOLKTALES OF CHINA 

Eberhard, Wolfram 

Univ. of Chicago Press, 1965, paper, ISBN 0-226-18193-6 

A collection of 79 Chinese short stories of folklore. Historical notes about each 
story are included, and there is an index to th'^ stories and subjects. The stories are 
grouped into the following catagories: Luck id Good Fortune, Tales of Love, The 
Origin of Human, Animal and Plant Characteristics, Supernatural Marriages, . 
Persons with Magic Powers, Kindness Rewarded and Evil Punished and Help from 
Spirits and Dieties. 



Native American 
Novel 



FOOLS CROW 

Welch, James 

Viking, 1986, ISBN 0-670-81121-1 
Penguin, 1987, paper, 0-14-008937-3 



An 18-year-old Blackfoot in 19th Century Montana, tries to help his people 
understand the significance of the white "seizers" who threaten the traditional 



Indian way of life 



American 
Novel 



FOR WHOM THE BELL TOLLS 
Hemmingway, Ernest 
Scribner, 1983, ISBN 0-684-10239-0 
Macmillan, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-02-051850-1 

Robert Jordan is an American in the Loyalist ranks during the Spanish Civil War. 
This war story covers four tension-filled days in his life. Jorodn has blown up a 
bridge, but is injured when his horse falls, he must meet advancing enemy troops by 
himself. Another dimension of the story centers on Jordan^s love for Maria. 



ERLC 



-47- 



53 



American 
Science Fiction 



British 

Science Fiction 



American 
Novel 



American 
Non-fiction 



FOUNDATION 

Asimov, Isaac 
Doubleday, 1952 

Ballantine, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-345-33627-5 

The fall of the Galactic Empire impels a group of psychohistorians to establish a 
hidden foundation for the development of a new society. 

FRANKENSTEIN 

Shelley, K^ary 

Raintree Pubs, 1981, ISBN 0-81 72-1 674-X 
Bar .-on, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-8120-4076-7 

of mo'f '^•^?''^"m^'']' the secret of creating life and fashions a creature out 

of materials collected from butchers and dissection labs. When the creature later 
turns into a monster, Victor must spfend his final days in pursuit. 

FRANNY & ZOOEY 
Salinger, J.D. 

Little, Brown, 1961, ISBN 0-316-76954-1 
Bantam Books, 1969, paper, ISBN 0-553-20348-7 

Franny Glass, 20 years old, is experiencing desper;^te dissatisfaction with her life 
and seems to be looking for help via a religious awakening. Zooey, her brother, 

I'l^VZrrl?^' T °- ^^l d?f?'-essmn. An older brother Is also an important part of 
t«ie interrelationships in the Glass family. - 

FUTURE SHOCK 
Toffler, Alvin 

Rando.Ti House, 1970, ISBN 0-394-42586-3 
Bantam Books, 1971, paper, ISBN 0-553-24649-6 

I "?M^l^?''l^i"^T''if?'''^"*?*'°" f"*"""^ ^'■'■'v^s too quickly, and it creates 

a future shock." Toffler points out the the nature of the problem of rapidly 
advancing technology and the resulting need for quick adaptation. He also points 
out several strategies for survival. 



G 



American 
Novel 



ERIC 



A NEW ENGLAND GIRL'S JOURNAL, 1830-32 



A GATHERING OF DAYS 
Blos, Jane 
Macmillan, ■'979, ISBN 0-684-16340-3 
Greater Gold, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-9611842-7-2 

Fourteen-year-old Catherine records the events of her life on a small New 
Hampshire farm. Written in the idiorr , che early 19th century, events recalled 
include her father's remarriage, the o.^th of a close friend, her small efforts to 
help a fugitive slave, making a quilt, and the 4th of July celebration. 



-48 



GERMINAL 

World Zola, Emile 

Novel New American Lib, 1970, paper, ISBN 0-451-51975-2, CE1809 

This is a study of life in the mines and Etienne Lanier who is forced to work m the 
mines. Low wages and fines result in a strike, and Lanier is one of the leaders. 
Although he counsels moderation, hunger drives the miners to force. Several are 
killed, Lanier is deported, and the miners return to their old slavery. 



GILGAMESH THE KING 

World Gardner, John and Maier, John 

Folklore Arbor House, 1984 

Random, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-394-74089-0 

Gilgamesh is the Sumerian god-king who sought eternal life and found instead the 
bitter wisdom of mortality. This is fantasy, myth, and ancient history woven 
together with the deep human truths that lie beneath the legend. 



GIRL MEETS BOY 

American Colman, Hi la 

Young Adult (no ISBN listed) 

A teenage feminist and her macho boyfriend are the center of this lightweight but 
entertaining love story. 



Black 
Novel 



GO TELL !T ON THE MOUNTAIN 

Baldwin, James 
Doubleday, 1953 

Dell, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-440-33007-6 

Fourteen-year-old John struggles against the sins of his forefathers and the 
sensuous evils of riarlem to attain a religious conversion that reflects man's battle 
for inner peace. 



GIRL WHO MARRIED THE BEAR, THE 

North McClellan, Catherine 

Folklore (no ISBN listed) 

. This detailed analysis of about a dozen versions of a Tlingit story from the 
Yukow I. rritory. Biographies of the story tellers are also included. 



GOING AFTER CACCIATO 

American O'Brien, Tim 

Novel Dell, 1979 

Del!, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-440-32966-3 

Private Cacciato takes off from the Vietnam war to walk to Paris, and his company 
follows him in a real/surreal journey. 



EKLC 



GONE WITH THE WIND 

Mitchell, Margaret 
Mcmillan, 1936 

Avcn Books, 1973, paper, ISBN 0-380-00109-8 

This was the Pulitzer Prize winner in 1937, Scarlett O'Hara is the embodiment of 
the inaomitable spirit of the South, Around her loves and marriage to Rhett Butler, 
the dashing hero, surges the Civil War, Reconstruction, and the collapse of the old ' 
social order. While Scarlett succeeds in restoring the old family estate she 
sacrifices everything else for money and security. 



GOOD EARTH, THE 

Buck, Pearl S. 

Buccaneer Bks, 1981, ISBN 0-89966-299-4 

Oxford Univ. Press, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-1 9-581 035-X 

This 1932 Pulitzer Prize winner is set in pre-revolutionary China and describes the 
the rise of a Chinese peasant from poverty to rich landowner. The vigor, fortitude 
persistence and enduring love of the soil by the man and his wife are emphasized ' 
throughout the book which won high acclaim for its authentic picture of Chinese 
life. 



GRANDFATHER OF UNALAKLEET 

Brown, Emily Ivanoff 

Eskimo, Indian, Aleut Printing Co., Frbks, 1974 
(no ISBN listed) 

The history of the people of Unalakleet and the nearby area was compiled as part of 
this masters thesis by the author. It is based on oral history. 



GRAPES OF WRATH 

Steinbeck, John 

Viking, 1939, ISBN 0-670-34791-4 
Penguin, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-14-015508-2 

Moving from the desolation of the Dust Bowl in the 1930's, the Joad family soor 
finds their desperate struggle for survival as California migrant work'^rs replaci 
their hope for a better life. 



GREAT EXPECTATIONS 

Dickens, Charles 

Buccaneer Books, 1986, ISBN 0-89966-518-7 
Longman, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-582-330882 

Pip, the hero, after being raised by his sister is told he will be raised by a gentleman 
because an unknown person has provided money for his education and expects to 
make Pip his heir. The patron is a convict who Pip helped, Wnen the convict, who 
struck it rich, returns to England he is arrested and his money is confiscated. ' Pip's 
love IS another "great expectation" but she marries another. 



^6 

-50- 



GREAT QATSBY 
American Fitzeragid, F. Scott 

Novel Scribner, 1981 , ISBN 0-684-16498-1 

Barron, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-8120-3415-5 

Gatsby pursues Daisy through the glittering high life of the Roaring Twenties. The 
book provides a sharp and antagonistic portrayal of wealthy society in America with 
its false glamour and cultural barrenness. 



GREEN MANSIONS 

World Hudson, William H. 

Novel Buccaneer Books, 1982, ISBN 0-89966-374-5 

.AMSCO School Pubns, 1970, paper, ISBN 0-87720-726-7 

The book is based on the author's travels in South America and centers on a young 
man making his way over the Andes. He becomes invovled with a tribe of savage 
Indians. He also discovers and becomes enamored with a being part woman, part 
':ird. While trying to unravel her mystery he passes through great danger. 



GRENDEL 

British Gardner, John 

Folklore Knopf , 1971 , ISBN 0-394-47143-1 

Random, paper, ISBN O-394-74056-4 

In a unique interpretation of the Beowulf legend, the monster Grendel relates his 
struggle to understand the ugliness in himseif and humanity in the brutal world of 
14th century Denmark. 



GULAu ARCHIPELAGO 

World Slozhenitzyn, Alexander 

Non-fiction Harper Row, 1985, ISBN 0-06-015474-8 

These four volumes describe what /as like for the millions of political prisoners 
who became slave laborers in the network of penal institutions across Stalin^s 
Russia. 



GULLIVER'S TRAVELS 
British Swift, Jonathon 

Novel Oxford Univ. Press, 1977, ISBN 0-19-519978-2 

Da Capo, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-306-80339-9 



Ship's physician, Lemuel Gulliver, makes voyages to four different 
wonder-countries: a land of tiny people and giants, a flying island of wise men, and 
to a Utopia ruled by horses where humans are despised. Swift satirizes 
contemporary manners, morals, art and politics in this book first published in 1726. 



GUNS OF NAVARONE 
British MacLean, Alistair 

Novel (no ISBN listed) 

With the lives of 1,200 British soliders dependent upon their success, Captain 
Mallory and a small group of commandos must destroy the German-held batteries in 
the impregnable rock fortress of Navarone. 

ERJC K7 



H 



American 
Young Adu1 t 



Anieri can 
Novel 



North 
Folklore 



Bri ti sh 
Novel 



HAUNTED 

St George, Judith 

Bantam, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-553-26047-2 

Alex is caught in a battle between two ghosts, and one of them wants to kill him. 

HEART IS A LONELY HUNTER, THE 

McCullers, Carson 

Houghton, 1940, ISBN 0-3S5-07978-0 
Bantam, 1970, paper, ISBN 0-553-25481-2 

f^fr n?nn"irn^.'^°^^?'"^!L''^''°^ dreams and yearnings of 

tour people in a small southern town. 

HAA SHUKA: OUR ANCESTORS: TLINGIT PROSE NARRATIVES 

Dauenhauer, Richard and Nora Marks 

Sealaska Heritage Foundation, 1987, ISBN 0-295-9649-4 

University of Washington Press. 1987, paper, ISBN 0-295-96495-2 

JhoT ^ii^^'l'^'f" ^" P^''* °^ the natural anC social context of 

the people who live in the Southeast Alaska rain forest. There are fourteen 
narratives, a long explanatory introduction about the Tlingit people, and 
references. Tlingit and English versions of the text are on facing pages. 

HEART OF DARKNESS 

Conrad, Joseph 

Bent ley, 1982, ISBN 0-8376-0458-3 
Morton, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-393-95*^52-4 

JJ^Hinn inff?*?'" ^ ^^^^"^u °" "^"^ ^is experiences visiting 

trading posts of a company that dealt in ivory. The white agents are greedy and 
degenerative while the natives are in virtual slavery. Mr. Kurtz has reveled fn his 
power, but a tropical illness has taken its toll before he dies on boa d Ma fow' s 



World 
Novel 



HIROSHIMA 

Horsey. John 

Knopf. 1985. ISBN 0-394-54844-2 
Bantam. 1986. paper. ISBN 0-553-26058-8 

l!!p^^i^^^I^^^T^'■J''^" ^''JL ^^'^^^ ^^"^^ *° Hiroshima. Japan to report on 
the first ^ity to be destroyed by an atomic bomb. Using the experiences of six 
victim.', of the first atomic bomb, Hersey created a classic work. In this updated 
years since *° ^"PP""^^ *° ^he six people in 



ERIC 



-52- 58 



HITCHIKER'S GUIDE TO THE GALAZY 
American Adams, Douglas 

Science Fiction Crown, 1980, ISBN 0-517-59209-9 

Pocket Books, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-671-52721-5 

To make way for an intergalactic highway, the worici is destroyed. Afterwards, 
Arthur Dent is off on some absurd travels when he finds himself on a Vogon 
spaceship and discovers his friend Ford Prefect is really an alien. Since he has no 
choice, Arthur shares Ford's travels to many planets. 



HITLER: A PORTRAIT OF A TYRANT 
World Marvin, Albert 

Biography Viking, 1987, ISBN 0-670-81546-2 

A comprehensive book that is as much a history of Nazi Germany as a biography of 
Adolf Hitler. Hitler's World War I experiences as a messenger between the 
trenches—for which he eagerly voh'^*eered, surviving when almost nobody else 
did—are vividly portrayed. Der Fuhrer's rise to power is presented within the 
historical context of European power struggles. The brutal effects of German 
impfc lalism are conveyed through such horrors as the Holocaust and the siege of 
Leninu,rad. 



HOBBIT, THE 

British Tolkien, J.R.R. 

Science Fiction Houghton Mifflin, 1984, ISBN 0-395-36290-3 

Houghton Mifflin, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-395-28265-9 

Bilbo Baggins is the hobbitt who lives in a land of dwarfs, elves, goblins, dragons, 
and humans. His adventures begin upon joining a band of dv/arfs who are seeking to 
recover a stolen treasure that is hidden in the depths of mountain. The book is full 
of mythology and magic. 



HOLLOW HILLS, THE 
British Stewart, Mary 

Fantasy Morrow, 1973 

Fawcett, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-449-20645-9 

This is the continuation of Merlin's story when .Arthur is born but is sent into hiding 
for his own safety. Merlin, although doubting his powers, becomes reassured and 
rejoins Arthur. The focus is on the concealment and final acknowledgement of 
Arthur and the search of Merlin for the sword. Lesser conflicts involve Christians 
and pagans. 



HOME BEFORE DARK 
American Bridgers, Sue Ellen 

Young Adult Knopf, LC 76-8661 

Bantam, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-553-26432-X 

After spending most of ner life traveling in an old station wagon, Stella Willis loves 
being in one place even if it is an old sharecropper's cabin. She finds, however, 
there is more to life than just finding a place to live when she has to handle a first 
love, a tragic death, and a friendship. 



ERLC 



-53- 



S9 



HOMECOMING 

American Voight, Cynthia 

Young Adult Macmillan, 1981. ISBN 0-689-30833-7 

Fawcett, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-449-70254-5 

Four children are left in a parked car and must make their own way. The oldest at 
Pn.r'.T'H" ?"'L^t^° 9oes to the police the children will be ' 

separated. So with less than $10, the children begin a long trip to reach a great 
aunt m Connecticut. But they discover they must make ! second journey bef o e 
having a true homecoming. 

HOMESICK, MY OWN STORY 

World Fritz, Jean 

Biography Putnam Publishing Group, 1982, ISBN 0-399-20933-6 

Dell, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-440-43683-4 

"cAln'^Hantow^ ''''' '^"'"^ '^'^ ^^'Se of 

HOUSE MADE OF DAWN 

Native American Momady, Scott 

Novel Harper & Row, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-06-080421-1 , P421 

KL^.^'lnHifn wh^^ ^ post-World War II account of a 

Kiowa Indian who cannot come to grips with the reservation life following his 
service as a G.I. He commits a senseless murder and Is given ^ light sentlnce on 
the condition that he re-settle in Los Angeles under an Indian rehTbilita im 

ffrrptnrn. fn?K"*'""'' tod^ink heavily to cove - up for a life that has no meaning. 
He returns to the reservation with hopes of finaing himself. 



Ameri can 
Novel 



HOUSE OF THE SEVEN GABLES 

Hawthorne, Nathaniel 

Buccaneer Books, 1982, ISBN 0-89966-379-6 
Penguin, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-14-039005-7 

This book follows the fortunes of a decayed New England family of four. One who 
was unjustly impr';soned has ust been released. The judge who was nf luent"al Tn 

asvZS,"Aiti:'''H'^ *° ''i' t T ^^°"g-doing tries to^ave Mm commit Ld io an 
asylum Although poor, the brother and sister work against the judge's efforts 
When the judge suddenly dies, the two are free and get his weafth 



World 
Novel 



HOUSE ON PRAGUE STREET, THE 

Demetz, Hanna 
St. Martin's, 1980 
(no ISBN listed) 



nf olVh"?^".*'"^^"''^ sentiment forms the backdrop of a strongly autobiographical 
novel that balances pleasant recollections of a girl's protected gVowing up n 
^dd wi°^^^ ^'^^^"^^t^"^^^ °^ '^er first love and the nigStmare of 



ERIC 



60 

-54- 



HOW GREEN WAS MY VALLEY 
Llewellyn, Richard 

Amereon Ltd, 1983, ISBN 0-8841 1''936-X 
Dell, 1967, paper, ISBN 0-440-33923-5 

The youngest member of a Welsh coal mining family tells the story of his changing 
country. First the valley was prosperous and the people law abiding, but gradually 
it changed to desolation with slag from the mines covering the mountain slopes. 
Then hard times, strikes, and layoffs bring suffering and the destruction of the 
earlier life. 



HOW RAVEN BECAME BLACK AND GAVE WATER TO THE WORLD 
Partnow, Patricia and Lowenstein, Tom 
(no ISBN listed) 

This story was originally published by the Alaska State Museum as one of their 
education kits. 



HOW RAVEN STOLE THE LIGHT 
Lowenstein, Tom 

Alaska Multimedia Education Program, Alaska State Museum, Juneau 
(no ISBN listed) 

This is the script for a radio play about this important Tlingit charactei . 



HUNCHBACK OF NOTRE DAME 
Hugo, Victor 

Buccaneer Books, 1981, ISBN 0-89966-382-6 
Raintree Pubs, ->983, paper, ISBN 0-8172-2010-0 

Quasimodo, the hunchback bell ringer of Notre Dame; Esmeralda, a beautiful gypsy; 
and Frollo, the evil archdeacon of Notre Dame; are the main characters in this 
historical romance set in fifteenth-century France. Grotesque because of his 
extreme physical ugliness, Quasimodo faces betrey^! from Frollo but remembers a 
kindness once paid him by Esmeralda. As Frollo gives in to temptation, it falls to 
Quasimodo to protect Esmeralda from Frolic's evil. 



I AM THE CHEESE 
Cormier, Robert 

Pantheon, 1977, ISBN 0-394-83462-3 
Dell, 1978, paper, ISBN 0-440-94060-5 

Adam Farmer is a teenager on an arduous journey. Questions arise: What is he 
looking for? Why does he have two birth certificates? Why is there a sudden move 
to a new town? And what about the strange Mr. Gray who keeps reappearing? An 
innocent young victim tells a horrifying tale of government corruption, espionage, 
and counter-espionage. Suspense build throughout the book. 




I HEARD THE OWL CALL MY NAME 
World Craven, Margaret 

Young Adult Dell, 1980, paper,.|SBN 0-440-34369-0 

His Bishop assigns Mark Brian to a British Columbia outpost with the KwakiutI 
Indians when he learns Mark is dying. Through his experiences with the fndians the 
one's'exis?en^r5SH*° h T^'^^^l"^'"^ '^^^P*^"'^ °f death as alrmarpa^ 
without ear """"^ ^'^ "^^^^ faces death 



Black 
Biography 



Ameri can 
Novel 



I KNOW WHY THE CAGED BIRDS SING 

Angelou, Maya 

Random, 1970, ISBN 0-394-42986-9 
Bantam, 1971, paper, ISBN 0-553-25615-7 

Candid and poetic the first of Angelou's autobiographical accounts describes her 
growing up Black in the South, her slow recovery as a child from an ep sode of 

Sr'etc^Va:^^^^^^^ '^^'^ -'^^'-^'P^ ^^'P'"^ ^-totr°Ja 

I NEVER PROMISED YOU A ROSE GARDEN 

Green, Hanna 
Harper, 1964 

NAL/Signet, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-451-13747-7, AE3136 

fhP^Jn nY;°''' '^^'f P'?''^"'^^ g'/l struggles to leave her private fantr.sy world with 
ci;al?^^g°es onSC P^y^^^'^t^'^t who helps her to accept the harsh but healthy 



I, ROSOT 
American Asimov, Isaac 

Short stories Fawcett, 1978 

Ballantine, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-345-33139-7 

Pni'lprSn nf' machine-like, is the central character in this 



I WEAR THE MORNING SUN 

Native American Highway, Jamake 

Harper and Row Junior Books, ISBN 0-06-022356-1 



[h^s or^v of 91 tn JnH^K^ 5^"!- ^"^^"^ °'der woman. This is 

hfnnnh n • ^^'l^fuggles in boarding school where he tries to find himself 

through painting and in the process resurrects the lost magic of his Indian her age 



62 

-56- 



IF BEALE STREET COULD TALK 

Baldwin, James 

Doubleday/Dial, 1974 

Dell, paper, ISBN 0-440-34060-8 

Twenty-two-year-old Fonny, wrongly imprisoned for rape, and 19-year-olci Tish, 
pregnant with his child, support each other in the struggle against injustice and 
racial oppression in Harlem. 

ICEBERG HERMIT, THE 

Roth, Arthur J. 

Four Winds Press, 1974 

Scholastic Inc, 1976, paper, ISBN 0-590-01582-6 

The story of a teenage boy's struggle for survival after being shipwrecked on an 
ireberg in 1757, and how he tames an orphan polar bear cub. 



IDIOT, THE 

Dostoyevsky, Feodor 

Bantam, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-553-21136-6 

Prince Myshkin, an epileptic who suffceri a mental disease as a child, in this novel 
is the champion of humanity. Although placed in a world of foolishness, vice and 
sordid ambition, his intellect of more than ordinary power retains the simplicity and 
clear insight of a child. The author tries to realize the perfect and noble man in 
this book. 



IDYLLS OF THE KING 

Tennyson, Alfred Lord 

Airmont, 1968, paper, ISBN 0-8049-0180-5, CL-180 

A cycle of poems about King Arthur and the Knights of the Round Table. 



ILIAD, THE 
Homer 

Raintree Pubs, 1980, ISBN 0-8172-1663-4 
Raintree Pubs, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-8172-2011-9 

This Greek epic poem details the events of the few days near the end of the Trojan 
War. It focuses on the withdrawal of Achilles from the contest and the disastrous 
effects of this act on the Greek campaign. 



IMMORTAL WIFE 
Stone, Irving 
Doublsday, 1944 

Doubleday, 1972, paper, ISBN 0-451-11172-9 

A biography in fiction form of an ambitious woman who had a hand in the making of 
history in the West. Jessie Brenton married explorer John Fremont and spent her 
life promoting her husband's career as a soldier, explorer and politician. It was a 
conflicting career of fortunes made and lost, a presidential nomination and two 
court-martials. 

^53 



American 
Novel 



Afnerican 
Novel 



IN COLD BLOOD 

Copote, Truman 

Random, 1966, ISBN 0-394-43023-9 
NAL/Signet, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-451-15446-0 

In a documentary written like fiction. Capote reconstructs the crime of a brutal 
multiple murder and the background and personalities of the victims and klKers 
including also the long trial and final execution. 

IN COUNTRY 

Masson, Bobbie Ann 

Harper & Row, 1985, ISBN 0-06-015469-1 

Harper & Row, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-06-091350-9, PL 1350 

Sam is 17. She lost a father she never knew in Vietnam and is living with an uncle 
who seems to be affected by Agent Orange. Now, obsessed by the war, she tries to 
sort out why and how Vietnam has altered the lives of the Vets of a small Kentucky 
town. ' 



North 

Non-fiction 



North 

Young Adult 



IN HONOR OF EYAK: THE ART OF ANNA AJELSON HARRY 
Kraus, Michael 

Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1982, ISBN 0-933769-08-3 

These are traditional stories, history, and poetic compositions by the late Anna 
Nelson Harry. This last fluent speaker of the Eyak language of southeastern Alaska 
was a gifted storyteller. Eyak history and language is provided in an introduction 
There is an English prose translation and detailed footnotes are provided. 

IN THE SHADOW OF THE BEAR 

St. George, Judith 

Putnam, 1983, ISBN 0-399-21015-6 

Seventeen-year-old Annie's week in Alaska at her father's company's camp 
stretches her mental and pyhsical limits as she must deal with hostile Russians and 
survival in the wilderness. 



INCREDIBLE JOURNEY, THE 

World Burnford, Sheila 

Young Adult Amereon Ltd, ISBN 0-884411-099-0 

Bantam, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-553-26218-1 

A young Labrador retriever, a Siamese cat, and an old bull terrier set out on a 
250-rnile journey to return to their master. The trip takes them through the 
Canadian wilderness, and along the way they encounter starvation, exposure, a 
hungry bobcat, and a bear. 



ERIC 



R4 

-58- 



s > 



American 
Drama 



INHERIT THE WIND 

Lawrence, Jerome and Lee, Robert E. 
Random House, 1955 

Bantam Books, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-553-26915-1 

This semidocumentary reenactment of the historic Scopes "monkey trial" of 1925 
tells of the Tennessee school teacher who was arrested and pu* in the dock for 
aquainting his students with Darwin's evolutionary theories. Wi^Mam Jennings Bryan 
prosecuted the case, and Clarence Darrow defended the young teacher and pleaded 
the cause of reason and freedom of thought. 



American 
Novel 



American 
Novel 



INSTANT REPLAY 

Kramer, Jerry 

Holtzman Pr, 1968, ISBN 0-941372-05-7 

New American Lib, paper, ISBN 0-317-45960-0 

The story of a championship season by the outstanding lineman on pro football's 
Green Bay Packers while Vince Lombardi was coaching. 

INTRUDER IN THE DUST 

Faulkner, William 

Random House, 1948, ISBN 0-394-43074-3 
Random, 1972, paper, ISBN 0-394-71792-9, T88 

An elderly Black is accused of murdering a white man. Sixteen-year-old Charles, 
who is white, works to save Lucas from being lynched. He is assisted by an 
aristocractic old lady and a young Black boy. This can be read as a mystery and as 
a soc»al commentary on the South. 



Black 

Novel 



INVISIBLE MAN, THE 

Ellison, Ralph 

Modern Library, 1963, ISBN 0-394-60338-9 

Random House, 1972, paper, ISBN 0-39^ 71715-5, V715 

This is the record of a Black boy's progression from youthfu? affirmation to a sense 
of total rejection. The protagonist is dismissed from a Black college for showing 
how Blacks actually live in the South. He plays a political role for Communists in 
New York until realizing he is being used. During a riot in Harlem he understands 
that to affirm his identity he would have to contend with both Blacks and Whites. 



British 
Novel 



ISLAND 

Huxley, Aldous 

Harper-Row, 1972, paper, ISBN 0-06-083101-4, P3101 

The Southeast Asia island community of Pala is modern and urbane. The exiles 
living their are dedicated to the contemplative life, and there has been no intrusion 
for 200 years. A shipwrecked English journalist stumbles upon the island. He take^j 
some mushroom medicine and '.s converted to the Pala way of life. He argues with 
Pala's rulers who want to Wer.ternize the island. This commentary on the world of 
1962 is a mirror for readers ^:o see modern problems. 



ERLC 



R5 

-59^- 



IT'S GOOD TO BE ALIVE 

American Campenalla, Roy 

Sports (no ISBN listed) 



J 



ERIC 



The courageous story of a famous, professional baseball player in his long struqqie 
to conquer paralysis An equally important aspect of the book is the historic 
documentation of race relations in professional sports. 



IT'S NOT THE END OF THE WORLD 

American Blume, Judy 

Young Advl t Bradbury Pr, 1 972, ISBN 0-02-71 1 050-8 

Dell, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-440-44158-7 



Karen, her brother, and her sister react normally when their parents get divorced 
but they try to get them back together. The children also worry about whether 
their parents still love them and worry about their welfare. A friend introduces 
them to a book about the subject. 



IVANHOE 

British Scott, Sir Walter 

''"^^^ '^'tate Mutual Books, 1985, ISBN 0-7062-4173-8 

Bantam, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-353-21326-1 



A tale of the Norman Conquest that includes Richard I, Robin Hood, fair ladies 
conspiracies, a tournament, and t:ie buring of a great castle. Wilfed, knight of ' 
Ivanhoe, is involved in both love and the events of the times 



JANE-EMILY 
American Qlapp, Patrica 

Young Adult Dell, 1971 , paper, ISBN 0-440-94185-7 

Louisa, eighteen, doesn't want to leave her boyfriend and go with her nine-year-old 
niece Jane, to Jane'j grandmother's. Louisa becomes involved in an unbelievable 

S^sofve the^matter ""^""^ ^"^"^^ ''""^ ^^"^ *° ^ ^"""^ ^^'^^ 

JANE EYRE 
British Bronte, Charlotte 

Norton, 1987, ISBN 0-393-02424-5 

Running Press, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-89471 -631 -X 

Orphaned and abused, Jane Eyre spends her early years at the Lowood School 
Later she leaves to become the governess at an estate where she finds herself in the 
midst of mysterious happenings: unexplained fires, maniacal laughter at midniqht. 
and the eerie Grace Poole. She falls in love with the owner of the estate and it is 
only on her wedding day the truth about the secrets are revealed. 



-60- 



P£ 



JONATHAN LIVINGSTON SEAGULL 
American Bach, Rich£.rd 

Young Adult Avon, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-380-01286-3 

Jonathan refuses to accept the conventional wisdom about how fellow seagulls 
should live and behave. As a result he is scorned by other segulls when he pursues 
an interest in the dynamics of flight. 



JOHN FREDSON EDWARD SAPIR HAA GOOGWANDAK 

North McGary, Peter, Katherine, and Jane, editors 

Non-fiction Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1982, ISBN 0-933769-02-4 

These stories were told in 1923 by John Fredson, born near Arctic Villag^^^ in 1891, 
to Edward Sapir. The narration in the original language faces the text in ^.iglish. 

JOSEPH ANDREWS 

British Fielding, Henry 

Novel Wesleyan Univ. Press, ISBN 0-8195-3070-0 

Penguin, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-14-043114-4 

Andrews is dismissed as a footman after resisting the advances of his employer. 
Lady Booby. He leaves London to rejoin his true love. They are set upon by 
thieves, rescued, and after many reversals are finally married. 



JUBILEE 

Bi3ck Walker, Margaret 

Novel Houghton, 1966 

Bantam, 1975, paper, ISBN 0-553-25791-9 

Plantation life in Georgia, the events of the Civil War, and the frustrations of 
Reconstruction are vividly portrayed from the Black point of view through the story 
of the slave woman Vyry. 



JUDE THE OBSCURE 

Bri ti sh Hardy, Thomas 

f4ovel Bantam, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-553-21191-9 

Set in rural England, this novel deals with two who love each other but marry 
someone else. After getting divorces they live together, but Jude's son from his 
first wife murders his two younger children then kills himself. Broken by the 
tragedy the two return to their original spouses. 



JULY'S PEOPLE 
World Gordimer, Nadine 

Novel Viking, 1982, ISBN 0-670-41048-9 

Penguin, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-14-006140-1 




This novel takes place in the near future when the South African government has 
been toppled and the cities are under seige. A white family is rescued by their 
3lack house servant who takes them to his bush village. Although the two children 
run freely with. the others in the village, the adults have more difficulty adaptmg. 



-61- 



Aneri can 
Novel 



JUNGLE, THE 

Sinclair, Upton 

Univ. III. Press, 1988, ISBN 0-252-01494-4 
Penguin, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-14-039031-6 

Life in the Chicago stockyards is portrayed with shocking and revolting vividness 
The central figure is a poor immigrant who comes to the new world to earn his 
fortune. He, his father, fiancee, and her family are cheated, abused, oppressed, 
and suffer such privations that death is a blessed release 



British 
Novel 



JUNGLE BOOK, THE 
Kipling, Rudyard 

Schocken, 1984, ISBN 0-8052-3906-5 

Oxford Univ. Press, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-19-281650-0 

Mere, In Kipling's magic prose, are Mowgle, the boy the wolves adopted; wise 
Bagheera the black panther; the wicked tiger, Shere Khan; and other familiar 
animal characters. 



K 



KAHTNAHT'ANA QENEGA: THE KENAI PEOPLE'3 LANGUAGE 
North Kalifornsky, Pete 

Folklore Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1982, ISBN 0-933679-04-0 

The author was born on the Kenai Peninsula in 1911. This is a collection of his 

writings between 1974 to 1976 and has been organized into narratives about 

Pena ma life, traditional stories, prayers and songs, literary and grammar exercises, 



KALIKAG YUGNEK 
North Bethel Regional High Sc.iool, 1974 

Non-fiction (no ISBN listed) 

This series of publications serves as a link between students at the Bethel Regional 
High School and the 5?. villages jpread over 100,000 square miles. It includes 
informaticn about many subjects including stories; interviews; clothing; medicine; 
and how-to information about such things as seal hu.ti.ng, towing boats to the open 
sea, how young men got ready for hunting, etc. 



ERIC 



KIKSADI DOG SALMON LEGEND 
North Johnson, A. P. 

Foikic-e Alaska Bilingual Ed. Center of Alaska Native Ed Board 1975 

(no ISBN listed) 

A clan story originally n.\rrated by A.P. Johnson who has been a scholar In both the 
O traditional Tlingit and westen academic sense. 



KING MUST DIE, ' ^E 
Renault, Mary 

Pantheon, 1958, ISBN 0-394-43195-2 
Random, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-394-75104-3 

Small and quick-witted, the Greek hero Theseus at 17 is already a seasoned warrior 
when he volunteers to fight with the conscripted Athenians in the deadly bull dances 
in Crete. 



KLONDIKE KATE 

Lucia, Ellis 
Hastings House, 1962 
(no ISBN listed) 

The life and legend of Kitty Rockwell, the Queen of the Yukon. 



KON TIKI 
Heyerdahl, Thor 

Rand McNally, 1985, LC50-9489 

Washington Square Press, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-671-63789-4 

To prove that Polynesia could have been settled by pre-lncas from South America, 
the author and five other men sailed across the Pacific on a replica *'ie ancient 
balsa-log raft. 



K'OKHETHDENO DE*ON: MOVING AROUND IN THE OLD DAYS 

Frank, Ellen 

Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1983, ISBN 0-933769-18-0 

The old days as well as economic conditions of the Tanana Indians and the state. 
Text is also in the original language. 



KUTCHIN TALES 

Adult Literacy Laboratory 

Adult Literacy Laboratory, UAA, 1976 

(no ISBN listed) 

Four Athabascan stories that are adapted to serve as supplemental reading material 
for Level IV of the Adult Literacy Laboratory reading program. The stories include 
"The Ice Bear," Wolverine and the Wolves", "Crow and the Big Fish," and "Crow and 
Mallard Girl." 



fi3 

-63- 



L 



LAST GREAT RACE, THE 

North Jones, Tim 

Hoa-fiction (no ISBN listed) 

This is a contemporary story of the Iditarod sled dog race from Anchorage to Nome. 

LANGUAGE OF GOLDFISH, THE 

American Oneal, Zibby 

Young Adul t Viking, 1 980, ISBN 0-670-41 785-8 

Carrie and her sister piay with the goldfish in the backyard pond and have learned 

t.5p.TK ""'l^ "''^ '^^r- '^^^^ Carrie finds herself slipping into stS m^^^^^^^ 

Ss voice? hu't T: '° ^^^'^ °f f loatlnTand 

nears voices, but she can't remember what happens Sen* ^o a nwrhiatrkt to^h r^ow 

iTus'^n""'' '""'"3 '^^"^ *^ -^"P^ '-Carrie '^mL^TT^i^ ^^e^tat" 



LAST OF THE MOHICANS, THE 

American Cooper, James Fenimore 

Novel Buccaneer Bks, 1983, ISBN 0-89966-312-5 

Penguin, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-14-039024-3 



Another of Cooper's Leather-Stocking Tales, this historical romance captures the 
excitement and adventure of the Indian wars of the 1750's Co pe?'s s?orv s f lied 
fTilnrCh^^^^^^^^^^^^^ °^ ^^"^ Bumpo a'n^d ^ fo^aTrnitan"^' 



LAST UNICORN, THE 

American Beagle, Peter 

Fantasy Viking, 1968 

Ballantine, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-345-35367-6 



a^hMnnT?^'' ""^'^^ enchanted unicorn-joined on her journev bv 

foJ^sT&ciroth^rro^ ^ butterf l^-leavestV°d;\^rc^ 



LAUGHING BOY 

Native American LaFarge, Oliver 

Novel Buccaneer Bks, 1 981 , ISBN 0-89966-367-2 

New American Bks, 1971, paper, ISBN 0-451-52111-0, CE1769 

Noted for its sensitive and accurate depiction of Navajo culture and Dsvcholoav 
th s ,s tne story of LaOing Boy and Slim Girl. She is embittered as the^^^^^ 
her American schooling and is trying to find her way back into the heart if he 
people. The book, which won the 1930 Pulitzer Pri 'e teMs of how fhey fa ed 



ERIC 



-64- 7Q 



LEARNING TREE, THE 

Black Parks, Gordon 

Novel (no ISBN listed) 



Kansas in the 1920's is this book's setting. It tells of a year in the life of a teen age 
boy. Family crises, misunderstandings, first .sexual experiences and first love are 
part of this Black boy's growing up. He also experiences being Black in a 
community where the behavior of individuals affects the town's reaction to all 
Blacks. 



LEAVING POINT 

American Vander-Els, Betty 

Non-fiction Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1987, ISBN 0-374-34376-4 

Ruth, the daughter of missionary parents, endangers her own life and that of her 
family because of her secret friendship with Chuin-Mei, a zealous young 
Communist. The strength of this novel is its authentic setting in Maoist China. 



LEFT HAND OF DARKNESS, THE 

American LeGuin, Ursula 

Science Fiction Harper, 1969 

Berkley/Ace, paper, ISBN 0-441-47812-3 



On the ice-bound planet Winter, where mutated nongendered humans can become 
either male or female during estrus, Genly Ai, emissary from the Galactic League, 
finds his unchanging maleness a personal and social psychological barrier. This book 
won both the Hugo and Nebula awards. 



LEGEND DAYS 

Native American Highwater, Jamake 

Young Adult Harper & Row Junior Books, 1984, ISBN 0-06-022304-9 

The eleven-year-old heroine has lost most of her North Plains Indian Tribe to 
smallpox. Amana then receive spirit gifts from the white owl and the grandfather 
fox. The book reveals the spiritual richness of the Indian people whose way of life 
is being threatened. It also provides a detailed look at everyday life. 



LEOPARD, THE 

Lampedusa, Guiseppe di 
Novel Pantheon Books, 1960, ISBN 0-394-43291-6 

Pantheon Books, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-394-75668-1 

This novel follows the fortunes of the Sicilian House of Salin during the movement 
for liberation and reform in Italy from 1860 to 1910. It centers on the worldly, 
cultivated Prince, father of seven, who aware of the threat to royalty, allows his 
favorite nephew to marry the beautiful daughter of a person who has recently 
gained wealth and power while his daughters cling to t: ^ past and reject their 
suitors. 



-65- 



71 



World 
Novel 



Ameri can 
Novel 



LES MISERABLES 

Hugo, Victor 

Dodd, 1984, ISBN 0-396-08431.-1 

New American Library, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-451-52157-9 

French life in the first half of the 19th century is displayed in this novel which also 
reveals the cruelty of civilization's pressures on the poor, outcast, and criminal. 
Jean Valjean becomes a criminal and a slave because of the tyranny of society. 
Others of basic goodness also suffer at the hand of a cruel society. 

LETTERS FROM THE EARTH 
Twain, Mark 

Harper Row, 1962, ISBN 0-06-14435-1 

Harper Row, 1974, paper, ISBN 0-06-080331-2, P33 

The first section of this book show Twain's inventive imagination about Biblical 
themes and.he-lunges-out in-satire at the-world he lived-in. It includes "Letters 
from the Earth", "Papers of the Adam Family", and "Letters to the Earth". The 
second section includes selections from Twains unpublished manuscripts 



LIFE AND ADVENTURES OF jOHN MUIR, THE 
North Clarke, James M. 

Biography Slawson Comm. 1979, ISBN 0-932238-01-7 

Includes several chapters on this noted naturalist's trips and work in Alaska. 



LIGHT IN AUGUST 
American Faulkner, William 

Novel Random House, 1967, ISBN 0-394-43335-1 

Barron, 1935, paper, ISBN 0-8120-3521-6 



A story about society that classifies people according to race, creed and o. iqin. 
The central character appears white but is really part Black. He has an affair with 

Uin.Tr wf • "'^Mr'^i^""',"" H^'^^"'^ °^ "^^^ ^"9'^"d background and later 
kills her. He is then killed by local residents because the woman has become a 
symbol of innocent white women attacked by Blacks. 



LIGHT IN THE FOREST, A 
American Richter, Conrad 

Novel Knopf, 1953, ISBN 0-394-43314-9 

Bantam, paper, iSBN 0-553-23402-1 



A boy, stolen at a young age and brought up by the Delaware Indians, is, at age 
fifteen, suddenly returned to the family he has orgotten and white man's 
ci« .zation. He longs to return to the Indian life, but when he does he is forced into 
a Terrible decision between helping his Indian brothers kill a group of unsuspecting 
white men or helping the white men to escape. This study in conflicting loyalties is 
a companion volume to "A Country of Strangers" by the same author 



ERIC 



72 

-66- 



LITTLE BIG MAN 

Native American Bcrger, Thomas 
Novel Amereon Ltd, ISBN 0-8488-0429-5 

Dell, 1985, paper, ISSK' 0-440-34976-1 

A 111 year-old man tells about his life as an adopted Cheyenne after he was 
captured in 1852. He was an Indian scout, gunf ighter and buffalo hunter, and the 
story is a mixture of adventure and history. 



LITTLE PRINCE, THE 

World St.-Exupery, Antoine de 

Science Fiction Harcourt, Brace, 1943 

Harcourt, Brace, Jovanovich, 1982, paper ISBN 0-15-646511-6 

This allegory of life and death features a little prince who comes to earth from 
another planet. He asks simple but significant questions about matters of 
Importance. 



LIVES OF A CELL, THE 

British Thomas, Lewis 

^ssay Viking, 1974 

Penguin, 1978, pape. , ISBN 0-14-004743-3 



A collection of short, lively essays in wh^'^h a scientist relates what he sees through 
a microscope to answer questions of how people live. 



LONG BLACK COAT, THE 

American Bennett, Jay 

Young Adult (no ISBN listed) 

Two dangerous men believe Phil Brant has a package they must have. 



LOOK HOMEWARD ANGEL 

American Wolfe, Thomas 

f^ovel Buccaneer Books, 1981, ISBN 0-89966-293-5 

Scribner, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-684-17616-5 

This autobiographical novel describes the childhood and youth of Eugene Gant. He 
becomes aware of the relationships among his family, meets the unusual people of 
his town, goes to college, has his first love affair, discovers books and ideas, and 
finally sets out on his "pilgrimage". 



World 
Novel 



LORD JIM 

Conrad, Joseph 

Buccaneer Books, ISBN 0-89966-057-6 

Oxford Univ. Press, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-19-281625-X 



A tough analysis of a man who has been branded a coward but finds himself a 
demi-god among the savages in Malay. 



ERIC 



73 

-67- 



LORD OF THE FLIES 

British Golding, William 

Amereon Ltd, ISBN 0-88411-695-6 

Putnam Pub. Group, paper, ISBN 0-399-50148-7 



Marooned on a tropical island, a group of English schoolboys tries to set uo a 



LOST HORIZON 
British Hilton, James 

Novel Buccaneer Books, 1983, ISBN 0-89966-450-4 

Pocket Books, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-671-54148-X 



Civilians are evacuated from Baskul when trouble begins in 1931 British rn.mril 
Hugh Conway and three others leave on a plane but fly inThe wronq d ect^on 

k^o^" ret^^rrt'oV;^^^^^^^^ 

whTn :t'?sSie°d s:firdJs?rorthe;^id"onr'^' *° ' 



LOVE IS LIKE PEANUTS 

American Bates, Betty 

Young Adult Holiday, 1980, ISBN 0-8234-0402-1 

Archway, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-6^-47272-0 

Marianne finds first love with her first babysitting job. 

LOVED ONE, THE 
British Waugh, Evelyn 

Novel Little, Brown, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-316-92608-6 



Themes of love and death are carried to absurdity in this satire <?>5t in »n\\^,^,r.r.A if 



M 



MA JAME BOVARY 
World Flaubert, Gustave 

Novel Dodd, 1985, ISBN 0-396-08689-6 

Bantam Classics, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-553-21101-3 



hPwi?»hfi painstaking interpretation of life is the story of the slow but 

nev table moral degeneration of a weak woman. The narrative describes 'the 
squalor and narrowness of provincial fife and its effect on the woman' m nd 



ERIC 



-68- 74 



MADAME CURIE 
Curie, Eve 

Da Capo, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-306-80281-3 

Eve Curie writes this biography of her mother who discovered radium and was one 
OY the great women scientists. Madame Curie, who twice won the Pulitzer Prize, 
grow, in Poland and went to Paris to study and conduct hr- -^search. 



MAIN STREET 

Lewis, Sinclair / 

Buccaneer Books, 1984, ISBN 0-89966-495-4 

New American Library, 1974, paper, ISBN 0-451-52147-1 

College girl Carol likes "highbrow" drama and town planning. After she marries the 
local doctor she tries to uplift the residents of a small Minnesota tov/n. 



MALTESE FALCON 

Hammet, Dascheil 

North Point Press, 1984, ISBN 0-86547-156-8 
Avon, 1974, paper, ISBN 0-380-01485-8 

Called the best American detective novel by some, Sam Spade accepts a case but 
soon finds his partner dead. Spade, who hated him and was having an affair with his 
wife, feels the need to find the killer. The chase brings Spado into contact with an 
odd assortment of characters, each searching for the statute of a black bird. . 



MAN, THE 

Wallace, Irving 
(no ISGN listed) 

Through a series of deaths to the others in the line of succession, the Speaker of the 
House becomes the first Black President. He is faced with personal problems as 
well as significant domestic and international difficulties. There is a large cast of 
characters and one crisis after another for this moderate, intelligent, able president. 



MAN WHO LOVED CAT DANCING, THE 

Durham, ^^arilyn 
(no ISBN listed) 

Released from imprisonment for killing the murderers of his Indian wife. Jay 
Grobart stages the robbery of a train to get money to buy back his son—but the 
presence on board of a white woman complicates his plans. 



MANCHILD IN THE PROMISED LAND 
Brown, Claude 

New American Lib, 1971, paper, ISBN 0 ,51-13445-1 

Ghetto life in Harlem is the setting for t 'is autobiographical book. Brown was a 
former dope dealer totally involved in the ghetto, but is able to pull himself out of 
the misery and become a law student at one of the country's top universities. 



-69- 



World 

Non-fiction 



MAN'S FATE 
Malroux, Andre 

Random, 1969, paper, ISBN 0-394-70479-7 



French Russian Japanese, and Chinese revolutionaries are all involved in the same 
social struggle to free Chinese workers in Shanghai. The novel is set in the 
Shanghai insLirrPction of 1927 and includes conspiracy, bombings, bloodshead and 
vice, and the revolutionaries ars soon faced with having to determine the value of 
human lite. 



American 
Science Fiction 



MARTIAN CHRONICLES 

Bradbury, l.^y 

Amereon, Ltd, ISBN 0-88411-862-2 
Bantam, 1974, paper ISBN 0-J553-26363-3 

The late-twentieth-century colonization and exploration of Mars by Earth provides 
a loose rramework for a series of stories about the first iandmg on Mars, the first 
colonies, the nature of the elusive Martians, and the lives of Earthlings turned 
Martians. - ^ 



British 
Drama 



MARY, QUEEN OF SCOTS 
Fraser, Antonia 
Delacorte, 1969 

Dell, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-440-35476-5 

This is a fascinating and compelling portrait of Mary, steeped in historical detail, 
and d'ied ^'^^ personality and the tenor cf the times during which she. lived 



Ameri can 
Yoo-ng Adul t 



British 
Novel 



MEAT IN THE SANDWICH, THE 
Bach, Alice 
fno ISBN listed) 

rrincipfes°in iSr^ ^ ^"''^^^ ^^^'^ "'^ """'^ important 

MILL ON THE FLOSS 
Elliot, George 

Oxford Univ. Press, ISBN 0-19-812560-7 
Longmar., 1988, paper, ISBN 0-582-52545-4 

^""^ ^'°J^^' 3nd within the family relationships with 

their father takes place amidst the quaint folk and old-fashioned surroundings of a 
country town. Tension rises as the sister yields to an unworthy lover and betrayal 
of her finer nature. Brother and sister are reconciled only in death 



North 

Non-fiction 



ERIC 



MINUS 148 DEGREES, THE WINTER ASCENT OF MT 
Davidson, Art 

Cloudcap, 1987, par /, ISBN 0-938567-00-4 



MCKINLEY 



The story of the first successful winter ascent of .Mt. McKinley. One team member 

L1o?:in?er';tnrm''^'H- "^'^ '^^^rV'T ^'""^^ "^^^ ^^e 'ummlt by a 
major winter storm and survived only by digging a snow cave. 



-70- 



'^6 



American 
Novel 



MOBY DICK 

Melville, Herman 

Buccaneer, 1983, ISBN 0-89966-478-4 

Silver, Burdett & Ginn, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-382-09016-0 

The ferocious white whale known as Moby Dick is pursued in a fury of revenge by 
Captain Ahab who has lost a leg to the whale. In addition to the story itself, 
Melville uses the whale as a symbol of the strong forces of the natural universe and 
the captain is doomed to disaster in this epic tragedy. 



World 
Novel 



MONKEY 

Wu Ch'eng-en 

Grove, 1958, paper, ISBN 0-394-17211-6, El 12 

An historical novel based on a pilgrimage to India in the 7th century to gather the 
teachings of "Buddha^for-^the Chinese. There are fantastic adventures and strong 
allegories meshed with the realistic and human story. 



American 
Science Fiction 



MOON IS A HARSH MISTRESS 
Heinlein, Robert 
Putnam, 1966 

Ace Books, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-441-53699-9 

With the help of a sentient computer named Mike, the inhabitants of Earth's open 
penal colony on the moon rebel against the Authority to demand independence. 



American 
Novel 



MOON IS DOWN, THE 

Steinbeck, John 
Viking, 1942 

Penguin, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-14-066222-X 

Villagers, presumably in Norway, resort to sabotage and every other means possible 
to thwart an army, evidently Germany, that has occupied their country. As the 
village mayoi is marched out to be shot in ^n effort to control the townspeople, he 
recites Socrates's dying message, knowing his people will continue their fight. 



American 
Novel 



MOUNTAIN MAN 

Fi.sher, Vardis 

Amereon Ltd, 1976, ISBN 0-891 9U-832-3 
Pocket Books, 1983, paper, 0-671-47672-6, 42288 

Art adventure story that also shows the mountain man s love of nature and his 
struggle to survive. Trapper Sam Minard builds a cabin for Kate Bowden whose 
family has been killed by Indians. When his family is killed, Sam declares war 
against the Crow Indians. 



ERLC 



?7 



-71- 



MR. AND MRS. BOJO JONES 
American Head, Ann 

Young Adult Putnam Pub Group, 1967, ISBN 0-399-1 05S2-X 



The. probiems described in this book are universal and pertinent to modern family 
life. High school students Bo Jo and July have to get married and face difficulties 
in deal-ng with love, marriage, differences in family background, and their baby's 
death. The parents then arranage what seems a reasonable separation, schooling, 
and return to opposite sides of town. The young couple yields, but then realizes the 
Donds that have grown between them are strong and decide to work out their 
destiny and education together. 



MRS. MIKE 

Freedman, Benedict and Nancy 

Buccaneer Books, 1981, ISBN 0-89966-396-6 

Berkley Pub; -1984, paper, ISBN 0-425-10328-5 

Set many years ago in the Canadian wilderness, this is a story of life and love. 



MY ANTONIA 

American Gather, Willa 

Novel Barron, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-8120-3528-3 



Antonia, daughter of a Bohemian immigrant, prevails in a struggle with a stubborn 
farm and an equally unbending Nebraska community. 



, . MY FIRST LOVE AND OTHER DISASTERS 

American Pascal, Francine 

Young Adul t viking, 1 979, ISBN 0-670-49952-8 

Dell, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-440-95447-9 



Fifteen-year-old Victoria is in love with a guy who doesn't even know she exists, 
bhe takes a summer job just to be near him and has to ? jnd her days doing endless 
household chores Finally Jim begins to notice her oven to like her. But is 
this really what Victoria wants? 



Novel 



MY NAME IS ASHER LEV 

American ;3otok, Chaim 

Knopf, 1972, ISBN 0-394-46137-1 
Fawcett, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-44^ 20714-5 

A young Jewish boy is compelled to be an artist. To do so he must immerse himself 
m the Christian^radit.on of the masters, tear himself away from his own ancestral 
heritage, and alienate himself from his orthodox Jewish family. In the process he 
goes through great tension and conflict. 



ERIC 



"^8 

-72- 



N 



NARRATIVE OF THE LIFE OF FREDERICK DOUGLASS: AN AMERICAN SLAVE 

Black Douglas, Frederick 

Biography Penguin, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-1 4-03901 2-X 

Originally published in 1845 this is an outstanding book about the life of slaves in 
America. Douglass became famous as a slave who escaped to the North and spent 
his life in the abolitionist movement. The book provide^^ a point-by-point "^ttack on 
the slave-owners arguments, and it is a passionate denunciation of the principle of 
man owning man. 



Black 
Novel 



NATIVE SON 

Wright, Richard 

Harper-Row, 1940, ISBN 0-06-014762-8 
Harper-Row, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-06-080855-1, P855 

For Bigger Thomas, a Black man accused of a crime in the white man's world, there 
could be no extenuating circumstances, no explanations — only death. 



NATURALIST IN ALASKA 

North Murie, Adolf 

Biography Devin-Adair Co., 1961 

(no ISBN listed) 

As a field biologist for the National Park Service, Murie lived cL;se to Alaska 
animals. He writes about the domestic, prey, and predator ways of the grizzly bear, 
wolf, lynx, wolverine, Dall sheep, caribou, and Arctic fox. 



North 
Folklore 



NEETS'AU GWIINDAII: LIVING IN THE ChANDALAR COUNTRY 

Peter, Katherine 

Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1981, ISBN 0-933769-11-3 

Includes information about the social life and customs of the Kutchin and 
Athapascan Indians. Text is in both languages. 



World 
Novel 



NECTAR IN A SIEVE 

Markandaya, Kamala 

New American Library, 1954 

New American Library, paper, ISBN 0-051-13460-5, AE2291 

Natural diseases, an arranged marriage, and industrialization of her village are the 
challenges Rukmani faces as the bride of a peasant farmer in southern India. 



ERIC 



79 



-73- 



NEVER CRY WOLF 
North Mowat, Farley 

Non-fiction Little, Brown & Co., 1963, ISBN 0-316-58639-0 

Mowat describes a summer he spend in the Arctic as a Canadian government 
biologist studying the wolf. He finds the wolf very different from the legends about 
them, and writes about their hunting, marking boundaries, diet, rearing the young", 



World 
Novel 



Anier- can 
Young Adult 



World 
Novel 



Miner 1 can 
Novel 



NIGHT 

Wiesel, Elie 

Bantam, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-553-1^0807-1 

Inifhin'^ u'*°u^ °^ ^ fifteen-year-old Jewish boy's experiences at Auschwitz and 
Buchenwald. He loses both his family and his faith in a God who would allow such 
thii.js to happen. 

NITTY GRITTY, THE 
Bonham, Frank 
(no ISBN listed) 
LC 68-024719 

Torn between a desire to stay in school and hie father's insistence that it is a waste 
of time, a Black boy decides to quit school and go into business with the uncle he 
worships. When the venture fails and the uncle deserts him, the boy faces reality 
with a new maturity. / lai-co i cdmy 

NO LONGER AT EASE 

Achebe, Chiuna 

Heinemann Ed, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-435-90528-7 

A Nigerian studies in England and returns home. Written by one of Nige-ia's 
foremost novelists, the author is concerned with social change and conflict of 
cultures in his country There are parallels between the situations in this book and 
some parts of modern Alaska. 

NO NO BOY 

Okada, John 

Univ. of Washington Press, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-295-95525-2 

This powerful novel by a Japanese-Anerican is about conf lictina loyalty in the 
Japanesecommunityof Seattle during and after World War II. 



American 
Novel 



ERIC 



NO TIME FOR SERGEANTS 

Hyman, Mac 
(no ISBN listed) 

Will Stockdale is drafted and sent to camp and the Air Force where he ends up on 
almost permanent duty as latrine orderly. After being assigned to a daffy air crew 
he narrowly misses a plane crash but does claim a medal for his buddy. That effort' 
costs bumbling Sergeant King his strips and earns a transfer to the infantry 



-74- 



NOBODY KNOWS MY NAME 

Baldwin, James 
Dial Press, 1961 

Dell, 1978, p^.per, ISBN 0-440-36435-3 

Baldwin dtAs with relations between Blacks and white, between writers and 
society, and between majorities and minorities in this collection of first person 
essays. 



NOTES FOR ANOTHER LIFE 

Bri 'gers. Sue Ellen 

Knopf, 1988, ISBN 0-394-94889-0 

Bantam, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-563-27185-7 

Wren Jackson won't forget the summer before her fourteenth birthday. It^s the 
summer her father returns from a mental institution, but then slips off again into 
his own world. It's the summer her mother decides to get a divorce and move 
away. It's the summer her tennis champion brother breaks his arm, and Wren feels 
the first stirrings of love. It's also the summer their grandmother's wisdom helps 
them find courage to begin new lives. 

NOTES FROM THE UNDERGROUND 

Dostoyevsky, Feodor 

The author traces the development of a nihilistic conspiracy in a Russian provincial 
tov/n. 



NUNAGA: 10 YEARS AMONG THE ESKIMOS 
Pryde, Duncan 
Walker & Co., 1971 

Hippocrene Books, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-907871-21-6 

Hired as a fur trapper by the Hudson Bay Company in 1955, Pryde spent ten years 
living with the Canadian Eskimos. He tells of their life, and hunts, adventures, and 
long trips. 



ODYSSEY, THE 
Homer 

Raintree Pubs, -»980, ISBN 0-8172-1654-5 
Amsco Sch, ISv , paper, ISBN 0-87720-845-X 



An epic Greek poem that is the sequel to the Iliad. !t lells of Ulysses' ten years of 
adver ures during his return journey from Troy to his own kingdom. 



81 

-75- 



World 
Novel 



OF HUMAN BONDAGE 

ivlaugham, Somerset 

Buccaneer Books, 1981, ISBN 0-89966-386-9 
Penguin, 1978, paper, ISBN 0-14-001861-1 

An ambitious and sensitive young man with a deformed leg attempts to find love 
despite his handicap. The issue of his deformity is raised primarily as a cause for 
his becoming sensitive to the actions of others and his isolation from the 
mainstream of human interaction. 



American 
Novel 



OF MICE AND MEN 

Steinbeck, John 
Bantam, 1970 

Penguin, 1978, paper, ISBN 0-14-004891-X 



The painful responsibilities of friendship are explored in this tragic story of the 
relationship between two migratory workers. Lennie is large and strong but ha« 
simple mind. Caring for him becomes more difficult for George for example wl 
because of his strength, Lennie maims or kill5 small inimals he is trying to love 
When It s the matter of a girl's death, Georae mercifullv kills i pnnip tn 



from a mob. 



North 

Non-fiction 



OF WOLVES AND MEN 
Lopez, Barry 

Scribner, 1979, paper, ISBN 0-684-16322-5, SI882 

The wolf is a wild animal, but it is also an animal that man has bestowed with many 
different images. This book looks at the wolf from some of these different 
perspectives such as how the animal h seen by scientists, Eskimos, Indians, the 
wo, killer, and in the imagination of folklore, fables, and werewolves 



American 
Novel 



OLD MAN AND THE SEA 

Hemingway, Ernest 

Scribner, 1984, ISBN 0-684-18227-0 

Macmillan, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-02-051910-9 

With a young companion looking on, an old, once skillful fisherman now down on his 
.v>ck fights a heroic battle with a monstrous fish. 



British 
Novel 



OLIVER TWIST 
Dickens, Charles 

State Mutual Books, 1985, ISBN 0-7062-4249-1 
Longman, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-582-52279-X 



Rogues train a young boy from an English workhouse to become a pickpocket. His 
e_ forts to escape from the criminal element involves hardship, danger, and difficult 
Oustacies 



American 
Non-fiction 



ERIC 



ON DEATH AND DYING 
Kubler-Ross, Elizabeth 
Macmillan, 1969 

Macmillan, 1970, paper, ISBN 0-02-089130-X 

The needs and feelings of the mortally III come cU -i' irough Kubler-Ross's 
sensitive investigation of death based on interview.* with some 200 terminal patients. 



Do 



ONCE AND FUTURt KING, THE 
British White, T.H. 

Science Fiction Putnam, 1958, ISBN 0-399-10597-2 
Be'-kley, paper, ISBN 0-425-09116-3 

A dramatic, sometimes witty retelling of Arthurian legend follows Arthur from 
bo*'" jod to the disintegration of Camelot. 



ONE DAY IN THE LIFE OF IVAN DENISOVITCH 

World Soizhenitzyn, Alexander 

Novel Duttcj\ 1963 

Bantarrii 1984, paper, ISBN 0-553-24777-8 

Condemned by the Stalinist government to forced labor in Siberia, a man suffers 
through a day at the camp, evoking the ritu?Js and ploys he has conceived to 
preserve his life and sanity. 



Amen can 
Novel 



ONE FLEW OVER THE CUCKOO'S NEST 

Kesey, Ken 

G.K. Hall, 1988, ISBN 0-8057-988-4 
G.>K. Hall, paper, ISBN 0-8057-S037-8 

Feigning insajuty to avoid the law, rabble-rouser Randal Patrick McMurphy leads a 
group of fellow mental patients in a struggle to rediscover their human dignit; 



British 
Novel 



ORDEAL Of-' RICHARD FEVEREL 

Meredith; t3eorge 

Ne.w Arfierican Library, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-452-00777-1 

No emotional outlets were provided for in the rigid educational system in which 
Richard Feverel is brought up. He faces an ordeal when he reaches adolescence and 
first love. Richard and his love, Lucy, secretly marry, face corr.plicated 
misfortunes which end tragically and fatally for both. 



ORDINARY PEOPLE 

American Guest, Judith 

Novel Viking, 1976 

Ballantine, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-345-33505-8 



Still emotionally fragile after his attempted suicide, 17-year-old Conrad returns 
hom.a to reevaluate his relationship with his parents and to cope with the pain and 
guil't associated with his brother's death. 



OTHER SIDE OF JHE MOUNTAIN, THE 

American Valens,,E.G. 

Sports Warner Books, 1 977 

Harper-Row, 1988, pape; ^.BN 0-06-080S48-5; P948 

While training to be oiv.the U.S. Olympic ski team, Jill Kinmont crashes into a tree 
at forty miles an hour and becomes permanently^paralyzed from the shoulders 
down. Her determination to leada meaningful and productive life is inspiring. 

ERIC 83 



OUT OF BOUNDS 

American Boatright, Lorl 

Young AduU (no ISBN listed) 



p 



Novel 



/act ?„"f irobC.' '^^ ""^ «^en eh. 



OUTSIDERS, THE 
American Hinton, Susie 

Young Adol t Viking, 1967, ISBN 0-670-53257-6 

Dell, 1968, paper, 0-440-96769-4 



Johnny's father is a drunk, and his mother is a selfish slob. Two-B s mother work, 
ho.?! H-lTh H ^'"^ ^''^ kid sister. Dally turns into a Ldlum because 



. OX-BOW INCIDENT, THE 

American Clark, Walter Van Tilburghe 

Novel Amereon, Ltd, ISBN 0-88411-135-0 

Guild Books, paper, ISBN 0-685-74098-6, 125 



catte ms^iCrrTheffrm°i '•n''T °* '"^"^bers has been Killed by 

cattle rustlers. They form an illegal posse, pursue the murderers and lynch them 



P.S. I LOVE YOU 
American Conklin, Bg'bara 



Young Adult Bantam, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-553-24460-4 

Mariah loses her first love, Paul, to cancer. A sequel is "Falling in Love Again". 



PAMELA 

British Richardson, Samuel 

Houghton Miffljn, 1971, paper, ISBN 0-395-11152-8 



TJiis novel was a literary epic-maker as a study of the femalp hpart it :c * 
of prudent maidservant whose virtue is assailed hy her mTster. " 



ERIC 



84 

-78- 



American 
Sports 



PAPER LION 

Plimpton, George 

Holtzman Press, 1981, ISBN 0-941372-07-3 
Harper-Row, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-06-091540-4, PL1540 

To understand professional football, the author spent four weeks with the Dotroit 
Lions during summer training. The book is about his experiences as the "last string" 
quarterback. 



British 
Novel 



PASSAGE TO INDSA 
Forster, E.M. 

Lightyear Press, 1981, ISBN 0-89968-223-5 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-15-671142-7 

The clash between East and West, and prejudices and misunderstandings are played 
out through two women who have recently arrived in India. 



Bl ack 
Novel 



PATCH OF BLUE, A 
Kata, Elizabofh 

Amereon,'Ltd, ISBN 0-89190-060-8 

Warner Books, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-446-31340-8 

Selina, blinded at an early age, is intelligent though uneducated. Isolated by 
cruelty, poverty, and intolerance, she finds love with a man who has had his share of 
pain* 



PEARL, THE 

American Steinbeck, John 

Novel Viking Press, 1947, ISBN 0-670-54575-9 

Bantam, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-553-2S261-0 

In this Mexican tale. Kino the fisherman and his family have an indestructible 
closeness as they face the events following his discovery of a priceless pearl. 
Superstition, love of family, and the feeling of Mexicans toward those who rule the 
village is vividly described. 



PENAL COLONY AND OTHER STORIES, THE 
World Kafka, Franz 

Shor'w stories Schocken, 1948 

(no ISBN listed) 

Short stories that include The; Judgement, The Metamorphosis, a Country Doctor, In 
the Penal Colony, and A Hungry Artist. 



PEOPLE OF THE TWILIGHT or LORTH OF 60: THE INUIT 

North Jenness, Diamond 

Non-fiction Minister of Indian and Northern Affairs, Ottawa, 1978 

Univ. of Chicago Press, 1959, paper, ISBN 0-226-39653-3, P32 

An introduction to the/Eskimos of Canada, 'this booklet includes topics such as 
origins, early contact^ trading, missionaries, governments. Native associations, land 
claims, economic ard social development, education and culture. 




-r79~ 



85 



American 
Young Adult 



British 
Nov«jl 



Bri tish 
Novel 



American 
Young Adul t 



Aneri can 
Yoi'ng Adult 



PICKING UP THE PIECES 

Bates, Betty 

Archway, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-671 -53-| 38-7 

After her former boyfriend Is seriously hurt in an accident, Nell wonders if she can 
renew hsr relationship with him. 

PICKiWiCK PAPERS 
Dickens, Charles 

Buccaneer Books, 1983," ISBN 0-89966-314-1 
Oxford Univ Press, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-19-281775-2 

The book is letters and manuscripts of the doings and foibles of the Pickwick Club 
Among the incidents are the army parade, trip to Manor Farm, the saving of Rachel 
Wardle from the villain;, Alf-ed Jingle, ice skating and more. Pickwick is also sued 
by his landlady or breach^of promise and ends up in prison for refusing to pay 
damages. Upon release he r,«5tires to a house, dissolves the club and.spends his time 
arranging its memoranda. 

PICTURE OF DORIAN GRAY, THE 

Wilde, Oscar 

Norton, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-393-95568-0 

Dorian is a beautiful youth whose portrait proves to have supernatural powers 
Whatever Dorian feels or thinks is reflected in the picture. Dorian meets a man 
who has mastered all the vices. His degeneration is also reflected^in the portrait 
The book is a moral preachment against the crimes of hedonism. 

PIGMAN, THE 
Zindel, Paul 

Harper & Row Junior Books, 1968, ISBN 0-06-026828-X 
Bantam, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-553-26321-8 

Two outsiders become friendly with a pathetic old man and innocently brinq on 
tragedy. ' ■ ^ 

PIGMAN'S LEGACY, THE 
Zindel,. Paul 

Harper & Row Junior Books,- 1980, ISBN 0-06-026854-9 
Bantam, 1984, paper, 0-553-26599-7 

A seque' to "The PIgman." John and Lorraine atone for their guilt by their kindness 
to another old man. 



Ameri can 
Mon-f iction 



ERIC 



PILGRIM AT TINKER CREEK 
Dillard, Annie 
(no ISBN listed) 

In a personal narrative reflecting a sense of wonder at the intricacies of the natural 
world, Dillard shares.her reactions to creatures large and small-catching then, in 
"prose photographs", ^ 



-80- 86 



3 



PLEASE REMEMBER ME 

American Brady, Mari 

Young Adult (no ISBN listed) 



Mari meets Graham, a fifteen-year-old cancer victim. 



PORTRAIT OF A LADY 

British James, Henry 

Novel Modern Library, ISBN 0-394-60432-6 

Penguin, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-14-043223-X 

'Various types of American character are transplanted into a European 
environment: an attractive girl, an old banker, his repellent wife, his invalid son, an 
indomitably American journalist. The girl refuses offers of marriage from high 
ranking British men but falls victim to a worthless dilettante who marries her for 
money and ruins her life. 



PORTRAIT OF THE ARTIST AS A YOUNG MAN 

British Joyce, James 

Novel Viking, 1982, ISBN 0-0670-56683-7 

Barron, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-8120-3535-6 

This autobiographical novel follows Stephen Dedalus from childhood to early 
maphood. Realization of his artistic ability forces Stephen to reject the v/orid in 
whictKhe has been brought tip; The stream-of -consciousness technique is used to 
develofj\ Stephen's experiences. 



PORTRAIT OF MYSELF 
British Bourke--White, Margaret 

Non-fiction Simon & Schuster, 1963 

G.K. Gill, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-8398-2858-6 

A noted woman photojournalist shares bits of her personal and professional history 
in a memoir that reflects both her courage and her independent spirit.. 



POSTMAN, THE 

American Brin, David 

Science Fiction Bantam, 1966, ISBN 0-553-25704-8 

Gordon Krantz finds ar old, worn postman's uniform after the nuclear holocaust and 
becomes a symbol of hope to communities of the American Northwest. 



POWER AND THE GLORY, THE 

British Green , Graham 

Novel Amereon, Ltd, ISBN 0-88411-656-5 

Penguin, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-14-001791-7 




The wanderings or an outlaw whisky.priest are. set in Mexico. The priest, vyho 
senses his own worthlessness, is determined to function as a priest until captured. 
The story combines elements of a thriller with Christian themes and symbolism. 



PRIDE AND PREJUDICE 

dritish Austen , Jane 

Novel Dodd, 1985, ISBN 0-396-08-536-9 

Longman, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-582-3£o36-6 



Jll?*fn-M"^* scrambles to find husbands for her five daughters in a gentle satire of 
the^foibles and prejudices of human nature. 



PRINCE AND THE PAUPER, THE 

Anieri can 

Twain , Mark 

Novel Univ. of Calif Press, 1983, ISBN 0-520-05088-6 

Univ. of Calif Press, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-520-05108-4 



Jh. fh ^' fA,t°r^" ^'''"'^ ''"'e in common with Edward Tudor, heir to 

the throne What^hey do have in common is that they look exactly alike, and by an 
accident they exchange places. The adventures that follow reveal the couSqe 
cleverness, and maturity of both. courage, 

PRINCESS BRIDE, THE 
British Goldman , William 

Young Adul t Ballantine Books, 1982 

Ballantine Books, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-345-34803-6 

claims he has lifted the "good parts" of this tale from the S. Moregenstern 
classic Tale of True Love and High Adventure. The pace 'lere is hectic, the 

in Tni-fT- ^•.w''-*^-;-.^^.''^^*^''' endearing. This unusual fairy tale has as a ' 
moral, "life isn't fair. It's just fairer than death, that's all." 

PROFILES IN COURAGE 

-Amencsn Kennedy , John F. 

Non-fiction Harper, 1956 

Harper & Row, "5988, paper, LC 83-48678 

A young U.S. Senator from Massachusetts who later became presiaent explores 
courageous turning points in the lives of a number of American statesmen, among 
them John Quincy Adams, Daniel Webster, Srtm Houston, and Robert Taf t. 

PROMISE, THE 

American Potok , Chaim 

Novel Knopf, 1969, ISBN 0-394-44163-X 

Fawcett, 1985, paper, 0-449-20910-5 

JiH°e?i^nf nllT?' "'^^^ Chosen" are now yoL, ,men embarking on 

different careers and drifting apart. A complex situation centering on an 
adolescent heading for a complete breakdown brings them together 



ERIC 



^8 

-82- 



PUSHCART WAR 

Merrill , Jan 

Peter Smith, ISBN 0-8446-6251-8 
Dell, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-440-47147-8 

An allegory of how wars begin, escalate, and are resolved. e story is about a war, 
told as if it were history, between the trucks and the pushcarts in New York City. 
Battles, strategies, and causes are described with humor and thoughfulness. 



RASCAL: A MEMOIR OF A BETT :R ERA 
North , Sterling 

Avon, 1975, paper, ISBN 0-380-01518-8 

This true story of a pet reaches greatness as a boyhood remembrance of a year 
spent with a mischievous pet raccoon, half a century ago. 



REBECCA 

Du Maurier , Daphne 

Doubleday, 1948, ISBN 0-385-04380-5 

The quiet and plain second wife of weathly, handsome Mr. deWinter find the 
oppressive memory of Rebecca, the first wife, everywhere. Throughout the house, 
on the grounds, in the eyes of the servants and friends Rebecca mocks the new Mrs. 
deWinter and threatens to take away any happiness she hopes to gain in her 
marriage. 



RED AND THE BLACK, THE 
Stendahl 

Modern Library, 1984, ISBN 0-394-6051 1 -X 

New American Library, 1970, paper, ISBN 0-451-51793-8, CE1793 

Julien Sbrel is a handsome, cold and intensely egotistical young man and this is the 
story of his rise to power. He uses his love affairs to serve his ambition and tries to 
kill his first mistress when she betrays him to her successor. The title refers to the 
colors of the military class represented by Napoleon, the author's hero, and of the 
clergy, which the author detested. 



RED BADGE OF COURAGE, THE 
Crane , Stephen 

Amereon, Ltd, ISBN 0-89190-118-3 
Avon, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-380-70432-3 

The confusion, glory, pride, horror, and cowardice associated with war are depicted 
in this graphic account of young Henry Fleming's Civil War experiences. 

-83- 



American 
Novel 



Ameri can 
Non-fiction 



World 
Novel 



British 

Science Fiction 



Ameri can 
Novel 



RED PONY, THE 

Ste.Yibeck , John 

Viking, 1986, ISBN 0-670-81285-4 
Bantam, 1986, paper, ISBN <>-553 -26444-3 

This is the story about the pain of becoming an adult: birth and death, ove and 
hate, pleasure and pain, wisdom and foolishness. The young boy Jody t -ounters 
them all as he becomes a man. 

RESTORING OUR EARTH 

Pringle , Laurence 

Enslow, 1987, ISBN 0-89490-143-5 

A study of how various public and private organizations restore misused North 
American water, air and land. Positive solutions to enviornmental problems are 
presented in an informative account that is hot just for ecologists. It includ j 
photos, drawings, glossary, and bibliography. 

RESURRECTION 

Tolstoy , Leo 

New American Lib, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-452-00718-6 

Nekhludov is a young, light-hearted, noble who finds himself on a jury considering 
the case of a girl who poisoned a merchant for his money. Nekhludo" recognizes 
the^girl as someone he seduced years ago. Tormented by a sense of responsibility 
he decides to follow-her to Siberia and marry her. 

RETURN OF THE KING, THE 
Tolkien , J.R.R. 

Houghton, Miilflin, 1967, ISBN 0-395-08256-0 
Ballantiht, 1976, paper, ISBN 0-345-33973-8 

This is the thi(d part of Thfe Lord of the Rings series and shows the forces of good 
winning, in their fight against the Dark Lord of Evil. Frodo^and Sarh destroy the 
Ring on Mount Doom. This volume also includes several lengthy appendixes and 
information about the past history of Middle Earth and its inhabitants of elves, 
dwarfs, men, and hobbits. 

REUNION 

Uhlman , Fred 
Farrar, 1977 

Penguin, 1978, paper, ISBN 0-14-004790-5 

As fHitler comes to power in Germany, the close friendship between a Jewish boy 
and his aristocratic classmate is destroyed— until there is a tragic "reunion". 



ERIC 



-84- 



American 
Novel 


REIVERS, THE 

Faulkner , William 

Random House, 1962, ISBN 0^394-70339-1 

This 1963 Pulitzer Prize winner begins when eleven-year-old Lucius Priest, 
"borrows" his grandfather^s car for a trip to Memphis. Two others, including Ned 
McCaslin, a Black, are on the trip which ends up at a bordello. Ned trades the car 
for a horse and events accelerate and includes smuggling, a bizarre race, and jail. 


" American 
Non-fiction 


RIGHT STUFF, THE 
Wolfe , Tom 

Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1983, ISBN 0-374-25033-2 
Bantam, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-553-25596-7 

The.first American.astronauts are seen as hr roes in a narrative of their public and 
private lives. as they were selected, trained, and launched into space. 


• World 
Novel 


ROBE, THE 

Douglas , Lloyd C. 

Houghton Mifflin, 1942, ISBN 0-395-07635-8 
Houghton Mifflin, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-317-38798-7 

The story of Christ's robe and the influence it had on the wealthy young Roman 
soidier who won it at dice. Marcellus later converts to Christianity. In addition the 
book describes the rise of Christianity in the first years after the crucifixion. . 


^' World 
Novel 


ROBIKSON CRUSOE 

DeFoe , Daniel 

Amereon, Ltd, ISBN CV8841 1-594-1 
Penguin, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-14t035072-1 

Crusoe is shipwreckeJ on what appears to be an unihabiteJ island off the coast of 
South America in. the late 1600*s. The story tells of his daily routines and, after 
years, his meeting of Friday and their continuing adventures. 


Native American 
Black 


ROOTS 

Haley , Alex 

Doubleday, 1976, ISBN 0-385-03787-2 
Dell, 1980, paper, 0^440-17464-3 


0 


From Kunta Kinte, who was. kidnapped cs a slave in West Af rica in the mid-1700*s, 
to the present, Haley's family narrative spans seven generations, with emphasis on 
those who lived before Emancipation. 


ERIC 


-85- 



Ameri can 
Novel 



Ameri can 
Young Adult 



ROUGHING IT 

Twain , Mark 

Hippocrene Books, 1988, ISBN 0-87052-707-X 

HI. pocrene Books, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-87052-708-8 

A humorous account of a trip to California across the plains and then to Hawaii in 
the early 1860's. Twain's book is filled with exaggeration, drollery, and good spirit. 

RUMBLE FISH 
Hinton, S.E. 

Dell, 1976, paper, ISBN 0-440-97534-4 

Rusty James's town frequently sees motorcycles, gang<5, and gang fights. Rusty 
fights and scrambles nis way through high school together with his rough and 
respected brother. Close scrapes with death and the law are part of Rusty's I'fe as 
a rumble fish", but beneath the toughness he has deep feelings and hurts 



s 



SARAH BISHOP 

American O'Dell , Scott 

Young Adult ^.Hcughton Mifflin, 1980, ISBN 0-395-29185-2 

Scholastic Inc* 1988, paper, ISBN 0-590-42298-7 

During the American Revolution! Sarah has reason to be afraid because her father 
has been tarred and feathered, and her brother was captured and starved to death 
on a prison.ship. So Sarah decides to flee from the British and go into the 
wilderness where, with only a musket for protecMpn, she must defend herself 
against wild animals, e-.dmy soldiers, and hostle xownspeople. 

SAY HELLO TO THE HITMAN 
American Bennett , Jay 

Young Adult Dell, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-440-97618-9 

Fred leads a normal enough life as a student who spends time with his girlfriend and 
dreams of being a teacher. Things take a drastic turn when Fred receives 
iite-threatening phone calls and notes from a madman killer. When Fred's 
girlfriend, father and uncle also are threatened, he looks desperately for a way to 
escape the madman. ' « ajr lu 



American 
Novel 



ERIC 



SCARLET LETTER, THE 
Hawthorne , Nathaniel 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1986, I9BN 0-15-179^168-1 
New American Library, 1986, paper, 0-451 -51 65^-4 

Hester Prynne, forced to wear the scarlet A for adultery, faces the ho iMty of 
early Puritan settlers in Massachusetts. 

-86- 92 



SEA OF GRASS 

Aineri can 

Richter , Conrad 
Novel Knopf, 1937, ISBN 0-394-44397-7 

Ballantirie, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-345-31778-5 



Leaving her husband, children, and their large cattle ranch, a refined lady, returns to 
the city. Twenty years lat^r, her youngest son, rummored not to be her husband's 
child, is a desperado and is KMIed. The woman returns to her husband who has loved 
her in spite of everything. 



SEIZE THE DAY 

American Bellow , Saul 

Novel Viking, 1956, ISBN 0-670-63176-0 

Asa Leventhal is on the verge of insanity. Although his position on a New York 
trade journal had given him some security, things started falling apart with the 
sultry time he spent while his wife was away, the remembrance of his insane 
mother , and the harrying of a Gentile friend insisting Asa ruined his career. 



SEPARATE PEACE, A 
British Knowles , John 

Novel Macmillan, 1959' 

Dell, 1980, paper, ISB^' 0-385-2886-7 

In a New Hampshire boarding school during World War II, Gene causes an accident 
that cripples his handsome, daredevil friend Finny; and, much later, Gene faces the 
ambivalence and rivalry in their friendship. 



North 
Folklore 



SELECTIONS FROM ALEUT FOLKLORE 
Partnow , Patricia 
(no ISBN listed) 

This collection was developed a$ part of a unit on Aleut culture by the Alaska 
Native Education Board in the 1970*s. 



American 
Young Adult 



SEVENTEENTH 4ER 
Daly , Maureen 

Buccaneer Books, 1981, ISBN 0-89966-355-9 
Archway, 1868, paper, ISBN 0-671-61931-4 

It's Angle's seventeenth summer and filled with picnics, parades, problems, dances, 
and daydreams. There is also Angle's romance with Jack, a handsome and popular 
basketball hero. Although they must separate at the end of the summer, both have 
learned much about life and about themselves. 



SHADOW RIDERS 

American L'Amour , Louis 

Young Adult Bantam, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-353-23132-4 



Another story of the American West by this popular writer. 



ERLC 



-87- 



93 



SHANDAA: IN MY LIFETIME 

N°>"th Pfisterer , Bill and McGary, Jane, editors 

Biography Alaska Native Language Ganter, UAF, 1982, ISBN 0-93376-01-6 



American 
Novel 



North 
Biography 



British 
Mystery 



American 
Biography 



World 

Short Stories 



The story of Belle Herbert an Athabaskan woman from Chalkyitsik between 105 
and 127 years old who told about her iife du. ig recorded interviews that fSrm the 
basis for this book. The book tells of such things as skin tents,7 arelinq as a ch Id 
c othing marriage burial customs, cooking, the arrive of white people, the con na 
of Christianity and more. It is printed in two languages. ^ 

SHANE 

Schaeffer , Jack 

Hough.^on Mifflin, 1954, ISBN 0-395-07090-2 
Bantam, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-553-26262-9 

In 1889 Wyoming Shane gets a job at ranch. Although alone and silent he win-s 
respeot and admiration of the owners and stays at the ranch to heK a ranae war 
co'mact^witr*"'"' Shane changes the livlfo?'fhose hTc'om^rin 

SHEM PETE'S ALASKA 

(nolsBN list'e^^^"^''''^^ ^^'^ f^o^^dation, 1987 

SoMntt're'aion* 'l^VZZT P'^'' "'"^•'^ Athabaskans of the upper 

r^onflrc ? ' ^^^^u °" '"^erviews with Pete Sham and includes 16 
aKted '""^ place names that are I isteS mapped and 

SHERLOCK HOLMES, SELECTED STORIES 
Doyle , Arthur Conan 

Oxford Univ Press, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-1 9-21 81 530-X 

wtiln v"*'A"^'^u detective Sherlock Holmes and his friend. Dr. Watson put 
Scotland Yard to shame as they outwit the villainous Moriarty. ^ 

SHINING SEASON, A 
Buche lan , William 

Univ. of New Mexico Press, 1987, ISBN 0-8263-1 01 5-X 
Univ. of New Mexico Press, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-8263-1016-8 

A glowing tribute to John Baker , a track star who died of cancer at 36. 

SHORT STORIES OF SAKI 
Munro , H.H. 

Modern Library, ISBN 0-394-60428-8 
A collection of nearly 100 short stories. 



ERIC 



r88 



North 

Non-fiction 


SIBERIANS 

Mowat , Farley 

Little Brown & Co., 1970 

Bantam, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-553-24896-0 

This is a descrjptipn of the author's trip to Siberia, his impressions of the people, 
and their achievements. 


World 
Novel 


SIDDHmRTHA 

Hesse , Hermann 

Buccaneer Books, 1983, ISBN 0-89966-447-4 
Bantam, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-553-20884-5 

Siddhartha leaves his Brahmin family on a quest that takes him from a life of 
self-denial, to one of abadonment, to vice, and to a love of the world as it is. 


British 
Novel 


SILAS MARNER 

Eliot , George 

Amereon, Ltd, ISBN 0-88411-275-6 

New American Library, 1987, paper, ISBN> 0-451 -52108-0 

The good Man Silas Marner's life as a weaver has been wrecked by false accusations 
of theft which cannot be disproved. After years of lonely living, he chances upon a 
small child. Raising the baby makes him a kindly man again. Eventually the real 
thief is discovered and Silas* apod name is restored. 


Ameri can 
Non-fiction 


SILENT SPRING 

Carson , Rachel 

Houghton Mifflin, ISBN 0-395-07506-8 

By one of the first ecologists to recognize the problem, this alarming and 
significant account shows how the widespread use of pesticides is poisoning the 
environment. 


World 

Non-fiction 


SILENT WORLD, THE 

Cbusteau , Jacques-r' ves and Dumas, Frederick 
Harper/Trophy, 1950 

Lyons, Nick Bks, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-941130-45-2 

The authors describe the adventures and sensations of underwater exploration using 
the newly invented aqualung in an entertaining, sharply realized, and 
well-documented account. 


Black 

Short Stories 


SIMPLE'S UNCLE SAM 
Hughes , Langston 

Hill & '.A/ang, 1965, paper, ISBN 0-<5U90-0087-3 


> 


More than 30 short stories including % 3 title tale. 


ERIC 


•^5 



North 
Novel 



North 
Folklore 



SITKA 

L'Amour , Louis 

Bantam, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-553-26119-3 

Adventures-of an Aofierican 5 5|ing captain in the days when Sitka was a major West 
Coast city. 

SITSIY YUGH NOHOLNIK TSMN: AS MY GRANDFATHER TOLD IT 
Attia , Catherine 

Yukon-Koyukuk School District and Alaska Native Language Center, 
UAF, 1983, ISBN'0-9i\S.783-07-5 ^«niBi, 

Traditional folktales and spiritual stories from the Koyukon Athabaskan. Catherine 
Aiv'S tirst heard these stories during the long winters when she was younq rhe 
stories were told to help pass time during winter. Koyukcn and English are on 
facmg pages. Notes follow the stories and there is an appendix of song melodies. 



Anieri can 
Novel 



SISTER CARRIE 
Dreisar , Theodore 

Lightyear Press, 1980, ISBN 0-89968-207-3 
Bantam, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-553-21264-8 

The powerful account of a young working girl's rise -to worldly success 
declme of her protector and lover. 



'ow 



American 
Novel 



Black 

Young Adult 



SLAUGHTERHOUSE FIVE 
Vonnegut , Kurt 
Delacorte, 1965 

Barron, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-8120-3539-9 

Billy Pilgrim, "unstuck in time" shuttling between the World War II fire-bombinq at 
Dresden and a luxurious zoo on the planet Tralfamadore, learns that life is 
rneanmgless. 

SLAVE DANCER, THE 
Fox , Paula 

Bradbury PreSb, 1973, ISBN 0-02-735560-8 
Dell, 1975. paper, ISBN 0-440-96132-7 

This is a gr^ri story of a thirteen-year-old boy who is shanghaied aboard a slave ship 
to play his-f ife as the prisoners "dance" for exercise. Athough the boy survives a 
shipwreck there is nothing joyful in his escape. The author shows the degradation of 
all involved in the slave trade. auauun u. 



North 

Non-fiction 



SLED DOG TRAILS, 
Shields , Mary 

Alaska Northwest Publisning Co., 1983 
Pyrola Pub, 1984, paper. ISBN 0-88240-258-7 

Of the many books that document a woman's adventures when^arriving in Alaska 
this one is special. Mary Shields was the first woman to race in the Iditarod. ' 

-90- 



SNOW GOOSE, THE 
World Gallico , Paul 

Young Adult Knopf, 1941, ISBN 0-394-44593-7 

This is a symbolic story of faith, love, courage, and sacrifice. A lonely man, a little 
girl, and a wild goose are driven by a storm to the England coast. The story telb 
how an artist came to the aid of his country in a time of need and hov/ a bird 
became the symbol of hope to the lost armies on the beach at Dunkirk. 



SNOW WALKER 

North Mowat , Farley 

Folklore Little Brown & Co., 1975 

Bantam, 1977, paper, ISBN 0-7704-2058-3 

Stories concerned with survival in the Canadian Arctic and the Eskimo way of life 
are the subjects of this book. 



SNOWS OF KILIMANJARO AND OTHER STORIES, THE 

A:nerican Hemingway , Ernest 

Short Stories Scribner, 1961 

Macmillan, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-02-051830-7 



This collection includes the title story plus A Day's Wait, The Gar ->ier, The Nun, 
and The Radio; Fathers and Sons; The Killers; and nine others. 



SONG OF SOLOMON 

Black Morrison , Toni 

Novel Knopf, 1977, ISBN 0-394-49784-8 

New American Library, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-451-15261-1 

The mysterious chain of being a Black American family is unraveled in this book 
Macon Dead meets his crazy aunt for the first time when he is twelve, and the 
meeting changes his past and future. Macon is told by his father the bag hanging in 
the aunt's room is filled with gold, so when he and a friend go to steal it one night, 
the aunt watches them curiously. A search for the real gold takes Macon on a 
search for his family's past. Language in this book reflects open intimacy between 
young people. 



SOUNDER 

American Armstrong , William 

Young Adult ABC-Clio, 1987, ISBN 1-55736-003-0 

Harper & Row Junior Books, 1972, paper ISBN 0-06-440020-4 

This is a Newbery Medal winning book about a very poor Black Southern family. 
The father is jailed for stealing a ham, the dog. Sounder, is crippled and deformed 
after trying to save the father. When father returns from jail, he's also crippled 
and deformed and both man and dog die at the same time. The son begins his 
education and hopes for a better life. This book has been criticized by many 
because of its depiction of the Black as a passive accepter of the white man's 
injustice. 



ERLC 



.97 

-91- 



Ameri can 
Nove'k 



SOUND AND THE FURY, THE 

Faulkner, William 

Norton, 1987, ISBN 0-393-02546-2 
North, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-393-95652-0 

A Southern family of gentle blood is shown in decay. Family members are petty 
failures, drunkards, suicides, pathological perverts and idiots. The family is seen 
through different eyes and in difre.ent years in the first three sections of the book 
In the last part, the author's direc. narrative shows the white disintegration and the 
Black solidarity. 



Asian 
Novel 



World 
Novel 



American 
Science Fiction 



SOUND OF WAVES, THE 

Mishima, Yukio 

Knopf, 1954, ISBN 0-394-44629-1 

Putname Pub Group, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-399-50487-7 

Delicately traces ihe lives of two young lovers on a small Japanese island untouched 
by modern civilization. 

SOURCE, THE 

Michener, James 

Random House, 1965, ISBN 0-394-44630-5 
Fawcett, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-449-44525-9 

The focal point of this book is an archeological dig in Israel. The story features 
four ma:n characters: a Catholic archaeologist, an Arab archaeologist, a Jewish 
administrator, and an Israeli female scientist. As artifacts are found, the author 
H^°<Ii^™ ® history of the people who occupied the present state of Israel from 
10,000 BC to present. 

SPACE MERCHANTS, THE 
Pohl, Frederik 

St. Martins, 1985, ISBN 0-312-74951-1 

St. Martins, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-312-90655-2 

Large corporations control the president and wage armed war to achieve their qoals 
m this future world. Mitchell Courtenay is to promote the colonization of Venus 
He infiltrates an underground organization, reveals the girl he loves is a member 
and after a series of events concludes hers is the better cause. 



British 
Novel 



SPIRE, THE 
Golding, William 
Harcourt,, 1964 

Harcourt B-'ace Jovanovich, 1965, paper, ISBN 0-15-684741-8 

This is an allegorical story about the vision of a dean of a medieval cathedral He 
dreams of building the tallest cathedral spire in the world. The funding is from a 
dubious source, there are deaths, and the church is empty because it is unsafe, but 
the dean's obsession pushes him to continue the project. 



ERIC 



98 

-92- 



SPRING MOON 
Lord, Betty B. 

Avon, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-380-59923-6, 59923-6 

Her pampered home life destroyed. Spring Moon's determination dominates five 
generations in a heart-wrenching cultural and personal history of a China in 
transition. 



STEFFIE CAN'T COME OUT TO PLAY 
Arrick, Fran 

Dell, 1979, paper, ISBN 0-440-97850-5 

Fourteen-ysar-old Steff ie falls into the life of a prostitute after running away to 
New York. 



STEPPENWOLF 
Hesse, Herman 

Buccaneer Books, 1983, ISBN 0-89966-448-2 
Buccaneer Books, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-553-25533-9 

Harry Haller is torn between the frustrated artistic idealism of his inner life and 
the cold, inhuman nature of the modern world. His inability to be part of the world 
and the resulting loneliness cause him to consider himself a "Steppenwolf". Haller 
eventually learns he must overcome his social and sexual taboos in order to relate 
successfully to humanity. 



STORIES FOR MY GRANDCHILDREN 
Scollon, Ron, editor 

Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1980, ISBN 0-933769-05-9 

Traditional stories of bears. Brush Indians and dentalium necklaces. Facing pages 
include English and Tanacross Athabaskan. 



STORY OF MY LIFE, THE 
Keller, Helen 

Buccaneer Books, 1984, ISBN 0-89966-509-8 

New American Library, 1988, paper. ISBN 0-451-52245-1 

This remarkable woman became an outstanding citizen of her country and the world 
as well as an author who inspired millions with her story. 



STRANGE CASE OF DR. JEKYLL AND MR. HYDE, THE 
Stevenson, R,L. 

Dodd, 1979, ISBN 0-393-07758-7 
Penguin, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-14-035047-0 

Hyde is a vile and obnoxious person. Jekyll is a reputable doctor, pleasant and well 
liked. The recent relationship between them has the doctor's friends puzzled. 
Little do they know that Doctor Jekyll has created the weird Mr. Hyde. 



-93- -99 



American 
Science Fiction 



STRANGER IN A STRANGE LAND 

Heinlein, Robert 
Putnam, 1961 

Ace Books, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-441-79034-8 

f ilTinn ' vI?Lr' *'"''m-"'J' ''•"i^l ^ '^'^"^ °^ ^^"tasy- satire, and science 

tiction. Valentine Michael Smith, born on Mars and educated to its strange 
customs, superhuman abilities, and ignorance of sex, a-rives on earth He is 
c^?r?P f ^ ^.-^H'?^' ^^^^^ *° a mountain estate and protected from exploitation by 
scientists, politicians and the press. Eventually the Martian establishes a new 
church based on customs from his world, but it runs into conflict with Western 



World 
Novel 



North 
Fol klore 



STRANGER, THE 
Camus, Albert 

Amereon, Ltd, ISBN 0-89190-220-1 
Barron, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-8120-3543-7 

Meursault feels a stranger in his world and refuses to "play the game" of telling 
litJe white lies or believing in love or religious faith. He shows noarief or emotion 
over his mother's death, killing another, or his affair. While in prison wait ng 
execution, he discovers a passion for life. 

SUSITNA STORY 
Shem, Pete 
(no ISBN listed) 

Center^*°'^^ ^ ^^"^'"^ ""^^ of^'ginaHy published by Alaska Native Language 



American 
Novel 



British 
Non-ficti on 



SUMMER OF MY GERMAN SOLIDER, THE 
Green, Bette 

Dial Books For Young Readers, 1973, ISBN 0-8037-8321-3 
Bantam, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-553-27247-0 

l?no.tn^ '^^^I^^' ^^".y.^^'S^" desperate for acceptance after being rejected by 
are dfsastrous ^" ^'""^^^"^ consequences 

SURVIVE THE SAVAGE SEA 
Robertson, Dougal 
Praeger, 1973 

Sheridan House, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-246-12509-8 

r'^fwi'v 'c'in?nni '''''^''^^^ ^^ales, the Robertson family and a friend face 

a 38-day struggle for survival on a small raft many miles from shore. 



ERIC 



100 



-94- 



British 

Science Fiction 



SWORD IN THE STONE 

White, Terance H. 

Putnam, 1934, ISBN 0-399-10783-5 

Dell, •f978, paper, ISBN 0-440-98445-9 

Two boys, one of whom turns out to be King Arthur, live in a great medieval manor 
and barn about hawking, jousting, sword play, and being gentlemen. 



SWORD OFSHANNARA 

American Brooks, Terry 

Young Adult Ballantine, 1978, paper, ISBN 0-345-31425-5 

This is a sweeping, adult epic-fantasy featuring humans, trolls, dwarfs, elves, 
gnomes, good and evil sorwrers, knights, and knaves. An orphan reluctantly takes 
up the quest for the Sword of Shannara which is a legendary blade that can defeat 
the forces of evil in the world. 



r 



North 
f ol klore 



TALES OF ESKIMO ALASKA 
Frost, O.W. 

Alaska Methodist University Press, 1971 
(no ISBN listed) 

This collection of 21 Eskimo legends and stories, transcribed and interpreted for 
children, includes tales about animals, monsters, mischievous children, and the 
mythic past. It is divided into four sections: Togiak Tales, Bethel Tales, Legends of 
the Lower Yukon and Kuskokwim, and Legends of Kotzebue and vicinity. 



British 
Novel 



TALE OF TWO CITIES, A 
Dickens, Charles 

Running Press, 1986, ISBN 0-89471-479-1 
Scholastic, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-590-02904-5 

Set in the midst of the French Revolution, this book captures the terror and tumult 
of the times and, in addition, weaves a love stcy in which a man is willing to give 
up his life to ensure the happiness of a woman who loves another man. 



ERiC 



101 



-95- 



TALES OF THE FRONTIER: FROM LEWIS AND CLARK TO THE LAST ROUNDUP 

American Everett, Dick 

Short Stories Univ. Nebraska Press, 1960, ISBN 0-8032-0038-2 

Univ. Nebraska Press, paper, iSBN 0-8032-5744-9, BB539 

A collection of short, true stories that illustrate occasions and conditions of life on 
the frontier. Efforts were made to select stories that represent most types of 
occupation and activity during these times. General groupings of stories include 
opening up the Way West, Pioneering on the Middle Border, Overland Trails, the 
Trans-Missouri Frontier, and the Last Frontiers. 

TANAINA TALES 
North Vaudrin, Bill 

Folklore University of Oklahoma Press, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-8061-1414-2 

A collection of legends and stories to'd by Tanaina Indians of Southwest Alaska 
Collected here are 29 anecdotal narratives centering on animals common to the 
area. A glossary and map is also included. 

TELL ME THAT YOU LOVE ME, JUNlE MOON 
American Kellogg, Margorie 

Young Adult Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-374-51825-4 

The funny and poignant story of three physically disabled young people—Junie 
Moon, disfigured by an acid attack; Arthur, victim of a progressive neurological 
disease; and Warren, a paraplegic— who set up housekeeping together. 

TENDER IS THE NIGHT 
American Fitzgerald, F. Scott 

""^^^ Amereon, Ltd, ISBN 0-89190-600-2 

Scribner, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-684- " 7_6 

Dick Diver's career as a psychiatrist is thwarted and his genius numbed through his 
marriage to the wealthy Nicole Warren. Outwardly their life is glitter and glamour, 
but beneath the surface is a corrosion of false social values and Nicole's disturbed 
mind. 

TESS OF THE D'UBERVILLES 
British Hardy, Thomas 

Novel Modern Library, ISBN 0-394-60484-9 

Oxford Univ. Press, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-19-281826-0 

Set in the i9th century this book questions the part fate plays in our lives. Tess is 
sent to meet her f amous relatives to make a good marriage. Instead she is seduced 
and abandoned. When her baby dies she makes a new life for herself and marries 
only to oe discarded again when her husband learns of her past. Through a series of 
incidents, Tess meets both men again for a final time. 



ERIC 



102 

-•96- 



Anerican 
Young Adult 



TEX 

Hinton, S.E. 

Dell, 1980, paper, ISBN 0-440-97850-5 



Since their father is a rodeo cowboy and only rarely home, Tex and his brother Mace 
are forced to take care of themselves. Fifteen-year-old Tex is in love with his 
horse and a f riend^s sister. Things get tough for the brothers whdn their father 
stops sending them money. 



THAT WAS THEN, THIS IS NOW 
American Hinton, S.E. 

Young Adult Viking, 1971, ISBN 0-370-69798-2 

Dell, 1972, paper, ISBN 0-440-98652-4 

Mark was like a brother to Bryon with w.hom he has lived since he was orphaned at 
age nine. Both are now adolescent, but on the edge of delinquency. Bryon is upset 
when he finds his girlfriend's younger brother on a bad drug trip. Then he discovers 
Mark is a pusher and decides to betray him knowing Mark will totally reject him. 
Heartsick, Bryon also rejects his girlfriend. 



THESE THOUSAND HILLS 

American Guthrie, A.B. 

Novel (no ISBN listed) 

Lat Evans decides to get a ranch of his own after driving a herd of cattle from 
Oregon to Montana. The novel follows his adventures, love of a parlor house girl, 
and marriage to respectable Joyce. 



THINGS FALL APART 

World Achebe, Chiuna 

Novel Astor-Honor, 1959 

Fawcett, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-449-20810-9 



White civilization has not yet made its way into a remote Nigerian village in the 
late 19th century. Okonkwo is a self-made man who follows the old ways in place 
for centuries. When one of his favorite sons converts to Christianity it kills him and 
his world. 



THIS OLD HOUSE: THE STORY OF CLARA RUST, ALASKA 
North Wold, JoAnne 

Biography Alaska Northwest Publishing Co., paper, ISBN 0-88240-069- X, 062 

The story of Clara Rust, an Alaska pioneer, and her family, friends, Fairbanks, and 
a fine old house. She first came to Fairbanks in 1908, and this book is based on her 
journals and interviews. 



THREE MUSKETEERS, THE 

World Dumas, Alexander 

Novel Dodd, 1984, ISBN 0-396-08355-2 

Penguin, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-14-035054-3 



D'Artagnan arrives in Paris in 1625 and gets involved in a duel with three 
musketeers who become his best friends. Their adventures are played out in the 
Q rich historical background of the reign of Louis XIII and Louis XIV. 

ERIC ,g,_ 103 



Ameri can 
Short Stories 



American 
Young Adult 



North 
Biography 



THURBER CARNIVAL, THE 
Thurber, James 

Modern Library, 1957, ISBN 0-394-60474-1 

Harper & Row, 1975, paper, ISBN 0-06-090445-3, CN445 

A collection of short stories that include friendly humor and satire. 

TIGER EYES 
Blume, Judy 

Bradbury Press, 1981, ISBN 0-02-71 1080-X 
Dal I, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-440-98469-6 

Davey must try to work through her pain and confusion following the death of her 
father during a robbery of his grocery store. To help recover from the tragedy 
Davey and her family visit her father's sister in New Mexico. 

Ji^^M D 1"^°."^ TEACHER iN THE ALASKAN WILDERNESS 

bpecht, Robert 

Bantam, 1984, paper. ISBN 0-553-26596-2 

Inrnt^l * °- ^" ^S-ye^r-old girl who travels to Alaska in 1927 to teach 

Alaska at Vume.°'^ ' '"^'^^^t'^'^ed, but a true-to-life account of 



North 
Folklore 



North 
Folklore 



TLINGIT MYTHS AND TEXTS 
Swanton, John R. 

Scholarly Press, ISBN 0-403-03710-7 

i^q^Tlm'f 'J"^^^'' '!f • "'xr- ''^'^ "^""S'* "^y^^' texts was collected in 
llrl' f°'^^,^^^'<g'-°und in Tlingit culture would be helpful for those using this 
book. It IS ^ne Df the well known publications of the Bureau of American Ethnology. 

TLINGIT STORIES 
Ackerman, Maria 

Alaska Methodist University, 1975 
(no ISBN listed) 

m.°n?nVf^*nlMj; "^""^'^ '"''!^"' *° entertain. This also includes 

maps of the Chilkat area and a glossary of Tlingit words. 



American 
Novel 



TO KILL A MOCKINGBIRD 
Lee, Harper 

Harper-Row, 1961, ISBN 0-397-00151-7 
Warner Books, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-446-31049-2 

Tornboy Scout recollects a telling summer in the 1930's when her beloved father. 
Atticus -inch, risked condemnation by town racists for defending a Black man 
unjustly accused of rape. ^ 



ERIC 



104 

-98- 



TOM JONES 

Fielding, Henry 

Buccaneer Books, 1982, ISBN 0-89966-398-2 
Modern Library, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-394-60519-5 

The history of a young man of strong natural impulses, little sense of morality, and 
a good disposition. A great cast of characters of all sorts and all conditions appear 
in this novel set in 1745. 



TOMBS OF ATUAN, THE 

LeGuin, Ursula 

Bantam, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-553-14946-6 

This is the second book in the Earthsea Trilogy. Arha has had home, family, and 
possessions taken away and is made high priestess to the ancient and nameless 
Powers of the Earth. Set down at the Place of the Tombs in the deserts of Atuan, 
she faces a thief seeking the greatest treasure of the Tombs. 



TOO FAR TO WALK 

Hersey, John 

Bantam, 1966 

*** not in print, librarians 

Hersey examines the rebellious behavior of a group of undr^rgraduates in a New 
England college. 



TRAPPED 

Roth, Arthur 
(no ISBN listed) 

When Floyd Collins in trapped in a cave in 1925 the rescue attempts receive wide 
news coverage. This is the story of how the media coverage came to hamper anc 
may have even contributed to Collin's death. Rescue workers came to do things to 
please the press rather than follow proven techniques. R^dio stations carried hourly 
bulletins and newspapers carried conflicting reports and en made up stories to 
make things more exciting. 



TRAVELS IN ALASKA 
Muir, John 

AMS Press, ISBN 0-404-16075-1 
Sierra, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-87156-783-0 

John Muir first visited Alaska only twelve years after the purchase from Russia in 
1879, and he made four more trips. This is his writings about Southeast Alaska 
visits including trips to Glacier Bay, Wrangell, Sitka, Admiralty Island, Tracy Arm 
and more. 



TRAVELS WITH CHARLEY IN SEARCH OF AMERICA 

Steinbeck, John 
Viking, 1962 

Penguin, 1980, paper, 0-14-005320-4 

T.he author and his poodle, Charley, travel across the U.S. on backroads to get to 
know the country as it is now. Although some things upset him, Steinbeck he is 
proud of his native land. 

105 

-99- 



World 
Novel 



TREASURE ISLAND 

Stevens, Robert Lewis 

Dodd, 1985, ISBN 0-396-08532-6 

Young Jim Hawkins, a cabin boy aboard a sailing ship in the 18th century, finds 
himself in the midst of a treasure hunt and a mutiny. Although he fights the 
mutineers to protect his friends, his life is saved when he is wounded by Long John 



American 
Novel 



American 
Novel 



World 
Novel 



American 
Novel 



TREE GROWS IN BROOKLYN, A 

Smith, Betty 

Buccaneer Bks, 1981, ISBN 0-89966-303-6 

Harper & Row, 1968, paper, ISBN 0-06-080126-3, P126 

During the early 1900's life in Brooklyn is rough, but the childhood and youth of 
Francie Nolan is far from somber. Nur^^red by a loving mother, Francie grows and 
seeks happiness despite poverty and an alcoholic father. 

TREES, THE 
Richter, Conrad 

Knopf, 1940, ISBN 0-394-44951-7 

This is the first of three volumes about a pioneer family. The Luckett family faces 
isolation and hardships in the wilderness north of the Ohio River. Events are viewed 
through the eyes of the oldest daughter. 

TRIAL, THE 
Kafka, Franz 

Buccaneer Books, 1983, ISBN 0-89966-453-9 
Schocken, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-8052-0848-8 

Joseph K. is accused of an unnamed crime of which he knows nothing by a 
mysterious legal authority with offices in a rundown tenement. The novel is about 
his fruitless efforts to obtain justice from an authority with which he cannot even 
effectively communicate. It ends with his loss of dignity and death. 

TRUE GRIT 
Portis, Charles 

New American Library, ISBN 0-451-13734-5, AE2707 

A stubborn 14-year-old talks an equally stubborn marshal into helping her track 
down her father's killer in an Old West yarn that mixes the comic with the typical 
s.noot-em-up. 



American 
Young Adult 



ERIC 



TUCK EVERLASTING 
Babbitt, Natalie 

Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1975, ISBN 0-374-37848-7 
Farrar, Straus, Giroux, 1975, paper, ISBN 0-374-48009-5 

There is kidnapping, murder, and jailbreak in the aftermath of a young girl's 
discover of a family that has found the "Fountain of Youth." The book offers a 
sobering answer to the question, what would it be like to live forever. 



TUNNEL VISION 

American Arrick, Fran 

Young Adult Dell, 1981, paper, ISBN 0~440-98579-X 

When fifteen-year-old Anthony, & near genius, commits suicide, he leaves no note 
and no explanation. His parents and friends search for answers to the death as they 
deal with feelings of guilt and bewilderment. 



TURN OF THE SCREW 
British James, Henry 

Novel Raintree Pubs, 1981, ISBN 0-8172-1672-3 

Raintree Pubs, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-8172-2027-5 

The new governess of a country estate quickly finds strange happenings occur 
around her two young charges. Set in mid-nineteenth century England, this story 
revolves around the two children and the ghosts with whom they communicate. 



TWO IN THE FAR NORTH 

North Murie, Margaret 

Biography Alaska Northwest Publishing, 1978, paper, ISBN 0-88240-111-4 

The author's adventures in the Alaska frontier begin as a child in Fairbanks during 
the gold mining days. They continue with her marriage at Anvik and then as 
trail-mate and fellow explorer with her biologist husband Olaus Murie. Their trips 
take them to the Upper Koyukuk, Old Crow River (1926), and the Sheenjek (1959). 



TWO TOWERS 
British Tolkien, J.R.R. 

Science Fiction Houghton, 1967, ISBN 0-395-08255-2 
Ballantine, paper, ISBN 0-345-33971-1 

The Companions of the Ring met Saruman the wizard, cross the Dead Marshes, and 
prepare for the Great War in which the power of the ring will be undone. 



u 



UNANGAM UNGIIKANGAN I: ALEUT TRADITIONS I 

North Bergsland, Knu', editor 

Folklore Alaska Native Language Center, UAF, 1977, ISBN 0-933769-17-2 

Retransciption of legends and history in Aleut prose originally collected in 
1909-1910. English translations are included. 



ERIC 



107 

-101- 



UNCLE TOM'S CABIN 

Stowe, Harriet Beecher 

Modern Library, 1985, ISBN 0-394-60527-6 

Bantam, 1981, paper, ISBN 0-553-21119-6 

This is the story of slavery and racial vioience. Uncle Tom is a faithful old slave 
who \s^6\d to different families who treat him well. The brutal Simon Legree, 
however, treats him so harshly he is dying when found by the son of a former 
owner. Another slave escapes by crossing the Ohio River on cakes of ice, and 
another uses the Underground Railway to reach freedom. 



UNVANQUISHED, THE 
Faulkner, William 

Random House, 1965, paper, ISBN 0-394-70351-0, V351 

These seven interlocking stories are set during the Civil War and deal with the 
Satoris family. The book centers primarily on Bayard Sartoris and his* Black 
companion, Ringo. 



UPSTAIRS ROOM, THE 

Reiss, Johanna 

Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1987, ISBN 0-690-04702-9 
Harcourt Brace Jovanovice, 1987, papor, ISBN 0-694-05610-3 

The author details the events of her life during the Nazi occupation of Holland. She 
recalls the strengths and weaknesses o\ the family who offered their home as a 
hiding place for herself and her sister. 



VICAR OF WAKEFIELD 
Goldsmith, Oliver 

State Mutual Books, 1986, ISBN 0-017-52513-1 
Penguin, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-14-043159-4 

The Vicar, like Job, Is tried by undeserved misfortune. He is a mixture of 
shrewdness and simplicity, vanity and unselfishness. Together with his sample and 
rustic family life goes well until rudely distrupted by a seducer and more. By the 
end of the book, the af f lications are restored to happiness and prosperity. 



VIRGINIAN, THE 

Wister, Owen 

Reader's Digest Assoc, 1988, ISBN 0-89577-305-8 
Lyie Stuart, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-8065-0923-6 

This is one of the standards for fiction of the Wild West. The romantic cowboy is 
the hero and gentleman who defends justice and a lady's honor, shoots it out with 
villains and conqueres evil. In this book, the author has established a character who 
is tne original type for the Western folk hero. 



w 

WALDEN 

American Thoreau, Henry David 

Non-fiction Running Press, 1987, ISBN 0-89471-496-1 

Running Press, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-89471-495-3 

In the 1840*s, Thoreau went alone to Walden Pond to live life more fully. This is his 
description of daily activities, animals, and his reflections on life. 



WALL, THE 

American Hersey, John 

Novel Knopf, 1961, ISBN 0-394-45092-2 

Random, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-394-75696-7 

A long, harrowing, ultimately triumphant World War II novel of the heroic 
resistance of a group of Jews facing annihilation by the Nazis in the Warsa'v ghetto. 



WAR AND PEACE 

World Tolstoy, Leo 

Novel Modern Library, 1931, ISBN 0-394-60475-X 

Penguin, 1982, paper, ISBN 0-14-044417-3 

The author's most famous novel deals with Russia and France during the time of 
Napoleon. The authories theories of history are detailed in Napoleon's invasion of 
Russia. The life of a nation is shown through the eyes and emotions of a wide 
variety of characters both real and fictitious. 



WAR OF THE WORLDS 

World Wells, H.G. 

Science Fiction Buccaneer 3ooks, 1981, ISBN 0-89966-376-1 

Scholastic Inc 1972, paper, ISBN 0-590-10112-9 

Earth is under attack by war machines from Mars. Humans are defenseless against 
these hovering machines shooting powerful light rays that destroy anything in their 
path. No human weapons seem able to damage the invading machines. 



WATERSHIP DOWN 

British Adams, Richard 

Science Fiction Macmillan, 1974, ISBN 0-0-02-700030-3, 70003 

In this unique animal saga, a ragtag band of rabbits threatened by the destruction of 
their warren sets out to establish a new home on the English downs. 



ERLC 



109 

-103- 



WAY WEST, THE 
American Guthrie, A.B. 

Novel 

With an emphasis on how characters think and feel, rather than on what they do, 
this novel describes an 1840's emigrant trek from Independence, Missouri to 
Oregon. This was a Pulitzer Prize winner m 1950. 



WE 

World Zamiatim, Yevgeny 

Novel Avon, 1983, paper, ISBN 0-380-63313-2 

In the future, a glass-walled city is ruled with absolute rationality by the 
Benefactor, and its citizens are nameless numbers. A journal is kept by D-503 
There are rumors of revolution, attacks f^nd conspiracy, and D-503 is drawn deeper 
into events. *^ 



WE HAVE ALWAYS LIVE IN THE CASTLE 

American Jackson, Shirley 

Mystery Amereon, Ltd, ISBN 0-89190-623-1 

Penguin, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-14-007107-5 

Marricat Blackwood lives with her sister Constance; everyone else in xhe family is 
dead, poisoned by a fatal dose of arsenic in the sugar bowl. 



WHAT MANNER OF MAN: A BIOGRAPHY OF MARTIN LUTHER KING, JR 

Black Bennett, Lerone 

Biography Johnson Publishing Co, 1968, ISBN 0-87485-027-4 

Writing with warmth and objectivity, a Black journalist portrays Martin Luther 
King, Jr . and his role as a leader of the American civil rights movement. 



WHEN THE LEGENDS DIE 

Native American Borland, Hal 

Harper, 1963 

Wm. C. Brown, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-697-02597-7 

Thomas Black Bull, a young Ute forced into the white man's world, becomes an 
embittered, brutal, horse-killing rodeo rider before he finds his identity throuqh 
acceptance of his Indian heritage. 



WHITE DAWN, THE 
North Houston, James 

^^''^^ Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1971 

(no ISBN listed) 



This IS the account of the fate befalling the crew of a small whale boat that ended 
up in the ice north of Hudson Bay in 1897. Near death, the men were found and 
nurtured back to life by Eskimos who were seeing their first white people. The book 
tells of the happiness and the problems that developed during this encounter 




North 
Novel 



WHITE FANG 

London, Jack 

Penguin, 1984, paper, ISBN 0-14-035045-4 



Half dog, half wolf. White Fang soon learns that kill or be killed is the Law of the 
North. He is captured by Indians, tortured by a cowardly white man, and becomes a 
deadly fighter. 



WHERE THE RED FERN GROWS 

American Rawls, Wilson 

Young Adult Doubleday, 1973, ISBN 0-385-02059-7 

Doubleday, 1973, paper, ISBN 0-385-05619-2 

A ten-year-old boy growing up in the Ozark mountains finally gets a pair of hounds 
and begins the task of turning them into first-class hunting dogs. The characters 
demonstrate perseverance, courage, family, sacrifice, work, life, and death. 



WHY WE CANT WAIT 
Black King, Martin Luther, Jr. 

Non-fiction New American Library, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-451-62181-6, ME218 

The author reviews the background of the 1963 civil rights demands, describes the 
strategy of the Birmingham campaign and outlines future action. That action 
includes a national war on poverty and ignorance and the use of non-violence as a 
way of winning civil and human rights as well as world peace. 



WINESBURG, OHIO 

American Anderson, Sherwood 

Movel Amereon, Ltd, ISBN 0-8488-0417-1 

Penguin, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-14-043304-X 



George Willard, a reporter undergoing the trials of adolescense who is also revolting 
against the narrowness of small-town life, connects most of the stories in this 
collection. Other characters have their own stones which are often of thwarted 
happiness. 



WINGS OVER ALASKA 

North Herron, Edward 

Non-fiction J. Messner, 1959 
(no ISBN listed) 



The story of Carl Ben Eielscn the pioneer Alaska aviator who was born in 1897 and 
died in 1929. 



WINNING 

American Brancato, Robin 

Sports Bantam, 1978, ISBN 0-553-26597-0 

The novel revolves around the efforts of a high school football star who is paralyzed 
in an accident to adjust to the changes v/ith his girl friend, parents, and a new 
teacher. Gradually he overcomes despair and hopelessness to cope with his new life. 

-105- ill 




WINTER IN THE BLOGD 
Native American Welch, James 

Novel Penguin, 1986, paper, ISBN 0-14--008644-7 

Although he is a looser, a 32-year-old Blackfoot. Indian returns to Montana 
eventhougli he knows he doesn t belong there either. We learn why he is the way he 
13 in this existentialist novel through ?. series of misadventures, flashbacks and 
co'iversations. 



WISE CHILD 
American Furlong, Monica 

Novel Knopf, 1987, ISBN 0-394-89105-8 

Juniper, a kind and loving witch woman shunned by inhabitants of a remote Scottish 
village, agrees to take nine-year-old, abandoned, precocious Wise Child into her 
home. The younp girl learns about love, loyalty, responsibility, superstition, maqic, 
and the healing arts. 



WISHSONG OF SHANNARA 

American Bfooks, Terry 

Science Fiction Ballantine, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-345-33687-9 

This is the concluding volume of the Shannara trilogy that features a variety of 
characters, impossible odds and victory gained through sacrif ce. The third 
generation of Ohmsfords answers the call to fight the forces of evil as Brin and her 
brother Jair carry their own version of elven magic-the wishsong-into the enemy's 
camp. 



WIZARD OF EARTHSEA, A 
American LeGuin, Ursula 

Science Fiction Bantam, 1979, paper, ISBN 0-553-13767-0 

The first book in the Earthsea Trilogy is a tale of wizards, dragons and shadows 
played out in Earthsea, a wor'd of numberless islands and vast oceans where mages, 
looking for adventure, wandt d and v/orked magic. This is the story of Ged, who 
became both dragonlord and Archmage, in the time before his fame. 



WOMAN WARRIOR, THE 
Asian Kingston, Maxine Hong 

Biography Knopf, 1976, iSBN 0-394-40067-4 

A fiercely honest autobiography about growing up Chinese-American in California, 
caught by both the ghosts of Chinese traditon and the alien values of the U.S. 



WORKING 

American Terkel, Studs 

Non-fiction Pantheon, 1974, ISBN 0-394-47884-3 

Ballantine, 1985, paper, ISBN 0-345-32569-9 



ERIC 



In 134 oral histories people in a wide range of jobs from barber to film critic "talk 
about what they do all day and how they feel about what they do." 



112- 



106- 



WRINKLE IN TIME, A 
L'Engle, Madeleine 

Farrar, Straus, Grioux, 1962, ISBN 0-374-38613-7 
Dell, 197G, paper, ISBN 0-404-99805-8 

This unusual story describes the adventures of Meg, brother Charles, and friend 
Calvin as they experience a tessaract, or wrinkle in time, in their search for Meg's 
father. The story show v/arm family relationships. 



WUTHERING HEIGHTS 

Bronte, Emily 

Buccaneer Books, 1936, ISBN 0-89966-520-9 

Routledge Chapman & Hail, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-415-00667-8 

This tale of passion and violence is set jund the turn of the century on the English 
moors. Taken into a family as an orphan, Heathcliff loves the family's daughter. 
Thwarted in his quest, he wreaks havoc on the lives of others. 



YEAR WITHOUT MICHAEL, THE 

Pfeffer, Susan Beth 

Bantam, 1987, ISBN 0-553-05430-9 

Bantam, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-553-27373-6 

Michael is missing on the eve of his 14th birthday and the mystery of his 
disappearance threatens to unravel the loving ties that hold his family together. A 
painful, emotionally raw novel that spans a one-year period from the 16-year-old 
sister's perspective. 



YEARLING, THE 

Rawlings, Marjorie K. 

Macmillan, 1985, ISBN 0-684-18461-3 

Macmillan, 1988, paper, ISBN 0-02-044931-3 

After the Civil War, Jody leads a lonely life in the scrub forests of Florida. Then he 
finds a fawn and persuades his father to let him keep it for a pet. When the fawn 
eats the crop, Jody has to make mature decision. 



YOU CAN'T GO HOME AGAIN 

Wolfe, Thomas 

Buccaneer Books, 1981, ISBN 0-89966-294-3 

Harper & Row, 1973, paper, ISBN 0-06-080314-2, P314 

Set in the 1920*s and '30*s, the novel deals with the author's semiautobiographical 
hero, George Webber who has become something of an author. Upon returning, he's 
disappointed by his hometown and his reception. He goes to New York, where he 
becomes involved with a stage designer, and then goes to Europe. 



-107- 173 



YUPIK STORIES 
North Kawagley, Dolores 

Folklore Alaska Methodist University Press, 1975 

(no ISBN listed) 

A collection of 12 stories for children by various authors in Southwest Alaska 
between Unalakleet and the Alaska Peninsula. These stories are often told at 
bedtime or on rainy days. Some titles include "The Bitter Leaf," "Traqedv" 
Legend," and "The Bear Hears." Also included are maps and a glossary ' 



z 



2 FOR 7ACHARIAH 
American O'Brien, Robert C. 

Science Fiction Macmillan, 1975, ISBN 0-689-30442-0 

Macmillan, 1987, paper, ISBN 0-02-044650-0 

Jurviv^d ^^^^^ holocaust realizes that one other person also 



ZIA 

World O'Dell, Scott 

Novel Houghton Mifflin, 1976, ISBN 0-395-24393-9 

Dell, 1978, paper, ISBN 0-440-99904-9 

The sequel to Island of the B lue Dolphins . It is the poignant story of Zia's efforts to 
find her aunt, Kraana. 



20RBA THE GREEK 
World Kazantzakis, Nikos 

Novel Simon & Schuster, 1971, paper, ISBN 0-671-21132-3 

Zorba, a workman, philosopher and hedonist, goes to Crete with the narrator, a rich 
ulS.^^l u*^^ dilettante. He puts Zorba in charge of a newly purchased mine. 
While Zorba accomplishes great feats of strength, he also tells wild stories of his 
erotic adventures, misbehaves with his patron's money, dances, and sings 



ERIC 



-108- 



ALASKA NATIVE LITERATURE ANTHOLOGIES 
Listings by Language Groupings 

Aleut 

Bergsland, Knut, ed. Unanqam Ungilkangan I. . Aleut Traditions I. 

Snigaroff, Cedor. Atkan Historlal Traditions . Partnow, Patricia, ed., Selections 
from Aleut Folklore. 

Inupiaq 

Brown, Emily Ivanoff. Grand Father of Unalakleet . 

Hall, Edwin. T he Eskimo Storyteller: Folktales from Noatak. Alaska . 

Lowenstein, Tom. Eskimo Poems from Canada . 

Oman, Lela. Eskimo Legends . APU Press, 1975. 

Oquilluk, William. People of Kauwerak . APU Press, 1973. 

Siberian Yupik 

Lore of St. Lawrence Island . Volume 1, Gambell; Volume 2, Savoonga. Bering Strait 
School District. 

Central Yupik 

Frost, O.W., (ed). Tales of Eskimo Alaska . 

Kawagley, Dolores. Yupik Stories . 

Woodbury, Anthony. Eskimo Narratives and Tales from Chevak, Alaska . 

Athabaskan 

Kutchln/Gwich' In 

Herbert, Belle. Shandaa. In My Lifetime, edited by Bill Pfisterer and Jane McGary 

Peter, Katherlne and Jane McGary (eds), John Fredson Edward Sapir Haa Googwandak. 
Stories Told by John Fredson to Edward Sapir . 

Peter, Katherlne. Neets'all Gwlindali: living in the Chandalar County . 



ERIC 



U5 

-109- 



Koyukon 

Attla, Catherine. Sitsiv Yugh Noholnik Ts'in': As My Grandfather Told It . 
Jones, Eliza (ed). The Stories Chief Henry Told . 

Peg Hit'an (Ingalik) 

Chapman, John. Athabaskan Stories from Anvik . Retranscribed by James Karl. 
Tanaina 

Kalifornsky, Peter. Kahtnuht'ana Qenaga: The Kenal People's Language . 
Kari, James and James A. Fall, eds. Shem Pete's Alaska . 

Pete, Shem. Susitna Storv . (This older version is different from the version in 
Shem Pete's Alaska. It is also included in Alaska Quarterly Review See 
Anthologies. ) 

Tenenbaum, Joan (ed). Tanaina Stories . 

Vaudrin, Bill (ed). Tanaina Tales . 

Tanacross 

Paul, Gaither. Storie s for mv Grandchildren - 
Upper Tanana 

Brean, Alice. Athabaskan Stories . 
Ahtna 

Karl, James (ed). Tatl'ahwt'aenn Nenn'/The Headwaters People's C ountry- 
Narratives of the Upper Ahtna Athabaskans . 

Ridley, Ruth (ed). Stories in Eagle Han Ches Huch'inn. 

Yukon Territory . 

McClellan, Catherin. The Girl Who Married the Bear . 
Eyak 

Krauss, Michael (ed). In Honor of Evak: The Art of Anna Nelson Harry. 



ERIC 



1 1 



Tlingit 

Ackerman, Maria. Tlingit Stories . 

Dauenhauer, Richard and Nora Marks (eds). Haa Shuka, Our Ancestors: Tlingit Oral 
Narratives . 

Johnson, A. P. Kiksadi Dog Salmon Legend . 

Lowenstein, Tom. How Raven Stole the Light . 

McClellan, Catherine. The Girl Mho Married the Bear . 

Partnow, P. and Tom Lowensteln. How Raven Became Black . 

Swanton, John. Tlingit Myths and Texts . 

Haida 

Swanton, John. Haida Texts and Myths > BAE, 1905. 
Swanton, John. Haida Songs and Tsimshian Texts > 1912. 

Pulu, Tupou (ed>* The Transcribed Tapes of Christine Edenso . No date 198_* 
Tsimshian 

Boas, Franz. Tsimshian Mythology , BAE, 1916. 

Cove, John and G.F. MacDonald. Tricksters, Shamans> and Heroes: Tsimshian 

Narratives I , Collected by Mar i us Barbeau and William Beynon, Canadian 
Museum of Civilization, Ottawa, 1987. 

Swanton, John and Franz Boas. Haida Songs and Tsimshian Texts . 



ERIC 



117 

-111- 



ANTHOLOGIES 



The following anthologies of Native American writers include works by Alaska Natives 
and are especially useful in thematic comparative literature units: 



Nat;v e American Writers 

That's What She Said. Contemporary Poetry and Fiction by Native American Nomen . 
Green, Rayna (ed.), Indiana University Press, Bloomington, IN 1984. 

Anthology of 20th Century Native American Poetry . Niatum, Duane (ed.). Harper and 
Row, New York, NY, 1988. 

Earth Power Coming, Short Fiction in Native American Literature . Ortiz, Simon J. 
(ed.), Navajo Community College Press, Tsaile, AZ 1983. 

American Indian Nriting , Bruchac, Joseph (ed.). The special issue of The Greenfield 
Review. Greenfield Review Press, Greenfield Center, New York, 1981. 

Songs From This Earth on Turtle's Back. Contamporary American Indian Poetry . 
Bruchac, Joseph (ed.), Greenfield Review Press, Greenfield Center, New York. 
1983. 

The Remembered Earth, An Anthology of Contemporary Native American Literature . 
Hobson. Geary. University of New Mexico Pre^s. Albuquerque. NM. 1979. 



ERIC 



Alaskan Writers 

Alaska Native Nriters. Storytellers and Orators . Dauenhauer. Richard and Nora, and 
Holthaus. Gary (Ed.).. Alaska Quarterly Review . Vol. 3-4.. University of 
Alaska-Anchorage. Anchorage. AK. 1986. 

Inroads. An Anthology Celebrating Alaska's Twenty-seven Fellowship Nriters . 
Guttenberg. Elyse and Jean Anderson (ed.). University of Alaska Press, 
Fairbanks. AK. 1988. 

In the Dreamlight. Twenty-one Alaskan Nriters . Hedin. Robert and David Stark (ed.), 
Copper Canyon Press. Port Townsend. WA. 1984. 

Hunger and Dreams. The Alaskan Nomsns' Anthology . Monaghan. Partricia (ed.), 
Fireweed Press. Fairbanks. AK. 1983. 

A Good Crew, An Alaskan Men's Anthology . Wilbert. Roland and Larry Laraby (ed.), 
Fireweed Press. Fairbanks. AK. 1986. 

Finding the Boundaries, Poems and Short Stories by Alaskan Nriters . Alaska State 
Council of the Arts. Anchorage. AK. 1981. 

On People a nd Things Alaskan. A Collection of Pr-:^ by Alaskan Nriters . Smith, 
Brido/.'t (ed.). Firsthand Press, Juneau, AK, 1982. 

The Compass Inside Ourselves . Lord, Nancy, (Stories), Fireweed Press, Fairbanks, AK. 
1984. 

Tides of Morning. Evans. Mei Mei. et. al . . Introducing Four Alaska Nomen and Their 
Writing (stories and poetry). Vanessapres. P.O. Box 81335. Fairbanks. AK 99708, 
1985. 

-■'■'2- ^ ^ ^ 



Alaskan Poets 



Balk, Chrlstlanne, Bindweed . Collier Books, 1986. 

Baron, Mary, Letters for the New England Dead . David R. Godlne Publisher, Boston. 
1974. 

., Wheat Among Bones, the Sheep Meadow Press, distributed by Persea Books, 



Inc., 225 Lafayette Street, New York, NY, 10012, 1979. 

Bigjim, Fred, Sinrock . Press-ZZ, Portland, OR, 1983. 

. Walk the Wind . Press-ZZ, Portland, OR, 1988. 

Burke, William T. , S.J., I Breathe White . Silver Wings Press. P.O. Box 1000. 
Pearblossom, CA 93553-1000, 1987. 

Burke, William T. , S.J., and Marvin Timberlake, Marvin: Poetry and Dialysis . Silver 
Wings Press, P.O. Box 1000, Pearblossom, CA 93553-1000, 1988. 

Chandonnet, Ann Fox, Ptarmigan Valley . The Lightning Tree, P.O. Box 1837. Santa Fe 
NM 87501 , 1980. * 

Cornberg, David, Liquid Mirrors . Alaska Nature Press, P.O. Box 632, Eagle River, AK 
99577, ] 986 • 

Oauenhauer, Nora Marks, The Droning Shaman . The Black Current Press. P.O Box 1149 
Haines, AK 99826, 1988. 

Oauenhauer, Richard, Glacier Bay Concerto . Alaska Pacific University Press 
Anchorage, AK 99504, 1980. 

.. Frames of Reference . The Black Current Press, P.O. Box 



1149, Haines, AK 99827, 1987. 

., Phenologies. Thorp Springs Press, 1002 Lorrain, Austin, TX 



78703, 1988, 

Davis, Robert, Soul Catcher . Raven's Bones Press, P.O. Box 1450, Sitka, AK 99835, 
1 986 • 

Goodwin, Sister, A Lagoon Is In Mv Backyard . I Reed Books. Order from: 1446 Sixth 
St., Suite D, Berkeley, CA 94710, 1984. 

Haines, John, News From the Glacier. Selected Poems. 1960-1 980. Wtleyan University 
Press, Middetown, CT, 1982. ' 

Hedin, Robert, Snow Country. Copper Canyon Press, Box 271, Port Townsend, WA, 98368. 
_, County 0, Copper Canyon Press, Box 271, Port Townsend, WA, 98368, 



1984. 



Holthaus, Gary, Circling Back . Peregrine Smith Books, P.O. Box 667. Layton UT 
84041. 1984. 



1 1 ,9 

ERIC .113- 



, Unexpected Manna . Copper Canyon Press, Box 271, Port Townsond, WA 

98368, 1978. 

Knoeller, Christian, Song In Brown Bear Country . Devil's Club Press, Juneau, AK 
99801, 1987. 

McCleery, Nancy, Night Muse . Uintah Press, P.O. Box 420, Port Townsend, NA 98368, 
1981. 

, Staving the Winter . The Cummington Press, Omaha, 1987. 



McElroy, David, Making it Simple . The ECCO Press, 1975. 

Morgan, John, The Bone-Duster . Quarterly Review of Literature Series, 1980. 

. The Arctic Herd . The University of Alabama Press, 1984. 

Nlckerson, Sheila, Songs of the Pine Wife , Copper Canyon Press, Box 271, Port 
Townsend, WA 93868, 1980. 

, Feast of the Animals. An Alaskan Bestiary . Old Harbor Press, 



P.O. Sox 97, Sitka, AK 99835, 1987. 

. On Why the Quilt-maker Became a Dragon. A Visionary Poem . 



Va.iessapress, P.O. Box 81335, Fairbanks, AK 99708, 1985. 

, In the Compass of Unrest . Trout Creek Press, 5976 Bel lings 

Road, Parkdale, OR 94041, 1988. 

, To the Maters and the Mild. Poems of Alaska . Thorp Springs 



Press, 1002 Lorrain, Austin, TX, 1975. 

Sexton, Thomas, Terra Incognita . Solo Press, 1209 Drake Circle, San Luis Obispo, 
CA 9.^401, 1974. 

Townsend, Joanne, B alancing Act . Harpoon Press, 1409 Twining Drive, Anchorage, An 
99504, 1979. 



ERIC 



DRAMA/PLAYS 



A 



ACT WITHOUT WORDS; A MIME FOR TWO PEOPLE 

Samuel Beckett 

This mime for one player is about a man who is alternately successful and 
frustrated in attempts to perform certain actions. 



AH| WILDERNESS 

Eugene O'Neill (1933) 

A typical middle-class American small-town family leads a pleasant life in this 
comedy. The sixteen-year-old son writes love letters to his high school love, but 
that provokes his stern father. Richard then falls into the arms of a "colleoG tart" 
which greatly alarms the family. After being straightened cJt about the facts of 
life by his father, Richard returns to his first love as the parents watch with 
nostalgic affection. 



AGAMEMNON 

Aeschylus (458 B.C.) 

This tragedy begins with the approach of the fall o* "'roy. The queen has been 
unfaithful to her absent husband. His transgrer' 'ne command in his 

prideful return with the princess Cassandr-^ se^ "^^j.. of retribution to the 

third generation. When the queen announces si ^ * oth the king and the 
princess, the people protest. 



ALAS, BABYLON 

Anne Martens 

Based on the Pat Frank novel, this is about a group of people in Florida who survive 
nuclear war and then face physical and emotional problems. 



ANTIGONE 

Sophocles (ca. 441 B.C.) 

The city of Thebes has just won a great battle but lost their king as this tragedy 
begins. Creon, the new king, announces the body of the invading king shall remain 
unburied, but his sister, Antigone, plans to bury the corpse. Creon sentences her to 
death. His son who is betrothed to Antigone pleads for hor life as do others. 
Finally Creon relents only to find Antigone and his son have killed themselves. 
When Green's wife hears of her son's death she also kills herself. 

ER?C -"5- 



ARSENIC AND OLD LACE 

Joseph Kesselring (1941) 



Called the funniest play about murder over written, it revolves around the sweetly 
homicidal mania of two old maids. With humanitarian mo*ives> the two welcome 
lonely, friendless old men and ply them with arsenic-spikeo ^vine and then bury 
them in the basement. A nephew discovers a corpse and considers what to do. 
About then another nephew, a more direct homicidal maniac who has also claimed 
his twelfth corpse, arrives. The police take care of him, but the aunts are seint to a 
home, where, as the play ends, they offer the custodian an arsenic drink. 



B 



BELLE OF AMHER§T 
William Luce 

A one woman impersonation of American poet Emily Dickenson that is based on her 
poetry and letters. 



BETSEY BROWN 

Ntozake Shange 



BLOOD WEDDING 

Federico Garcia Lorca (1932-33) 

Two feuding families are the center of this tragedy- ,<e last living ma!e of one 
clan courts a girl who has been implicated in an affair with the one male of the 
other clan not in jail. On the eve of the wedding, the bride resumes her relations 
with the groom's enemy. They flee into the forest and are followed by the groom. 
The two men kill each other and the bride returns to the groom's house to face \)\s 
mother. 



c 

CHERRY ORCHARD, THE 
Anton Chekhov (1903) 

The Russian Ranevskayas family attempts to maintain their aristocratic values in 
an increasing bourgeois world. Because of precarious family finances, a part of the 
estate with the cherry orchard must be sold. Although all family members realize 
the need to raise money, for di ferent reasons none can bear to sell the orchard. It 
symbolizes for each the happiness of a lost past. 



1^2 

-116- 



CHILDREN OF A LESSER GOD 

Mark Medof (1980) 



Problems arise when a speech teacher at the state school for the deaf falls in love 
and marries a woman who has been deaf from birth and whose only form of 
communication is by sign language. 



CHILDREN'S HOUR, THE 

Lillian Hellman (1934) 

Two young women set up a boarding school, but their hopes for a secure future are 
shattered when a pupil accuses the teachers of an abnormal sexual relationship. 
The student blackmails another girl into supporting her story and the rumor gains 
momentum. The teachers lose their libel suit, and the school is wrecked. One of 
the women breaks her engagement; the other commits suicide. Too late efforts are 
made to right the wrong. The author has explained this is not ? ^y about 
lesbianism, but about a lie. 



CRIMES OF THE HEART 

Beth Henley (1982) 



The shared memories and forgotten dreams are revealed at a reunion of three young 
sisters in their Mississippi home. The present family crisis involves the youngest 
sister who has just shot here politically prominent husband. 



CRUCIBLE, THE 

Arthur Miller (1952) 

Intolerance and mass hysteria are explored in this dramatization of the Salem witch 
hunts at the end of the 17th century. Seeking to avoid punishment for dancing in 
the woods, several girls declare themselves victims of the Devil and accuse 
harmless women of witchcraft. The community is caught in a frenzy. One farmer 
who was seduced by the ringleader of the girls, tries to defend his wife who has 
been accused of being a witch. He refuses to save himself with a false confession 
and IS led to the gallows. 



CYRANO DE BERGERAC 

Edmond Rostand (1837) 

Cyrano's large nose prevents him from telling Roxane of his love. Instead he 
successfully helps Christian win Roxane. When Christian dies, Cyrano vows never 
to reveal his role, but he remains devoted to Roxane. When she is dying, Cyrano 
reveals he was the soul behind the man she loved. 



ERIC 



1^3 

-117- 



DEATH OF A SALESMAN 

Arthur Miller (1949) 



At 63, traveling salesman Willy Loman has reached a dead end. Looking back, 
events in his past have new meaning. His image of a perfect father and husband is 
shattered when one son finds him with another woman. Another adventurous son 
who.has died comes to call again and again. Willy finally pulls himself together and 
asks his indifferent boss for an in-town job. Instead he's fired. Since his insurance 
is paid up, Willy realizes if he dies in an accident heMI be worth more than if he is 
alive. He goes to the garage and starts the car. Although Willy's wife loves him for 
what he is and can foresee the catastrophe, she can do nothing to prevent it. 

DOCTOR FAUSTUS 

Christopher Marlowe (ca. 1589) 

This tragedy traces the fall of Faustus who sold his soul to the Devil in exchange for 
24 years of earthly power and delight. In a counterpoint, Faustus' servant follows a 
similar cause. Scenes of tragic intensity are interspersed with scenes of parody, 
farce, black magic, and pageantry. 

DOLL'S HOUSE, A 

Henrik Ibsen (IP^g) 

Protected from responsibility and knowledge of worldly arfairs by her husband, Nora 
Helmar is childishly innocent. After forging her dying father's.name to a note to 
get money to pay for her husband's medical care, Nora is threatened with exposure. 
Instead of understanding her motives, Nora's husband upbraids her unmercifully 
when he learns of her actions. Although later forgiven by her husband, she was so 
shocked by his original outburst that she leaves both her husband and children to 
seek a life where she is not treated as a mere doll. 



EFFECT OF GAMMA RAYS ON MAN-IN-THE-MOON MARIGOLDS 
Paul Zindel (1965) 

This play won the Pulitzer Prize. The plot deals with a widow and her two 
daughters. One is disturbed, and the other is imaginative and has been captured by 
the atom and the possibilities it offers of producing mutations. 



-118- ^ 



ELEPHANT MAN, THE 

Bernard Pomerance (1979) 



John Merrick was deformed from birth and has been regarded as a freak until Dr. 
Treves* interest in his case makes Merrick a favorite of the aristocracy and literati. 



ELECTRA 

Sophocles (ca. 418 B.C.) 

Accompanied by friends, the exiled Orestes returns to his murdered father's house 
to seek revenge on his faithless mother and her lover in this tragedy. A messenger 
is sent ahead with false information of Orestes' death. The mother readily accepts 
the news. Orestes then returns carrying an urn of his supposed ashes. He meets his 
sister Electra from whom he has long been separated. Eventually they recognize 
each other and kill their mother and her lover. 



EQUUS 

Peter Shaffer 

Equus is Latin for horse. From a psychiatrist's probing we learn that 17 year-old 
Alan used to ride naked at night; the horses gave him exhilaration and sexual 
release. Also after an unsuccessful attempt at lovemaking, Alan blinded six horses. 
The psychiatrist while treating the boy is also seeking escape from a boring 
routine. He finds a more mature adjustment with the help of sympathetic woman 
magistrate. 



ESCAPE TO FREEDOM 

Ossie Davis (1978) 

The play depicts Frederick Douglas's early life as a slave in Maryland, his struggles 
to learn reading and writing, and his escape to freedom. 



EVERYMAN 

Anonymous (15th century) 

In this morality play, God instructs Death to take Everyman. Seeking company to 
the grave, Everyman is rejected by those he asks such as Knowledge, Confession, 
Discretion, Strength and Beauty. Only Good Deeds is prepared to enter the grave 
with Everyman. At the conclusion a doctor interprets the obvious moral. 



ERIC 



1^5 

-119- 



FIDDLER ON THE ROOF 

Joseph Stein 



In this musical, Jews in a Czarist ghetto learn to endure poverty and even enjoy 
their days through dancing in the joy of the Lord and the joy of mating. One of 
Tevye's three daughters marries a non-Jew and is spoken of no more. On the whole 
the community mane jes life and even accepts with resignation the news that their 
village was to be taken from them and they were to be evicted. Some planned to go 
to the land of the free. 



FOR COLORED GIRLS WHO HAVE CONSIDERED SUICIDE WHEN THE RAINBOW 
IS ENUF 

Ntozake Shange 

A series of poetic monologues by five Black women, and it is told from their points 
of view. The play gives insights and observations of the modern Black experience. 



GLASS MENAGERIE, THE 

Tennessee Williams (1945) 

In this ''memory play," Tom Wingfield evokes the drab flat he left long ago, his 
former Southern belle mother, his sister Laura who is shy and finds refuge in the 
imaginary world of her glass animals, and a friend from work who the mother tries 
to match with Laura. Tom flees from the mother and sister but cannot banish the 
thought of their fragile, helpless existence. 



GREAT WHITE HOPE, THE 

Howard Sackler 

The play about the world of boxing and racial conflict debuted on Broadway in 1968. 



P6 

-120- 



HAIR 

Ragni, Gerome, and James Rado (1967) 



Called, the American tribal love-rock musical, this play came in a period of 
rebellion and was a protest against many things deemed wrong by the young in 
contemporary life, especially war. The music is a very strong part of the play; a 
tape recording by the original cast went to the moon on Apollo 12. The play was 
notorious for the nude scene at the end of Act I. 



HAMLET 

William Shakespeare (ca. 1600) 

Hamlet is a prince with good qualities likely to make him an ideal ruler. But sin has 
corrupted the court. His mother has married his uncle, the murderer of his father. 
Sworn to vengeance, but by means answerable to God, Hamlet feigns madness to 
discover the extent of the guilt conspiracy at court. Even when King Claudius 
reveals his guilt, Hamlet cannot bring himself to kill him. Inadvertently, however 
he kills Pollnus and is exiled. His mother dies of a poison prepared for Hamlet who 
avenges himself on the king. Hamlet is killed in a duel by Laetes who then dies with 
a poisoned rapier. 



HEDDA GABLER 

Henry Ibsen (1890) 

A frustrated woman, Hedda Gabler is capable only of destroying others. She tries 
to convince a young scholar to commit a glorious suicide with one of her dueling 
pistols. But the suicide is not glorious. He shot himself in the stomach, perhaps by 
accident. An unscrupulous judge finds the pistol and threatens to reveal its owner 
unless Hedda consents to a clandestine affair with him. Disappointed and 
frightened, she uses the other pistol to kiil herself. 



HOMECOMING, THE 

Harold Pinter (1965) 

Teddy and his wife Ruth come home to his father's London house, also occupied by 
several other characters. Ruth soon makes love with one and, with family approval, 
agrees to give her sexual services to the household members and sell it to help 
support the family. Without protest, Teddy returns to his professorship and their 
three children. At play's end, Teddy's father protests he's not too old for Ruth. 



IP? 



-121- 



IMPORTANCE OF BEING ERNEST, THE 

Oscar Wilde (1894) 



This social satire plays lightly over the characters who move through a farce that 
has no underlying thesis. Jack pretends to his niece he is going to London to look 
after a wicked brother, Algernon, as an excuse for seeing the niece, impersonates 
the wicked brother. Jack, who is going to be married has no further need of a 
brother, arri/es with the news of his brother's death. And so on. The absr^rdity of 
the situations is made doubly absurd by the contrasted grace and dignity of 
everyone's utterances. The play is filled with witticisms and humor. 



INHERIT THE WIND 

Jerome Lawrence 

The play is based on the 1925 "monkey trial" of John Scopes who 
was defended by Clarence Darrow and prosecuted by William Jennings Bryan, The 
issue was the teaching of Darwin's theory of man's evolution and the courtroom 
trial scene is exceptionally strong. 



JULIUS CAESAR 

William Shakespeare (ca, 1598) 



The Roman commoners rejoice in Caesar's victory over Pompey, but the patricians 
fearing Caesar's growing ambition, conspire against him, Caesar is killed by 
Brutus, Mark Anthony pretends to submit to the reasoning of the assassins and 
gives an oration that sets mischief afoot in the marketplace. He then joins with 
Octavius Caesar whcse army wins and Cassius and Brutus take their own lives. 



KING LEAR 

William Shakespeare (ca, 1605) 

In this tragedy, headstrong and arrogant King Lear decides to divide his kingdom 
among his three daughters and reserves the largest share to the one loving him the 
most. Unable to distinguish between flattery and love, he banishes the honest 
daughter. The other two conspire to strip him of his dignity and possessions. As 
Lear is struck my madness he begins to know himself as a human being, Gloucester 
is also blind to the evil he has fathered. Evil does its worst to both, but in the wake 
of physical destruction comes spiritual regeneration. 



L 



LADY'S NOT FOR BURNING, THE 

Christopher Fry (1947) 

In this verse comedy, the enchanting Jennet Jourdemayne denies having turned 
Matthew Skipps into a dog. An old soldier claims to have killed Skipps, but others 
cannot be bothered as long as there are witches to be burned. The appearance of a 
very drunken Skipps promises a happy ending. 



LITTLE FOXES 

Lillian Hellman (1939) 

Three children join to raise money to establish a cotton mill in their Southern town. 
Family members become involved in trying to raise money or reject the avaricious 
family plotting. Two of the plotters steal securities belonging to their sister's 
ailing husband and plan to cut her out of the scheme. The husband learns of the 
plot, suffers a heart attack and dies because his wife refuses him medicine. She 
then threatens to prosecute her brothers for theft of the securities. Her daughter 
finally leaves the family unable to bear the greed. 



LONG DAY'S JOURNEY INTO NIGHT 

Eugene O'Neill (1941) 

This is an autobiographical play about a family love-hate relationship developed in 
its tawdry details. The mother is addicted to morphine, the father has ruined his 
acting career by his success in a single role in a potboiler play, a brother is a 
dissipated soul who has consumption. 



LOWER DEPTHS, THE 

Maxim Gorky 

A group of derelicts live in a dark flophouse that is run by a brute. His wife is in 
love with one of the flophouse dwellers and encourages the murder of her husband. 
The stories of others living here are presented during the course of the play. 
Eventually Luka comes into the midst of these "dregs of society" and invents 
reasons for them to hope for something better. 



LYSISTRATA 

Aristophanes (411 B.C.) 

In this comedy, Lysistrata proposes all the women of Greece go on a sex strike to 
make the men stop the Athens-Sparta war. The women capture the Acropolis and 
lock the men out. Lysistrata must be strong to prevent some women from returning 
home for short visits. Eventually the men give in and make peace. 



ERIC 



M 



MACBETH 

William Shakespeare (ca. 1606) 

In this tragedy, Macbeth, knowing the consequences, murders King Duncan, an 
honored guest in his Macbeth's castle. A living hell follows. Haunted by his act, 
Macbeth keeps spies in every noble house. He murders a fellow general, but is 
unmanned when he see the man's bloody ghost. Lady Macbeth is driven to suicide. 
Macbeth is finally killed by Duncan's son. 



MADWOMAN OF CHAILLOT, THE 

Jean Giraudoux (1S43) 

A group of French financiers suspect oil in the Parisian subsoil and are willing to 
destroy to city to exploit it. The Madwoman of Chaillot, a poor and humble person, 
fights against them and entices them down a stairway from which there is no 
return. Beauty and love now return to earth. There are episodes of Parisian street 
life and a mock trial. 



MAN FOR ALL SEASONS, A 

Robert Bolt (1960) 

This is the story of Sir Thomas More who refuses to violate his conscience and as 
Lord Chancellor refuses to uphold Henry VIITs religious supremacy although he 
knows the consequences. He is beheaded in 1533. As More says, "When statesmen 
forget their own private conscience for the sake of their public duties.. .they lead 
the country by a short route to chaos. 

MARY OF SCOTLAND 

Maxwell Anderson (1933) 

Catholic Queen Mary returns to Protestant Scotland when her husband's death 
blocks plans to unit the kingdoms of France arid Scotland. Queen Elizabeth I fears 
she will becoming queen of England and tricks her into a variety of poor decisions. 
Mary is eventually driven into exile. Elizabeth gives her "sanctuary" in prison. In 
the dramatic final scene Mary wins verbally but loses politically. 



ERIC 



MEDEA 

Euripides (431 B.C.) 



The barbarian Medea has sacrificed everything to help Jason, her lover, steal the 
golden fleece from her father. Although now married to Medea, Jason plans to 
marry another. Medea sends poisoned gifts to the intended bride and kills her. To 
further hurt Jason, Medea kills both their children and then won't let Jason bury 
them. 



MEMBER OF THE WEDDING 

Carson McCullers (1949) 

Frankie, 12, is hot-tempered, imaginative, and feels the world should take notice of 
ner. b.ie longs for companionship during these times when she first ceases to be a 
child. Her mother is dead, her father pays her little attention, and older girls 
refuse to let her join their club. Frustrated she decides to accompany her brother 
on his honeymoon but they leave without her. Later she becomes Frances and the 
neighborhood youth appears to be a Greek god. 



MIDSUMMER NIGHT'S DREAM, A 

William Shakespeare 

To affirm the strength of their love, Hermia and Lysander escape into the 
enchanted woods outside of Athens. They are pursued by two others and the four 
are beset by fairy mischief in the shape of Puck. To attempt a cure for love's, 
torment. Puck uses drops from a magic flower. Others come into the woods to 
rehearse a play and become involved. The four lovers are eventually happily paired 
and return to Athens for a f'istive wedding. 



MIRACLE WORKER, THE 

Williams Gibson 

Describes the early days of the famous humanitarian and writer Helen Keller who 
was blind and deaf from birth. 



MOTHER COURAGE AND HER CHILDREN 

Bertold Brecht (1939) 

Mother Courage is an itinerant merchant living off troops from both sides during 
the Thirty Years' War. She uses shrewdness and tenacity to keep her family intact. 
Although she loses each member of her family. Mother Courage survives the 
misfortunes of war. She, however, is unaware that by living off the war she is 
partly responsible for the death of her family. 



131 

-125- 



MOUSETRAP 

Agatha Christie (1952) 

The play opens with the radio announcing a woman's death in Paddington. Various 
guests arrive at a country house, and the police follow. A woman was killed at the 
same address where three children had been sent by court order years before. Two 
of them died. The farmer died in prison. The dead woman was his wife. When the 
judge who sent the children to the farm is killed at the guest house, police asked 
everyone to repeat their actions. Various guests are kept under suspicion until the 
end. 



MUCH ADO ABOUT NOTHING 

William Shakespeare (ca. 1598) 

A comedy about Claudio who is in love with Hero but steps aside out of loyalty to 
Don Pedro. Characters add laughter and intrigue, plot the romance of Beatrice and 
Benedick, and bring villainy to light before tragedy has destroyed the courtship of 
Hero and Claudio. 



N 



NIGHT THOREAU SPENT IN JAIL, THE 
Jerome Lawrence and Robert E. Lee (1970) 

The play explores the problem of finding a balance between the values of society 
and the individual. It builds upon Thoreau's statement, "If a man does not keep pace 
with his companions, perhaps it is because he hears a different drummer." He is 
jailed for refusing to pay a federal tax for what he deemed an evil purpose: support 
of the Mexican war. 



NO EXIT AND OTHER PLAYS 

Jean-Paul Sartre (1944) 

Three characters, a coward, a socialite and adultress, and a lesbian have each died. 
The action concerns their attempts to alter or relive their earthly lives while 
confined in an apartment in Hell. Their desires are thwarted by a triangle where 
each is held in check by one of the others. The play is an exposition of a portion of 
Sartre's existential philosophy. 



ERLC 



132 

-126- 



ODD COUPLE, THE 

Neil Simon (1966) 

In this comedy, their wives have left two best friends who move in together, but 
then find irritations mounting. 



OEDIPUS REX 

Sophocles (ca. 430 B.C.) 

King Oedipus tells the people of Thebes who are stricken by a terrible plague he has 
sent Creon to tne oracle at Delphi to learn what should be done. Creon reports the 
plague will end when the killer of King Laius is cast out. Oedipus is told he is the 
killer, but he accuses Creon of plotting to discredit him. Eventually Oedipus learns, 
as was prophesied, that he did kill his father and married his own mother. Oedipus's 
wife kills herself and he blinds himself before asking his people to exile him. 



OTHELLO 

William Shakespeare (ca. 1604) 

lago is passed over for promotion and plans to avenge himself on his commander 
Othello. Using evil without limits, lago plots to ruin the reputation of Desdemona 
whom Othello has secretly married. It works. Othello kills his wife and commits 
suicide. When he is discovered, lago is put to death. 



OUR TOWN 

Thorton Wilder (1938) 

A "stage manager" carries us through the lives of the people of Grover's Corners 
about the turn of the century. The story centers around George and Emily who fall 
in love over sodas, marry, and suffer tragedy when she dies in childbirth. They are 
reunited briefly at the graveside, but Emily discovers how painful a return to living 
can be when one walks among those by whom the beauties of life are taken for 
granted. 



PHILADELPHIA STORY, A COMEDY IN THtVc£ ^CTS 
Barry Philip 

Tracy Lord divorces her playboy husband Dexter because of his excessive drinking. 
She IS set to marry boorish George. Newspaper reporter who knows of the Lord's 
private lives lias received permission to cover the wedding to keep Tracy's father 
philandering out of the paper. Dexter shows up at the wedding. George comes to 
some incorrect conclusions and angers Tracy in the process. She rejects him and 
returns to Dexter. 



193 

-127- 



PLAYBOY OF THE WESTERN WORLD 

John M. Synge (1907) 



In this comedy, young Christy Mahan become a local hero when he reveals he killed 
his evil father. Two women vie for him. Relishing the attention he wonders why he 
was so foolish as to not actually have killed his father. When the father shows up, 
the local cheers change to jeers, but with his new confidence, Christy tames his 
father and leaves \'he town to become the "Playboy of the Western World." 



PYGMALION 

George Bernard Shaw (1912) 

Phonetics professor Higgins coaches a poor flower girl in the arts of speech and 
good manners in this comedy. He is so successful, Eliza is accepted into high 
society. Higgins offends Eliza by treating her as an object so she deserts him to 
find appreciation as a human being. 



R 

RAISiNIN THE SUN, A 
Lorraine Hansberry (1959) 

The play is set in Chicago's South side after World War II. Lena uses insurance 
money from her husband to make a dov/n payment on a house in a white 
neighborhood. The rest of the money is given to her son for safekeeping but he 
invests it in a liquor store and then is cheated out of it by one of his partners. 
White neighbors offer to buy the heme, but the son stiffens in refusal and the play 
closes with the family preparing to move into their new home. 



RHINOCEROS 

Eugene lonesco (1960) 

A rhinoceros appears in a small French town, and it is soon learned the people are 
being transformed into this animal. One by one the people are transformed until 
only one brave individualist remains who defies the mass hysteria in this satire of 
the human condition. 



RIVALS, THE 

Richards. Sheridan (1775) 

Comic incidents develop whpn adults try io match-make. The play vacillates 
between high comedy and farce as it pokes not always gentle fun at excessive 
sentimentality. One character, Mrs. Malaprop who is one of the match-makers, 
employs ludicrous distortions of the language and make her of the most famous 
characters in English drama. 



ERLC 



1^4 

-128- 



ROMEO AND JULIET 

William Shakespeare (ca. 1595) 



These tragic events make one of the most famous love stories. Two youths from 
feuding families fall in love and marry secretly. While trying to stop a fight 
between the families Romeo kills someone and has to flee. Juliet's family tries to 
marry her to someone else but she takes a fake sleeping potion and seems to die. 
Romeo hears only of her death, not the trick, and kills himself on her grave. When 
she awakes and finds Romeo dead, Juliet kills herself. The shock of the tragedy 
brings the two feuding families together. 



SCHOOL FOR SCANDAL, THE 

Richard B. Sheridan (1777) 

In this comedy, one brother is portrayed as a model of virtue and the other as a 
libertine. Both pursue the same woman but one for her love the other for her 
money. The brothers are eventually shown in their true light, opposite from their 
portrayal by scandalmongers, and justice prevails. 



SHE STOOPS TO CONQUER 

Oliver Goldsmith (1773) 

Mariow and Kate, who have never met, are matched by their parents. A trickster 
directs Mariow to Kate's house but convinces him the place is really an inn and 
Kate IS a maid. Kate takes advantage of the misunderstanding to break down 
Marlow's reserve. Inept servants add to the merriment before the mistakes are 
finally corrected. 



SIX CHARACTERS IN SEARCH OF AN AUTHOR 
Luigi Pirandello (1921) 

Six characters from a play assume a life of their own and invade a theater during a 
rehearsal of another play. Each character strives for a kind of existence at once 
necessary to him and impossible for him to aj:hie\<e. They are all driven by their 
own motivations into actions never conceived of b/ the author. 



SKIN OF OUR TEETH 

Thorton Wilder (1942) 

This Pulitzer Prize winning play is rich in comments about modern life. The 
Antrobus family represents mankind, both now and in the Stone Age. Mr. Antrobus 
shows the wheel he has just ' ^ ented and judges an Atlantic City beauty contest. 
Things grow serious when the Antrobuies try to teach their children the 
accumulated knowledge of the world as the Ice Age descends upon them, and when 
he fights against the f ascistic spirit which develops in his son in a postwar period. 




STREETCAR NAMED DESIRE, A 

Tennessee Williams (1947) 

Stella and Blanche are the last membors of an impoveriched Southern plantation 
family. Stella lives as the slave of husband out has found happiness in their 
intense sexual relationship. Blanche, a prostitute, arrives at their tenement 
claiming to be taking a leave of absence from a teaching job. When her past is 
revealed she eventually is taken away to an asylum. 

r 



TEA AND SYMPATHY 

Robert Anderson (1955) 

Tom, a boy in a New England prep school, is unjustly accused of homosexuality with 
the tacit approval of Bill, the headmaste.*-. His wife, Laura, leaves him because of 
his role in tormenting Tom and gives herself to the boy so he can prove he is a man. 



TELL ME THAT YOU LOVE ME, JUNIE MOON 
D.D. Brooke 



TEMPEST, THE 

William Shakespeare (ca. 1611) 

In this comedy, Prospero fails as a worldly rul:>r because of his absorption in study, 
but ironically he wrests control of the island where he has been banished. By raising 
a tempest, Prospero causes a ship carrying his old enemies to wreck on the island. 
Though tempted toward revenge, he uses his art to heal old wounds. Prospero 
survives an attempt on his life, casts his books into the sea, and promises to return 
lo the world of men. 



TO BE YOUNG, GIFTED AND BLACK 
Lorraine Hansberry (1971) 

Illuminating the Black experience, this play draws on material from the Author's 
plays and writings to tell about her life and her work. 



THREE SISTERS, THE 
Anton Chekhov (1901) 

After the death of their father, three sisters find their lives purposeless. Each tries 
to find a substitute for the former gaiety and hope they once felt: through teaching, 
an affair, and the "dignity of work." The efforts are futile and the situation 
becomes worse v;hen their brother brings home his wife, a coarse peasant woman. 
Eventually the sisters have not even a solace of a private refuge from the realities 
of their situation. They do, however, resolve to seek again some sense of purpose 
and hope 'n life. 



ERLC 



-130- 



TRUE WEST 

Sam Shepherd (1981) 



Violence erupts when a successful Hollywood screenwriter who is staying in his 
mother's house is visited by his drifting, drinking older brother. 



TWELVE ANGRY MEN 

Paddy Chayefsky 

A jury play about a young man who murdered a relative. The resulting trial involves 
current social ramifications. 



w 



WAITING FOR GODOT 

Samuel Beckett (1952) 

Estragon and Vladimir wait by the road for a nebulous Godot without really know 
what it is they expect. Two plod down the road: one a pompous taskmaster and the 
other a near-idiot. In a dreamlike slapstick, Estragon and Vladimir trade funny 
hats, pretend at slave-and-master, recite humorous poetry, and argue. The two 
stumble in again but are confused. Godot sends word he will not come today, but 
surely tomorrow. 



WEST SIDE STORY 
Arthur Laurents 

An American musical play which transposes the story of Romeo and Juliet to the 
gangland wars of New York City. 



WHO'S AFRAID OF VIRGINIA WOOLF 

Edward Albee (1962) 

After a college faculty meeting, George and his wife Martha bring home Nick and 
his wife Honey. Martha throws insults on her husband. Nick reveals he married 
Honey, who by now has become totally drunk, during a false pregnancy. Martha, 
with George's semi-approval, leads Nick upstairs to make love, but it's a fiasco, 
Nick takes Honey home and George and Martha find a transitory truce. 



ERLC 



-131- 



YUPIK ANTIGONE 

David Hunsaker (1985) 

The classic Greek tale of Antigone is retold as a YupMk Eskimo ceremony. Greek 
references to gods and Theban citizens are replaced by YupMk references and 
legend. Dance and story telling devices are used as choral odes between each major 
scene. The play is available in both English and Yup'ik. 



1^8 

-132- 



Poetry 



In any literature program, the following poets* works are suggested by the Literature 
Panel: 



Daute Aligheri 


Theodore Roethke 


W. S. Merwin 


William Blake 


Kenneth Rexroth 


Gabriel Garcia Marq 


Robert BIy 


Adrienne Rich 


Nancy McCleery 


Charles Bukowski 


Sir Walter Raleigh 


Sheila Nickerson 


Richard Brautigan 


Gary Snyder 


Pablo Neruda 


Lord Byron 


Shel Silverstien 


. Ogden Nash 


William Cullen Bryant 


Leslie Silko 


Wilfred Owens 


Elizabeth Bishop 


Ann Sexton 


Ossu 


Robert Burns 


Jon Silkin 


Ezra Pound 


John Barrymore 


Carl Sandberg 


Sylvia Plath 


Elizabeth Barrett-Browning 


Wallace Stevens 


Banjo Patterson 


Fred Bigjim 


Robert Service 


Kathryn Ann Porter 


Boshu 


William Shakespeare 


Edgar Allan Poe 


E. E. Cummings 


Dr. Seuss 


Jack Prelutsky 


Gregory Corso 


Buff ie St. Marie 




Bob Dylan 


Sir Edward Spenser 


- 


Emily Dickenson 


Dylan Thomas 




Richard Dauenhauer 


Lao Tsu 




Robert Davis 


Alfred Lord Tennyson 




Nora Marks Dauenhauer 


Henry David Thoreau 




David the Poet (Psalms) 


Sara Teasdale 




Ralph Waldo Emerson 


William Carlos Williams 




Lawrence Ferlangetti 


Richard Wilbur 




Nikki Giovanni 


Philip Whalen 




Alan Ginsberg 


John Greenleaf Whittier 




Langston nugnes 


Waii Whitman 




Sam Hamill 


William Worc^worth 




Rudyard Kipling 


Richard Wright 




Robert Lowell 


Nancy Willard 




Denise Levertov 


David Wagonner 




Henry Wadsworth Longfellow 


William Butler Yeats 












-133- 





Short Stories 



When suggesting literature ^n the local level, short stories should definitely be included. 
The Literature Panel offers the names of the following short stories and urges librarians 
teachers and administrators to selecc some of their works. 



* Asimov, Isaac 


* Kafka, Franz 


Bierce, Ambrose 


* Kipling 


* Bradbury, Ray 


London, Jack 


Christie, Agatha 


Lopez, Barry 


* Cormier, Robert 


Norton, Andre 


de la Mare, Walter 


O'Connor, Flannery 


* del Ray, Lester 


O'Henry 


de Maupassant 


* Paterson, Katherine 


* Doyle, Sir Arthur Conan 


* Poe, Edgar Alan 


iiaric, Drcl 


OaKi 


Hawthorne, Nathaniel 


* Singer, Isaac 


Heinlein, Robert A. 


Stuart, Jesse 


* Irving, Washington 


Twain, Mark 


* Jackson, Shirley 


Wells, H. G. 


Jacobs, W.W. 




* especially recommended for junior ^ligh students 





ERIC 



-134- 140 



"Role of Literature as a Source of History, 
Values and Identity" 

(Excerpted from a paper presented at the 
Bilingual/Multi-cultural Conference, 

February, 1988 by Edna MacLean , Special Assistant to the Commissioner, Alaska 
Department of Education) 



One day in the mid 1960*s while still In college, I received the biggest shock of my life 
when I realized that I did not know the literature, history, art, and some of the traditional 
customs of my own people, the Inupiat of the North Slope Alaska. I fel empty when that 
realization hit me. There was a void. I know western man*s literature, history, art and 
customs but did not have substantive knowledge of my own cultural ancestry. 

I know the dates of the arrival of Columbus to America, the arrival of the pilgrims to 
America, the Civil War, and so forth. I know why there events were important; but I did 
not know the important historical events of my own people. I felt terrible; but at the 
same time I felt anger. Angry at the schooling process which had excluded the history 
asrd knowledge of my ancestry. 

Fortunately, I was near a good public library which contained some literature on 
Eskimos. I even found an article about my father who had impressed a scientist with his 
ability to build a small house without the help of a blueprint. The author of the article 
was impressed with my father's spatial assessment abilities. You can imagine the pride I 
felt reading about my father and the house that he had built. 

This has not been an easy paper for me to write, because by talking about myself a lot, I 
am bordering on breaking one of the cultural mores of being Inupiaq. But I believe that 
my experience need not be repeated if our schools would truly reflect the linguistic and 
cultural heritage of the communities that they serve. Thus I would like to share the 
learning experience that I pursued on my own, searching for my history, my ancestral 
'history. 

Also, I have a wish that someday, in the near future, I will ask an Alaska Native high 
school student about the history of the group that he identifies with and have him tell me 
with confidence and pride the history of his people. 

Like I caid, I was fortunate to be near a library which contained many books about 
Eskimos when I felt the need to learn more about myself, my ancestry. 

The first book that I opened had pictures of Inupiat living in snow-houses. I remember 
thinking to myself "oh, how neat!" The book was about Canadian Inuit. That was the first 
that I truly began to identify with the Inuit of Canada and Greenland. It was not the first 
time that I had seen pictures nor read about the Canadian Inuit, but it was the first time I 
identified with them because I was searching for my ancestors, the grandparents of my 
grandmother. These were people who ate the same food that I ate and wore the same 
clothing that I used to wear in Barrow, Alaska. The only strange thing about them was 
that they lived in snow-houses! That was my thinking then. 

Let me assure you that I have since learned through life history interviews that I've 
conducted with Inupiaq elders of Barrow that my ancestors also lived in snow-houses as 
they traveled hunting different game. Like the Canadian and Greenlandic Inuit my 
ancestors were nomads moving from one hunting environment to the next. 



-135-141 



Needless to say there were misinterpretations about the activities of the Inupiat in many 
of the books that I found. The misinterpretations along with the lack of depth of material 
written about the Inupiat made me determined to dig a bit more deeply. 

Upon my return to Alaska, after completing my university education, I began listening to 
and studying the oral literature of my people. 

During my last two years in college I had studied Far Eastern literature. I was fascinated 
by the beauty of the myths of the people of India. It never occurred to me that my own 
people had legends and poetry through song that contained as much beauty and 
philosophical content. 

You can imagine the excitement cf finding tapes full of Inupiaq legends and stories at the 
Alaska Native Language Center and the Rasmussen Library at the University of Alaska in 
Fairbanks. 

The first thing that struck me in the oral literature was the abundance of activities in the 
spiritual and supernatural realm. In the legends that I listened to, Inupiat were able to 
"communicate" with animals, could transform themselves into other beings, and could 
also influence the activities of animals and humans through song. 

In the course of my private "literature class in Inupiaq" which has spanned several years, I 
have come to understand that according to the Inupiat, "long before day and night had 
been created, or the first man made his appearance, there lived an old woman, indeed 
very old, for the tradition of her having had a beginning, if there ever was such a one, had 
been lost. We must bear in mind that during the first stage of the world everything 
remained young and fresh; nothing grew old. The old woman was like a young girl in her 
appearance and feelings, and being the only inhabitent of the earth, naturally felt very 
lonesome and wished for a companion. She was one time chewing "pooya" when the 
thought arose in her mind that it would be pleasant to have an image to play with, so 
taking her "pooya" she fashioned a man, then by way of ornamentation placed a raven's 
beak on his forehead. She was delighted with her success in making such a lovely image 
and on lying down to sleep placed it near her side. On awakening her joy was great, for 
the image had come to life and there before her was the first man." (Driggs, 1905) 

Inupiaq legends tell of the "tulungiksraq" - the Raven Spirit who is also a man. He is 
credited with having secured land and light for humanity. According to Inupiaq legend 
there was a period of darkness when there was no light. This was the time when humans 
did not age. The Raven-Spirit "tulunikaraq" secured the land and the source of tight from 
an old man, his wife, and his daughter. Light appeared only after the Raven-Spirit stole 
the source of light from them. As he was fleeing the Raven-Spirit dropped the source of 
light which them exploded and dispersed units of light throughout existence. 

Our languages and our cultures can be sources of pride and identity for us. The oral 
literature of our ancestors send us messages based on their experiences and their 
interpretations of them. 

Besides legends and accounts of life experiences, our ancestors left us with a wealth of 
short stories usually based on animals with human attributes. One story which comes to 
mind was told by Oscar Swan, one of the Inupiaq teachers in Kavaiina. It seems that an 
avinngaq, a mouse, decided to venture out of his hole and access the rest of the world. 
When he stood on his hind legs, lo and behold, to his surprise he was able to reach the 



142 

-136- 



heavens! When he reached down he felt the ground. When he reached in all directions he 
was able to touch the limits of the world! He concluded that he was the largest person on 
the face of the earth. The poor mouse had surfaced from his hole onto the ground into an 
old Inupiaq boot sole turned upside down! The top of his heaven had bee the sole of the 
"atungi. *", and the outer limits of his world had been the sides of the "atungak". 

When I think of this story I am mindful that I should consider all facets of a situation 
before I make any conclusions; and that I should not limit myselt to what is around me but 
to explore and search for other information, lest I be like the poor mouse. 

Another attribute of Inupiaq culture evident in our literature is that the roles of women 
and men had not been stratified. The type of role undertaken depended on the ability and 
capability of the person. In one of the legends told by one of our foremost historians, 
Uqumailaq, I found these words: 

"Once there lived a large number of people and their chief along a river in the interior. 
Their chief had a daughter. She did not mature slowly. She had a bow and arrow as she 
grew up. She hunted like a man using the bow and arrow. When she saw a wolf she would 
stalk it and would eventually kill it with her bow and arrow. She did likewise with 
wolverine. Although she was a woman she was a skillful hunter.'* 

Woman as hunter is not a common theme among our oral literature. But the presence of 
such themes indicate to us that the society of our ancestors was egalitarian. In fact, one 
cheerful little Inupiaq eider-woman told me that she had belonged to a whaling crew, and 
the only reason she had never struck a whale was because she was so tiny! She laughed 
and said that she did not have the strength to strike the whale with enough force. From 
the legends and from more recent accounts I learned that men and women have equal 
status and one was limited only by one's abilities. 

Throughout our literature the attibutes essential to being a good hunter or a good 
provider are identified as quickness of movement, mental alertness, physical excellence, 
capacity for endurance of pain, stamina, and knowIHge of and respect for nature. These 
qualities are still applicable to the world of toda> . i e must be quick, alert, be in good 
physical condition, be able to endure pain, have stamma, and know and respect the land 
and animals because they are our sustenance. 

A hunter and his family spent much of their time traveling on the ice searching for food. 
The ever-changing environment of the ice and probably the need for a way to quickly 
pinpoint the location of a seal or any other object or activity on the ice produced the 
elaborate set of demonstrative pronouns that we have in Inupiaq. Instead of using 
landmarks, we have words which serve as indicators for the location of an object. Each 
pronoun gives information about number, proximity, visibility, vertical position, and 
whether the object is insiob or outside, moving or not moving, or lengthy or not lengthy. 
There are no permanent markers out on the ice, therefore a word which provides a mental 
map is very useful. 

As I listened to numerous legends I would sometimes be pleasantly rewarded with a song. 
Much of our literature is interspersed with songs. The songs are powerful. There are 
songs to call animals. Songs that heal. Songs that harm. And songs to relate oneself to 
the land. Hare are the words of a song sung by a Greenlander as he is overwhelmed by 
the emotion he feels for the land. (The following was written in one of Knud 
Rassmussen's letters, October, 1930.) 



ERLC 



-137 



- 143 



0, warmth of summer gliding over the land in waves! 
Not a gust of wind, not a cloud - 

And in the mountains, the belling reindeer, the sweet reindeer 

in the bluish distance! 
0, how it pulis me! 
0, how it fills me with delight! 
Sobbing with emotion, I lie down on the earth. 

The literature of any culture, whether it be in written or oral form, contains the history, 
values, and mores of that culture. The themes of our literature reflect our values, the 
things that are important to us. 

I have touched upon only a few of the themes upon which Inupiaq literature is based. 
Through legends and life experience accounts, the Alaska Native people told their 
history. In our elementary and secondary schools, Alaska Native children learn the 
literature and culture of western man; it is equally important for th^e students to learn 
and study the literature and culture of their ancestors. 

I have purposefully restricted my presentation to the Alaska Native situation because I 
feel an urgency. If we do not succeed in transmitting the knowledge of our ancestors to 
our children here in Alaska, there is no other place for them to go to learn them. Alaska 
is their ancestral home. If Alaska Native languages and cultures die here in Alaska, they 
die forever. We cannot let that happen. 



144 

-138- 



The Right to Read 



An open letter to the citizens of our country from the National Council of Teachers of 
English 

Where suspicion fills the air and holds scholars in line for fear of thm jobs, 
there can be no exercise of the free intellect. . . . A problem can no longer 
be pursued with impunity to its edges. Fear stalks the classroom. The 
teacher is no longer a stimulant to adventurous thinking; she becomes instead 
a pipe line for safe and sound information. A deadening dogma takes the 
place of free inquiry. Instruction tends to become sterile; pursuit of 
knowledge is discouraged; discussion often leaves off where it should begin. 

Justice William 0. Douglas, 
United States Supreme Court: 
Adier v. Board of Education, 1952. 

The right to read, like all rights guaranteed or implied within our constitutional tradition, 
can be used wisely or foolishly. In many ways, education is an effort to improve the 
quality of choices open to all students. But to deny the freedom of choice in fear that it 
nriay be unwisely used is to destroy the freedom itself. For this reason, we respect the 
right of individuals to be selective in their own reading. But for the same reason, we 
oppose efforts of individuals or groups to limit the freedom of choice of others or to 
impose their own standards or tastes upon the community at large. 

The right of any individual not just to read but to read whatever he or she wants to read 
is basic to a democratic society. This right is based on an assumption that the educated 
possess judgment and understanding and can be trusted with the determination of their 
own actions. In effect, the reader is freed from the bonds of chance. The reader is not 
limited by birth, geographic location, or time, since reading allows meeting people, 
debating philosophies, and experiencing events far beyond the narrow confines of an 
individual's own existence. 

In selecting books for reading by young people, English teachers consider the contribution 
which each work may make to the education of the reader, its aesthetic value, its 
honesty, its readability for a particular group of students, and its appeal to adolescents. 
English teachers, however, may use different works for different purposes. The criteria 
for choosing a work to be read by an entire class are somewhat different from the 
criteria for choosing works to be read by small groups. For example, a teacher might 
select John Knowles' A Separate Peace for reading by an entire class, partly because the 
book has received wide critical recognition, partly becuase it is relatively short and will 
keep the attention of many slow readers, and partly because it has proved popular with 
many students of widely differing abilities. The same teacher, faced with the 
responsibility of choosing or recommending books for several small groups of students, 
might select or recommend books as different as Nathaniel Hawthorne's The Scarlet 
Letter, Jack Schaefer's Shane, Alexander Solzhenitsyn's One Day in the Life of Ivan 
Denisovitch, Pierre Boulle's The Bridge over the River Kwai, Charles Dickens* Great 
Expectations, or Paul Zindel's The Pigman, depending upon the abilities and interests of 
the students in each group. And the criteria for suggesting books to individuals or for 
recommending something worth reading for a student who casually stops by after class 



ERLC 



are different from selecting material for a class or group. But the teacher selects, not 
censors, books. Selection implies that a teacher is free to choose this or that work, 
depending upon the purpose to be achieved and the student or class in question, but a book 
selected this year may be ignored next year, and the reverse. Censorship implies that 
certain works are not open to selection, this year or any year. 

Wallace Stevens once wrote, "Literature is the better part of life. To this it seems 
inevitably necessary to add, provided life is the better part of literature." Students and 
parents have the right to demand that education today keep students in touch with tho 
reality of th woiid outside the classroom. Much of classic literature asks questions as 
valid and significant today as when ihe literature first appeared, questions like "What is 
the nature of humanity?" "Why do people praise individuality and practice conformity?" 
"What do people need for a good life?" and "What is the nature of the good person?" But 
youth is the age of revolt. To pretend otherwise is to ignore a reality made clear to 
young people and adults alike on television and radio, in newspapers and magazines. 
English teachers must be free to employ books, classic or contemporary, which do not lie 
to the young about the perilous but wonderous times we live in, books which talk of the 
fears, hopes, joys, and frustrations people experience, books about people not only as they 
are but as they can be. English teachers forced through the pressures of censorship to use 
only safe or antiseptic works are placed in the morally and intellectually untenable 
position of lying to their students about the nature and condition of mankind. 

The teacher must exercise care to select or recommend works for class reading and group 
discussion. One of the most important responsibilities of the English teacher is 
developing rapport and respect among students. Respect for the uniqueness and potential 
of the individual, an important facet of the study of literature, should be emphasized in 
the English class. Literature classes should reflect the cultural contributions of many 
minority groups in the United St'^.tes, just as they should acquaint students with 
contributions from the peoples of Asia, Africa, and Latin America. 

The Threat to Education 

Censorship leaves students with an inadequate and distorted picture of the ideals, values, 
and problems of their culture. Writers may often rtpresent their culture, or they may 
stand to the side and describe and evaluate that culture. Yet partly because of 
censorship or the fear of censorship, many writers are ignored or inadequately 
represented in the public schools, and many are represented in anthologies not by their 
best work but by their "safest" or "least offensive" work. 

The censorship pressures receiving the greatest publicity are those of small groups who 
protest the use of a limited number of books with some "objectionable" realistic 
elements, such as Brave New World, Lord of the Flies, Catcher in the Rye, Johnny Got 
His Gun, Catch-22, Soul on Ice, or A Day No Pigs Would Die. The most obvious and 
immediate victims are often found among our best and most creative English teachers, 
those who have ventured outside the narrow boundaries of conventional texts. 
Ultimately, however, the real victims are the students, ^'^nied the freedom to explore 
ideas and pursue truth vherever and however they wish. 

Great damage may be done by book committees appointed by national or local 
organizations to pore over anthologies, texts, library books, and paperbacks to find 
passages which advocate, or seem to advocate, causes or concepts or practices these 
organizations condemn. As a result, some publishers, sensitive to possible objections, 
carefully exclude sentences or selections that might conceivably offend some group, 
somehow, sometime, somewhere. 



146 

-140- 



The Community's Responsibility 

American citizens who care about the improvement of education are urged to join 
students, teachers, librarians, administrators, boards of education, and professional and 
scholarly organizations in support of the students* right to read. Only widespread and 
informed support in every community can assure that: 

enough citizens are interested in the development and maintenance of a superior 
school system to guarantee its achievement; 

malicious gossip, ignorant rumors, and deceptive letters to the editor will not be 
circulated without challenge and correction; 

newspapers will be convinced that the public sincerely desires objective school news 
reporting, free from slanting or editorial co"iment which destroys confidence in and 
support for schools; 

the community will not permit its resources and energies to be dissipated in conflicts 
created by special interest groups striving to advance their ideologies or biases; and 

faith in democratic traditions and processes will be maintained. 



ERLC 



147 

-141- 



LIBRARY BILL OF RIGHTS 



The American Library Association affirms that all libraries are forums for information 
and ideas, and that the following basic policies should guide their services. 

1. Books and ot'r.er library resources should be provided for the interest, information, 
and enlightenment of all people of the community the library serves. Materials 
should not be excluded because of ^ »e origin, background, or views of those 
contributing to their creation. 

2. Libraries should provide materials and iriformation presenting al! points of view on 
current and historical issues. Materials should not be prescribed or removed because 
of partisan or doctrinal disapproval. 

3. Libraries should challenge censorship in the fulfillment of their responsibility to 
provide information and enlightenment. 

4. Libraries should cooperate with all persons and groups concerned with resisting 
abridgment of free expression and free access to ideas. 

5. A person's right to use a library should not be denied or abridged because of origin, 
age, background, or views. 

6. Libraries which make exhibit spaces and meeting rooms available to the public they 
serve should make such facilities available on an equitable basis, regardless of the 
beliefs or affiliations of individuals or groups requesting their use. 



Adopted June 18, 194P Amended February 2, 1961 . June 27, 1967, and January 23, 1980, 
by the ALA Council. 

Endorsed by AKLA March 27, 1982. 



ERLC 



ids 

-142- 



SOURCES FOR ALASKA LITERATURE 



The following agencies or companies are good sources for many of the Alaskan works 
cited. In response to repeated requests from ieachers, we include their addresses and 
contact numbers for ease of inquiry and ordering. We also encourage you to contact your 
local bookstore for assistance. 

1) Mariswood Educational Resources 
Box 7 

Aniak, Alaska 99557 
(907) 675-4383 

2) Alaska Native Language Center 
Box 900111 

University of Alaska 
Fairbanks, Alaska 99775-0120 
(907) 474-7874 

3) KYUK 
Box 468 

Bethel, Alaska 99537 
(907) 543-3131 

4) Bering Strait School District 
Box 225 

Unalakleet, Alaska 99684 
(907)624-3611 

5) Lower Kuskokwim School District 
Box 305 

Bethel, A'.^^ka 99559-0305 
(907) 543-4805 

6) Alaska Pacific University Press 
3500 University Drive 
Anchorage, Alaska 99504 
(907) 276-8181 



ERIC 



-143- 



Alaskan Associations 



The following associations were represented on the Literature Panel: 

The goal of the ALASKA ASSOCIATION FOR BILINGUAL EDUCATION is to support 
Bilingual Education and English as a Second Language education for all age groups in 
Alaska. Our activities include dissemination of information by newsletters, teacher 
training, political awareness, an annual student writing contest, outstanding education 
award and conference. We are affiliated with the National Association for Bilingual 
Education and the Teechers of English to Speakers of Other Languages. Our membership 
numbers approxiioately 100 educators, parents and students in Alaska and on the West 
Coast. 



The ALASKA ASSOCIATION OF SCHOOL LIBRARIANS is a round table affiliate of the 
Alaska Library Association. Its main objective is to advance a high standard for the 
school library profession and the school library/media program in Alaska. Our activities 
include disseminating information through the Puffin newsletter, coordinating the 
state-wide Battle of the Books reading incentive program, sponsoring continuing 
education opportunities for school librarians, advancing political awareness of library 
concerns, co-sponsoring the Alaska Library Association annual conference, and sponsoring 
the annual School Librarian of the Year award. We have 140 members. 



The ALASKA COUNCIL OF TEACHERS OF ENGLISH is an organization of educators 
created to support the language arts in schools grades K through post secondary. We 
publish a bimonthly newsletter, an annual anthology of student writing, and we sponsor an 
annual conference. We are affiliated with the National Council of Teachers of English. 



The ALASKA STATE READING ASSOCIATIO N is dedicated to improving the quality of 
reading instruction at all levels of education. Further, we need f.o develop an awareness 
of the impact of reading on our citizenry. In order to fulfill these purpo'-es, ASRA and 
our national organization, the International Reading Association, spons» conferences and 
planning meetings to bring professionals together. 

The mission of the SEALASKA HERITAGE FOUNDATION is to harness all available 
resources to preserve, promote and maintain the cultures and heritage of the Tlingit, 
Haida and Tsimshian people for the benefit of present and future generations and the 
public. One of thbir recent projects, "Classics of Tlingit Oral Literature," will help 
conserve the stories, history and traditions of Southeast Alaska's native people. 

ALASKA STATE WRITING CONSORTIUM is an eight year old association made up of 39 
Alaska school districts, the Department of Education and ihe University of Alaska. The 
Consortium aims to improve student achievement in writing as a skill and and as a 
thinking tool for learning in all content areas. To improve the teaching of writing the 
Consoritum offers a series of summer institutes, credit course and seminars, publishes a 
bi-monthly newsletter, hosts an annual conference/meeting and supports the other 
associations concerned with language arts. 



ERIC 



150 



Book Selection Guides 



1. The ALAN Review . Assembly on Literature for Adolescents, National Council of 
Teachers of English, 1111 Kenyon Road, Urbana, IL 61801. 

2. Black Literature for High School Students . Eds. Barbara Dodds Stanford and 
Karima Amin. 1978. National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 Kenyon 
fload, Urbana, IL 61801. 

3. Book'Baitt Detailed Notes on Adult Books Popular with Young People . Ed. Elinor 
Walker. 3rd ed., 1979. American Library Association, 50 E. Huron St., Chicago, 
IL 60611. 

4. Booklist. The American Library Association, 50 E. Huron St., Chicago, IL 60611. 

*5. Booktalk! 2: Booktalking for All Ages and Audiences . Second edition, 1985. Joni 
Bodarr. H. W. Wilson Company, 950 University Avenue, Bronx, New York. 

6. Sooks for the Teen Age Reader 1979 . Ed. Marian E. White, New York Public 
Library, Fifth Avenue and 42nd Street, Room 58, New York, NY 10018. 

7. Books and the Teen Age Reader by G. Robert Carlsen. National Book 
Committee. Bantam Books, 414 E. Golf Road, DesPlains, IL 60016. 

8. Books for You: A Booklist for Senior High Students . Ed. Kenneth L. Donelson. 
Rev. ed., 1982.' National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 Kenyon Road, 
Urbana, IL 61801. 

9. Bulletin of the Center for Chiidreh's Books . Ed. Zena Sutherland. The University 
of Chicago Graduate Library School, University of Chicago Press, 5801 Ellis 
Avenue, Chicago, IL 60637. 

*10. Comics To Classics . A Parent's Guide to Books for Teens and Preteens. Arthea 
J.S. Read. International Reading Association, 6 Tyre Avenue, Newark, Delaware, 
^9711. 

*11. Choosing Books for Young People , Volume 2: A Guide to Criticism and 

Bibliography, 1976-1984. John R. T. Ehlinger and Diana L. Spirit. Oryx Press, 
2214 W. Central Avenue, Phoenix, AZ 85004-1^83. 

12. The English Journal . National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 Kenyon Road, 
Urbana, !L 61801. 

13. High Interest-Easy Reading for Junior and Senior High School Students . Ed. 
Marian E. White, 5th ed., 1988. National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 
Kenyon Road, Urbana, IL 61801. 

14. The Horn Book Magazine . The Horn Book, Inc., Park Square Building, 31 St. 
James Avenue, Boston, MA 92116. 

15. Interracial Books for Children Bulletin . Council on Interracial Books for 
Children, 1841 Broadway, New York, NY 10023. 



151 

145- 



ERIC 



15. Journal of Reading . International Reading Association, 6 Tyre Avenue, Newark, 
DE 19711. "(particularly the October 1988 issue) 

16. Junior High School Library Catalog . Ed. Ilene R. Schechter and Gary L. Bogert. 
3rd ed., 1975. H. W. Wilson Company, 950 University Avenue., Bronx, NY 10452. 

*17. Literature for Today's Young Adults , Second Edition, Kenneth L. Donnelson, 

1985. Scott, Foresman and Company, 1900 E. Lake Avenue, Glenview, IL 60025. 

18. Media and Methods . North American Publishing Co., 401 N. American Building, 
491 N. Broad Street., Philadelphia, PA 19108. 

19. The New York Times Book Review . New York Times Co., Times Square, New 
York, NY 10036. 

20. Reading Ladders for Human Relations . Ed. Eileen Tway. 6th ed., 19P1. 
American Council on Education and National Council of Teachers of English, 1111 
Kenyon Road, Urbana, IL 61801. 

21. School Library Journal . R. R. Bowker Company, 1180 Avenue of the Americas, 
New York, NY 10036. 

22. Senior High School Library Catalog . Ed. Gary L. Bogart and Karen R. Carlson. 
11th ed., 1977. H. W. Wilson Company, 950 University Avenue, Bronx, NY 10452. 

*23. Senior High School Paperback Collection . John T. Gillespie. American Library 
Association, 50 E. Huron Street, Chicago, IL 60611. 

24. Top of the News . Joint publication of the Association for Library Service to 
Children and the Young Adult Services Division of the American Library 
Association, 50 E. Huron Street, Chicago, IL 60611. 

25. Wilson Library Bulletin . H. W. Wilson Co., 1950 University Avenue, Bronx, NY 
19452. 

26. Your Reading: A Booklist for Junior High and Middle School Students . Ed. Jerry 
Walker. 1983. National Council of Teachers of E.nglish, 1111 Kenyon Road, 
Urbana, IL 61801. 



* Especially recommended by Alaska Literature Panel members, 1988. 



377ARC 



ERIC 



152 

-146- 



Feedback Form 



The Department of Education is interested in your response to this publication, Common 
Ground. - 



1. How useful was this publication to you? 



2. What titles would you add ? 

(Please include at least two of these: title, author, ISBN number, genre, 
annotation.) 



3. What titles would you delete ? Why? 



4. What additional sections should be add*- in the next edition? 



Thank you for your time, attention, and thoughtful comments. 



Please return to: 



ERLC 



377ARC 



Language Arts Specialist 
Alaska Department of Education 
P.O. Box F 
Juneau, Alaska 99S01 



-147- 



