Conducting Research on Teaching Literature: The Influence of Texts, Contexts, and 
Teacher on Responses to Multicultural Literature 



Richard Beach, University of Minnesota, rbeach@umn.edu 

Paper presented at the National Reading Conference, Miami, December 2, 2005 

The purpose of this report is to examine issues associated with studying teaching of 
literature in reference to a study of high school students’ responses to multicultural literature. 

The purpose of this study was to determine how students’ discourses of race, class, and gender 
influences their responses to multicultural literature as well as how students adopted alternative 
discourses through coping with the tensions portrayed in multicultural literature. The 
participants in this study consisted of 14 high school students — eight females and six males of 
whom nine were white; three, Asian- American; one, Hispanic, and one, a student of African 
descent, enrolled in a multicultural literature class taught by one of the researchers/authors, Daryl 
Parks, in Fall, 2001, in Thompson High School, a diverse, urban high school of 1,600 students in 
a “working class” section of a large, Midwestern city with a student body of 42 percent White, 

30 percent Asian, 17 percent African, 10 percent Hispanic and one percent Native American. 
Students’ journal and discussion responses to a range of different multicultural literature texts as 
well as interviews about their perceptions of themselves and the course were analyzed using 
critical discourse analysis based on coding of the different types of discourses adopted by 
participants. 

Results indicated that students’ responses were influenced by three different factors: the 
teacher’s modeling of alternative ways of thinking about texts by adopting alternative 
perspectives; responses to texts in which students experienced characters challenging status-quo 
discourses and institutional forces; and context, in which student challenges to each others’ 
discourses led students to revise their discourses. In experiencing characters interrogating 
ideological forces limiting their development, students began to examine forces in their own 
lives limiting their own development. Students who shifted in their discourses over the period of 
the course were most open to entertain alternative perspective on themselves and their worlds. 
These results suggests the need in conducting research on teaching literature to examine the 
influence of all three factors — teacher modeling, texts, and contexts on shifts in students’ 
thinking about literature (76 references). 



In this paper, I address various issues on research on teaching literature — certainly a large 
topic. I would like to focus my discussion on issues associated with analyzing students’ learning 
to adopt critical interpretations of texts, particularly multicultural literature. I do so because it’s 
been the focus on my work for the past four year (Beach, Thein, & Parks, under review). This 
was a one-year qualitative research study of 14 high school students — eight females and six 
males of whom nine were white; three, Asian- American; one, Hispanic, and one, a student of 
African descent. These students were enrolled in a multicultural literature class taught by one of 
the researchers/authors, Daryl Parks, in Fall, 2001. At the time, Parks, a white male, was in his 
seventh year of teaching. In this class, students read and discussed a variety of texts including, 
The House on Mango Street, Bless me Ultima, Kindred, Their Eyes Were Watching God, 

Ohasan, Smoke Signals (film). Woman Warrior, Love Medicine, Bastard Out of Carolina, and 




2 



Yellow Raft in Blue Water. This class is part of a college in the schools program through which 
1 1 th and 12 th grade students receive college credit for taking this course while still in high school. 

An important aspect of this study was that most of these students were from working- 
class backgrounds constituting stances associated with working-class identities. They were 
students at Thompson High School, a diverse, urban high school of 1,600 students in a “working 
class” section of a large, Midwestern city. This school was chosen for its diversity (the student 
body is 42 percent White, 30 percent Asian, 17 percent African, 10 percent Hispanic and one 
percent Native American) and because the recent demographic shifts in the school and the 
community created a unique site for studying racial and social class tensions. 

I argue for the need to focus on three components simultaneously influencing growth in 
students’ learning to adopt critical interpretations: the influences of texts, context/student, and 
teacher. While this is relatively classic rendering of traditional reader-response, transactional 
models of response (Rosenblatt, 1978), it differs from those models in emphasizing the ways in 
which this transaction is mediated by discourses, genres, narratives, language, and intertextuality 
operating in particular historical and cultural contexts (Fairclough, 2003). It also differs from 
those models in highlighting the ways in which interpretion is mediated by participation in 
networks of social relationships with other readers with allegiances to different contexts with 
different agendas (Shuart-Faris & Bloome, 2004). And, as recent “history of the book” research 
on literary responses in past historical contexts (Finkelstein & McCleery, 2001) reminds us, the 
meaning of interpretations need to be grounded in an understanding of the larger historical and 
cultural forces shaping interpretations, text construction, and norms operating in communities of 
readers/theater-goers. 

In examining studying these three components: texts, contexts/readers, and teachers, I 
propose some methodological approaches on how to conduct research on this components. 

Texts 

Rather than perceiving texts as singular entities, I frame them as spaces that invite, evoke, 
or position readers to experience dialogic tensions between competing discourse perspectives. In 
doing so, I draw on Elizabeth Ellsworth’s (2004) recent work on how places themselves contain 
their own pedagogical agendas. Ellsworth cites the example of the Vietnam This strong sense of 
the value of creating irreverent spaces for students reflects what Elizabeth Ellsworth describes as 
an interest in the pedagogies of place, “The experience of the learning self in the times and 
places of knowledge in the making, which are also the times and places of the learning self in the 
making” (p. 8). For Ellsworth, places and spaces have their own inherent pedagogical designs 
that link external, physical realities to ways of imagining and thinking. She notes that places 
“speak to and about pedagogy indirectly through design... [they are] things in the making [that] 
provide us with a ‘zone of historical indetermination’ that allows room for experimentation” (p. 
9). She cites the example of the Vietnam War Memorial designed by Maya Lin. Lin wanted to 
create a memorial that encouraged visitors to generate their own reflections on those who died in 
the war, noting that “‘I create places in which to think, without trying to dictate what to think’” 
(p. 9). Lin believes strongly in the need to “‘create places in which to think without already 
knowing what we should think’” (p. 10). At the same time, places also invite participants to 
acquire new perceptions by “ ‘confronting] us from outside the concepts we already have, 
outside the subjectivities we already are” (p. 10). 

Texts function in similar ways by positioning readers to take up competing perspectives 
associated with “third space” contexts which postcolonial (Bhabha, 1994) theorists refer to the 




3 



hybridity operating in contested, often contradictory versions of spaces, particularly in terms of 
binary/essentialist categories applied to identities. Soja (1996) describes the Firstspace as the 
actual, “real” physical places of the neighborhood, workplace, home, school, etc., in which 
practices are defined according to rules and expectations. The Secondspace is the imagined, 
idealized versions of spaces development by planners, architects, or educators that define how 
they believe spaces should operate. For example, the standards movement in schooling functions 
to define how schools as Firstspaces should ideally operate. Because Firstplaces rarely operate 
according to expectations, the tensions between the actual and the imagined ideal create a 
Thirdspace, a space of resistance to expectations. 

For Alex Kostogriz (2002), Thirdspace is “a way of living and learning with difference(s) 
and ambivalence in systems of cultural representations and practices of representing” (p. 6). 
“Thirdspace is not about a resolution of contradictions between differences but is itself a way of 
living and learning with difference(s) and ambivalence in systems of cultural representations and 
practices of representing” (p. 10. 

Adopting a Thirdspace perspective also entails interrogating discursive positioning of 
people through what are often fixed or binary language, signs, and symbols (Bhabha, 1994). 

This results in “splitting” (Bhabha, 1994, pp. 98-99) of “of discourse, culture, and consciousness, 
in which students both take up and resist the privileged language of academic contexts” by 
challenging dominant discourses (Moje, Ciechanowski, Kramer, Ellis, Carrillo, & Collazo, 

2004). 

Challenges to Status-Quo Systems from Counter-Narratives, Genres, and Language 

In experiencing these Thirdspace perspectives in responding to literature, students are 
adopting perspectives mediated by counter-narratives, genres, and language in opposition to 
dominant, hegemonic perspectives. They may also experience characters recognizing how they 
are controlled by these dominant, hegemonic perspectives, leading these characters to take up 
counter-narratives, genres, and language to challenge political and economic systems. By 
adopting these characters’ perspectives, they experience a character shifting form perceiving 
themselves as active subjects to objects shaped by systems. 

The shift from first-person to third-person reflection involves perceiving a character as 
“subject” operating in systems to perceiving a character as an “object” constructed by status-quo 
systems (Beach & Spicer, 2004; Kegan, 1994; 2000). Characters’ identities are shaped by a 
sense of agency constituting themselves as “subjects,” which Robert Kegan (1994) defines as 
“those elements of our knowing or organizing that we are identified with, tied to, fused with, 
embedded in” (Kegan, 1994, p. 62). Characters begin to perceive themselves as “object,” which 
refers to “those elements of our knowing or organizing that we can reflect on, handle, look at, be 
responsible for, relate to each other, take control of, internalize, assimilate, or otherwise operate 
on” (Kegan, 1994, p. 63). “What is ‘object’ in our knowing describes the thoughts and feelings 
we say we have; what is ‘subject’ describes the thinking and feeling that has us. We ‘have’ 
object; we ‘are’ subject” (Kegan, 2000, p. 38). Roth, Hwang, Goulart, and Lee (2005) note: 

This stepping back constitutes a conversion from a direct, unmediated relation with the 
lifeworld to an indirect, objectifying, and objectified relation (Buber, 1970). The 
conversion is constituted by the change of view from the first person to a (quasi-) third 
person; that is, it is constituted by a change from the mere experience of resistance of an 
individual subject to the idealized perception of a contradiction from a generalized and 
generalizing perspective of the collective, (p. 91). 




4 



This shift from perceiving oneself as subject to object often serves as the basis for 
portrayals of character’s narrative development in literature. Characters are often initially 
congruent with their social worlds but, from perceiving themselves as the “object” of those 
world, become increasingly aware of the limitations of those worlds. Shifting from “subject” to 
“object,” leads them to challenge the discourses and cultural models constituting their identities, 
leading to construction of new worlds and a rearticulation and resituation of the self (Lewis, 
2004). Kegan (2000) illustrated this shift from “subject” to “object” in literature with the 
example of Isben’s The Doll’s House. In the play, Nora’s husband’s, Torvald, attempts to 
maintain control of his wife, reflecting his allegiance to patriarchic systems and traditional 
family roles in the late 1800s. In the beginning of the play, Nora assumes a subservient, 
childlike identity. However, after a series of miscommunications and misunderstandings that 
lead to her husband forbidding her to visit her own children, Nora begins to perceive herself as 
“object” of the patriarchic system. Unable to accept such an arrangement, Nora tells her husband 
that she is leaving him. Torvald then implores her to recall her “sacred duties. . . toward your 
husband, and your children.” She replies, “I’m no longer prepared to accept what people say and 
what’s written in books. I must think things out for myself, and try to find my own answer.” 

Kegan (2000) notes that this is more than simply Nora “changing her mind” (p. 67). 

Nora has come to, “a new set of ideas about her ideas, about where they even come from, about 
who authorizes them or makes them true (p. 67). In this sense, she is no longer subject to others’ 
definitions of “sacred duties.” These changes also involve more than simply adopting a different 
way of knowing. They involve “ being someone different — the Nora at the end of A Doll’s House 
who has the temerity to call her “sacred duties” into question” (Kegan, 2000, p. 68). Nora 
recognizes how a patriarchic system as mediated by Torvald’s narratives, genres, and language 
positioned her as subordinate. Thus, the shift from “subject” to “object” also involves 
recognizing how narratives, genres, and language function to perpetuate status-quo systems by 
mediating identities as subservient to those systems. 

Nora then resists the system by creating counter-narratives, genres, and language that 
parody or challenge narratives, genres, and language reflecting patriarchic discourses. By 
recasting the conventional, public “Me” position in alterative discourses, the “I” adopts new, 
alternative roles through narrative, genres, and language. Nora develops a counter-narrative for 
herself that challenges the familiar narrative of the dutiful, subservient housewife. She begins to 
reformulate language use by redefining the meanings of “husband,” “wife,” and “family” in 
ways that challenge the cultural meanings of these categories operating in the late 19 th century. 
Through creating counter-narratives, genres, and language, Nora reconstitutes her identity. 

In our study, one of the most popular books was Dorothy Allison’s Bastard out of 
Carolina , a novel that portrays the transformation of Bone, an illegitimate daughter born to 15- 
year-old, white, working-class Anney Boatwright. The novel portrays Bone’s struggle to 
overcome sexual abuse at the hands of her stepfather Daddy Glen while seeking to find a future 
for herself. Along the way she struggles with the patterns of her larger impoverished family, and 
her mother’s inability to rescue her from Daddy-Glen. Bone is ultimately saved by her Aunt 
Raylene who provides an alternative family world in which she achieves some sense of agency. 

In the novel, Dorothy Allison examines stereotypical categories of social class reflecting 
middle-class discourses of working-class people as “white trash.” Moira Baker (1999) notes that 
Allison (1994) in her essay, “A Question of Class,” interrogates bourgeois discourses of 
working-class people. In that essay, Allison argues that these middle-class discourses positing 
that working-class people are poor because they lack motivation or schooling deliberately 




5 



marginalizing working-class people. Baker points to a scene in Bastard out of Carolina in which 
Bone reflects on her mother’s numerous attempts to obtain a birth certificate without 
“Illegitimate” stamped on it: ‘“Mama hated to be called trash, hated the memory of every day 
she’d ever spent bent over other people’s peanuts and strawberry plants while they stood tall and 
looked at her like she was a rock on the ground’ (3-4)” (p. 5). Baker notes that this is an example 
of the characters’ recognition of how the middle discourse reflecting in the category of “white 
trash” created a sense of Bone’s inferiority. 

Baker notes that Bone’s transformation derives from her resistance to these discourses, 
resistance fostered from being placed in conflicting, contradictory positions, leading to her 
awareness of how the class system was positioning her as inferior. Bone’s relatives challenge the 
discourses by creating alternative narratives and categories that identify the contradictions of 
patriarchal, class-based discourses. And, Bone’s Aunt Raylene, who refuses to work in the local 
factory, “does not merely speak an oppositional discourse; she embodies it in her own living” (p. 
6 ). 

Students in our study were aware of Bone’s increasing resistance to dominant patriarchal 
and how, shifting from a first-person to third-person perspective, Bone was increasingly aware of 
how a system of poverty and class hierarchy repressed her and her family. In his analysis of the 
novel, Mitch noted the power of such systems in both Bone’s life and that of Daddy Glenn. In a 
journal entry, he noted how Bone becomes aware of her family’s poverty: 

Bone recognizes that her family in more poor than the other people at church and 
school. . .. On p. 66, she says, “just for a change, I wished we could have things like other 
people, wished we could complain for no reason but the pleasure of bitching and act 
like the trash we were supposed to be,” her mom making a big effort to not be identified 
as “trashy,” but Bone still picks things up and starts believing she it. Later on p. 82, her 
mom’s explaining to Bone, “we’re not bad people. We’re not really even poor.” But 
Bone says “we knew what the neighbors called us, what Mama wanted 
to protect us from. We knew who we were.” This is where she first makes the 
distinction between who she’s “supposed to be” and who she “is” in terms of her social 
class. 

Mitch is charting how Bone is moving from a first-person to third person awareness of 
the effects of poverty on her identity. Mitch also considered how Daddy Glen, now destitute, is 
envious of his relatives’ wealth, but within the prevailing class system in the town, he’s a failure: 
Daddy Glen complains, “nobody wants me to have nothing nice.” Daddy Glen is 
basically an outcast because he associates with the Boatwrights [Bone’s family]... 

I think the difference between Daddy Glen and Bone is Bone has lived in poverty 
since birth and so she as a default sees herself as poor, and Daddy Glen came from a 
wealthy family, so he doesn’t think that he’s “good enough” because he’s trying to 
live up to expectations. 

Mitch recognizes that Daddy Glen realizes that he is a victim of the class system, but, 
unlike Bone, he is never entertains alternatives to that system that would afford him with a sense 
of agency. Given his lack of power within the larger community system, Daddy Glen turns to 
assert his power within his family through abuse of Bone. As Mitch notes “He’s got to find a 
way to deal with his frustration, so he turns to the only thing he knows to empower himself, and 
that is to victimize Bone.” 

Mitch is therefore framing his analysis of the novel in terms of institutional critique of 
lower and middle class social structures. He attributes some of this critique to his brother’s 




6 



influence, who he attributes as helping him “see poverty as a problem of society. I don’t think of 
poor people so much as I do poverty and the injustice inherent in it.” 

Adopting historical perspectives associated with perspective-taking. Texts also invite students 
to experience portrayals of past historical contexts and worlds that challenge official 
predominant Eurocentric, masculine interpretive frames and idealized narratives of historical 
progress for race, class, and gender groups. Pat Ensico (in press) argues that multicultural 
literature provides counter-narrative portrayals of history that fills in the “silences, partialities 
and absences in historically formed narratives of access to education” (p. x) excluded from 
official historical accounts taught in schools. She argues that all historical narratives need to be 
perceived “as contingent and partial both because a singular perspective is necessarily limited 
and because the traumatic events through which people have lived, from the Middle Passage to 
9/1 1 cannot be fully witnessed or fully addressed” (p. x.). She proposes a critical-inquiry 
pedagogy that challenges idealized progressive narratives that calls students attention to 
“historical, political and cultural absences, divergences, and paradoxes” (p. x). 

Brenda Daly (2005), drawing on Boler (1999) distinguishes between passive empathy 
and “testimonial reading” in which readers critically examine their subjectivity related to the 
experience of racism. According to Boler (1999, p. 164), when readers engage in “testimonial 
reading,” “instead of a consumptive focus on the other [in the novel], the reader accepts a 
commitment to rethink his or her own assumptions, and to confront the internal obstacles 
encountered as one’s own views are challenged” (p. 231). To model her own processes of being 
White, she discusses her family’s history with her students, focusing on instances of racist 
practices in her family and her own schooling in the 1950s in North Dakota. She recalls that 
despite the diversity of her classmates, 

politeness dictated that these ethnic and racial differences should not be mentioned. Such 
politeness is, as I understand in retrospect, repressive; for one thing, it gave so-called 
whites considerable strength of numbers: all those who claimed a white identity did so 
over and against an Africanist presence. I also learned in school, through an all-white, 
male literary canon, that whiteness was the norm. At the same time, because we studied 
mostly English writers, not Norwegians — Shakespeare, not Ibsen — I learned that 
the English were, supposedly, superior to Norwegians. This knowledge was conveyed 
through silences, since our teachers or parents were too “polite” to say such things aloud; 
therefore, I also learned to keep secret my thoughts on such matters. In short, the silent 
curriculum in my school taught me that while I was inferior to certain whites, I was 
nevertheless part of a superior race. (p. 223). 

Rather than openly expressing her emotions about this racial positioning in this culture 
of silence, Daly both suppressed these emotions as part of being a “nice,” “popular” girl, and she 
projected them onto African Americans. In her “testimonial reading” self-reflections, she also 
realized how her white identity shaped her responses to British literature that served to reify the 
superiority of Whiteness within her culture. 

To encourage her students to critically reflect on their own readings related to their 
white identities, she asked students to read novels by white women portraying representations of 
madness: Jane Eyre, The Yellow Wallpaper, Mrs. Dalloway, The Bell Jar, followed by a 
reexamination of these white perspectives with a reading of Jean Rhys’s Wide Sargasso Sea, 
that retells Jane Eyre from the point of view of the “mad” Jamaican woman, Bertha, who in 
Jane Eyre is portrayed as a “clothed hyena.” She then asks students to apply their responses to 
Wide Sargasso Sea to reexamine their initial responses to Jane Eyre. Her students then 




7 



recognized Bronte’s racist portrayal of Bertha defined markedly from Rhys’s portrayal. 

Similarly, to foster self-reflection on one’s own response stances as white students. 

Rather than simply reading historical accounts of these horrific historical events in a 
social studies class, in responding to literature, students are experiencing characters’ complex, 
often inexplicable reactions to these events that defy rational explanations. In our study, in 
responding to the internment of the Japanese in Obasan, students experienced an event for which 
there is no clear explanation: why would Americans engage in the same repressive practices that 
they condemned in their enemies — something that it also the case with current torture of so- 
called “combatant enemies.” In another novel read in the course. Kindred , by Octavia Butler 
(1979), students experience how the meanings of narratives, genres, and language differ 
according to historical and cultural contexts. In this novel, the protagonist, Dana, is an urban, 
African-American female who is a writer in 1970’s Los Angeles. She is transported back to the 
world of slavery in antebellum Maryland through a link to her great- grandfather and slave- 
owner, Rufus. In the novel, she experiences the harsh realities of lived slavery set against the 
distant notions of slavery as mediated by 1970’s historical narratives (Rushdy, 1993). She 
understands her present self through understanding her past heritage not only as related to her 
white great-grandfather, who fathered her grandmother with another slave, but also as 
constructed in the contemporary urban world of Los Angeles. 

Through her time-travel experiences, she recognizes that history and the heritage of 
slavery has a profound influence on her current identity as a contemporary African American. 
This return to the past is itself a biographical counter-narrative that serves to mediate the 
construction of her memory as well as her present identity. At one point, Dana returns to the 
present without her arm, something that she cannot explain to her husband, Kevin. Ashraf 
Rushdy (1993) describes the role of biographical narrative in constructing her identity through 
linking past memories with the present to create an ongoing narrative: 

Dana provides the possibility for that narrative — which would give her a sense of 
selfhood by returning her to and re-engaging her with the past — when she employs her 
memory: “I closed my eyes again remembering the way I had been hurt — remembering 
the pain” (p. 10). Within the parameters of her recollection, as presented in the novel’s 
seven chapters, we receive the study of Dana’s unique relationship to her slave-holding 
great-grandfather Rufus Weylin. Dana’s memory, then, acts as a framing device to 
constructing the story of her relationship with her ancestor. . . Her memory is a 
performance of history, a performance of such potency that it incorporates her into the 
past, leaving “no distance at all” between her and the remembered events, (p. 137) 

As she moves back into her past world, Dana confronts a sense of loss and destruction, as 
symbolically represented in the loss of her arm. In reading about her experiences of slavery, the 
students in the course relived Dana’ s experiences of slavery not simply an historical event or 
morality tale, but an experience fraught with complexities, contradictions, and silences that 
persist in contemporary Los Angeles. In experiencing Dana’s testimony, students also learn how 
the distortions, incompleteness, and silences about events reflect larger institutional forces at 
work, for example, how the historical records of slave ownership Dana uncovers about her past 
are completing silent about the morality of slavery. They students may then define how able to 
define how her identity is shaped by discourses and cultural models operating in slavery and in 
contemporary Los Angeles, 

In doing so, they recognize how some of the characters in the novel are never aware of 
themselves as the “objects” (Kegan, 1996; 2000) of systems (Leontev, 1981). The white male 




8 



plantation owners in Kindred were not consciously aware of operating in a system of white 
racism and privilege, even though their practices reflect their participation in that system. In 
contrast, Dana applies contemporary counter-narratives and language to gain an awareness of 
how the system shapes her and her ancestors. At the same time, Dana herself is having difficulty 
understanding her experience in history, leading the students to recognize the limitations of their 
own attempts to formulate a coherent, definitive explanation of slavery. Students also 
questioned whether Dana had a right to impose values and beliefs from the modem world onto 
the past. They also wondered as to whether those living in the past, such as the slaveholder, 

Rufus, should be held accountable for their actions based on modem values and beliefs or based 
on the norms of their own historical period. 

Thus, the time-travel genre of Kindred itself modeled and mediated the kinds of cross- 
cultural comparisons of different social worlds shaping the characters’ identities. By 
highlighting differences and dialogic tensions between the worlds of the 1970s and slavery, 
students shifted their focus from a first-person perspective focus on Dana as “subject” to a third- 
person focus on Dana as “object” of slavery and the contemporary world, leading them to focus 
on the influences of their own worlds on their identities. 

Defining intertextual links. Students also read across different texts, using intertextual 
links to define similar themes across texts that represented instances of characters’ resistance 
across different cultures. For example, in responding to Obasan portraying Japanese internment 
camps, Pamela described similarities in terms of form between Obasan and the Nazi control of 
Polish ghettos in Mans and Maus II: 

In Maus , the males and females were split into different camps. In the beginning of Obasan, 
the males and females were split into separate sleeping quarters. In many cases, people had to 
get passes to see their fa mi lies. In addition to having camps split into male/female, some men 
were sent to labor camps. The labor camps in Maus were more severe, but labor camps none 
the less... Early in the war, on p. 103, Emily says in her journal, “Mind you, you can’t compare 
this sort of thing to anything that happens in Germany. . . Canada is supposed to be a 
democracy.” In fact they were quite comparable. After everything was finished, on the last page 
in the memoranda sent to the senate, it says the orders were “an adoption of the methods 
of Nazism.” 

And, she drew parallels between the internment and the post 9/1 1 orders “to do what was 
necessary on the U.S. borders to provide stability and safety.” Pamela used these “text-to-text” links to 
formulate critiques of “fascist” institutional forces operating in these texts, connections that constituted 
their social stances and identities in the classroom discussions, consistent with the idea of intertextuality 
as driven by social agendas (Shuart-Faris & Bloome, 2004). 

Stances as mediated by popular culture and media texts. Texts also evoke stances and 
perspectives that are highly mediated by popular culture and media texts. These stances are 
mediated by popular culture representations of the topics and issues based on certain discourses 
or cultural models. These stances also reflect tensions in popular culture between the actual and 
the desirable shaped by what Judith Butler (1993) described as “normalizing discourses” as 
driving the need to be perceived of as “normal” as the desirable within certain social 
communities or contexts, as well as who has the power to define what is considered to be normal 
within a community or context. 

Within texts, there are multiple, competing character perceptions regarding what’s 
considered to be normal or desirable, as well as the legitimacy of those social norms and who can 
dictate those norms. For example, in Kindred , Dana adopts one set of perceptions regarding 




9 



normality and desirability in slavery in opposition to the slaveholder’s perceptions. And, in 
contemporary 1970s Los Angeles, she adopts another set of perceptions about her husband 
regarding the normality and desirability of their mixed-marriage relationship. Characters also 
perceive each others’ identities in terms of their own social and cultural agendas. 

Readers sort out these conflicting perceptions by drawing on discourses and cultural 
models derived from popular culture, media, and other literary texts. In our study, the working- 
class female participants’ perceptions of moral dilemmas facing female characters in House on 
Mango Street, Their Eyes Were Watching God, Yellow Raft in Blue Water, Kindred , and Bastard 
Out of Carolina — dilemmas such as ways of coping with sexism and racism in a relationship or 
what is meaning of romance. In their research on the cultural models of romance, Holland and 
Eisenshart (1990) found that these cultural models were highly mediated by popular cultural 
representations of romance. In our study, some of the working-class females adopted a stance 
mediated by popular culture texts based on the belief that while they are expected to marry, they 
perceive marriage as an inevitability and not necessarily a positive, romantic venture. Likewise, 
these girls understand that in an unpredictable world, they must find ways of being responsible 
for their own financial stability. This is consistent with Greer’s (2004) theory of “flexible moral 
realism” which suggests that working-class women interpret lived and text worlds through a 
stance that is flexible in terms of understanding women’s negotiations of relationships. In this 
stance women are realistic about the difficulties of marriage and other relationships, and focus on 
the notion that despite mishaps, moral and ethical lapses, and other struggles, it’s still possible to 
find resolution and maintain a sense of happiness in life (p.148). 

Studying Text Positioning of Readers 

How then do researchers examine the ways in which texts position readers and readers 
uptake of that positioning? One approach is to focus on students’ openness to grappling with the 
conflicted stances invited by the dialogic tensions in the text. This involves determining 
differences in students’ resistance to dialogic tensions as well as how they may take up 
interpretation of dialogic tensions. 

Resistance to dialogic tensions. In our study, some students resisted grappling with 
dialogic tensions while others were open to grappling with those tensions. They perceived little 
need or ethical imperative in exploring dialogic tensions given their allegiance to the high 
school’s monologic world of white privilege and intellectual control (Kubal, Meyler, Stone, & 
Mauney, 2003; Weis, 1996) and to family worlds in which there was limited exploration of 
alternative perspectives. These students also adopted a backlash stance to exploring racial 
tensions by perceiving Whites as victims of employment inequity and affirmative action 
programs (Chaisson, 2004; Kincheloe & Steinberg, 2000). Because they did not perceive 
themselves as shaped by economic forces constructing class differences and limiting their lives, 
they turned to discourses of whiteness to resist dealing with economic forces (Bettie, 2003). 
These resistant students were therefore primarily adopting first-person perspectives on 
individuals as the primary unit of analysis, resisting the need to examine larger institutional 
forces. 

A study of ninth graders responses to N. Scott Momaday’s The Way to Rainy Mountain 
and a film about Wounded Knee, a class of 19 high school students, 5 of whom were white, the 
white students were relatively reticent about participating in discussions (Glazier & Seo, 2005). 
The white students were particularly reticent about making connections between the texts and 
their own cultural experiences, while students of color who were more likely to discuss their 
cultural experiences. Glazier and Seo (2005) speculate that because students assumed that the 




10 



text is about the “other,” they then dismiss the text. On the other hand, even Students of Color 
may be resistant to discussing graphic portrayals of racism; in one study, younger elementary 
students of color adopted a stance of “engaged resistance” to “the feelings of helplessness or 
danger” in responding to such portrayals (Moller & Allen, 2000, p. 172). 

White students may remain silent fearing that the benefits of engaging in discussions are 
outweighed by the detriments, such as appearing racist or insensitive (Beach, 1997; Gallagher, 
2003). White working-class male college students are particularly resistant, given their 
reluctance to challenge economic structural inequality because they assume that they are 
advantaged by that structure (Trainor, 2002). 

Recognition of dialogic tensions. If students do identify dialogic tensions between 
conflicting perspectives in the text, then researchers could determine the kinds of tensions 
identified and motivations for focusing on those particular tensions. In our study, we noted that 
students frequently focused on tensions related to issues of social or government support versus 
individual initiative, particularly in terms of affirmative action. Some students’ perceptions of 
characters were shaped by their cultural models of affirmative action, models acquired from the 
larger community or parents, in which nonwhites are represented as gamering unfair advantages 
due to affirmative action programs. 

Text engagement. Researchers also need to consider variations in students’ level of 
engagement with different texts. One of the reasons for the popularity of a book such as Kindred 
was that it was relatively easy to read, while the dialect of Their Eyes Were Watching God and 
the complex plot development, use of symbolism, and shifting points of view of Love Medicine 
proved to be more difficult for students, a reaction characterized by other researchers as 
“aesthetic resistance” (Soter, 1997) or “aesthetic shutdown” (Athanases, 1998). Given the 
difficulty level of the language and symbol systems of many multicultural texts, it is important 
that teachers not forego using these texts by providing students with some assistance in 
comprehending language and symbols. In teaching Love Medicine , Parks therefore provided 
students with additional assistance in interpreting the novel, giving them excerpts of criticism 
that interpreted symbols, shorter reading assignments between discussions, and a “family tree” of 
the characters in order to navigate the complex relationships. 

Differences in engagement and interest also varied across different students according to 
race due to differences in background cultural knowledge, findings consistent with Amosa’s 
(2004) research indicating that Australian ethnic students responded more positively to 
multicultural literature than did white students. In her study, ethnic students were significantly 
more likely to adopt characters’ perspectives, cite personal relevance of texts, and connect texts 
with other texts or prior experiences than were white students. They were also more likely to 
identify instances of prejudice in texts than did white students. 

Con texts/studen ts 

A second component is that of the social contexts or spaces operating in text worlds, the 
social context or spaces of the classroom, and the larger social contexts or spaces to which 
students hold certain allegiances. Studying the influence of contexts on interpretations requires 
that researchers examine the nested relationships between specific micro-contexts operating in 
the classroom, the classroom context, the larger school context, and allegiances to other contexts 
outside of the school: family, community, workplace, and virtual worlds (Phelan, Davidson, & 
Yu, 1998). Studying the intersections of different contexts entails determining the norms, 




11 



expected roles, sense of community, tools, and larger objects driving these worlds (Engestrom, 
1987). 

Positioning of student identities in social/figured worlds. Within social or figured 
contexts injunction with text positioning, participants are positioned to adopt certain identities as 
“culturally imagined types such that others and, even the person herself as least temporarily, treat 
her as though she were such a person” (Holland & Leander, 2004, p. 130). 

Based on her research on Latino adolescents’ uses of popular culture, Moje (2004) posits 
the concept of “spatial and temporal identities” as “versions of self that are enacted according to 
understanding of and relations in different spaces and time periods” (p. 17). Rather than explore 
adolescents’ Latino identities simply based on cultural heritage, Moje focuses on how 
adolescents’ spatial positioning relative to hybrid, borderland spaces of national, community, 
neighborhood, home, suburban (often malls and movie theaters), and virtual spaces constitutes 
their identities. The meaning of their uses of popular culture texts in these spaces often involved 
racial or ethnic identity construction mediated by participation in these spaces, for example, 
reading newspapers and books by and about Latino/as as a means of identifying with their Latino 
neighborhoods/community. Adolescents therefore construct different versions of self according 
to the people they interact with in different spaces (Blackburn, 2005; Sarroub, 2005). When 
worlds are perceived as incongruent, students perceive these borders as insurmountable barriers 
between worlds, particularly when they assume they lack the social or cultural capital (Bourdieu, 
1974; 1977) valued in academic worlds. 

In a study of a female high school student, Janette, who perceives herself as a “‘tattooed 
freak’” (p. 138) enrolled in an alternative program, Vadeboncoeur (2005) contrasted aspects of 
time/space of the traditional school with the alternative program. In the traditional school, time 
was highly segmented and regimented, while in the alternative school, Janette could work on 
projects for extended periods of time during the school day. And, while spaces were limited to 
either staff or students and the library was controlled, spaces in the alternative school were 
jointly used by both staff and students and the library functioned also as a community 
center/meeting site. Because Janette did not function well in what she perceived to be as 
oppressive traditional high school spaces, she was more comfortable in the alternative school 
spaces that allowed her to work at her own pace and in relatively private spaces. 

Vadeboncoeur draws on Bakhtin’s notion of the carnival as a “space where the 
prohibitions of social life are tossed out and replaced by spectacles [and] temporary challenges to 
hegemony, and a fleeting and impermanent celebration of the dialogism between the standard 
system (centripetal) and alternatives to the norm (centrifugal)”(p. 141). She identifies instances 
of a celebration of the carnivalesque in Janette’s poetry, for example, a poem about the girls’ 
bathroom in which she portrays tensions between girls focusing on their appearance in front of 
the mirror and their suffering from bulimia that serve to challenge gendered constructions, as 
well as defining her own simultaneous identification with and resistance to these constructions. 

Over time in different worlds, social positionings can “thicken” so that a person becomes 
increasingly defined, labeled, and celebrated or marginalized within a social hierarchy (Holland 
& Lave, 2001; Kehily, 2005). In spatial terms, those with power or agency to act often assume 
center stage, positioning those with less power or agency to the margins (Roth, Hwang, Goulart, 
& Lee, 2005). In our study, a group of white, male students often assumed center stage in the 
discussions by voicing discourses of masculinities, competition, and individual achievement, 
discourses privileged within the school and community. When certain groups assume center 
stage, people in the margins resist by taking up alternative practices and create their own center, 




12 



transforming what was the center into the margins (Roth, Hwang, Goulart, & Lee, 2005 p. 42). 
Some of the white females in the study who were marginalized by the males’ attempt to control 
the floor challenged the males by formulating alternative feminist discourses that then positioned 
themselves as in the center and the males on the margin. Some of the male participants in our 
study regularly challenged statements by one of the female participants, Kayla, whom they 
perceived to be outspoken and problematic. Drawing on their peer- group allegiances to 
traditional masculine discourses of competitive sports, they attempted to position her as 
deviating from a shared figured world of masculine discourses that was the prevailing norm in 
the school and its classrooms, a positioning that marginalized Kayla and her perspectives. As 
these positionings began to “thicken” over time, Kayla resisted this positioning by challenging 
masculine discourses that reflected her allegiances to feminist orientations portrayed in the 
literature. 

In our study, because the students were enrolled in a course for which they were 
receiving college credit as high school students, they were on a peripheral trajectory that 
involved acquiring certain academic practices associated with being a college student. While 
they were not fully participating physically in an actual college world, they were exposed to 
practices associated with being a college student. For example, in writing journal entries and 
papers, students had to learn to develop their theses by not only providing supporting evidence, 
but also by entertaining alternative perspectives and counter-arguments, strategies consistent 
with the genre of argumentative writing valued in first-year college composition courses. 

This represented a challenge for some of the students in that they were accustomed to 
their familiar role as “high school student.” Moreover, because they were accustomed to 
relatively traditional instruction that involved little intellectual exploration, they were 
participating in the course as students with peripheral access to the academic world of college 
work. 

Thompson High School was a highly controlled culture with continuous monitoring of 
student behavior and enforced regulation of closed-campus rules. This physical control over 
students was often focused on students of color, particularly African-American students, who are 
assumed by many teachers and staff as the most likely to deviate from school norms or challenge 
authority. The fact that students of color were the most likely suspects reflects a link between 
the practices of physical control and a cultural model that emphasizes the values of order, 
punctuality, control, hierarchy, and “rationality,” a cultural model that also reflects a discourse of 
Whiteness set against what is perceived to be the assumed lack of control and irrationality of 
students of color (Barnett, 2000) 

For the more academically motivated students in this school, this intellectual control 
manifests itself both as boredom and frustration. Kayla, a 12 th grader at Thompson, expressed 
these ideas in her comments about the academic climate at Thompson, “It’s so easy here and I 
get bored. . . Well I mean I like it cause I don’t have homework and different things like that. I 
still leam but in a sense I feel like my, my brain, my knowledge power that I have in a sense is 
going to waste. I mean, I could be learning so much more.” 

Racial tensions at Thompson. From 1970 to the time of our study, Thompson went from 
being an all-white school to one in which Whites comprised only 40% of the school’s 
population, a shift that itself fosters racial conflict within the school and the community. 

Because many of these white students defined racism as the expression of racist comments, a 
discourse of prejudice (Bonilla-Silva, 2001), they did not perceive themselves as participating in 
institutional or systemic racism. In maintaining a sense of control over the facilities, the 




13 



students, and the traditions of the school, the school community in many ways resists the cultural 
transformation that comes with shifting demographic groups. While struggling to become a place 
of true diversity, Thompson is still rooted in white culture and white traditions that have been in 
place for generations. Groups that are relatively new to the school have become peripheral 
factions, and are only slowly beginning to become pieces of the mainstream student culture. 
Thompson may be a demographically diverse school, but interactions between racial groups 
often remain quite minimal or superficial, as is the case in the broader community. 

The culture of male athleticism infiltrated nearly every aspect of life at Thompson, a 
norm that exists in comfort alongside the emphases of physical control and limited intellectual 
expression, as noted earlier in this chapter. As previously noted, Thompson’s athletic tradition 
reaches back well into its past, as well as far into the community and beyond. This section 
explores the ways that athletic “tradition” and “pride” help construct a culture that is defined by 
very clear racial and gender hierarchies. 

The discourse of physical control that mediates social practices in the school is 
consistently linked to a discourse of athleticism, as well as a cultural model in which 
competition, self-discipline, achievement, and physical prowess are highly valued (Barker & 
Galasinski, 2003). The administration consistently assumed that self-discipline acquired through 
sports directly transfers to self-discipline in other activities. The most popular girls at 
Thompson, like the most popular boys, tend to be white and they tend to be involved in athletics. 
Girls who identify as “jocks” often expressed contempt for other girls who were outspoken or 
argumentative in class. 

Allegiances to discourses and cultural models operating in these different worlds 
influenced students’ interpretations. Some of the white males drew on the discourse of 
competitive athleticism to interpret characters’ practices in terms of adopting a competitive 
stance. For example, one white male athlete consistently applied discourses of individualism and 
meritocracy also mediated his interpretations of characters’ actions. He explained the successes 
and failures of characters’ actions in terms of the level of their own individual initiative and 
motivation, as reflected in his explanations of character’s actions in Bastard Out of Carolina. 

He argued that Bone’s future depends on her own self- initiative — that she herself is responsible 
for her own fate. As he noted: 

I think she could if she stayed in school and went to college after, just like anybody else 
could. But, I don’t know, the things that went on in her life might mess her up a little bit. 
She might need counseling or something, but I still think that she could get probably get 
through it. I just think that she has a chance like anybody else. Anybody can (his 
emphasis), if you do the right stuff and work hard your whole life. 

In discussing Daddy Glen’s problems, Corey suggested that because Daddy Glen had not 
adhered to his family’s expectations for him, he should begin living the way he was “brought up” 
in a middle-class family. 

I thought that Glen sort of started off backwards from his family. His family is rich, and 
he should have an easier life to start off with, but he kind of failed at everything and 
started going down the tubes and now he’s got to rebuild his way back up. Like, you guys 
were saying, he didn’t follow in his family’s footsteps; he kind of funneled down. He’s 
got to just build up and work harder now to get back up to where his family is. . . with 
expectations. 

These responses reflect Corey’s larger allegiances to the school world in which 
athleticism serves as a hegemonic discourse of control, excluding many female and nonwhite 




14 



students from positions of power. All of this suggests the need to study how student response 
reflects allegiances to discourses of power operating in classroom and school contexts. 

Studying Contextual/Student Influences 

Studying these contextual/student influences entails some qualitative analysis of the 
classroom and school cultures, as well as students’ perceptions of and allegiances to those 
cultures. In our study, two of the researchers conducted ethnographic analyses of the school 
and community cultures, focusing particularly on the ways in which discourses of whiteness and 
athleticism and a history of white control shaped the school and community culture. 

Observations of the cafeteria during lunch periods offer further examples of social and racial 
stratification among students at Thompson. With very few exceptions, students clearly organize 
themselves into racial groups (Tatum, 2003). A similar pattern was often seen in observations of 
classrooms where students were allowed to choose their own seats. 

There are a number of possible explanations for these patterns of in-school segregation at 
Thompson by race. One explanation for this in-school segregation may be the lack of a 
discourse of class that would serve as a bond between the shared challenges facing both 
working-class Whites and working-class people of color (Bettie, 2003). Bettie (2003) suggests 
that that working-class students from different racial backgrounds fail to find solidarity with one 
another because while race is very visible in the United States, social-class is nearly invisible and 
transparent. She found that students lack the discourses for talking about the ways that social- 
class may provide common grounds in understanding institutional oppression. Lacking this 
discourse of class, students turn to the more familiar discourse of race as the primary frame of 
reference for defining peer differences and relationships (Keating, 2004). 

Understanding these discourses operating in the school helped us examine the students’ 
interpretation of racial conflicts. Because many of the white students defined racism as the 
expression of racist comments reflecting a discourse of prejudice (Bonilla-Silva, 2001), they did 
not perceive themselves as participating in institutional or systemic racism. These students were 
also resentful about the economic advantages afforded their middle-class suburban peers, for 
example, parental support for going to college. This resentment of their middle-class peers 
paralleled their resentment towards Thompson students of color whom they perceived as 
receiving similar financial scholarship support; in both instances, these working class white 
students understood themselves as marginalized. 

The Teacher 

Another component is that of the teacher. Researchers could examine teachers’ adoption 
of different stances and identities associated with creates classroom spaces that foster students’ 
reflective explorations of their positioning, stances that themselves can reflect certain 
ambivalences. In our study, the teacher, Parks, challenged students’ discourses underlying these 
prototypical conceptions by voicing “orienting discourses” (Rex, 2001; 2002) that contradicted 
the students’ discourses constituting characters’ identities. 

Challenger and supporter. Adopting a critical pedagogy approach, teachers are 
challenging students’ status quo discourses. At the same time, they also need to provide support 
for the difficulties involved in interrogating these status quo discourses. Rather than 
marginalizing white students by implying that they are racist simply because they are white 
students who are failing to subscribe to the teacher’s agenda, teachers need to consider these 
students’ perspectives and the emotional appeal of “race-talk” or conservative discourses. As 
Jennifer Trainor (2002) notes: 




15 



We are asked, on the one hand, to respect, even love, students. . .and we must, on the 
other, organize our teaching around attempts to change students. Caught between these 
two mandates, we struggle to represent whiteness and white students as perpetrators of 
injustice who must be taught to disavow whiteness and as legitimate social actors on 
whom we must risk “an act of love.” I want to suggest that once we confront this 
contradiction and the ways it delimits how we see mainstream students, it becomes 
possible to represent and understand encounters with resistant students in less politicized 
and essentialized terms, (p. 634). 

Trainor (2002) has her students explore the more private, subjective processes of 
constructing one’s racial identity, requiring an appreciation of both the “rational and the 
irrational, the conscious and the unconscious, thought and feeling” (p. 637). She cites a study of 
white college students (Gallagher, 1995) that demonstrates the emotional appeal of the “whites 
as victim” theme as a rallying cry for group identification with others who share this discourse. 
Given the potential for conservatives to exploit white anger, she argues for the need to avoid the 
use of “rhetorical frames that demonize whiteness and white students” (p. 647) and to directly 
challenge discourses of Whiteness through recognition of the role of subjectivity in shaping 
discourses of race and class. 

One strategy teachers employ is to make students feel more at ease in discussing issues of 
race so that such discussions become a part of ordinary conversation in which all students share a 
sense of comfort (Bolgatz, 2005). A study of the use of this strategy on high school students’ 
willingness to discuss race in a class taught by a white and an African-American teacher found 
that sharing narratives about experiences with race served to create a relaxed atmosphere while at 
the same time, raising issues of racial difference (Bolgatz, 2005). For example, the African- 
American teacher shared anecdotes about his mother having to pass a literacy test in order to 
vote, sharing that provided students with some understanding of the historical and institutional 
forces of racism shaping his identity. Over time, as students became accustomed to sharing these 
narrative experiences, they were less intimidated by discussing race. 

Students can then study how narratives themselves function as a tool for reifying 
essentialist categories of race or “race-talk” (Bonilla-Silva, 2001). Ann Winans (2005) has her 
students examine the ways in which race is constructed through essentialist narratives that allow 
them to remain “safe” in specific, local social relationships. She helps students critically 
examine assumptions inherent in “narratives of colorblindness” as reifying racism as individual 
prejudice, while at the same time remaining sensitive to white students’ fear of not wanting to be 
perceived as racist. Rather than assigning guilt by critiquing these narratives, she has students 
explore their ambiguous feelings about race, particularly in terms of the ethical dimensions of 
relationships with others: “Preserving innocence is one aspect of colorblindness, yet another 
aspect emerges from a desire to act ethically toward others, to affect the lives of others in 
positive ways” (p. 264). 

Winans’ s students examined writers’ autobiographical narratives about race to highlight 
the ambiguities and contradictions in their own experiences of constructing and coping with race. 
For example, in having students discuss James McBride’s (1996) The Color of Water: A Black 
Man ’.s' Tribute to His White Mother, she asks students to explore the contradictions associated 
with being the mother of a family of 12 biracial children evident in quotes such as following: 
“Mommy’s contradictions crashed and slammed against one another like bumper cars 
at Coney Island. White folks, she felt, were implicitly evil toward blacks, yet she 
forced us to go to white schools to get the best education. Blacks could be trusted 




16 



more, but anything involving blacks was probably slightly substandard. (McBride, 1996, 
29).” 

In discussing the mother’s color-blindness, Winans’s students explored the limitations 
and contradictions associated with colorblindness, as well as distinguishing between being a 
white person from white privilege. Noting that McBride’s mother was white, the students 
recognized that she did not necessarily subscribe to white privilege. In her teaching, Winans 
avoids attributions of 

innocence and guilt [that] offer false resolutions that misrepresent the complexities of 
students’ experiences [by] seeking to understand the consequences of our actions and 
responding accordingly, then we are freed to explore students’ narratives of those 
experiences rather than facing, confronting, and rediscovering “correct” conclusions, (p. 
272). 

And, teachers may make explicit how their own narratives, genres, and language mediate 
discourses of race and identity construction, describing the ways that different forms of racism 
and whiteness themselves were shaped by these narratives, genres, and language. For example, 
Walter Jacobs (2005) employs the idea of the “teacher as text” (p. 9) approach in which he, as an 
African-American instructor, describes his particular experiences with racism associated with 
popular culture texts. He then encourages his students to study him as a “text” in terms of how 
his construction of racism as an African American teacher with authority in the classroom 
influences his interpretation of race in texts. Then, when his predominately white students note 
that he may be biased about his perceptions and therefore racist, he argues that his perceptions 
represent only one of many different, multiple forms of racism operating in the classroom. 

None of this means that teachers simply assume the role of a neutral, facilitator because 
to do so will only perpetuate students’ dominant discourses (Powers, 2002). Denise Baszile 
(2003) challenges the notion of creating an illusionary “safe” classroom space, noting that the 
classroom can never be “safe” given the fact that students are continually under surveillance by 
their peers and by persons outside the class. She argues in favor of a contested space that 
addresses conflicts given her belief that: 

racism is not only an institutional phenomena, it also an inter/intra personal one. To act as 
if my experiences are irrelevant is to allow many students to remain too comfortable, to 
obfuscate my complexity as a person and to reinforce the idea that race and racism is 
simply about respecting difference. The question, for me then is not whether to include 
my experiences, but how do I engage students critically and responsibly. Knowing that I 
am the first and for many the only encounter with a Black female professor, I have come 
to understand that I am myself a counter hegemonic text, a living oppositional framework 
and as such a subject of study by the students, (p. 31). 

When faced with these challenges, her white students resort to silence for fear of being 
perceived as racist, which is read by students of color as an implicit admission of racism, 
creating frustrations for students of color who then themselves become silent. While students of 
color may share their experiences, white students’ failure to share their experiences leaves 
discourses of Whiteness unchallenged. Keeping silent serves to reify the power of white 
students, who assume that there is no burning need to voice their opinions, particularly if those 
opinions will be challenged. Silence can also reflect a sense of shame about not having 
previously challenged racist practices. As Thandeka (2002), notes, “white people cannot talk 
about race because the stories we tell ourselves about our childhood work to cover up our red- 




17 



faced confusion when our parents, unknowingly perhaps, denied our honest, loving impulses 
(e.g. to make friends with the child of color down the street).” (p. 56). 

Referencing one’s own identity construction. Teachers can model ways of adopting 
certain stances in the classroom by describing their own experiences in negotiating competing 
allegiances between different worlds. Parks shared childhood narratives of financial destitution, 
family members’ run-ins with the law, and the prevalent drug culture of his factory-employed 
neighborhood. In discussing his own working-class background, Parks established identification 
with his own students, who perceived him as a “co-author of students’ lives” (Rymes, 2001, p. 
168) — someone who is able to bridge competing worlds. 

In perceiving Parks as “one of us,” his students established a relationship with him so that 
they perceived him as someone who had a shared interest in their personal lives given his own 
prior experiences (Borkowski, 2004). In his teaching, Parks is continually addressing questions 
of identity construction: “Who am I? Who are the others around me? How am I seeing things? 
How are they seeing things? How are they seeing me?” In doing so, he shared his 
autobiographical experiences with students to reference certain aspects of his identity. 

In addition to the challenge of addressing issues of race in a school in which white 
privilege and control remain the cultural norm. Parks also faced the challenge of helping high 
school students acquire new academic practices and assume the “habitus” (Bourdieu, 1977) of 
college students. Socializing high school students into college academic communities of practice 
involves helping them adopt new practices that differ from their familiar practices operating in 
high school classrooms (Beach, Lundell, & Jung, 2002; Harklau, 2001). 

To help students make this transition. Parks made explicit the practices involved in 
critically analyzing literature consistent with first-year-college work. Because he knew that his 
students would have difficulty projecting themselves into an unknown, unfamiliar world of 
college, Parks knew that he had to do more than simply modeling certain academic practices. He 
also had to demonstrate how he operated in a college world as a person from a working-class 
background. Central to that transition was his experience of learning to value the intellectual 
aspects of academic work that transcend the idea of simply being on a college campus and taking 
college course work. Given these instrumental conceptions of schooling (Seitz, 2004), Parks had 
to show his students how analyzing literature affords him some intellectual satisfaction as a 
worthwhile endeavor. In doing so, he helped students envision themselves as operating in a 
future world so that they could project themselves into the future and perceive the value of 
operating in that world. For Wenger (1998) teacher/mentors need to help students imagine “who 
they are, who they are not, who they could be. . .reinventing the self, and in the process 
reinventing the world” (pp. 272-273). He argues that teachers also need to go beyond their 
conventional institutional roles by “just being adults [who] act as members and engage in the 
learning that membership entails.” (p. 277). 

In sharing autobiographical narratives mediating his trajectories into academia. Parks 
faced a challenge noted by teachers from working-class backgrounds of how to position himself 
between close attachment to one’s family and neighborhood and the often alien, impersonal 
academic world (Ryan & Sackrey, 1996; Shepard, McMillan, & Tate, 1998; Villanueva, 1993; 
Zandy, 1990). People from working-class backgrounds who have gone to college and/or 
graduate school often struggle to negotiate their identities in relationship to the working-class 
backgrounds they have “left behind.” For some, such negotiation demands a rejection or silence 
regarding their working-class backgrounds or experiences. For others, making this transition 
involves creating a Thirdspace (Soja, 1998) that rejects binary either/or thinking to consider the 




18 



benefits and limitations of both working-class and academic worlds. In describing his own 
experience of growing up in a working-class home and becoming an academic, David Borkowski 
(2004) notes that he was not bookish, was not a good student, and did not like school or his 
teachers, practices and attitudes related to his working-class background. In working with 
students from working-class backgrounds, he attempts to connect with all of his students 
regardless of their attitudes, noting that “I don’t value some students over others because they’ve 
already pocketed some cultural capital. . .1 felt obliged to invite all of my students into the 
conversation, generating as many voices as possible” (p. 1 16). He therefore does not perceive 
his role as simply one of socializing students into acquiring academic discourses which are 
themselves class-based. Rather, he perceives his role as exploiting differences in his students’ 
background experiences to create diversity in his classroom. 

To help his students conceptualize the idea of operating in a cultural world, he employed 
a “fishbowl” metaphor to help students interpret practices and beliefs as shaped by cultural 
forces. Early in the course, the metaphor emerged from a journal prompt in which he asked 
students to respond to the following: “Water is to fish as culture is to people.” The crux of the 
conversation was around whether or not fish know that they are in water. Once students 
acquired an understanding of the metaphor, they continued to use it to remind themselves that 
they are operating in particular cultural worlds. As Parks noted in a journal reflection about a 
discussion of Kindred l: 

The whole idea of a culture having such profound influence in the lives of its members 
seems pretty fresh to the students. As we discussed the character of Rufus in Kindred , 
students understood that his culture had shaped him to such an extent that he could not 
break free of the norms and examples given to him by his father; he felt that rape was a 
culturally acceptable option but that the love of a black woman was not. Students keep 
coming back to the idea of culture as a fishbowl and that there was little chance for Rufus 
to even consider an outside idea. At the same time, students were quick to note that 
somehow some individuals in the society were able to transgress the culture and consider 
ideas like abolition, racial equality, and the like. 

In a class presentation, in describing the world of the family in Bastard Out of Carolina, 
he talked about the insular nature of the family world for the children growing up in that family: 
We’ve been talking about the fishbowl and fishbowls describe families too, when you 
grow up in a family, you think that the way your parents parent is normal, that that’s how 
the whole world does it, and you think however your brothers and sisters behave, you 
think that’s normal. And if you have a Grandma and all your uncles and cousins doing 
the same thing, it all seems normal, so you’re sort of stuck in a family culture fishbowl. 
Sending as a cultural broker/guide to a community of literary readers. In addition to 
mentoring students into the college world, Parks also served at a cultural broker or “tourguide” to 
introduce students into a larger community of readers who enjoy or participate in interpreting 
literature (Edelsky, Smith, & Wolfe, 2002). 

To help students define connections between their experiences in lived worlds with 
interpretations of text worlds, he provided them with three scaffolding categories for formulating 
these connections: “text to text,” “text to life,” and “text to world.” As students described their 
lived worlds, he continually asks them “How is this world constructed?” That is, just as the 
students became adept at interpreting the social pressures on characters in a text, such as Rufus 
in Kindred, Parks asked them to apply the same types of lenses to considering the constructs of 
the social worlds in which they lived. Parks also posed similar questions related to broader 




19 



forces, such as “how is America constructed?” For example, he asked students if it would be 
easier to go camping as a White person or person of color across small towns with largely white 
populations. While the response for many students was begrudging, they noted that it would 
likely be easier to visit small towns if you were white. 

Parks also modeled transfer of interpretations of the symbolic meaning 
within texts to students’ interpretations of their own lives. For example, in his own response to 
Bastard out of Carolina, he described the thematic focus of the influence of prior generations on 
current generations. In response to this modeling, students described their own experiences with 
generational conflicts. One student noted that his friends and parents were struggling with 
alcoholism in terms of differences in generational attitudes. 

Teaching critical lenses. Parks also modeled the use of different literary critical analyses 
associated with adopting “feminist,” “Marxist,” and “deconstructionisf ’ lenses, among others 
(Appleman, 2000). To help students compare the differences between these lenses, he put 
students into groups and asked members of each group to assume a different lens. In teaching 
students to apply a feminist and Marxist lenses, Parks asked students to examine how differences 
between characters’ power is related to differences in race, class, and gender. For example, in 
desiring students to assume a Marxist perspective with Love Medicine, Parks asked questions 
such as: “Who has power within the novel and how are their lives portrayed? Who has no money 
in the novel and how are their lives portrayed?” 

Using drama activities. Teachers also employ drama activities to help students envision 
and reflect on participation in imagined worlds. For example, in studying Bastard Out of 
Carolina, students created monologues in which they adopted one character’s voice confronting 
some of the issues in the novels portraying different characters’ identities. In these performances, 
Parks asked that the student first describe the character’s behavior, then proclaim: “You think 
you know me, but you don’t!” The notion of using speech to reveal a character’s underlying 
traits and attitudes was consistent with Parks’ use of the “iceberg” metaphor— that surface 
practices suggests larger, deeper phenomena beneath the surface. 

In performing these monologues, students broke out of their conventional classroom 
identities and experimented with alternative roles. For example, Mai, a Hmong student who was 
normally quite reserved in classroom discussions, became highly engaged when she adopted the 
role of Tenorio, one of the characters in Bless Me Ultima. As Parks noted: 

We all loved her little taped on moustache and beard. She basically told us everything we 
knew about Tenorio. I loved when she threw the bird up in the air and said, “whew I 
killed Ultima’s spirit guide!” and she spun in a circle with glee. It was like the only time 
that I saw her carry out what she’d obviously practiced a great many times. It was like her 
mental checklist said, “when you throw owl, spin and yell to show emotion.” It was a 
great moment of seeing someone slip from complete nervousness into the fulfillment of 
one of the hundred things she’d practiced. 

In other drama activities, Parks had students take characters from the novels and place 
them into lived- world situations. For example, with the novel Their Eyes Were Watching God, 
students assumed the roles of Janie’s grandmother, Janie, and her multiple husbands. Working 
in pairs, students adopted these roles of these characters and a “counselor” who would ask them 
questions about their practices and perspectives. For example, students had previously criticized 
Janie’s grandmother for forcing Janie to marry a man for whom she had no love. When Janie and 
her grandmother met with a “family counselor” to explore reasons for their conflict, the 




20 



grandmother described her experience of slavery, sexual abuse, and poverty that led her to 
recommend marriage as a form of security. 

Teachers also use drama activities to address issues of power and identity. In his work on 
the use of “imaginative inquiry,” Brian Edmiston (2005) devises activities in which a community 
group is engaged by a “client” to complete a certain task or activity, leading students to create an 
“as-if ’ figured world. In participating in these activities, students are continually constructing 
and negotiating their identities in relations with others. In doing so, they are grappling with 
issues of uses of power “with others,” as opposed to “over others” or “for others,” issues of 
power related to social justice. Students are continually reflecting on how shifts in power and 
control influence each others’ perceptions their contributions to completing an activity. For 
example, in a town meeting, if certain participants begin to dominate the meeting, creating an 
“us”/“them” binary, the students then explore how such a binary influences their involvement in 
the meeting. 

Facilitating discussion. Another key teacher role is that of facilitator of classroom 
discussions. Rather than direct students to certain text passages, Parks encouraged students to 
select their own passages that served to illustrate their interpretations. He then refrained from 
voicing his own interpretations, asking students to react to each others’ interpretations to 
encourage tensions between competing interpretations. Students wrote in their journals as 
homework assignments or engaged in freewrites in the beginning of class. Additionally, Parks 
often read aloud or provided students with a list of quotations as a means of provoking 
discussions. For example, in discussing the film. Smoke Signals, he provided students with 
anonymous quotations that he had culled from students’ journals related to the topic of race and 
asked students to circle the three quotes they perceived to be the most controversial, for example 
“White people as a group enjoy an easier life than anybody else in the country.” In response to 
the quote, “Realistically, I feel most reservation Indians to be well to do with free money. 
Somehow in Love Medicine they tend to portray our government as cheap but I don’t see it. 
Indians see us as unfair, but I don’t believe it is true in real life,” students debated the issue of 
Native American’s judgments of Whites for their past actions against Native Americans, as well 
as making generalizations about Whites as a group. 

Mediating racial tensions in the classroom. The three female Hmong students in the 
course, were often reluctant to actively participate in discussions. Some of this reluctance may 
reflect the fact that while students of color constitute the majority in the school, they are rarely 
acknowledged or listened to by those with social power. Such hesitancy may also be consistent 
with Southeast Asian cultural norms regarding both gender and the classroom authority of the 
teacher (Fee, 2001; 2005). While Parks experienced some measure of success in mediating white 
students’ resistance to interrogating racism, he was less successful in drawing these students into 
the classroom conversations of race and whiteness. 

When Parks talked with these students individually about their participation, they 
explained that in discussing issues of race, they were fearful of being perceived as biased if they 
expressed racial solidarity with peers or characters of color. One of the three students, Mai 
explained that this displayed itself even in small ways, “I wanted to talk about how much I 
enjoyed the novel Obasan, but I feared that the other students would think that I liked it just 
because it was Asian.” Pauline noted that while white students experienced the invisible burden 
of a fear of being misunderstood as racists, the students of color were fearful of being perceived 
as saying something primarily in terms of racial allegiance; they feared being seen as doctrinaire 
or narrow-minded. 




21 



Recognizing that these students did not have an opportunity to develop this topic, Parks 
and Thein met privately with one of the students, Mai, a highly motivated student who ranks in 
the top of her class and plans to continue her studies next year at a state university. Mai’s 
comments challenged the assumption that white teachers or students can readily understand or 
empathize with the experiences of people of color either in lived worlds or text worlds (Lewis, 
2000). She also argued that by focusing his attention primarily on the issue of white students’ 
privilege in these conversations, Parks paradoxically marginalized the students of color. And, she 
also implied that simply encouraging the white students to recognize their privileged status did 
not necessarily mean that they were any less privileged. 

Mai’s critique also reflects a larger issue of how nonwhite students are positioned in a 
class focusing on diversity issues in which they are expected to educate white students about 
their lives as “different” consistent with portrayals of nonwhite characters in texts. McCoy and 
Jones (2005) describe this as the “burden of representation” (Shohat & Stam, 1994, p. 183) in 
which it is assumed that all members of a nonwhite groups are similar in which negative 
behaviors of that group are generalized as representative of a negative trait associated with that 
group, for example. Blacks as dependent on welfare. In addressing the issue of these burdens in 
a college class, McCoy and Jones (2005) note that: 

...the burdens “oppressed communities” carry include correcting these negative images 
and behaviors and projecting more positive ones to American society. We discussed how 
this burden limits the freedom of such groups or individuals to pursue goals or to 
develop in ways that these communities see fit. (p. 63). 

The Hmong students were limited by this “burden of representation” in that within the 
school culture, they were often stereotypically perceived as an immigrant group originally from a 
relatively primitive agricultural culture in Cambodia and Laos who were having difficulty 
assimilating into mainstream American culture. Thus, as Mai notes, she knows “how much 
harder I have to work for things” in having to continually confront this group representation. 

Over time, the Hmong students became less reluctant to participate and more willing to 
challenge other students. In final focus-group discussions about the course, they noted that they 
had learned to confront and challenge “race-talk” discourses by citing instances of their own 
actual experiences of racism that contradicted some white students’ attempts to deny their 
culpability associated with racism as a system. 

Determining the Influence of Teaching: Tracking Learning or Change 

Studying the influence of teaching on student learning poses a number of methodological 
challenges. Employing traditional measures of literary learning such simply determining the 
increased use of interpretation over time may not capture the complexity of the kinds of 
interpretative practices students acquire from participating in a course. 

Amending and revising discourses and cultured models. One alternative measure of 
change is the extent to which students amend and revise their discourses or cultural models. 

Over the period of six months, we did not expect students to demonstrate marked changes in 
their discourses or cultural models. Rather, they momentarily entertain new, alternative 
discourses and cultural models only to fall back on traditional, familiar discourses. Or, they only 
slightly amend or modify their discourses or cultural models rather than adopt totally new 
discourses or cultural models. 

The fact that these shifts only occur over a long time period is evident in a six-year- study 
of a group of eight middle school teachers who discussed multicultural literature texts and related 




22 



issues of identity, race, and multicultural education within the context of a rural, largely white 
Iowa community (Ketter & Lewis, 2001; Lewis, Ketter, & Fabos, 2001). Within this cultural 
context, in responding to the multicultural literature, these teachers largely adopted what the 
researchers defined as a discourse of “liberal humanism” in which characters that differ by race, 
class, and gender are constructed as individual people who are perceived to share the same 
values. On the other hand, some teachers, over time, moved towards adopting what the 
researchers defined as a discourse of “critical multiculturalism” that focused more on the larger 
institutional forces. These teachers focused on the aspects of institutional power portrayed in the 
multicultural literature and in their own everyday experiences, as well as tensions between their 
own perspectives in their group discussions. 

At the same time, all of the teachers moved from fixed positions to entertain alternative 
discourses that challenged those positions, an important finding related to our own study results. 
For example. Barb, who framed the shooting of the black character in individualistic terms, 
momentarily shifted to consider the fact that if the character had been white, then the police may 
not have shot him, a perspective voiced by other participates that considers race as the key factor 
in explaining the shooting. Such a shift was useful for getting students to consider the 
possibilities of institutional influences in the interactions of individual actors. 

In considering how or why people may want to amend or revise their discourses and 
cultural models, it is useful to consider the role of emotional attachment to or desires for certain 
discourses, as, for example, adolescent Skinheads have for a discourse of Nazi violence. In our 
study, those students who resisted change were most likely to subscribe to familiar, monologic 
discourses of athleticism and femininity that afforded them with a sense of certainty, mitigating 
against their need to amend or revise these discourses. Marshall Alcorn (2002) argues that people 
who adopt certain definite, bed-rock, fixated discourses are not likely to be changed through 
rational debate or competing discourses. They may only change if they desire some change in 
themselves. “A new discourse will effect a change only if the subjects desire and make use of 
this discourse. Real change requires not the discourse production of new knowledge [as 
discourse] but a certain mobility in desire.” (p. 98). 

For Alcom, desire creates a dialectical conflict related to a demand for a better symbolic 
representation of the world and one’s identity. This dialectical conflict stands in opposition to 
what Lacan describes as the “master discourse” — the need for an authority figure in the form of 
political or religious leader, for example, who provides people with a sense of certainty. One of 
the subjective appeals of a “master discourse” is that it provides a ready-made alignment to a 
community of similarly devoted members. People then define their identities as loyal followers 
of the leader or authority figure who fulfills their desires for an identity constituted by a set of 
non-dialectical, fixated beliefs. 

One component of this “master discourse” political appeal to white working-class males 
is an appeal to Whiteness as challenged by affirmative action programs and “political 
correctness” (Roediger, 2001; Keating, 2004). Based on her research on white college students 
resistance to discussing race, Jennifer Trainor (2002) argues for the need to examine the 
emotional appeal of a white privilege discourse, an appeal related to both the “rational and the 
irrational, the conscious and the unconscious, thought and feeling” (p. 637). In our study, those 
students who demonstrated little change consistently adhered to a white privilege discourse. One 
reason for their steadfast allegiance to this discourse was its emotional appeal as reifying their 
sense of power perceived to be under threat by affirmative action programs as a form of “reverse 
discrimination.” Given these potential threats, these students gravitated towards emotional 




23 



appeals voiced in their family and community about the need to protect themselves from 
affirmative action programs. For example, Corey voiced opposition to affirmative action 
programs because, as someone who wanted to go into law enforcement, it was his understanding 
that he would be discriminated against in getting a job because of the need to hire nonwhite law 
enforcement people. 

As Seitz (2005) argues based on his research with college students, most of these students 
perceive little reason to interrogate discourses associated with acquiring middle-class values and 
job aspirations as a driving force behind their education because they perceive little to gain from 
adopting a critical perspective. An exception to adopting this instrumentalist perception of 
schooling was Kayla, who recognized the value of engaging in academic analysis as consistent 
with her projecting herself into the future as a college student. 

While the goal of a critical pedagogy approach is to examine power relationships in 
society, the students were reluctant to critique middle-class values they are striving to obtain, 
values that served to define their future trajectories, particularly in terms of notions of the family. 
They frequently perceived their own future in terms of achieving the ideal of “the perfect 
family,” which Matt equated with “middle class, hard working, a lot of love and that they are 
always there for each other, both parents and happy family, no problems. I think problems cause 
dysfunction in families.” Some of their resistance to reading and discussing portrayals of 
dysfunctional working-class families in novels such as Love Medicine or Bastard Out of 
Carolina stemmed from their belief in this idealized middle-class family world contrasted with 
the difficulties associated with poverty and family life. While both Love Medicine and Yellow 
Raft in Blue Water portrayed similar difficulties of working-class Native American lives, the 
students were less resistant to Yellow Raft in Blue Water because it also portrayed characters 
overcoming adversities, something they also liked about Bless me Ultima. 

Those white students who were more open to revising discourses and cultural models 
were less prone to the emotional appeal of the white privilege discourse because, through 
analyzing the negative historical effects of white privilege on nonwhite characters in the novels, 
they were beginning to challenge white privilege, leading them to revise their previous adherence 
to white privilege. For example, Devin, a white male, responded to the portrayals of 
discrimination against Native Americans in Love Medicine and Yellow Raft in Blue Water as 
demonstrating an institutional racism associated with white privilege. He was therefore 
beginning to critically examine how discourses can operate at an institutional level to limit racial 
groups. 

From experiencing the dialogic tensions in the novels, rather than cling to monologic 
perspectives students who challenged status quo discourses were also more likely to acquire the 
flexibility associated with adopting alternative discourses and cultural models. The fact that 
Devin experienced alternative perspectives acquired through his reading about Native Americans 
led him to recognize the limitations of his white privilege stances and the need to entertain 
alternative perspectives. 

Recognizing the need to adopt different cultured perspectives. Another index of change 
could be the extent to which students recognize the need to adopt different cultural perspectives 
as they moved across different worlds within texts. In having to adopt different perspectives for 
these different worlds, students reflected on the kinds of perspectives required for interpreting 
that world and whether they successfully adopted those perspectives. In responding to Kindred , 
Kayla noted that when Dana was transported back to slavery: 




24 



she had modern knowledge going back to that time. In a sense, it was like what if I went 
back would I act the same way she did? But I couldn’t really say that because ... it just 
made me think like this because she is pretty much in the same time I am and what if I 
got called back somehow like she did. It just kept me wondering . . . some books I like 
when they make me ask questions. This one I really did. 

Students also learned to judge the limitations of characters’ perspectives relative to 
their cultural contexts, recognizing that characters lacked insights or understandings of their 
social worlds. This required them to construct the norms, roles, beliefs, and traditions operating 
in a text world and then noting how characters were not consciously aware of the ways in which 
those norms, roles, beliefs, or traditions were influencing them. For example, in analyzing Rufus 
in Kindred , Pamela noted that: 

He said his mom told him that the slaves who worked on the plantations were called 
niggers and that the term nigger used to anger him. I thought, it showed that he had no 
idea what was going on at that time. He thought of the other slaves as niggers as well 
because he thought they were supposed to be called that. It wasn’t because he hated 
them. 

In this excerpt Pamela was interpreting Rufus’s perspective as constituted by the 
institutional discourses and cultural models of slavery, and not simply his own subjective 
perspective. At the same time, students recognized the importance of having the events of the 
novel filtered through Dana’s perspective as an African-American. When asked to consider how 
the perspective would differ if the novel was told from a white person’s perspective, Mai noted: 
You wouldn’t be able to feel the pain as much, like if a slave got whipped, and the main 
person was a white person, the white person would not have been able to tell you how it 
felt or you just wouldn’t know how bad it was to be a slave. If you were seeing it from a 
white person’s perspective. 

Mai then contrasted Dana’s perspective with that of Kevin’s who had a different 
perspective a White male. 

There was a part in the book where the kids were playing a big tossing game and Kevin 
didn’t really understand it. But, I guess, his perspective is, I mean, he knows that it is 
wrong, but he’s not able to do anything about it, or maybe he can, but it would cause a 
fight. . . .He played the role of the master, like he told Dana what to do. Yes, exactly, he 
became a part of the culture. 

Analyzing the relationships between these characters’ perspectives and larger cultural forces 
shaping those perspectives encouraged students to define perspectives as culturally-constituted, 
an important step towards distinguishing their own perspectives from others as shaped by 
differences in culture. 

Re-reading texts based on new perspectives. As students acquire new perspectives, they 
could go back to previous texts and reflect on how they may change their initial interpretations of 
texts, leading to a re-interpretation of those texts. This represents the idea of change as not only 
moving forward, but also retrospectively moving backward. 

Anthony Petrosky (2005) illustrates this re-reading with difficult texts through a series of 
tasks for interpreting a chapter, “Tame the Wild Tongue,” from Borderlands = La Front-era : The 
New Mestiza, by Gloria Anzaldua (1987). Petrosky, working with Stephanie McConachie, at the 
Institute for Learning in the Learning Research Development Center’s Disciplinary Literarcy 
Project at the University of Pittsburgh, uses this work with difficult texts to apprentice teachers 
and teacher-coaches to inquiry projects that involve multiple texts in thematic units, so that they 




25 



then design their own inquiry units using various architectures that enable inquiry across 
multiple texts. Anzuldua, in the reading selection for the Difficult Text unit, writes about her use 
of different voices and languages (English and Spanish) to portray her multiple identities in 
terms of race (Spanish, Indian, White) and gender (female, lesbian). This introductory unit 
scaffolds students through a series of re-readings for a single selection as a model for ways to 
make such texts accessible for inquiry with students unaccustomed to inquiry and difficult texts. 
The sequence looks like this: 

1. After a first reading in which students note significant moments in the essay, they write 
about Anzaldua’s arguments — what she says in the essay. 

2. The first re-reading focuses on ways in which they coped with Anzaldua’s use of 
Spanish and English. They share that writing with peers in inquiry discussions to 
contrast peers’ ways of coping with Anzaldua’s polyglot style. 

3. For a third re-reading, they identify specific language or moments that represents shifts 
in Anzaldua’s different voices. They share this writing with peers in inquiry discussions 
to open a study of how voice appears and shifts in written language. 

4. Students then return to their first writing and, based on responses to #2 and #3, write a 
revision of their initial interpretation of what Anzuldua is trying to say. Then they 
compose a quick- write about how this revised interpretation reflected a change in 
interpreting the text. 

5. They share this writing with peers, noting specific aspects from the text that reflect the 
changes in their interpretations. They formulate further inquiry-questions as to what 
aspects of the text are still difficult to understand and remain unexplored. 

6. Finally, they step back from the sequence of work to study the different interpretive 
strategies the used and what the teacher did to influence their use of these strategies, so 
that they reflectively develop meta-cognitive understandings of the work and its 
discourse. 

These re-reading and reflection activities help students leam the value of re-reading of 
and posing questions about texts to attend to different aspects of a text. And, through sharing 
alternative interpretive strategies with peers, students are learning how to reflect on themselves 
as inquiring readers who are continually formulating new questions leading to new ways of 
reading and re-reading. 

Critiquing race, class, and gender differences as institutionally constituted. Another 
measure of change could be the extent to which students are increasingly more likely to critique 
race, class, and gender differences shaping characters’ practices in terms of institutional as 
opposed to individual terms. During our study, some of the students became increasingly more 
adept at identifying how institutional forces of discrimination, schooling, employment, the 
justice system, etc., influenced characters’ practices. These critique derive from the shift from 
perceiving characters or self in terms of first-person subject to third-person objects operating 
within systems (Kegan, 1994). For example, rather than explaining characters’ economic plight 
in terms of their own innate characteristics, they began to attribute their plight to systemic forces 
limiting their economic or educational opportunities. Michelle noted that in the course, students 
grew increasingly aware of larger explanations for differences in race, class, and gender 
identities in terms of “why people are the way they are. . . and it might not be that person, it might 
be their culture and poverty level and whatever.” This shift also involved moving away from a 
belief that conflicts can be solved through enhanced human relationships — people getting along 
better or caring more about each other — as opposed to framing conflicts as reflecting larger 




26 



institutional forces of racism, classism, or sexism (Beach, 1997). Michelle described this shift in 
terms of initially thinking that “we’re all the same and we all have equal chances” to an 
awareness of the various obstacles facing people “because of their race and their culture and 
how they grew up and all of the things that they had to deal with that I wouldn’t being white.” 
Summary 

In summary, conducting research on teaching literature requires focus on the intersection 
of texts, contexts/students, and teacher as mediated by discourses and cultural models. Tracking 
how students leam or change in literature classes involves studying how they take up the 
practices and stances operating in these classrooms relative to the practices and stances operating 
in the other worlds to which they are allied. A key factor in all of this is the degree to which they 
entertain the dialogic tensions and alternative perspectives operating in texts and contexts that 
invite them to shift they perspective to a third-person perspective and to interrogate status-quo 
discourses and cultural models. We need more long-term research in K-12 classrooms similar to 
that conducted with teachers (Ketter & Lewis, 2001; Lewis, Ketter, & Fabos, 2001) to identify 
those specific instructional practices that are most versus least likely to foster students’ taking up 
of alternative perspectives and amending their status-quo discourses and cultural models. And, 
we need more research on how teachers self-reflexive use of their own identities as “texts” 
(Jacobs, 2005) serves to model students’ self-reflexive practices in examining their discourses 
and cultural models. Finally, we need some understanding of how experiences with characters’ 
testimonies of past, historical horrific events influences students’ understanding of similar 
current events. 

References 

Alcom, M. W. (2002). Changing the subject in English class: Discourse and the constructions of 
desire. Carbondale, IL: Southern Illinois University Press. 

Amosa, W. A. (2004). Mooting the Mosaic: A study of student engagement with multiethnic 
literary texts. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Newcastle, Australia. 
Anzuldue, G. (1987). Tame the wild tongue. In G. Anzaldua, Borderlands = La Frontera: The 
New Mestiza, San Francisco: Spinsters/Aunt Lute. 

Appleman, D. (2000). Critical encounters in high school English: Teaching literary theory to 
adolescents. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Athanases, S. Z. (1998). Diverse learners, diverse texts: Exploring identity and difference 
through literary encounters. Journal of Literacy Research, 30(2), 273-289. 

Baker, M. P. (1999). “The politics of they ”: Dorothy Allison’s Bastard Out of Carolina 
as critique of class, gender, and sexual ideologies. Retrieved July 17, 2005 at 
http ://www .radford.edu/~mpbaker/wmst 101 Allison.htm 
Barnett, T. (2000). Reading “whiteness” in English studies. College English, 63 (1), 9-37. 



27 



Beach, R. (1997). Students' resistance to engagement with multicultural literature. In T. Rogers 
& A. O. Soter (Eds.), Reading across cultures: Teaching literature in a diverse society (pp. 
69-94). New York: Teachers College Press. 

Beach, R., Lundell, D., & Jung, H. (2002). Developmental college students' negotiation of social 
practices between peer, family, workplace, and university worlds. Retrieved June 29, 2004, 
from the University of Minnesota Center for Research in Developmental Education and 
Urban Literacy Web site (J. Higbee & D. Lundell, Eds., Multiculturalism and 
Developmental Education): 

http://www.gen.umn.edu/research/crdeul/pdf files/monograph 3a.pdf 

Beach, R., & Spicer, D. E. (2004, April 12). Subject/system: Issues in research on identity and 
agency in developmental transformations. Paper presented at American Educational 
Research Association, San Diego. 

Beach, R., Thein, A., & Parks, D. (under review). High school students' competing social 
worlds: Negotiating identities and allegiances through responding to multicultural 
literature. 

Behling, L. L. (2003). "Generic" multiculturalism: Hybrid texts, cultural contexts. College 
English, (55(4), 411-426. 

Bettie, J. (2004). Women without class: Girls, race, and identity. Berkeley: University of 
California Press. 

Bhabha, H. (1994). The location of culture. New York: Routledge. 

Bolgatz, J. (2005). Talking race in the classroom. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Bonilla-Silva, E. (2001). White supremacy and racism in the post-Civil Rights era. Boulder, CO: 
Lynne Rienner Publishers. 

Borkowski, D. (2004). “Not too late to take the sanitation test”: Notes of a non-gifted academic 
from the working class. College Composition and Communication, 5(5(1), 94-123. 

Bourdieu, P. (1973). Cultural reproduction and social reproduction. In R. Brown (Ed.), 
Knowledge, education, and cultural change (pp. 71-112). London: Tavistock. 

Bourdieu, P. (1977). Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Budgeon, S. (2003). Choosing a self: Young women and the individualization of identity. 
Westport, CT: Praeger. 

Butler, J. (1993). Bodies that matter: On the discursive limits of sex. New York: Routledge. 

Butler, O. (1979). Kindred. Boston: Beacon Press. 

Chaisson, R. L. (2004). A crack in the door: critical race theory in practice at a predominantly 
white institution. Teaching Sociology, 32, 345-357. 

Daly, B. (2005). Taking Whiteness personally: Learning to teach testimonial reading and 

writing in the college literature classroom. Pedagogy: Critical Approaches to Teaching 
Literature, Language, Composition, and Culture, 5(2), 213 - 220. 

Edelsky, C., Smith, K., Wolfe, P. (2002). A Discourse on academic discourse. Linguistics and 
Education, 72(1), 1 - 38. 

Edmiston, B. (2005). Imaginative inquiry: Using drama to focus on social justice. Paper 
presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Council of Teachers of English. 

Ellsworth, E. (2004). Places of learning: Media, architecture, pedagogy. New York: 
Routledge. 

Engestrom, Y. (1987). Learning by expanding: An activity theoretical approach to 
developmental research. Helsinki, Finland: Orienta-Konsultit. 

Ensico, P. (in press). Reframing history in sociocultural theories: Toward an expansive vision. 



28 



In C. Lewis, P. Enciso, & E. B. Moje (Eds.), Identity, power, and agency: New directions 
in sociocultural research. Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Fairclough, N. (2003). Analyzing discourse. New York: Routledge. 

Harklau, L. (2001). From high school to college: Student perspectives on literacy practices. 
Journal of Literacy Research, 33(1), 33-70. 

Holland, D. & Lave, J. (Eds.). (2000). History in persons: Enduring struggles, contentious 
practice, intimate identities , Santa Fe NM: School of American Research Press. 

Holland, D., & Leander, K. (2004). Ethnographic studies of positioning and subjectivity: 
Narcotraffikers, taiwanese brides, angry loggers, school troublemakers. Ethos , Special 
Issue, 32(2). 

Kegan, R. (1994). In over our heads: the mental demands of modern life. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 

Kegan, R. (2000). What "form" transforms?: A constructive-developmental approach to 
transformative learning. In J. Mezirow (Ed.), Learning as transformation: Critical 
perspectives on a theory in progress (pp. 35-70). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Leander, K. M., & Sheehy, M. (Eds.). (2004). Spatializing literacy research and practice. New 
York: Peter Lang. 

Faust, M. (2000). Reconstructing fa mi liar metaphors: John Dewey and Louise Rosenblatt on 
literary art as experience. Research in the Teaching of English, 35(1), 35-65. 

Finkelstein, D., & McCleery, A. (Eds.). (2004). The book history reader. New York: Routledge. 

Gallagher, C. (2003). Playing the white ethnic card: Using ethnic identity to deny contemporary 
racism. In A. Doane & E. Bonilla-Silva (Eds.), White out: The continuing significance of 
race (pp. 145-158). New York: Routledge. 

Glazier, J., & Seo, J. (2005). Multicultural literature and discussion as mirror and window? 
Journal of Adolescent & Adult Literacy, 48(8), 686-700. 

Greer, J. (2004). "Some of their stories are like my life, I guess": Working-class women readers 
and confessional magazines. In P. Schweickart & E. Flynn (Eds.), Reading sites: Social 
difference and reader response (pp. 135-165). New York: Modern Language Association. 

Harklau, L. (2001). From high school to college: Student perspectives on literacy practices. 
Journal of Literacy Research, 33(1), 33-70. 

Holland, D. C. & Eisenhart, M. (1990). Educated in romance: Women, achievement, and college 
culture. Chicago, University of Chicago Press. 

Jacobs, W. (2005). Speaking the lower frequencies: Students and media literacy. Albany, NY: 
SUNY Press. 

Kehily, M. J. (2004). Gender and sexuality: Continuities and change for girls in schools. In A. 
Harris (Ed.)., All about the girl: Culture, power, and identity(pp. 205-216). New York: 
Routledge. 

Ketter, J., & Lewis, C. (2001). Already reading texts and contexts: Multicultural literature in a 
predominately white rural community. Theory into Practice, 40(3), 175-183. 

Kostogriz, A. (2002). Teaching literacy in multicultural classrooms: towards a pedagogy of 
'thirdspace'. Paper presented at the Annual Conference of the Australian Association for 
Research in Education. Retrieved May 12 2005 at 
http://www.aare.edu.au/02pap/kos02346.htm 



29 



Moller, K. J., & Allen, J. (2000). Connecting, resisting and searching for safer places: Students 
respond to Mildred Taylor's The Friendship. Journal of Literacy Research, 32, 145-186. 

Lee, S. J. (2001). More than "model minorities" or "delinquents": A look at Hmong American 
high school students. Harvard Educational Review, 77(3), 505-528. 

Lee, S. J. (2005). Becoming racialized Americans: Hmong American high school students in the 
Midwest. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Lewis, C., Ketter, J., & Fabos, B. (2001). Reading race in a rural context. Qualitative studies in 
education., 14(3), 317-350. 

McCoy, B. A., & Jones, J. M. (2005). Between spaces: Meditations on Toni Morrison and 
whiteness in the classroom. College English, 68(1), 42-71. 

Moje, E. B., et. al (2004). Working toward third space in content area literacy: An examination 
of everyday funds of knowledge and discourse. Reading Research Quarterly, 39(1), 38-70. 

Petrosky, A. (2005). Re-reading difficult texts. Unpublished paper, University of Pittsburgh. 

Phelan, P., Davidson, A. L., & Yu, H. (1998). Adolescents’ worlds: Negotiating family, peers, 
and school. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Powers, P. (2002). A ghost in the collaborative machine: The white male teacher in the 

multicultural classroom. In B. TuSmith & M. Reddy (Eds.), Race in the college classroom: 
Pedagogy and politics( pp. 28-39). New Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 

Reisigl, M., & Wodak, R. (2001). Discourse and discrimination: Rhetorics of racism and antisemitism. 
New York: Routledge. 

Rex, L. (2002). Exploring orientation in remaking high school readers' literacies and identities. 
Linguistics and Education, 13(3), 271-302. 

Rymes, B. (2001). Conversational borderlands: Language and identity in an alternative urban 
high school. New York, Teachers College Press. 

Roediger, D. R. (2002). Colored white: Transcending the racial past. Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 

Rosenblatt, L. (1978). The reader, the text, the poem: The transactional theory of the literacy 
work. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press. 

Roth, W., Hwang, S., Goulart, M., & Lee, Y. (2005). Participation, learning and identity: 

Dialectical perspectives. Berlin: Lehmanns Media. 

Ryan, J., & Sackrey, C. (Eds.). (1996). Strangers in paradise: Academics from the working 
class. Lanham, MD: University Press of America. 

Shuart-Faris, N., & Bloome, D. (Eds.). (2004). Uses of intertextuality in classroom and 
educational research. Greenwich, CT: Information Age. 

Seitz, D. (2004a). Making work visible. College English, 67(2), 210 - 221. 

Seitz, D. (2004b). Who can afford critical consciousness? Practicing a pedagogy of humility. 

Cresskill, NJ: Hampton Press. 

Shepard, A., McMillan, J., & Tate, G. (Eds.). (1998). Coming to class: Pedagogy and the social 
class of teachers. Portsmouth, NH: Boynton/Cook. 

Shohat, E., & Stem, R. (1994). Unthinking Eurocentrism: Multiculturalism and the media. New 
York: Routledge. 

Soja, E. (1997). Postmodern Geographies: The Reassertion of Space in Critical Socicd Theory. 

New York: Verso. 

Soter, A. O. (1997). Reading literature of other cultures: Some issues in critical interpretation. 

In T. Rogers & A. O. Soter (Eds.)., Reading across cultures: Teaching literature in a 
diverse society(pp. 213 - 230). New York: Teachers College Press. 




30 



Thandeka (2002). Learning to be White: Money, race, and God in America. New York; 
Continuum. 

Trainor, J. (2002). Critical pedagogy's "other": constructions of whiteness in education for social 
change. College Composition and Communication, 53(4), 631-650. 

Vadeboncoeur, J. A. (2005). The difference that time and space make: An analysis of 

institutional and narrative landscapes. In J. A. Vadeboncoeur & L. P. Stevens (Eds.), 
Re/constructing "the adolescent": Sign, symbol and body (pp. 123-152). New York: Peter 
Lang. 

Villanueva, V., (1993). Boostraps: From an American academic of color. Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English. 

Winans, A. E. (2005). Local pedagogies and race. College English , 67(3), 253-262. 

Zandy, J. (Ed.). (1990). Calling home: Working-class women’s writing, An anthology. New 
Brunswick, NJ: Rutgers University Press. 




