The Enduring Challenge of 
Concentrated Poverty in America: 

Case Studies from Communities Across the U.S. 




A JOINT PROJECT OF THE COMMUNITY AFFAIRS OFFICES OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE 
SYSTEM AND THE METROPOLITAN POLICY PROGRAM AT THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION 






The Enduring Challenge of 
Concentrated Poverty in America: 

Case Studies from Communities Across the U.S. 



A JOINT PROJECT OF THE COMMUNITY AFFAIRS OFFICES OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE 
SYSTEM AND THE METROPOLITAN POLICY PROGRAM AT THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION 




COMMUNITY AFFAIRS 



Supporting Community & Economic Development 



3 



Metropolitan Policy Program 



at BROOKINGS 



© 2008 The Federal Reserve System and The Brookings Institution 




The Enduring Challenge of 
Concentrated Poverty in America: 

Case Studies from Communities Across the U.S. 



EDITORS 

David Erickson, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Carolina Reid, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Lisa Nelson, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Anne O’Shaughnessy, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Alan Berube, Brookings Institution 



AUTHORS AND RESEARCHERS 

Alan Berube, Brookings Institution 
Jeremiah Boyle, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 
Ana Cruz-Taura, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Naomi Cytron, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Wenhua Di, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
Kelly Edmiston, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
David Erickson, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Ellen Eubank, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 
Jeff Gatica, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Sandy Gerber, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Dan Gorin, Federal Reserve Board of Governors 
DeAnna Green, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 
Michael Grover, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Elizabeth Kneebone, Brookings Institution 
Matt Lambert, Federal Reserve Board of Governors 
Jessica LeVeen Farr, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Roy Lopez, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 



Courtney Anderson Mailey, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Richmond 

Carl Neely, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Lisa Nelson, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 
Harriet Newburger, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Yazmin Osaki, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Carolina Reid, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 
Keith Rolland, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Anita Sands, ARI Planning & Research, Inc. 

Steven Shepelwich, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 
Alexandra Forter Sirota, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 
Sibyl Slade, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 
Elizabeth Sobel, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 
John Wackes, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia 
Sue Woodrow, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 
Roger Zalneraitis, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 



The views expressed herein are those of the editors and individual case study authors. These views are not necessarily 
those of the Federal Reserve Banks, the Federal Reserve System, or the Brookings Institution. 



Copyright © 2008 by the Federal Reserve System and the Brookings Institution. 



Printed October 2008 by the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. 

All rights reserved. This publication, in part or entirely, may not be reproduced, stored, or transmitted in any manner 
without permission from the editors or individual case study authors. (See http://www.frbsf.org/cpreport) 

ISBN 978-0-615-25428-9. 

To learn more about the activities of the Federal Reserve System’s Community Affairs Offices, go to a specific Federal 
Reserve Bank’s website or to http://federalreserve.gov. To learn more about the Brookings Institution’s Metropolitan 
Policy Program, go to http://www.brookings.edu/metro. 



Acknowledgments 

The Community Affairs Officers of the 
Federal Reserve System would like to 
acknowledge the following individuals 
and organizations, whose expertise, 
insights, and support were critical to 
the completion of this report: 

THE CASE STUDY AUTHORS, 

who spent a significant amount of time learning about 
poverty and its effects on the communities represented 
herein, and who tell the stories through a balanced mix 
of statistics and community insights; 

THE INDIVIDUALS RESIDING AND 
WORKING IN THESE COMMUNITIES 

who shared their knowledge about what it’s like for 
people to live in, and be surrounded by, such marked 
poverty. Their understanding of and insights into the 
issues affecting areas of high poverty provide a view that 
simply can not be captured by data alone; 

DAVID ERICKSON AND CAROLINA REID, 

both of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, who 
provided overall direction for and management of this proj- 
ect and whose patience, perseverance, and guidance were 
essential in seeing this project through to completion; 

ALAN BERUBE OF 

THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION, 

who was instrumental in conceiving of and executing this 
report, and whose reasoned thinking, clear writing, and 
knowledge regarding urban poverty are present through- 
out the document; 

LISA NELSON AND ANNE O ’ S H AU G H N ES S Y, 

both of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, who 
incorporated reviewer and author comments into drafts of 
the report, performed fact-checking and overall editing, 
and oversaw design and production of the final report; 



THE COMMUNITY AFFAIRS RESEARCH TEAM, 

which developed the research framework for the case 
studies, including Wenhua Di of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Dallas; Kelly Edmiston of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Kansas City; David Erickson of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco; Dan Gorin of the Fed- 
eral Reserve Board of Governors; Michael Grover of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis; Michael Minor, 
formerly of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis; Lisa 
Nelson of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland; Harriet 
Newburger of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia; 
Carolina Reid of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Fran- 
cisco, and Sherrie Rhine, formerly of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of New York; 

ELIZABETH KNEEBONE OF 
THE BROOKINGS INSTITUTION, 

who analyzed much of the quantitative data used in 
this report; 

THE CONCENTRATED POVERTY 
STEERING COMMITTEE, 

comprised of Community Affairs Officers Ruth Clevenger 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Sheila Maith of 
the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, Alfreds Nor- 
man of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Scott Turner 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, and Jack 
Richards and Dan Tatar, formerly of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of San Francisco and Richmond, respectively, 
which provided overall leadership for this project and 
was instrumental in moving it forward; 

ECONOMISTS 

Dan Aaronson of the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, 
Glenn Canner of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, 
Andrew Haughwout of the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, Bhashkar Mazumder of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of Chicago, Ned Prescott of the Federal Reserve Bank of 
Richmond, and Mark Schweitzer of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of Cleveland, who reviewed multiple drafts of this 
report and provided instructive comments on each; 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



JEFFREY LACKER, PRESIDENT OF THE 
FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF RICHMOND, 

whose guidance and support of this project was crucial 
and who provided helpful comments on the draft reports, 
as well as Richard Fisher, president of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas, and Charles Evans, president of 
the Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, who also reviewed 
and provided useful comments on the draft reports; 

THE NUMEROUS EXTERNAL EXPERTS 

we turned to for assistance in writing the report, including 
Scott Allard, Brown University; Cynthia Duncan, University 
of New Hampshire; Paul Jargowsky, University of Texas at 
Dallas; John Iceland, University of Maryland; Laura Lein, 
University of Texas; Dan Lichter, Cornell University; John 
Quigley, University of California, Berkeley; and Sudhir Ven- 
katesh, Columbia University, whose collective expertise in 
rural and urban poverty ideally suited them to offer valuable 
perspectives on this effort; while this report has benefited 
from these external experts, neither they nor their organiza- 
tions necessarily endorse the findings of this report; 

SALLY BURKE AND MICHELE LACHMAN, 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Philadelphia and Cleve- 
land, respectively, who provided editorial assistance; 

NAOMI CYTRON, 

of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, who pro- 
vided research, editorial, and design assistance through- 
out this project; 

DAN DiFRANCO AND VIVIAN PACHECO, 

of the Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago and San Francisco, 
respectively, who assisted in the fact-checking process; 

MATT LAMBERT, 

of the Federal Reserve Board of Governors, who pre- 
pared the literature review of poverty studies throughout 
the Federal Reserve System that comprises Appendix B; 

MARK KUNZELMANN AND BECCA MARSHALL, 

of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, who created the 
layout and helped direct production of the final report; and 

THE FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF RICHMOND, 

which printed, bound, and distributed this publication. 



Message from Federal Reserve 
Chairman Ben Bernanke 



I am pleased to present this report on concentrated poverty, which has been developed by the 
Community Affairs staff of the Federal Reserve System in collaboration with the Brookings Institution. 
The project combines data analysis with qualitative evaluations to provide texture to the understand- 
ing of economic and social dynamics in these communities. This in-depth exploration considers the 
interrelationships between public services and private investments, and provides important insights 
that will inform the work of the Federal Reserve in promoting economic growth. It also contributes to 
our understanding of the interplay between the broader economic context for private investments 
and public policy interventions in distressed communities. 

This report was developed by staff from the Federal Reserve’s Community Affairs function. Com- 
munity Affairs brings together the System’s strengths in research and data analysis, outreach, and 
convening with a regional presence in the 12 Federal Reserve Bank Districts. Since 1984, Community 
Affairs staffs at the Board of Governors and in the Reserve Banks have endeavored to identify bar- 
riers to capital and credit access, in order to better understand the challenges and identify path- 
ways to potential solutions. This project provided an opportunity to expand that work. Several of the 
Reserve Banks that undertook these studies have continued efforts in these locations, working with 
partners to share their understanding to inform local policy, philanthropic investments, and commu- 
nity reinvestment programs. 

This report is a collaborative effort by the 12 Banks and the Board of Governors. It builds upon 
outreach and relationships previously established through the Community Affairs programs in each 
of the 16 case study locations, leveraging the System’s regional presence to develop a comparative 
analysis. This work makes an important contribution to the literature on understanding the dynamics 
of poor people living in poor communities, and what pathways exist to bring both into the economic 
mainstream. I am pleased that we were able to partner with the Brookings Institution, combining 
our staffs’ knowledge of local communities with Brookings’ previous work on this topic. I believe this 
project will stimulate future efforts to better understand these communities and link them to our 
national economy. 



Sincerely, 




Chairman of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System 



vi 



Message from The Brookings Institution 
Metropolitan Policy Program Director Bruce Katz 

Concentrated poverty— poor people living in very poor places— presents some of the deepest 
economic and social challenges facing America today. The aftermath of Hurricane Katrina in 2005 
reminded us that the severe isolation of very poor communities and their residents can have devastat- 
ing consequences in the context of a disaster. Yet, as more than 20 years of research from scholars 
like William Julius Wilson has shown, concentrated poverty exacts a grave day-to-day toll on the 
people who continue to live in its midst, and threatens to perpetuate disadvantage across generations. 

In the past, the problem of concentrated poverty seemed intractable. Paul Jargowsky first showed 
with data what a trip through many of America’s inner cities in the late 20th century made evident: the 
population living in very high-poverty communities multiplied rapidly from 1970 to 1990. Economic and 
demographic changes played a role; so, too, did housing, transportation, and land-use policies that 
contributed to de facto racial and income segregation in so many metropolitan areas. In these com- 
munities, public safety deteriorated, access to jobs narrowed, schools failed to educate children, and 
wider areas were left without the fiscal or human capacity to meet these stark challenges head-on. 

Yet the 1990s proved that concentrated poverty was not an immutable mark on the American 
landscape. A strong economy, new efforts to promote work and subsidized wages, and new direc- 
tions in housing policy symbolized by programs like HOPE VI and the Housing Choice Voucher 
program helped to reduce the incidence of concentrated poverty across the United States. As the 
example of New Orleans showed, however, progress remains uneven, and may even have stalled 
during the current decade. Meanwhile, poverty is spreading and may be re-clustering in suburbs, 
where a majority of America’s metropolitan poor now live. 

In that light, this report— a joint effort of the Federal Reserve’s Community Affairs function and 
the Brookings Institution’s Metropolitan Policy Program— comes at a critical juncture. It shows that 
concentrated poverty Is still very much with us, and that It can be found among a much more diverse 
set of communities and families than previous research has emphasized. Not only does concen- 
trated poverty affect the big, older Inner cities in the North that are the subject of so many classic 
studies, but it also exists within smaller cities of the South and West, immigrant gateways, struggling 
areas of Appalachia and the Delta, and Native American lands. While the case studies in this report 
point to unique factors that accompanied rising poverty in each of these communities, the negative 
consequences ring familiar across places big and small; urban and rural; industrial and agricultural; 
African American, white. Latino, and Native American. 

We at Brookings have been grateful to partner with the Federal Reserve to produce this report, 
and hope that it contributes to renewed debate on how our society should confront and alleviate the 
substantial, pressing, and diverse challenges of concentrated poverty today. The 2008 presidential 
election presents a unique opportunity to have that discussion. The economic performance of our 
nation and its regions, the productive potential of our future workforce, and the promise of equal 
opportunity all depend on our collective response to the enduring problem of concentrated poverty 
in America. 




Director, The Brookings Institution Metropolitan Policy Program 



viii 



Table of Contents 

ABOUT THIS STUDY 1 

CONCENTRATED POVERTY IN AMERICA: AN OVERVIEW 3 

by Alan Berube, Brookings Institution 

INTRODUCTION TO THE CASE STUDIES 21 

by Carolina Reid, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

CASE STUDIES 

Fresno, California: the West Fresno neighborhood 2 5 

by Naomi Cytron, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

Cleveland, Ohio: the Central neighborhood 3 5 

by Lisa Nelson, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Miami, Florida: the Little Haiti neighborhood 4 7 

by Ana Cruz-Taura and Jessica LeVeen Farr, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

Martin County, Kentucky 5 7 

by Jeff Gatica, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland 

Blackfeet Reservation, Montana 6 7 

by Sandy Gerber, Michael Grover, and Sue Woodrow, Federal Reserve Bank of Minneapolis 

Greenville, North Carolina: the West Greenville neighborhood 7 5 

by Carl Neely, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 

Atlantic City, New Jersey: the Bungalow Park/Marina District area 8 3 

by Harriet Newburger, John Wackes, and Keith Rolland, Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia; 
and Anita Sands, ARI Planning & Research, Inc. 

Austin, Texas: the East Austin neighborhood 91 

by Elizabeth Sobel, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 

McKinley County, New Mexico: Crownpoint 101 

by Steven Shepelwich and Roger Zalneraitls, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City 

McDowell County, West Virginia 109 

by Courtney Anderson Mailey, Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Albany, Georgia; the East Albany neighborhood 117 

by Jessica LeVeen Farr and Sibyl Slade, Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta 

El Paso, Texas; the Chamizal neighborhood 12 5 

by Roy Lopez, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas 

Springfield, Massachusetts; Old Hill, Six Corners, and the South End neighborhoods 13 5 

by DeAnna Green, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston 

Rochester, New York; the Northern Crescent neighborhoods 143 

by Alexandra Forter Sirota and Yazmin Osaki, Federal Reserve Bank of New York 

Holmes County, Mississippi 151 

by Ellen Eubank, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis 

Milwaukee, Wisconsin; the Northwest neighborhood 15 9 

by Jeremiah Boyle, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago 

LEARNING FROM CONCENTRATED POVERTY IN AMERICA: 

A SYNTHESIS OF THEMES FROM THE CASE STUDIES 169 

by Alan Berube, Brookings Institution, and David Erickson and Carolina Reid, Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco 

APPENDICES 

Appendix A: References for Comparison Statistics Tables 19 5 

Appendix B: Literature Review: Federal Reserve System Poverty-Related Research 197 

Appendix C; References for Overview in Alphabetical Order (by First Author) 211 

Appendix D: Photo Credits 219 



X 



About This Study: 

A Letter from the Community Affairs Officers 
of the Federal Reserve System 



In May of 2006, the Community Affairs Officers from the 12 Reserve Banks and the Board of 
Governors heard a presentation on concentrated poverty from Alan Berube of the Brookings Institu- 
tion and Paul Jargowsky of the University of Texas at Dallas. The context for the discussion was the 
question of how to rebuild New Orleans after Hurricane Katrina, particularly given the devastation of 
the housing stock in the city’s low-income neighborhoods. Yet, as quickly became apparent during 
the meeting, underlying the conversation on rebuilding the city was a less tangible and potentially 
more difficult challenge. The storm revealed that, for individuals who reside in impoverished commu- 
nities, replacing physical infrastructure alone may not be enough to generate and sustain community 
development and well-being. 

This need for a deeper understanding of the relationship between poverty, people, and place— 
not only in New Orleans but in communities across the country— struck a chord in us. The Community 
Affairs offices of the Federal Reserve System have a shared mission to support economic growth 
objectives by promoting community development and fair and impartial access to credit. Each of the 
12 Reserve Banks establishes distinct programs and responds to local needs in its district. But as part 
of a nationwide entity, the Community Affairs offices also have the ability to collaborate on projects, 
to share information and resources, and to work together to support community development at 
regional and national levels. Given this unique structure, we saw an opportunity to study the issue of 
concentrated poverty in communities across the country— to draw on our local knowledge and, at the 
same time, pull the local stories together in a way that allowed us to share more broadly the common- 
alities and differences among places. 

In this report, we profile 16 communities of concentrated poverty, in areas as diverse as Cleve- 
land, Chio, El Paso, Texas, and the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana. We want to state at the outset 
that it is not the intention of this publication to explain poverty causation. Poor people, and the 
communities they live in, have been the subject of serious study and debate for decades. Rather, our 
goal is to add texture to our understanding of where and how concentrated poverty exists, by study- 
ing new areas and by interviewing local stakeholders, including residents, community leaders, and 
government representatives, to understand how concentrated poverty affects both individuals and 
communities. We believe this report will contribute to the public conversation among policymakers 
and practitioners about the relationship between people and place, and ultimately to a comprehen- 
sive policy discussion on poverty alleviation and community reinvestment. 

Most important for us in Community Affairs, conducting this research has helped us identify new 
ways we can collaborate with our government, nonprofit, and for-profit partners to help address chal- 
lenges in high-poverty communities. As this report demonstrates, poverty did not appear overnight; 
it will likely take comprehensive strategies and many years to successfully address it. In the mean- 
time, we will continue to identify and act on opportunities to support and collaborate with communi- 
ties across our districts in fulfilling our mission to promote economic development along with fair 
and impartial access to credit. 



1 



ABOUT THIS STUDY 



2 



Concentrated Poverty in America: 

An Overview 



W hat images does the phrase “poverty in Amer- 
ica” conjure up? Some people might associ- 
ate the phrase with hunger, homelessness, no 
work or low-paid work, perhaps even poor health. Some 
might envision specific populations that are more likely 
to live in poverty, such as children, racial and ethnic 
minorities, and single-parent families. 

For most Americans, though, the view of poverty 
entails more than individual circumstances. It also elicits 
thoughts about inner cities, isolated rural areas, and 
Native American reservations. That is, poverty connotes 
places as well as people. Going further, poverty implies 
something about the local conditions faced by poor 
individuals and families in these places; unsafe neighbor- 
hoods, failing schools, substandard housing, inadequate 
private services, and diminished community hope. 

“Concentrated poverty” represents the confluence 
of these two ideas of poverty in America. It concerns the 
tendency, in many corners of the United States, for poor 
populations to be clustered into very poor communi- 
ties. A large body of research argues that these areas of 
concentrated poverty place additional burdens on poor 
families that live within them, beyond what the families’ 



own individual circumstances would dictate. In addition, 
concentrated poverty can have wider effects on sur- 
rounding areas that limit overall economic potential and 
social cohesion. 

This overview chapter traces the recent history of 
research into the intersection of poverty and place in 
the United States and how the notion of concentrated 
poverty evolved. It also: 

• sets forth an empirical framework for identify- 
ing areas of concentrated poverty and examines 
recent trends in its incidence; 

• describes in broad outline the factors that 
research suggests contribute to concentrated 
poverty in America; and 

• reviews research findings regarding the effects 
of concentrated poverty on individuals and fami- 
lies, their neighborhoods and communities, and 
their surrounding areas. 

Motivating this project is a growing recognition— 
or perhaps a re-recognition— that the problems faced 
by many of the communities devastated by Hurricane 



3 




OVERVIEW 



Katrina in 2005 were not unique to those locations. 
Indeed, concentrated poverty exists on a similar scale in 
a number of American cities.' Immigrant gateways such 
as Fresno, Miami, El Paso, and Long Beach, California, 
have significant rates of concentrated poverty, as do 
smaller cities like Albany, Georgia, and Columbia, South 
Carolina. Even suburban municipalities outside cities 
such as Palm Beach, Mobile, and St. Louis have begun to 
exhibit extreme levels of neighborhood poverty. These 
high levels of local poverty are also evident in rural 
counties in the Mississippi Delta, the Southwest Border, 
Appalachia, inland California, and Native American lands, 
some of which fit the definition of “persistent poverty 
counties,” where poverty rates have remained above 20 
percent for more than three decades.^ 

■ BACKGROUND 

Poor places have been with us for as long as poverty has 
been with us. Charles Booth’s surveys of life in London 
the late 1800s, published as Life and Labour of the People, 
demonstrated how poverty clustered in eastern sections 
of the city, while wealth concentrated in the west. Jacob 
Riis’s photographs of New York City’s Lower East Side in 
the early 1900s highlighted the stark conditions in which 
the area’s poor, mostly immigrant tenement dwellers 
lived. James Agee and Walker Evans’s Let Us Now Praise 
Famous Men painted an enduring portrait of entrenched 
rural poverty among sharecropper families in 1930s 
Alabama. In short, the tendency of poor people to live 
among other poor people is hardly a new phenomenon. 

A vast literature examines the connections between 
place and poverty in America. A smaller, though sig- 
nificant, strand of the literature focuses on places of 
very high poverty and the problems these locales pose 
for individuals and society. This more recent focus on 
concentrated poverty grew largely out of concern about 
the nation’s inner cities in the wake of ongoing deindus- 
trialization, civil unrest in the late 1960s, and the rapid 
suburbanization and out-migration that followed. In most 
cases, these poor inner-city locations were populated 
predominantly by minorities, and many featured large 
public housing developments. 

Accounts of life in these neighborhoods lent sup- 
port to the view that poor Americans, especially those 
in very poor inner-city locations, lived outside middle- 
class norms in what some authors termed a “culture 
of poverty.”'^ These accounts emphasized the role of 



destructive individual behaviors in perpetuating poverty 
and disadvantage. These theories were echoed in sub- 
sequent work by scholars such as Charles Murray, who 
argued that government programs themselves engen- 
dered this purported culture of poverty."’ 

As violent crime, out-of-wedlock childbearing, and 
the crack cocaine epidemic peaked in American cities in 
the 1980s, a new body of scholarly research emerged to 
define and explain the workings of the so-called under- 
class, as the inhabitants of these neighborhoods came 
to be known. Journalists such as Ken Auletta, Nicholas 
Lemann, and Leon Dash chronicled the origins, lives, and 
locations of representative members of the underclass.^ 
Research by Erol Ricketts and Isabel Sawhill, as well as 
that of Ronald Mincy and Susan Weiner, sought to define 
the underclass based on “the coincidence of a number 
of social ills”— including poverty, joblessness, crime, 
welfare dependency, single parenthood, and low levels 
of skills— in small geographic areas.® While this research 
tended to emphasize the role of individual behaviors, 
other researchers focused on the structural explana- 
tions for inner-city poverty, including industrial transition, 
employment suburbanization, and racial segregation.^ 
Amid these competing definitions and explanations, 
Harvard sociologist William Julius Wilson has argued that 
structural factors— especially the decline of manufac- 
turing jobs for less-skilled inner-city workers— resulted 
in widespread joblessness, which in turn affected 
cultural norms and behaviors in poor neighborhoods.® 

His research examining Chicago’s South Side focused 
on neighborhood poverty as a proxy for a wider set of 
conditions that reflected and reinforced disadvantage. In 
this way, Wilson’s work served to bridge the gap between 
structural and behavioral explanations for concentrated 
poverty. He placed particular emphasis on the condi- 
tions present in “community areas” of Chicago (relatively 
large neighborhoods with identifiable boundaries) where 
at least 30 percent— and in some cases, 40 percent— of 
all individuals lived below the federal poverty line. This 
work helped to place a new focus on the role of very low- 
income neighborhoods in shaping the lives of the urban, 
mostly African-American poor. 

The rural poor were rarely considered alongside 
their inner-city counterparts in the underclass debate. 
Research examining the causes of poverty in rural areas 
tends to focus on the role of structural community-level 
factors, as well as individual characteristics and behav- 
iors. Those community-level factors often include the 



4 



decline of traditional industries (agriculture, manufactur- 
ing, etc.) coupled with low education levels and out- 
migration.® Counties, rather than neighborhoods, form 
the basis for most place-based poverty research in rural 
areas, though many remote rural counties have popula- 
tions in the range of urban census tracts, and very poor 
counties tend to cluster in “pockets of poverty.”'® 

Journalistic and ethnographic studies have also 
portrayed the unique features of concentrated rural pov- 
erty, reflecting on both individual and structural factors 
that produce it. Janet Fitchen studied poor households 
in an upstate New York community, demonstrating that 
low incomes have persisted across generations and that 
contemporary families have been unable to adapt to 
economic shifts toward modernized agriculture." Cynthia 
Duncan conducted in-depth case studies of poor com- 
munities in Appalachia, the Mississippi Delta, and north- 
ern New England, and found that social structures in 
these places can either promote or inhibit social mobil- 
ity.'® In the first two communities, she found that the poor 
(the “have-nots”) are socially isolated from the non-poor 
(the “haves”), despite their economic interdependence. 

In the northern New England community, however, she 
found more inclusive systems of hiring and governance 
and less evidence of multigenerational poverty. 

Similarly, the literature on poverty on Native Ameri- 
can reservations has rarely framed the issue as one of 
concentrated poverty; indeed, reservations such as the 
Navajo and Blackfeet are characterized more by remote- 
ness and small populations spread across wide areas 
than by the densely populated urban neighborhoods 
that the phrase evokes. Yet on many reservations, the 
problem of poverty is one of both people and place, 
encapsulating the same patterns of geographic and 
economic isolation, social problems, and unemployment 
as in urban settings.'® Both quantitative and qualita- 
tive research efforts have focused on the importance 
of human capital, the legacy of federal Native American 
policies, locational disadvantage, and cultural factors 
in explaining tribal poverty.''' More recent research has 
highlighted the critical roles of self-determination and 
sovereignty on tribal economic development.'® 

■ DEFINITIONS AND TRENDS 
Definitions 

Several studies have measured the incidence of 
high-poverty neighborhoods nationwide, using census 



tracts— small areas of 2,500 to 8,000 people— to proxy 
neighborhoods.'® A census tract is considered a high- 
poverty neighborhood if at least 40 percent of its resi- 
dents live in families with incomes at or below the federal 
poverty line."' Though the term “neighborhood” has more 
currency as a place descriptor in urban than in rural envi- 
ronments, Paul Jargowsky and others nonetheless use 
the same census tract-based threshold to define rural 
areas of high poverty.'® 

The concept of concentrated poverty developed by 
Jargowsky builds on the concept of high-poverty neigh- 
borhoods.'® His concentrated poverty rate expresses the 
proportion of all poor individuals in a certain area (e.g., 
city, metropolitan region, or county) who live in neighbor- 
hoods of high poverty. Everyone who lives in a high- 
poverty area may confront the challenges that accom- 
pany day-to-day life there; however, those challenges 
may weigh most heavily on families who are themselves 
poor and who may have, or may perceive that they have, 
fewer options to live elsewhere. Thus, the concentrated 
poverty rate aims to capture the extent of a possible 
“double burden” imposed on poor families living in 
extremely poor communities. 

This study borrows from both of these concepts— 
high poverty and concentrated poverty— to describe 
place and poverty in the United States today. The case 
studies in this report represent high-poverty communi- 
ties, collections of census tracts where the poverty rate 
generally exceeds 40 percent. The 16 case study com- 
munities chosen for this report include Fresno’s West 
Fresno neighborhood; Cleveland’s Central neighbor- 
hood; Miami’s Little Haiti neighborhood; Martin County 
in Kentucky; the Blackfeet Reservation in Pondera and 
Glacier Counties, Montana; Greenville’s (North Carolina) 
West Greenville neighborhood; Atlantic City’s Bungalow 
Park/Marina District; Austin’s East Austin neighborhood; 
Crownpoint in McKinley County, New Mexico; McDowell 
County, West Virginia; Albany’s (Georgia) East Albany 
neighborhood; El Paso’s Chamizal neighborhood; Spring- 
field’s (Massachusetts) Old Hill, Six Corners, and South 
End neighborhoods; Rochester’s (New York) Northern 
Crescent neighborhoods; Holmes County, Mississippi; 
and Milwaukee’s Northwest neighborhood. (See Introduc- 
tion to the Case Studies, which follows this chapter, for 
a detailed explanation of the selection process for these 
communities along with a map showing their locations.) 

As Figure 1A shows, poverty rates in the 16 case 
study communities are significantly higher than in either 



5 



OVERVIEW 



FIGURE lA 



o 

< 

m 

< 

m 

§ 



Poverty rates in the case study communities and their comparison areas* 



(f) 



< 

=) O 
Q O 




K O 

Z CL 

^ z 
o f 

cr 

LU 

Q. 




>^ 

c 

03 



>^ 

c 

03 



S O 


c 


TO 


o ~ 






03 .55 


</3 

<c 


C 

03 


C Q 




o 


m g 


to 

TO 


■D 


CC 


LU 


c 

TO 


o ^ 


C 


03 

> 


■B $ 


to 


03 


C TO 
_TO D_ 


< 


o 









0) 



o 



03 

D. 



C ^ 

<fi ■— ■> 

0) > C 

LJ- § 35 

+-» 03 2: 



O ^ 



03 



X 

03 



Urban Case Study Communities 



(0 


II 

<0 u 


— 


■o 


>^ 


>^ 


>> 


-S' ^ 


03 

5 


if 


o 

LU 


c 

o 


c 

o 


C 

o 


O 




03 03 


■D 




o 


o 


o 


O /— 




^ 03 

U 


O 


o 


O 


O 


o 


O 5 


o 

z 

03 

03 


O O 
CL c 

03 


■D 

03 

iC 

03 


o 

CO 

o3 

(0 


(0 

03 

E 

o 


c 

TO 


o 

5 

o 

Q 


>, o 
1 6 






c 


03 


T. 




O 


o 


TO 


O 


'Z 


c 








2 




z 


Q. 


o 














C/D 


o 










1 






X 











C/D 



03 

'o 

O 



03 

CL 

03 

03 

w— 

o 

_ro 

m 



Rural Case Study Communities — 



SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 



'Comparison areas are metropolitan areas for urban case study communities, and statewide non-metropolitan areas for rural case 
study communities 



their metropolitan regions (for the urban neighborhoods) 
or the other non-metropolitan counties in the state 
(for the rural areas). In addition, the poor are overwhelm- 
ingly concentrated in these high-poverty census tracts, 
as shown by the concentrated poverty rate of their sur- 
rounding areas, which are cities for the urban case study 
communities and counties for the rural case study com- 
munities. (See Figure IB) By studying these communities 
of high poverty, we explore the degree to which, as Jar- 
gowsky describes, “the poor.. .not only have to cope with 
their own poverty, but also that of those around them.”^° 

Trends 

Jargowsky’s research reveals how neighborhood pov- 
erty has changed over the past few decades. In Poverty 
and Place, Jargowsky found that between 1970 and 1990, 
the number of poor people living in high-poverty neighbor- 
hoods in U.S. metropolitan areas nearly doubled, from 1.9 
million to 3.7 million. The number of high-poverty census 
tracts in metropolitan areas also increased dramatically.^' 
(See Figure 2) By 1990, almost 18 percent of the poor in 



metropolitan areas lived in high-poverty neighborhoods, 
compared with just 12 percent in 1970. At a national level, 
neither individual nor family poverty rates increased sub- 
stantially during this period.^^ As Jargowsky notes, while 
there was not a change in the poverty rates per se, there 
was a fundamental change in where the poor lived. 

The concentration of poverty from 1970 to 1990 has 
been linked to many different factors, including de-indus- 
trialization, economic stagnation, and decline in cities 
of the Northeast and Midwest; the flight of white and 
black middle-class households to the suburbs; increased 
rates of single parenthood and welfare receipt among 
inner-city populations; and in some areas of the coun- 
try, increased immigration from Latin America. As cities 
like Detroit, Cleveland, and St. Louis lost one-third of 
their populations in 20 years’ time, their inner-city areas 
essentially emptied out, leaving large swaths of vacant 
housing and neighborhoods troubled by crime and disor- 
der. In metropolitan areas like Los Angeles, Mexican and 
Central-American immigration transformed some black 
and white neighborhoods into largely Flispanic barrios.^'^ 



6 



FIGURE IB 



Concentrated poverty in the case study communities’ surrounding areas 



o 

< 



33 

< 



O 

O 

>- o 

I— CM 

cr . 

LU CO 
> Q 

o o 
o 



cc 
O 
O 

CL 

LU Q. 
X 



X 
_ O 
O X 

I— 



o 

QC 




Urban Case Study Communities 



Rural Case Study Communities — I 



SOURCE: Brookings Institution calculations of data from 2000 Census 



1 Of the 9 census tracts that comprise McDowell County, only 2 have poverty rates over 40 percent. An additional 5 tracts have 
poverty rates between 35 and 40 percent. 

2 The Blackfeet Reservation case study spans 2 counties, Glacier and Pondera. Glacier County has no census tracts with a poverty 
rate over 40 percent. 



FIGURE 2 



Between 1990 and 2000, however, this national pattern 
reversed. Using data from the 2000 census, Jargowsky 
revisited his earlier question and examined changes in 
the concentration of poverty in both metropolitan and 
non-metropolitan areas.^'* What he found was that the 
total number of poor people living in high-poverty neigh- 
borhoods nationwide dropped by one-quarter over the 
decade, from 4.8 million to 3.5 million, or from 15 percent to 
just over 10 percent of the total U.S. poor population. Cities 
such as Detroit, Chicago, Houston, and Milwaukee saw 
widespread declines in extreme neighborhood poverty, as 
did many rural counties.^^ Moreover, all racial and ethnic 
groups benefited from the declines in the concentration of 
poverty during this time. (See Figure 3) 

The factors that contributed to these declines are 
likely numerous, but the strong economic growth of the 
1990s almost certainly ranks high among them. In April 
2000, the nation’s unemployment rate dipped below 4 
percent for the first time in roughly 30 years. The tight 
labor market pulled in more workers and led to wage 
gains for those at the bottom of the skill distribution.^® 



Trends in concentrated poverty in 
metropolitan areas between 1970 and 1990 



3,000 n 




O z. 
X c 



m ^ 
^ O 



1970 



1980 



1990 



I Number of high-poverty neighborhoods 

- Number of poor living in high-poverty 
neighborhoods (in thousands) 



SOURCE: Paul Jargowsky, Poverty and Place (New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation, 1997), 34. 



7 



OVERVIEW 



Viewed against the backdrop of that economic 
growth, however, the fact that concentrated poverty in 
2000 remained well above its levels in 1970 and 1980 
remains of significant concern. As of 2000, several big U.S. 
cities still had more than one in four poor individuals— and 
more than one in three blacks and Hispanics— living in 
high-poverty neighborhoods.^^ Also notable were regional 
differences: while the South and Midwest saw substantial 
declines in the population living in high-poverty neighbor- 
hoods, the West actually saw a 26 percent increase. 

Evidence suggests that the positive trends recorded 
during the 1990s were short-lived. More recent data indi- 
cate that increases in the overall U.S. poverty rate since 
2000 have coincided with a re-concentration of poor 
households nationwide.^® Poverty in rural communities 
also remains high, especially among minorities and chil- 
dren.^® Child poverty is of particular concern in rural areas. 
Of the 50 counties with the highest child-poverty rates in 
America, 48 are rural, and the gap between urban and rural 
child poverty has widened since the late 1990s.®° In Native 
American communities, those living on reservations remain 
among the poorest in the country despite the strong 
growth of reservation economies during the 1990s; in 2000, 
the Native American poverty rate on reservations was three 
times as high as that for the United States as a whole.®' 

■ THE DEVELOPMENT OF 
CONCENTRATED POVERTY 

The phenomenon of concentrated poverty is, by defini- 
tion, a local one: it has emerged along diverse paths and 
to varying degrees within cities, metropolitan areas, and 
rural areas. Thus, a wide range of economic and social 
forces have played a part in the creation of high-poverty 
communities. A review of the literature points to several 
factors as possible contributors to concentrated poverty 
in America over the past few decades. 

Economic Change 

Secular changes in the structure and function of 
metropolitan economies have wrought disproportionate 
effects on less-skilled workers, particularly those located 
in urban neighborhoods. John Kasarda documented how 
the economic shift in U.S. cities from the production of 
goods to information processing served to disadvan- 
tage underclass populations with relatively few years of 
schooling.®® He focused in particular on northern cities, 
finding dramatic declines between 1970 and 1990 



FIGURE 3 

Concentrated poverty by race and ethnicity 




White Black Hispanic American Asian 

Indian 



SOURCE: Paul Jargowsky, “Stunning Progress, Hidden 
Problems: The Dramatic Decline of Concentrated Poverty 
in the 1990s” (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2003) 

in blue-collar employment and a growing mismatch 
between the education levels of black males and the skill 
levels demanded in growth industries. Mark Alan Hughes 
reached a similar conclusion, finding strong relationships 
between deindustrialization and increases in extreme 
neighborhood poverty in northern metropolitan areas.®® 

The reversal of the trend in big Midwestern cities in the 
1990s may thus capture not just the effects of an improved 
overall employment picture, but also the rebirth of manu- 
facturing employment during that decade.®'’ More recent 
data, however, suggest that this rebirth was short-lived.®® 
The economic landscape of rural America has also 
shifted in significant ways. Over the past 30 years, agri- 
culture’s share of jobs in rural and small-town American 
has dropped by half. It is now only 6 percent of overall 
employment in non-metropolitan areas.®® Employment 
in extractive industries like mining has also declined in 
many areas. Manufacturing jobs, which accounted for 
nearly 20 percent of jobs in rural counties in the late 
1970s, comprised just 12 percent of jobs in 2005. These 
shifts are due in large part to global changes in the loca- 
tion of manufacturing plants and to increases in produc- 
tivity in both farm-related and manufacturing industries. 

Suburbanization and Migration 

Sociologists who studied the underclass and areas 



8 



of high poverty in the 1990s found that migration pat- 
terns contributed significantly to the shifting spatial 
concentration of poor city populations. Their research 
has found evidence that non-poor populations— both 
white and black— left mixed-income neighborhoods in 
the 1970s and 1980s, leaving behind poorer populations 
in the inner city.^^ In part, this out-migration reflected 
desegregation and the opening up of suburban housing 
opportunities for blacks during this period. Such oppor- 
tunities were generally not available to poor households, 
however, thus limiting their residential mobility and 
leaving them confined to poor inner-city neighborhoods. 
The long-term effects of these migration patterns are 
reflected in the dramatic decline in the share of central- 
city neighborhoods that had a middle-income or mixed- 
income profile over the 1970-2000 period.^® 

Research has linked migration and the spatial con- 
centration of poverty in rural America as well. Mark Nord 
found that more poor people moved into rather than out 
of high-poverty rural counties between 1985 and 1990, 
which reinforced preexisting spatial concentrations of 
poverty.®® Nord posits that these in-migrants may have 
been drawn to communities with plentiful— albeit low- 
paying— entry-level positions that matched their own 
skills, as well as low costs of living. 

Racial and Economic Segregation 

Since blacks (and in some cases, Hispanics) have 
traditionally constituted a disproportionate segment of 
the poor in areas of extreme neighborhood poverty, sev- 
eral scholars have pointed to racial segregation as a key 
contributor to concentrated poverty. In particular, Doug- 
las Massey and Mitchell Eggers show how metropolitan 
areas with higher levels of racial or ethnic segregation 
in 1980 demonstrated higher levels of concentrated pov- 
erty, particularly affecting blacks in the North and South 
and Hispanics in the Northeast.''® Considerable research 
suggests links between housing market discrimination 
and racial segregation, and ample evidence supports the 
hypothesis that a lack of coordinated land-use planning 
and localized fiscal structures have, over time, produced 
relatively fewer affordable housing opportunities in 
suburban jurisdictions, disproportionately affecting 
poorer households.'" In rural and Native American areas, 
research shows that persistent poverty has been perpet- 
uated by racial and income-based segregation and 
by the lack of inclusive political institutions.'’® 



Housing Policies 

Historical policies concerning the location and 
targeting of affordable housing— particularly public 
housing— as well as discrimination in the mortgage and 
housing markets also served to concentrate poverty in 
many cities, and further contributed to patterns of racial 
and economic segregation. As Margery Austin Turner and 
colleagues note: 

The history of racial segregation and poverty concen- 
tration in distressed public housing is well documented 
(Massey and Kanaiaupuni 1993). In many cities, discrim- 
ination led to the deliberate siting of public housing 
in poor minority neighborhoods that lacked access to 
transportation and jobs (Bickford and Massey 1991). 
Over time, these developments were often allowed to 
deteriorate, due to the lack of political clout, deliberate 
neglect, and prejudice. Moreover, HUD policies target- 
ing public housing assistance to households at the 
lowest income levels and giving priority to those in the 
most extreme distress exacerbated the concentration 
of profoundly poor households in these developments. 
In many cases, therefore, severely distressed develop- 
ments increase the overall poverty rate in the sur- 
rounding neighborhood (Schill and Wachter 1995)."'^ 

A recent investigation of concentrated poverty in 
New Orleans demonstrates how the location of large 
public housing developments served to worsen poverty 
in their surrounding neighborhoods over time."’'’ Other, 
more recent programs to facilitate the production of 
affordable housing, such as the Low Income Housing Tax 
Credit, may also have reinforced the concentration of 
poverty in certain metropolitan areas.''® Some scholars 
have noted that community-based affordable housing 
strategies present in many inner cities have too often 
proceeded without regard to the function of the broader 
metropolitan economy and housing market.''® 

Coupled with the location of affordable housing, the 
failure of the federal government in the mid-20th century 
to insure mortgages in inner-city neighborhoods and 
the coincident failure of private-sector lenders to extend 
mortgage credit in these neighborhoods served to worsen 
the economic isolation of these areas.'"’ The Fair Housing 
Act of 1968, which prohibits discrimination on the basis of 
race, color, religion, and national origin, and the Commu- 
nity Reinvestment Act of 1977, which requires regulated 



9 



OVERVIEW 



OVERVIEW 



financial institutions to meet the credit needs of all com- 
munities within their market areas, were adopted to rem- 
edy the problems of “redlining” in these communities. 

As with housing policies in the urban context, federal 
policy concerning Native Americans has also served to 
concentrate poverty on reservations. As Janet Kodras 
notes, “The historical choice of remote location has iso- 
lated the reservation from urban markets, and the legacy 
of federal neglect has left an infrastructure base insuf- 
ficient for development.”'*® The trust status of many tribal 
lands has further impeded the development of a private 
land market on reservations. Land held in trust cannot 
be sold or encumbered by a lien unless first approved by 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs, which often entails a lengthy 
process. This, along with other factors, has limited the 
availability of capital and credit for both homeownership 
and business development in tribal areas.'*® 

Immigration 

The Immigration and Nationality Amendments of 
1965 repealed immigration quotas based on nationality 
in the United States and opened up immigration from 
regions other than Europe. New immigrants began to 
arrive in large numbers, particularly from Latin America 
and Asia. Subsequently, the nation’s foreign-born popula- 
tion has more than tripled, to more than 35 million today.®® 
Because many of these immigrants arrive with low levels 
of education, they are more likely to live in poverty than 
their native-born counterparts.®' As a result, 
the foreign-born constitute a disproportion- 
ately large share of the poor, particularly in 
high-immigration regions like Los Angeles, 

New York, Miami, and Chicago. Immigration 
has also changed the face of many rural 
towns; while in 2003 the Hispanic popula- 
tion still constituted only 6 percent of the 
rural population, the Hispanic population 
increased dramatically in many rural areas 
in the 1990s (see Figure 4) and is the most 
rapidly growing group in non-metro areas.®® 

It does seem that immigration, then, 
has played some role in the emergence of 
concentrated poverty in certain parts of the 
country.®® The successful incorporation of 
immigrants and their children into American 
society over multiple decades also raises 
questions about whether or not concentra- 
tions of impoverished and low-skilled 



immigrants impact residents and the wider surrounding 
areas in ways similar to other forms of high area poverty.®'* 

Family Formation 

Amid the economic, housing, and migration shifts 
occurring in poor places in the late 20th century, secular 
trends in family formation affected the number of people— 
particularly children— in poverty. In 1965, 24 percent of 
black infants and 3 percent of white infants were born to 
unmarried mothers. By 1990, the rates were 64 percent and 
18 percent, respectively.®® The higher rates of single parent- 
hood among black families, combined with high rates of 
black-white segregation in many metropolitan areas, con- 
tributed to elevated rates of concentrated poverty. 

A complex mix of factors likely contributed to the 
long-term rise in births to unmarried mothers, including 
changing attitudes toward sex and single parenthood, 
changes in reproductive technology, and the improved 
economic position of women relative to men, espe- 
cially young black men.®® The rate of births to unmar- 
ried women leveled off after 1994, but in recent years it 
has begun to rise again.®^ Whatever the causes of these 
trends, research consistently demonstrates that children 
in single-parent families are much more likely to grow up 
poor because of their parents’ lower earnings.®® Indeed, 
Wilson finds strong correlations between high neighbor- 
hood poverty in Chicago and never-married parents in 
those neighborhoods.®® 



Growth in the Hispanic population by region, 1990-2000 




us Northeast Southwest Midwest South West 
SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Censuses 1990 and 2000 



10 



Economic Mobility 

These “headline” factors, however, do not account 
for whether the same individuals and families remain 
poor over time. Are these areas of concentrated poverty 
multigenerational poverty traps? Recent research on 
intergenerational economic mobility— the degree to which 
people move up and down the economic ladder from 
one generation to the next— finds that multigenerational 
economic mobility has declined in recent years.®° While 
some groups, such as Immigrants, seem to be doing well, 
others, such as African Americans, are losing ground. Yet 
research has revealed little about whether concentrated 
poverty has influenced economic mobility, either within 
individuals’ own lifetimes, or across generations. 

Some research argues that greater economic mobil- 
ity for whites can be explained by more developed skills, 
as measured by standardized tests. This finding, however, 
does not shed light on the underlying causes of these 
different skill levels. According to Debopam Bhattacharya 
and Bhashkar Mazumder, who have studied multigen- 
erational economic mobility, more studies are needed to 
understand the formation of the black-white skills gap 
and its effects on mobility.*^' Similarly, and with specific 
regard to this study, there is a need for more research on 
the connection between economic mobility and living in 
areas of concentrated poverty. 

The next section turns to the research evidence on 
how the spatial organization of poverty— particularly in 
areas where high poverty is concentrated— affects fami- 
lies, communities, and the wider areas in which it exists. 

■ WHY CONCENTRATED POVERTY MATTERS 

The economic segregation of poor populations, evident 
in many parts of the country today, exacts a toll from the 
inhabitants of these communities that may exacerbate 
their own personal challenges and limit their life choices. 
But the issues reach beyond these populations, since they 
also affect the wider areas in which poverty concentrates. 
A significant body of research literature, summarized here, 
has examined the effects of concentrated poverty across 
a variety of social and economic domains. 

Effects on Poor Individuals and Poor Neighborhoods 

In studying the effects of concentrated poverty on 
families, it is difficult to disentangle the neighborhood 
effects from other factors that lead to the observed 



outcomes, and even more difficult to understand the 
mechanisms by which various factors can influence one 
another. For example. Is the limited academic achieve- 
ment of a teenage youth the result of his family being 
poor, the result of being in a classroom where the major- 
ity of his classmates are also poor, or the result of limited 
academic achievement among his peers, regardless of 
their socioeconomic status?*^^ It is also difficult to mea- 
sure the extent to which families are “trapped” in poor 
neighborhoods, or whether they remain living there by 
choice. For example, the availability of affordable hous- 
ing, as well as the presence of strong social networks 
and cultural assets, can provide powerful incentives for 
families to choose to live in these communities, despite 
high levels of poverty.^ Other studies, however, have 
posited that the lack of affordable housing options in 
other parts of the city— as well as racially segmented 
housing markets— can constrain the ability of low-income 
families to move to lower-poverty neighborhoods, even 
when they express a desire to relocate.*^” 

To answer these questions, researchers are increas- 
ingly turning to longitudinal and experimental research 
designs that can help to illuminate both the theoreti- 
cal and empirical relationships between neighborhood 
effects and individual outcomes.®^ (See page 12, Does 
Neighborhood Matter? Moving Out of Concentrated Pov- 
erty) Although it is likely to be some time until the debate 
over the magnitude of those effects is laid to rest, the 
studies reviewed below have begun to explore the ways 
in which living in an area of concentrated poverty can 
limit options for an individual’s economic advancement. 

Private-sector Investment 

Large numbers of low-income and low-skilled house- 
holds living in the same place make a community less 
attractive to mainstream investors, employers, and busi- 
ness location advisers. In turn, this may limit local ameni- 
ties, job opportunities, and quality housing options for 
residents and may create a “spatial mismatch” between 
neighborhood residents and employment centers.®® 

A large proportion of low-income households in many 
metropolitan areas do not own private vehicles and also 
lack access to good public transit, further isolating them 
from job opportunities.®^ In some areas of the country, 
however, this spatial mismatch may actually disadvan- 
tage rural households more than urban ones.®® 



11 



OVERVIEW 



OVERVIEW 



Does Neighborhood Matter? 

Moving Out of Concentrated Poverty 



A great deal of research has sought to compare out- 
comes for poor families living in areas of very high poverty 
against their counterparts living in less poor communities. 
Bedeviling these inquiries is the question of “selection 
effects”; that is, are poor families who live outside the very 
poorest communities different from concentrated-poverty 
dwellers in ways that researchers cannot detect in conven- 
tional data? Differences in these unobservable characteris- 
tics (such as motivation and parental skills) could account 
for differences in social and economic outcomes. Falling to 
account for these distinctions might cause researchers to 
ascribe too much importance to a family’s surroundings as 
a determinant of its members’ life chances. 

Two programs have shed some light on the impacts 
that moving out of concentrated poverty might have 
on outcomes for poor families. The quasi-experimental 
Gautreaux program, initiated in the 1970s in response to a 
court order to remedy segregation in the Chicago Hous- 
ing Authority, has helped thousands of low-income, mostly 
black families relocate from public housing developments 
in inner-city Chicago to predominantly white or racially 
mixed neighborhoods in the Chicago suburbs.®^ Moving to 
Opportunity (MTO) was a five-city demonstration program 
that assisted families living in high-poverty public housing 
to move to private rental housing in low-poverty neighbor- 
hoods elsewhere in their metropolitan areas, with more 
rigorous experimental controls than were present in the 
Gautreaux program.™ With each program, researchers 
compared outcomes along several dimensions for families 
who moved (or were offered the opportunity to move) to 
families who remained in public housing. 

Results from the Gautreaux program were quite posi- 
tive. Movers to suburbs were more likely to be employed 
and less likely to receive public assistance than those 
who stayed in the city. Their children were more likely to 
enroll in college preparatory classes at school, and to 
subsequently enroll in post-secondary education.^' 

Results from the MTO program were decidedly more 
mixed. Families offered the chance to move to low-poverty 
neighborhoods (the experimental group) experienced no 
greater gains in employment than the control group, and 
researchers detected no significant effects on student 
test scores or behavior problems for their children.™ More 



positively, girls in experimental-group families were less 
likely to become involved in crime; boys were less likely 
to engage in violent crime but more likely to engage in 
property crime.™ Health effects were very positive for the 
experimental group, however. 

These mixed results have led to significant academic 
discussion on the limitations of MTO and other mobility 
programs for addressing poverty, and have spurred addi- 
tional experimental and non-experimental research on the 
possible impacts of poor neighborhoods on individual and 
family outcomes.^” Some of this research has argued that 
place doesn’t matter very much for poverty. Brian Jacob, 
for example, found little change in student outcomes 
before and after moving out of public housing in Chi- 
cago.™ A study using the Panel Study of Income Dynamics 
for similarly situated neighboring children likewise found 
only small effects on educational attainment that could be 
attributed to disparities in neighborhood quality.™ 

Other researchers, however, have argued that the 
moves undertaken by MTO participants were not suf- 
ficient to yield detectable effects on their employment.™ 
Similarly, researchers have speculated that MTO children 
performed no better in school because their moves often 
left them attending the same or only marginally better 
schools than in their old neighborhoods.™ Moreover, nei- 
ther MTO nor Gautreaux is able to account for the possi- 
ble historical impacts of concentrated poverty on families, 
which may have modified their attitudes, behaviors, and 
parenting skills in ways that frustrate upward mobility. 
Families never exposed to such deprived neighborhoods 
in the first place might have fared quite differently. In 
addition, both programs focused on large inner cities and 
metropolitan areas, and on African-American families. It is 
not clear that the results are generalizable to smaller cit- 
ies and rural places or to other racial or ethnic groups. 

Most researchers agree that individual and family 
characteristics matter more for outcomes than do charac- 
teristics of their surrounding areas.™ In addition, research- 
ers are exploring the roles that social networks and peer 
effects play in determining economic outcomes.®” The 
research outlined here and throughout this chapter sug- 
gests that the dynamics of concentrated poverty and its 
effects on families deserve further study. 



12 



Prices for Goods and Services 

David Caplovitz’s pioneering work on consumer prac- 
tices among low-income families, and the relatively lower 
availability and quality of goods and services in inner- 
city neighborhoods, was among the first to suggest that 
being poor in a poor area might place additional financial 
burdens on these families.®' More recent work has exam- 
ined how a lack of business competition, gaps in market 
information, and higher costs for doing business in poor 
neighborhoods can raise the prices charged for basic 
goods and services, such as food, car insurance, utilities, 
and financial services, in low-income neighborhoods.®^ 

As a result, poor residents may end up paying more than 
families in middle-income neighborhoods for the same 
goods and services. With less room in their budgets, 
residents of very poor areas might go without certain 
necessities (e.g., utilities), take on unsustainable debt, or 
forgo investments (e.g., a reliable car) that could improve 
their long-term economic situation. 

Empioyment Networks and Ambitions 

Low levels of labor force participation in distressed 
neighborhoods may effectively cut off these places from 
the informal networks crucial to helping workers find 
good jobs and advance their careers.®® Recent research 
finds that high-poverty locations may disadvantage both 
blacks and Hispanics in their job search activities.®'’ 
Employers may also attach a stigma to extremely poor 
neighborhoods that discourages them from hiring local 
residents; this may be rooted in racial as well as neigh- 
borhood discrimination.®® 

Based on his interviews of residents in high-poverty 
neighborhoods in Chicago, Wilson further argues that 
high local levels of joblessness may change the social 
norms around work.®® These norms may be absorbed by 
children as well, such that chronic unemployment among 
adults in the community may cause children to under- 
invest in the education and training necessary for future 
success in the labor market.®^ 

Educationai Opportunity 

Highly segregated communities (either racial or 
economic) can have a significant influence on the quality 
of the neighborhood schools. Even with the expanded 
school choice available today, children who live in 
extremely poor urban neighborhoods generally attend 



neighborhood schools where nearly all of the students 
are poor and at greater risk for failure, as expressed by 
low standardized test results, grade retention, and high 
dropout rates.®® James Ainsworth finds that children who 
grow up in poor areas face reduced educational expec- 
tations and homework demands, which in turn diminish 
their educational outcomes.®® 

Concentrated poverty can also inhibit actions 
designed to increase low-income students’ access to 
more economically integrated schools. It appears that 
communities can become segregated quickly when the 
percent of minority residents reaches a certain “tipping 
point,” making the successful integration of low-income 
students into surrounding wealthier school districts dif- 
ficult.®® Even under favorable conditions (e.g., motivated 
students and willing recipient districts), the academic 
benefits to the integrated students can fade.®' Also, 
efforts to move students to new schools often suffer 
because students are sent to similarly poor schools.®® 

High-poverty neighborhoods also exert “downward 
pressure” on school processes and quality. Schools in 
these areas endure high rates of student mobility that 
frustrate classroom stability, are often unable to attract 
the best personnel, and must operate additional systems 
to cope with disorder and the social welfare of their 
students.®® Moreover, living in an area of concentrated 
poverty may increase the risk of premarital childbear- 
ing among young women, thereby limiting their educa- 
tional opportunities.®'' Finally, there is growing evidence 
that there are significant additional social benefits 
from higher graduation rates, especially with regard to 
reduced incarceration costs.®® 

Crime 

In general, high-poverty inner-city neighborhoods 
exhibit higher crime rates, especially for violent crime.®® 
One team of researchers found that neighborhood pov- 
erty is a significant predictor of local crime.®’’ In another 
study, Anne Case and Lawrence Katz show that neigh- 
borhood peer groups influence adolescents’ propensity 
to engage in criminal behavior or drug use.®® In these 
neighborhoods, the social penalties for criminal activity 
may be lower, and reduced access to jobs and qual- 
ity schools may further reduce the opportunity costs of 
crime. Conversely, adults who participated in the Moving 
to Cpportunity demonstration, in which they were offered 
the chance to move from a high-poverty public housing 



13 



OVERVIEW 



OVERVIEW 



project to a low-poverty suburban neighborhood, 
reported significant improvements in neighborhood 
safety and crime victimization compared with control 
groups not offered the opportunity to move.®® 

Health 

Residents of high-poverty areas experience nega- 
tive health outcomes at much higher rates, owing partly 
to the stress of being poor and marginalized and partly 
to living in an environment with dilapidated housing and 
high crime. There may also be higher risk of exposure 
to other environmental hazards, such as lead-based 
paint, cigarette smoke, and pollution from heavily traf- 
ficked roads nearby. Researchers have associated the 
incidence of depression, asthma, diabetes, and heart 
ailments with living in these neighborhoods.'®® Even when 
the residents of high-poverty areas seek medical atten- 
tion, they may find that the quality of care available at 
local providers is inferior to the quality of care available 
to most residents of wealthier areas. 

As evidence of these neighborhood effects, adult 
participants in the Moving to Opportunity demonstration 
who relocated experienced significant improvement in 
mental health, an outcome that may be attributable to 
lower levels of stress associated with reduced violence 
and disorder, to Improved community resources (such 
as schools, housing, and parks) or to both.'®' Moreover, 
researchers found that the larger the Increase In neigh- 
borhood quality, the larger the mental health improve- 
ment. Overall, they liken the magnitude of the effect to 
that found in “some of the most effective clinical and 
pharmacological mental health interventions.”'®® 

Wealth 

Many residents of high-poverty areas own their 
homes; in 2000, 29 percent of households in high- 
poverty census tracts were owners.'®® But local conditions 
in these distressed areas are associated with market 
devaluation of those assets, and lack of house-price 
appreciation precludes residents and their progeny 
from the same wealth accumulation enjoyed by owners 
in other parts of the metropolis.'®'' Recent research by 
George Galster and colleagues suggests that the pres- 
ence of high-poverty neighborhoods within large met- 
ropolitan areas depresses values for owner-occupied 
properties in those areas by 13 percent.'®® 



Effects on Wider Areas 

The negative outcomes just described affect not only 
very poor neighborhoods and their poor residents, but 
may extend to surrounding neighborhoods and resi- 
dents as well. For instance, the failure of hIgh-poverty 
areas to attract market investment reduces housing and 
retail options for populations over a wider area. Crime 
may have spillover effects into surrounding areas. The 
existence of high-poverty schools may cause middle- 
class parents who are able to exercise choice to opt out 
of public school systems, or to leave jurisdictions with 
high-poverty schools altogether. And as the research on 
wealth Indicates, diminished housing value as a result 
of concentrated poverty affects wider private economic 
well-being and public fiscal capacity. Beyond these 
hypothesized and, in some cases, observed effects, the 
research literature points to additional costs imposed on 
the wider society by concentrated poverty. 

Local Government Services 

Concentrations of poverty generate high costs for local 
government— for elevated welfare case loads, for high loads 
of Indigent patients at hospitals and public health clin- 
ics, for extra policing— that can divert resources from the 
provision of other public services and can lead to increased 
tax burdens on local businesses and non-poor residents.'®® 
Consequently, wealthier households may migrate out- 
ward, which can further erode local fiscal capacity to 
address the problems facing vulnerable populations and 
may redirect state spending away from increasingly poor 
areas.'®^ The resulting inability of the public sector to make 
strategic investments in physical infrastructure and human 
capital may constrain future economic growth in cities and 
regions with high levels of concentrated poverty. 

Political and Societal Divisions 

Research In a number of disciplines has explored 
how concentrated poverty is both caused by and 
can lead to political and societal divisions between a 
community’s “haves” and “have-nots.”'®® The spatial 
divide between segregated poor neighborhoods and 
their wealthier counterparts can also sow misunder- 
standing, distrust, and negative assumptions among 
both groups, especially where racial divisions also exist. 

These political and societal divisions erode civic 
capacity by limiting the ability to find common ground. 



14 



and they often undermine efforts to address the problems 
associated with concentrated poverty. In a detailed study 
of the Gautreaux and Moving to Opportunity programs, 
for example, Edward Goetz finds that the political opposi- 
tion to these types of mobility initiatives has restricted 
their scope and limited their effectiveness at changing 
the dynamics of regional housing markets.'®® Moreover, 
some researchers argue that despite efforts to encourage 
participation in planning and development efforts, low- 
income residents are often given only token seats at the 
table, without any real decision-making authority or ability 
to influence the processes that affect their lives."® 

■ IMPLICATIONS FOR THIS PROJECT 

In light of the voluminous research examining concen- 
trated poverty in America, what new information can we 
hope to learn from this study? 

This study reflects a desire to ground a new under- 
standing of concentrated poverty in the historical and 
contemporary experiences of a more diverse set of 
places and people. As this short literature review reveals, 
much of the research into the problem of concentrated 
poverty emanates from large inner cities in the Northeast 
and Midwest. This is easy to understand in light of the 
devastating effects that high poverty has had on families 
from places like Chicago’s South Side, North Philadel- 
phia, and the east side of Cleveland. This type of inner- 
city community still figures prominently on the national 
map of concentrated poverty, and the experiences of 
several such communities— including one of Cleveland’s 
neighborhoods— are reflected in this report. 

But the existence and spread of high-poverty neigh- 
borhoods into places like southern California, southern 
Texas, cities throughout the Southeast, and smaller cities 
and suburbs in the North provide the impetus for this 
new inquiry. Moreover, research and policy dialogue have 
generally failed to associate the dynamics of extremely 
poor urban communities with their rural counterparts. 

The following section of this report includes case 
studies, undertaken by the Federal Reserve System’s 
Community Affairs Offices, of 16 high-poverty communi- 
ties across the United States. These areas ranged from 
new urban immigrant portals (Fresno) to older northern 
industrial cities (Milwaukee) to small communities in the 
South (East Albany, Georgia) to Native American reser- 
vations in the West (Blackfeet Reservation, Montana). 
Looking across this diverse landscape of concentrated 



poverty in America today, this study asks a few central 
questions relevant to each of these locales: 

• What factors are associated with the develop- 
ment and persistence of concentrated poverty? 

• What challenges does concentrated poverty 
pose for affected families and communities? 

• What is the capacity of local organizations to 
address the issues associated with concen- 
trated poverty? 

• What strategies are the public and private 
sectors employing to ameliorate concentrated 
poverty and its effects? 

This report shows that, despite the unique circum- 
stances that produced these pockets of high poverty 
across the nation, these case study communities share 
many common challenges and opportunities. As a 
result, public and private leaders may well benefit from 
exchanging information and perspectives on addressing 
concentrated poverty across diverse places. At the same 
time, the case studies also demonstrate that the vary- 
ing social and economic contexts in which concentrated 
poverty occurs imply the need for more than one-size- 
fits-all strategies to ensure a better future for these com- 
munities and their residents. 

In addition to bridging the geographic divides in the 
existing research on concentrated poverty, this study 
bridges disciplinary approaches by combining descrip- 
tive quantitative information with qualitative research in 
each of the 16 case study communities. It explores their 
respective histories, challenges, assets, and outlooks 
through analysis of national and local data, interviews 
with community leaders and local residents, and the 
Federal Reserve’s long-standing experience in many of 
these communities. 

This literature review was written by Alan Berube, 
research director of the Brookings Metropolitan 
Policy Program. 



Endnotes 

1 Alan Berube and Bruce Katz, “Katrina’s Window: Confronting 
Concentrated Poverty in America’’ (Washington, DC: Brookings 
institution, 2005). 



15 



OVERVIEW 



OVERVIEW 



2 Kathleen Miller and Bruce Weber, “Persistent Poverty Across the 
Urban-Rural Continuum,” Working Paper 03-02, Rural Poverty 
Research Center, 2003. 

3 Oscar Lewis, La Vida: A Puerto Rican Famiiy in the Culture of 
Poverty— San Juan and New York (New York: Random House, 1966). 

4 Charles Murray, Losing Ground: American Sociai Policy, 1950-1980 
(New York: Basic Books, 1984). 

5 Ken Auletta, The Underciass (New York: Random House, 1982). Nich- 
olas Lemann, “The Origins of the Underclass,” Atlantic Monthly 256 
(1986): 31-55. Leon Dash, When Children Want Children: The Urban 
Crisis of Teenage Childbearing (New York: William Morrow, 1989). 

6 Erol Ricketts and Isabel Sawhill, “Defining and Measuring the 
Underclass,” Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 7 (1988): 
316-25. Ronald Mincy and Susan Weiner, “The Under Class in the 
1980s: Changing Concepts, Constant Reality” (Washington, DC: The 
Urban Institute, 1993). 

7 John Kasarda, “Urban Industrial Transformation and the Under- 
class,” Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social 
Science 501 (1989): 26-47. John Kain, “Housing Segregation, Negro 
Employment, and Metropolitan Decentralization,” Quarterly Journal 
of Economics 82 (1968): 175-97. John Kain, “The Spatial Mismatch 
Hypothesis: Thirty Years Later,” Housing Policy Debate 3(2) (1992): 
371-460. Douglas Massey and Nancy Denton, American Apartheid: 
Segregation and the Making of the Underclass (Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press, 1993). 

8 William Julius Wilson, When Work Disappears: The New World of the 
Urban Poor (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1987). 

9 Ann Tickamyer and Cynthia Duncan, “Poverty and Opportunity 
Structure in Rural America,” Annual Review of Sociology 16 (1990): 
67-86. David Cotter, “Poor People in Poor Places: Local Oppor- 
tunity Structures and Household Poverty,” Rural Sociology 67(4) 
(2002): 534-35. 

10 Daniel Weinberg, “Rural Pockets of Poverty,” Rural Sociology 52(3) 
(1987): 398-408. 

11 Janet M. Fitchen, Poverty In Rural America: A Case Study (Boulder, 
CO: Westview Press, 1981). 

12 Cynthia M. Duncan, Worlds Apart: Why Poverty Persists in Rural 
America (New Haven: Yale University Press, 1999). 

13 Gary Sandefur, “American Indian Reservations: The First Under- 
class Areas?” Focus 12(1) (1989): 37-41. David Listokin, Robin 
Leichenko, and Juliet King, Housing and Economic Development in 
Indian Country: Challenge and Opportunity (Washington, DC: Fannie 
Mae Foundation, 2004). 

14 Stephen Cornell and Joseph Kalt, “Reloading the Dice: Improving 
the Chances for Economic Development on American Indian Reser- 
vations,” in What Can Tribes Do? Strategies and Institutions in Ameri- 
can Indian Economic Development, S. Cornell and J. Kalt, eds. (Los 
Angeles: American Indian Studies Center at UCLA, 1992), 1-51. G. T. 
Kingsley et al.. Assessment of American Indian Housing Needs and 
Programs: Final Report (Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Hous- 
ing and Urban Development, 1996). D. Duffy and J. Stubben, “An 
Assessment of Native American Economic Development: Putting 
Culture and Sovereignty Back in the Models,” Studies in Compara- 
tive International Development 33(4) (1998): 52-78. J. Kodras, “The 
Changing Map of American Poverty in an Era of Economic Restruc- 
turing and Political Realignments,” Economic Geography 73(1) (1997): 



67-93. Robin Leichenko, “Does Place Still Matter? Accounting for 
Income Variation Across American Indian Trial Areas,” Economic 
Geography 79(4) (2003): 365-86. K. Pickering, Lakota Culture, World 
Economy (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2000). R. Trosper, 
“American Indian Poverty on Reservations, 1969-1989,” in Changing 
Numbers, Changing Needs: American Indian Demography and Public 
Health, G. Sandefur, R. Rindfuss, and B. Cohen, eds. (Washington, 
DC: National Academy Press, 1996), 172-95. K. Frantz, Indian Reser- 
vations in North America: Territory, Sovereignty, and Socioeconomic 
Change (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 1999). 

15 Joseph Kalt et al.. The State of the Native Nations: Conditions Under 
U.S. Policies of Self-Determination, Harvard Project on American Indian 
Economic Development (Oxford: Oxford University Press, 2007). 

16 Sheldon Danziger and Peter Gottschalk, “Earnings Inequality, the 
Spatial Concentration of Poverty, and the Underclass,” American 
Economic Review 77(2) (1987): 211-15. Paul Jargowsky and Mary Jo 
Bane, “Ghetto Poverty: Basic Questions,” in Inner-City Poverty in 
the United States, L. Lynn and M. McGreary, eds. (Washington, DC: 
National Academy of Sciences Press, 1990). John Kasarda, “Inner- 
City Concentrated Poverty and Neighborhood Distress, 1970-1990,” 
Housing Policy Debate 4(3) (1993): 253-302. Paul Jargowsky, Pov- 
erty and Place: Ghettos, Barrios, and the American City (New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation, 1997). According to Jargowsky and Bane 
(1990), fieldwork in several major cities “confirmed that the 40 
percent criterion came very close to identifying areas that looked 
like ghettos in terms of their housing conditions.... The areas.. .cor- 
responded closely with the neighborhoods that city officials and 
local Census Bureau officials considered ghettos” (p. 239). 

17 Some researchers refer to neighborhoods above the threshold of 
40-percent poverty as extreme-poverty neighbohoods. We use the 
term high-pverty neighborhoods in this report. In 2006, the federal 
poverty threshold for a family of three was about $16,100 and 
$20,600 for a family of four (U.S. Census Bureau). 

18 Paul Jargowsky, “Stunning Progress, Hidden Problems: The Dra- 
matic Decline of Concentrated Poverty in the 1990s” (Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution, 2003). Census 2000 was the first decen- 
nial census in which all areas of the Unites States, urban and rural, 
were subdivided into census tracts. In rural areas, census tracts 
may capture significant portions of, and in some cases entire, coun- 
ties. As Jargowsky notes in Poverty and Place, the poverty rate/ 
census tract methodology is not without its drawbacks. It suffers 
from the same shortcomings as the federal government's poverty 
measure generally, which fails to account for regional differences 

in costs of living, ignores certain sources of in-kind income, and 
has not kept up with changes in Americans' consumption pat- 
terns over the past 40 years. Others criticize the measure for not 
making “full use of the data on the spatial distribution of income” 
(see Massey and Eggers (1990), p. 1155), but Jargowsky counters 
that their preferred exposure indices overlook the importance of 
threshold effects that distinguish neighborhoods at the higher end 
of the poverty spectrum. Douglas Massey and Mitchell Eggers, “The 
Ecology of Inequality: Minorities and the Concentration of Poverty, 
1970-1980,” American Journal of Sociology 95(5) (1990): 1153-89. 

19 Jargowsky, Poverty and Place. 

20 Ibid., 21. 

21 Jargowsky, Poverty and Place and “Stunning Progress, Hidden 
Problems.” 

22 Between 1970 and 1990, the poverty rate for families in the United 
States fluctuated between 9.7 percent and 13.9 percent. During this 



16 



same period, the poverty rate for individuals in the United States 
fluctuated between 11.1 percent and 15.2 percent. See U.S. Census, 
Table 2, “Poverty Status of People by Family Relationship, Race, 
and Hispanic Origin: 1959 to 2006,” available online at http://www. 
census.gov/hhes/www/poverty/histpov/hstpov2.html 

23 Shannon McConville and Paul Ong, “The Trajectory of Poor Neigh- 
borhoods in Southern California, 1970-2000” (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution, 2003). 

24 Jargowsky, “Stunning Progress, Hidden Problems.” Extending this 
same analysis back to 1970 is not possible due to data limitations 
in the earlier census years. 

25 For an excellent analysis of changes in the spatial concentration of 
the poor in rural areas, see Daniel Lichter and Kenneth M. Johnson, 
“The Changing Concentration of America’s Rural Poor Population,” 
Rural Sociology 72(3) (2007): 331-58. In addition, the Urban Institute 
has also analyzed changes in concentrated poverty in metropoli- 
tan areas using slightly different definitions, although the trends 
described here are the same. G. Thomas Kingsley and Kathyrn L. S. 
Pettit, “Concentrated Poverty: A Change in Course,” Neighborhood 
Change in America (Washington, DC: The Urban Institute, 2003). 

26 Testimony of Jared Bernstein before the Committee on Education 
and the Workforce, U.S. House of Representatives, March 11, 2004. 

27 Berube and Katz, “Katrina’s Window.” 

26 Elizabeth Kneebone and Alan Berube, “Reversal of Fortune: A New 
Look at Concentrated Poverty in the 2000s” (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution, 2008). 

29 Lichter and Johnson, “The Changing Spatial Concentration of 
America’s Rural Poor Population.” 

30 Kenneth Johnson, “Demographic Trends in Rural and Small Town 
America,” Reports on Rural America 1(1) (2006). 

31 Jonathan B. Taylor and Joseph P. Kalt, American Indians on Res- 
ervations: A Databook of Socioeconomic Change Between the 1990 
and 2000 Censuses (Cambridge, MA: Harvard Project on American 
Indian Economic Development, 2005). 

32 Kasarda, “Urban Industrial Transformation and the Underclass.” 

33 Mark Alan Hughes, “Misspeaking Truth to Power: A Geographic 
Perspective on the ‘Underclass’ Fallacy,” Economic Geography 
65(3) (1989): 187-207. Jargowsky (1997) notes that these effects 
may hold in northern, but not southern, metropolitan areas 
because northern manufacturing jobs may have paid better to 
begin with and thus served to lift more workers and families out of 
poverty and out of high-poverty neighborhoods. 

34 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, Annual Report, 1996. 

35 Howard Wial and Alec Friedhoff, “Bearing the Brunt: Manufacturing 
Job Loss in the Great Lakes Region, 1995-2005” (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution, 2006). 

36 USDA Economic Research Service, “Rural Employment at a 
Glance,” Economic Information Bulletin 21, 2006. 

37 William Julius Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner City, 
the Underclass, and Public Policy. (Chicago: The University of 
Chicago Press, 1987). Wilson, When Work Disappears. Jargowsky 
and Bane, “Ghetto Poverty.” Claudia Coulton, Shanta Pandey, 
and Julian Chow, “Concentration of Poverty and the Changing 



Ecology of Low-Income Urban Neighborhoods: An Analysis of the 
Cleveland Area,” Social Work Research and Abstracts 26(2) (1990): 
5-16. Kathryn Nelson, “Racial Segregation, Mobility, and Poverty 
Concentrations,” paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Population Association of America, 1991. Though much of this 
research focused on northern cities as well, Jargowsky and Bane 
include Memphis among the cities in their study of how migration 
patterns contributed to concentrated poverty. Massey, Gross, and 
Shibuya (1994) contest these findings on black middle-class out- 
migration, but Jargowsky (1997) demonstrates that those authors’ 
findings are not inconsistent with Wilson’s original hypothesis and 
subsequent research. Douglas Massey, Andrew Gross, and Kumiko 
Shibuya, “Migration, Segregation, and the Geographic Concentra- 
tion of Poverty,” American Sociological Review 59(3) (1994): 425-45. 

36 Jason Booza, Jackie Cutsinger, and George Galster, “Where Did 
They Go? The Decline of Middie-Income Neighborhoods in Metro- 
politan America, 1970-2000” (Washington, DC: Brookings Institu- 
tion, 2006). 

39 Mark Nord, “Poor People on the Move: County-to-County Migration 
and the Spatial Concentration of Poverty,” Journal of Regional Sci- 
ence 38(2) (1998): 329-51. 

40 Massey and Eggers, “The Ecology of Inequality.” 

41 John Yinger, Closed Doors, Opportunities Lost: The Continuing Costs 
of Housing Discrimination (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 
1995). Rolf Pendall, Robert Puentes, and Jonathan Martin, “From 
Traditional to Reformed: A Review of Land-Use Regulations in the 
Nation’s 50 Largest Metropolitan Areas” (Washington, DC: Brook- 
ings Institution, 2006). Research has not generally associated 
racial segregation per se with concentrated rural poverty, since in 
many high-poverty rural communities, one racial group predomi- 
nates (e.g., whites in Appalachia, blacks in the Mississippi Delta, 
Native Americans on reservations, Hispanics along the Southwest 
Border). However, the predominance of single-race groups in 
these communities itself often owes to historically segregationist 
policies (e.g., sharecropping, land transfers). 

42 Duncan, Worlds Apart. Duffy and Stubben, “An Assessment of 
Native American Economic Development.” 

43 Margery Austin Turner, Susan J. Popkin, and G. Thomas Kingsley, 
“Distressed Public Housing: What It Costs to Do Nothing” (Wash- 
ington, DC: Urban Institute, 2005). 

44 “New Orleans After the Storm: Lessons from the Past, A Plan for 
the Future” (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2005). 

45 Lance Freeman, “Siting Affordable Housing: Location and Neigh- 
borhood Trends of Low Income Housing Tax Credit Developments 
in the 1990s” (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2004). 

46 Jeremy Nowak, “Neighborhood Initiative and the Regional 
Economy,” Economic Development Quarterly 11(1) (1997): 3-10. Bruce 
Katz, “Neighborhoods of Choice and Connection: The Evolution of 
American Neighborhood Policy and What It Means for the United 
Kingdom” (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2004). 

47 Glenn Canner, “Redlining, Research, and Federal Legislative 
Response,” Staff Studies 121, Board of Governors of the Federal 
Reserve System, 1982. 

48 Kodras, “The Changing Map of American Poverty,” 87. 

49 Community Development Financial Institutions Fund, “The Report 
of the Native American Lending Study,” 2001. The sovereign status 



17 



OVERVIEW 



OVERVIEW 



of Indian tribes imposes additional constraints that are unique to 
housing on reservations. As sovereign governments, tribes have 
the right to form their own government; the power to make and 
enforce both civil and criminal laws; the power to tax; the power 
to establish membership; the right to license, zone, and regulate 
activities; the power to engage in commercial activity; and the 
power to exclude persons (Indian and non-Indian) from tribal terri- 
tories. Lenders are therefore often hesitant to lend on tribal lands, 
since lenders seeking to act on their leasehold collateral must 
work with the tribal judiciaries for the administration of foreclosure, 
eviction, and priority of lien procedures. In addition, fractionated 
land in some tribal areas requires that the multiple owners must all 
agree on its use before the land can be leased, sold, or developed. 

50 Audrey Singer, “The Rise of New Immigrant Gateways” (Washing- 
ton, DC: Brookings Institution, 2004). 

51 Elizabeth Grieco, “Characteristics of the Foreign-Born in the United 
States; Results from Census 2000” (Washington, DC; Migration 
Policy Institute, 2002). 

52 Kenneth Johnson, “Unpredictable Directions of Rural Popula- 
tion Growth and Migration,” in Challenges for Rural America in the 
Twenty-First Century, David L. Brown and Louis E. Swanson, eds. 
(University Park: Pennsylvania State University Press, 2003). 

53 Some scholars further argue that immigration has independently 
served to lower wages for native-born, less-skilled workers, par- 
ticularly blacks, which theoretically could have worsened poverty 
in black neighborhoods. George Borjas, Richard Freeman, and 
Lawrence Katz, “Flow Much Do Immigration and Trade Affect 
Labor Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic Activity 
1997(1) (1997): 1-90. These conclusions are not without contro- 
versy, however. According to Card (2005), improving neigh- 
borhood conditions for blacks in the 1990s occurred amid a 
tremendous wave of immigration into many of the same locales. 
David Card, “Is the New Immigration Really So Bad?” Working 
Paper 11547, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2005. 

54 George Borjas, “Immigration, Ethnic Identity, and Assimilation: The 
Intergenerational Transmission of Immigrant Skills,” in Economic 
Aspects of International Migration, FI. Giersch, ed. (New York: 
Springer Verlag, 1994), 139-54. George Borjas, “Ethnicity, Neigh- 
borhoods, and Fluman-Capital Externalities,” American Economic 
Review 85(3) (June 1995): 365-90. 

55 George Akerlof and Janet Yellen, An Analysis of Out-of-Wedlock Births 
in the United States (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 1996). 

56 Ronald Mincy, Black Males Left Behind (Washington, DC: Urban 
Institute, 2006). 

57 Andrea Kane and Daniel Lichter, “Reducing Unwed Childbearing: 
The Missing Link in Efforts to Promote Marriage” (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution, 2006). 

58 Ron Flaskins and Isabel Sawhill, “Work and Marriage: The Way to End 
Poverty and Welfare” (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2003). 

59 Wilson, When Work Disappears. 

60 Julia B. Issacs, Isabel V. Sawhill, and Ron Flaskins, “Getting Ahead 
or Losing Ground: Economic Mobility in America” (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution, 2008). Daniel Aaronson and Bhashkar 
Mazumder, “Intergenerational Economic Mobility in the United 
States, 1940 to 2000,” Journal of Human Resources 43(1) (2008): 139. 



61 Debopam Bhattacharya and Bhashkar Mazumder, “Nonparametric 
Analysis of Intergenerational Income Mobility with Application to 
the United States,” Working Paper 07-12, Federal Reserve Bank of 
Chicago, 2007, 29-30. 

62 Economist Charles Manski has explored this problem of identification 
effects, and has developed a typology for understanding the differ- 
ent types of interactions that might influence outcomes. Fie argues 
that researchers should be more explicit in quantifying whether 

the effects are “1) endogenous interactions, wherein the propensity 
of an agent to behave in some way varies with the behavior of the 
group; 2) contextual interactions, wherein the propensity of the 
agent to behave in some way varies with exogenous characteristics 
of the group members; [or] 3) correlated effects, wherein agents in 
the same group tend to behave similarly because they have similar 
individual characteristics or face similar institutional environments,” 
See Charles F. Manski, “Economic Analysis of Social Interactions,” 

The Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14(3) (2000): 127. 

63 For example, studies of FIORE VI redevelopment projects have found 
that certain residents opposed relocation for fear of losing the com- 
munity resources and support networks on which they relied, despite 
the poor quality and often dangerous conditions of the existing public 
housing. See Edward G. Goetz. Clearing the Way: Deconcentrating the 
Poor in Urban America. (Washington DC: The Urban Institute, 2003). 

64 A large body of research attempts to document the extent to which 
black residents in particular face barriers to residential mobility, 
especially in the form of housing discrimination and the existence 
of racially segmented housing markets. See, for example, George C. 
Galster and W. Mark Keeney, “Race, Residence, Discrimination, and 
Economic Opportunity: Modeling the Nexus of Urban Racial Phenom- 
ena,” Urban Affairs Quarterly 24(1) (1988): 87-117. Massey and Denton, 
American Apartheid. Anne B. Shlay, “Not in That Neighborhood: The 
Effects of Flousing and Population on the Distribution of Mortgage 
Finance within the Chicago SMSA from 1980-1983,” Social Science 
Research 17(2) (1988): 137-63. Yinger, Closed Doors, Opportunities Lost. 
Recent longitudinal research papers by South and Crowder have 
extended this body of literature by specifically exploring the racial 
and class dynamics associated with both the intention and ability to 
move out of a neighborhood of concentrated poverty. See Scott J. 
South and Kyle D. Crowder, “Escaping Distressed Neighborhoods: 
Individual, Community, and Metropolitan Influences,” American 
Journal of Sociology 102(4) (1997): 1040-84. Scott J. South and Kyle 

D. Crowder, “Leaving the ‘Flood: Residential Mobility between Black, 
White, and Integrated Neighborhoods,” American Sociological Review 
63(1) (1998): 17-26. Kyle Crowder, Scott J. South, and Erick Chavez, 
“Wealth, Race, and Inter-Neighborhood Migration,” American Socio- 
logical Review 71(1) (2006): 72-94. Scott J. South, Kyle Crowder, and 
Erick Chavez, “Exiting and Entering Poor Neighborhoods: Latinos, 
Blacks, and Anglos Compared,” Social Forces 84(2) (2005): 873-900. 

65 For a review of the literature and new methodological directions, see 
Robert J. Sampson, Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas Gannon-Rowley, 
“Assessing ‘Neighborhood Effects': Social Processes and New Direc- 
tions in Research,” Annual Review of Sociology 28 (2002): 443-478. 

66 Kain, “The Spatial Mismatch Flypothesis: Thirty Years Later.” Keith 
Ihlanfeldt and Daniel Sjoquist, “The Spatial Mismatch Flypothesis: 

A Review of Recent Studies and Their Implications for Welfare 
Reform,” Housing Policy Debate 9(4) (1998). 

67 Alan Berube and Stephen Raphael, “Access to Cars in New 
Orleans” (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2005). 

68 Evelyn Blumenberg and Kimiko Shiki, “Spatial Mismatch Outside 
of Large Urban Areas: An Analysis of Welfare Recipients in Fresno 



18 



County, California,” Environment and Planning C: Government and 
Policy 22(3) (2004): 401-21. 

69 Micere Keels et al., ‘‘How Permanent Are Successes in Residential 
Relocation Programs?” Joint Center for Poverty Research, Policy 
Briefs 5(2), 2002. 

70 Jeffrey Kling, “Moving to Opportunity: Background,” available at 
http://www.nber.org/-kling/mto/initial.html (accessed February 2008). 

71 James Rosenbaum and L. Rubinowitz, “Geography of Opportunity 
for Public Housing Residents?” Institute for Policy Research News 
21(1) (2000). 

72 Jeffrey Kling, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz, “Experimen- 
tal Analysis of Neighborhood Effects,” Econometrica 75(1) (2007): 
83-119. Lisa Sanbonmatsu et al., “Neighborhoods and Academic 
Achievement: Results from the Moving to Opportunity Experiment,” 
Working Paper 11909, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2006. 

73 Jeffrey Kling, Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence Katz, “Neighborhood 
Effects on Crime for Female and Male Youth: Evidence from a 
Randomized Housing Mobility Experiment,” Quarterly Journal of 
Economics 120(1) (2005): 87-130. 

74 Edward L. Glaeser, “The Economics Approach to Cities, “Working 
Paper 13696, National Bureau of Economic Research, 2007. Susan 
Clampet-Lundquist and Douglas S. Massey, “Neighborhood Effects 
on Economic Self-Sufficiency: A Reconsideration of the Moving to 
Opportunity Experiment,” American Journal of Sociology M40) (August 
2008): 107-143. Brian Jacob, “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and 
Student Achievement: Evidence from Public Housing Demolitions in 
Chicago,” American Economic Review 94(1) (March 2004): 233-58. 

75 Jacob, “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement.” 

76 Gary Solon, Marianne E. Page, and Greg J. Duncan, “Correlations 
Between Neighboring Children in Their Subsequent Educational 
Attainment,” Review of Economics and Statistics 82(3) (2000): 383-92. 

77 John Quigley and Steven Raphael, “Neighborhoods, Economic 
Self-Sufficiency, and the MTO,” paper prepared for the Brookings- 
Wharton Conference on Urban Affairs, October 2007. 

78 Sanbonmatsu et al., “Neighborhoods and Academic Achievement.” 

79 Ingrid Gould Ellen and Margery Austin Turner, “Does Neighborhood 
Matter? Assessing Recent Evidence,” Housing Policy Debate 8(4) 
(1997): 833-66. 

80 Matthew O. Jackson, Social and Economic Networks (Princeton: 
Princeton University Press, 2008). 

81 David Caplovitz, The Poor Pay More: Consumer Practices of Low- 
Income Families (New York: The Free Press, 1967). 

82 Matthew Fellowes, “From Poverty, Opportunity: Putting the Market 
to Work for Lower-Income Families” (Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution, 2006). 

83 Philip Kasinitz and Jan Rosenberg, “Missing the Connection: Social 
Isolation and Employment on the Brooklyn Waterfront,” Social 
Problems 43(2) (1996): 180-96. 

84 James Elliott and Mario Sims, “Ghettos and Barrios: The Impact 
of Neighborhood Ethnicity and Poverty on Job Matching Among 
Blacks and Latinos,” Social Problems 48(3) (2001): 341-61. 



85 Kathryn Neckerman and Joleen Kirschenman, “Hiring Strategies, 
Racial Bias, and Inner-City Workers,” Social Problems 38(4) (1991): 
433-77. Wilson, When Work Disappears. 

86 Wilson, When Work Disappears. 

87 It should be noted that, especially in the wake of welfare reform 
and the strong economy of the late 1990s, many residents of 
high-poverty neighborhoods do work. In 1999, about half of poor 
families in these neighborhoods had either a part-time or full-time 
year-round worker. Yet outside the highest poverty neighborhoods, 
poor families were more likely (60 percent) to have stable work 
(Brookings Institution analysis of U.S. Census Bureau data). 

88 Century Foundation Task Force on the Common School, Divided 
We Fall: Coming Together Through Public School Choice (New York: 
Century Foundation Press, 2002). 

89 James Ainsworth, “Why Does It Take a Village? The Mediation of 
Neighborhood Effects on Educational Achievement,” Social Forces 
81(1) (2002): 117-52. 

90 David Card, Alexandre Mas, and Jesse Rothstein, “Tipping and the 
Dynamics of Segregation,” Quarterly Journal of Economics 123(1) 
(2008): 177. 

91 Joshua D. Angrist and Kevin Lang, “Does School Integration 
Generate Peer Effects? Evidence from Boston’s Metco Program,” 
American Economic Review 94(5) (2004): 1613-34. 

92 Jacob, “Public Housing, Housing Vouchers, and Student Achievement.” 

93 Richard Kahlenberg, “An Unambitious Legacy,” Education Week, 
February 21, 2001. Brian Jacob, “The Challenges of Staffing Urban 
Schools with Effective Teachers,” The Future of Children 17(1) 

(2007): 129-53. Steven G. Rivkin, Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. 

Kain, “Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achievement,” Economet- 
rica 73(2) (2005): 417-58. Donald Boyd, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna 
Loeb, and James Wyckoff, “The Draw of Home: How Teachers’ 
Preferences for Proximity Disadvantage Urban Schools,” Jour- 
nal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(1) (2005): 113-32. Ruth 
Lupton, “Schools in Disadvantaged Areas: Recognizing Context 
and Raising Quality,” LSE Centre for the Analysis of Social Exclu- 
sion, London, 2004. Brian Jacob and Lars Lefgren, “Are Idle Hands 
the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation, Concentration, and Juvenile 
Crime,” American Economic Review 93(5) (2003): 1560-77. 

94 South and Crowder, “Leaving the ‘Hood.” 

95 Lance Lochner and Enrico Moretti, “The Effect of Education on Crime: 
Evidence from Prison Inmates, Arrests, and Self-Reports,” Working 
Paper 8605, National Bureau of Economic Research, November 2003. 

96 Ellen and Turner, “Does Neighborhood Matter?” 

97 Robert Sampson and William J. Wilson, “Toward a Theory of Race, 
Crime, and Urban Inequality, in Crime and Inequality, J. Hagan and 
R. Peterson, eds. (Palo Alto: Stanford University Press, 1995). 

98 Anne Case and Lawrence Katz, “The Company You Keep: The 
Effects of Family and Neighborhood on Disadvantaged Youths,” 
Working Paper 1555, Harvard Institute of Economic Research, 1991. 

99 Greg Duncan, Elizabeth Clark-Kauffman, and Emily Snell, “Resi- 
dential mobility interventions as treatments for the sequelae of 
neighborhood violence,” in Interventions for Children Exposed to 
Violence, Alicia Lieberman and Robert DeMartino, eds. (Johnson 
and Johnson Pediatric Institute, 2006). 



19 



OVERVIEW 



OVERVIEW 



100 Robert Quercia and Lisa Bates, “The Negiect of America’s Housing: 
Consequences and Poiicy Responses,” Working Paper 2002-02, 
University of North Caroiina at Chapei Hili, 2002. Deborah Cohen 
et ai., “Neighborhood Physicai Conditions and Heaith,” American 
Journal of Public Health 93(3) (2003); 467-71. Ana Diez-Roux et ai., 
“Neighborhoods of Residence and Incidence of Coronary Heart 
Disease,” New England Journal of Medicine 345(2) (2001): 99-106. 

101 Tama Leventhal and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn, “Moving to Opportunity: 
An Experimental Study of Neighborhood Effects on Mental Health,” 
American Journal of Public Health 93(9) (2003): 1576-82. 

102 Kling, Liebman, and Katz, “Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood 
Effects.” 

103 Brookings Institution analysis of U.S. Census Bureau data. 

104 David Rusk, “The ‘Segregation Tax’: The Cost of Racial Segregation 
to Black Homeovi/ners” (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, 2001). 

105 George Galster, Jackie Cutsinger, and Ron Malega, “The Costs of 
Concentrated Poverty: Neighborhood Property Markets and the 
Dynamics of Decline,” in Revisiting Rental Housing: Policies, Pro- 
grams, and Priorities, N. Retsinas and E. Belsky, eds. (Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution, 2008). 

106 Janet Pack, “Poverty and Urban Public Expenditures,” Urban Stud- 
ies 35(11) (1998): 1995-2019. 

107 Pascale Joassart-Marcelli, Jennifer Welch, and Juliet Musso, “The 
Fiscal Consequences of Concentrated Poverty in a Metropolitan 
Region,” Annals of the Association of American Geographers 95(2) 
(2005): 336-56. 

108 Y. Alex-Assensoh, Neighborhoods, Family, and Political Behavior 
in Urban America (New York: Routledge, 1998). Sharon D. Wright 
Austin, The Transformation of Plantation Politics: Black Politics, Con- 
centrated Poverty, and Social Capital in the Mississippi Delta (Buf- 
falo: State University of New York Press, 2006). Neil Kraus, Race, 
Neighborhoods, and Community Power: Buffalo Politics, 1934-1997 
(Albany: State University of New York Press, 2000). National 
Research Council, Losing Generations: Adolescents in High-Risk 
Settings, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Edu- 
cation (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1993). Douglas 
Rae, City: Urbanism and Its End (New Haven: Yale University Press, 
2003). Lawrence Vale, From the Puritans to the Projects: Public 
Housing and Public Neighbors (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University 
Press, 2000). 

109 Edward Goetz, Clearing the Way. 

no Gary Paul Green and Anna Haines, Asset Building and Community 
Development (Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications, 2002). 



20 



Introduction to the Case Studies 



I n 2007, the Federal Reserve System’s Community Affairs 
Offices undertook 16 case studies to add texture to 
our understanding of concentrated poverty. The case 
study approach capitalized on the strength and regional 
nature of the Community Affairs function to understand 
what is happening in high-poverty communities at the 
local level, not only by analyzing socioeconomic data, but 
also by drawing on the perspectives of residents, small 
business owners, government agencies, and community 
development organizations. As Federal Reserve Chairman 
Ben Bernanke has noted, “Knowledge bearing on com- 
munity economic development has both qualitative and 
quantitative aspects, and it can be gained through diverse 
channels, from talking to people in a neighborhood to per- 
forming a regression analysis.”' This introduction describes 
how the case study communities were selected and 
explains the methodology used in compiling the quantita- 
tive and qualitative data for each of the case study reports. 

■ THE CASE STUDY COMMUNITIES 

Selecting the case study communities for this report 
entailed two steps. First, the Brookings Institution identi- 
fied high-poverty areas across the United States based 
on a quantitative analysis of Census 2000 data. High- 
poverty census tracts were defined as those in which 
at least 40 percent of individuals live in families with 
incomes below the federal poverty threshold.^ 

The analysis identified 157 cities and counties across 
the United States that contained significant areas with 



high levels of poverty;'^ these locales were then aligned 
by Federal Reserve District. They included large cities in 
the Northeast— such as Chicago, Cleveland, and Detroit— 
that have traditionally been studied in the literature on 
concentrated poverty. But the analysis also highlighted 
the existence and spread of high-poverty neighborhoods 
into places like California’s Central Valley, southern Texas, 
cities throughout the Southeast, and smaller cities and 
suburbs in the North. 

From this list of cities and counties, each of the 12 
Federal Reserve Banks selected one or two high-poverty 
communities within its district to study. The goal was to 
select a diverse set of communities that would reflect the 
broad range of geographies where concentrated poverty 
exists. With their twin goals of research and outreach in 
mind, each of the Reserve Banks selected specific high- 
poverty communities that had relevance for their com- 
munity development activities. The Federal Reserve Bank 
of Cleveland and the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond, 
for example, both selected counties in Appalachia to 
bolster their understanding of the issues facing poor 
rural communities. Minneapolis and Kansas City, districts 
that include a significant number of Native American 
reservations, have had a longstanding interest in helping 
to address barriers to credit on tribal lands. These two 
Banks selected Native American areas to study as part 
of this project. The Federal Reserve Bank of San Fran- 
cisco selected Fresno as its case study community, partly 
because it is the city with the highest concentration of 



21 




INTRODUCTION TO CASE STUDIES 



FIGURE 1 



Concentrated poverty case study communities 




Milwaukee 



Cleveland 



McDow^T. 



.presno 



^ • jSreenViJe • 



Rochester 



Springfield 

'■r .w 



Atlantic City 



Percent of population in poverty 

Less than lO percent 
10-20 percent 
20-40 percent 
More than 40 percent 



Miami 



poverty in the country and partly because of the Bank’s 
commitment to building community development capac- 
ity in the rapidly growing metropolitan areas of Califor- 
nia’s Central Valley. 

For case studies in urban areas, the research 
focused on discrete neighborhoods, or contiguous 
neighborhoods, within the cities listed above. For exam- 
ple, the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta selected the Lit- 
tle Flaiti neighborhood in Miami as one of its case study 
communities, versus other high-poverty areas within the 
city’s borders. In rural areas, the county was the focus of 
the research, with the exception of the tribal areas, which 
do not conform neatly to county boundaries. In the case 
of the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana and the Crown- 
point area of New Mexico, the case study areas were 
delineated using census tracts. The resulting 16 case 
study communities included in this report are Fresno, 

CA’s West Fresno neighborhood; Cleveland, OFI’s Central 
neighborhood; Miami, FL’s Little Haiti neighborhood; 
Martin County in Kentucky; the Blackfeet Reservation 



in Pondera and Glacier Counties, MT; Greenville, NC’s 
West Greenville neighborhood; Atlantic City, NJ’s Bunga- 
low Park/Marina District; Austin, TX’s East Austin neigh- 
borhood; Crownpoint in McKinley County, NM; McDowell 
County, WV; Albany, GA’s East Albany neighborhood; El 
Paso, TX’s Chamizal neighborhood; Springfield, MA’s Old 
Hill, Six Corners, and South End neighborhoods; Roch- 
ester, NY’s Northern Crescent neighborhoods; Holmes 
County, MS; and Milwaukee, Wl’s Northwest neighbor- 
hood. (See Figure 1) 

■ CASE STUDY METHODOLOGY 

This report uses a case study approach that employs 
both quantitative and qualitative data to paint a portrait 
of the community and to explore questions raised in 
the literature on concentrated poverty. For each case 
study community, an initial profile of the study area was 
developed using publicly accessible state and national 
quantitative data sources. The data profile was then used 



22 



in conjunction with a review of relevant literature to guide 
on-site interviews with local individuals in professional 
and leadership positions at key institutions. Each of 
these steps is described in more detail below. 

The quantitative analysis used in the case studies 
relies primarily on data from the U.S. Census in 2000, 
since this is the only source of data available at the cen- 
sus tract level that covers a wide range of demographic, 
economic, and social indicators relevant to a study of 
concentrated poverty. For the purpose of convention, all 
references in this report to data from the decennial U.S. 
Census refer to the year of reporting (e.g., 1990, 2000) 
rather than the year for which the data were collected 
(1989, 1999). Other sources of data analyzed for each of 



the case study communities included Home Mortgage 
Disclosure Act (HMDA) data, data on academic achieve- 
ment from the scores of state-administered tests, crime 
data from the U.S. Department of Justice, and data on 
subsidized housing from the U.S. Department of Hous- 
ing and Urban Development.'’ For urban areas and 
Native American reservations, community boundaries 
were aligned with census tract boundaries to calculate 
descriptive statistics for the case study area. For each 
urban case study, the same data were calculated for 
the city and the Metropolitan Statistical Area to serve as 
points of comparison. County-level data were used for 
rural communities, and were then compared to data for 
the non-metropolitan areas of the state. 



TABLE 1 

Numbers of interviews conducted in each of the case study communities 




Local and 
Federal 
Government' 


Nonprofits, 
Community 
Organizations, 
and Foundations 


Research 

Institutions^ 


Schools, the 
Arts, and Health 
Organizations^ 


Financial 
Institutions and 
Businesses’ 


Residents^ 


Albany, GA 


7 


3 


n/a 


2 


1 


2 


Atlantic City, NJ 


2 


16 


2 


n/a 


18 


40 


Austin, TX 


34 


9 


4 


7 


11 


5 


Blackfeet, MT 


14 


1 


n/a 


17 


6 


3 


Cleveland, OH 


4 


4 


2 


1 


3 


10 


Crownpoint, NM 


14 


5 


2 


2 


5 


5 


El Paso, TX 


8 


6 


4 


n/a 


5 


7 


Fresno, CA 


9 


7 


4 


4 


7 


4 


Greenville, NC 


8 


3 


1 


n/a 


1 


3 


Holmes County, MS 


5 


3 


1 


3 


5 


5 


Martin County, KY 


4 


4 


n/a 


4 


2 


11 


McDowell County, WV 


5 


5 


2 


3 


8 


12 


Miami, FL 


7 


9 


3 


2 


10 


40 


Milwaukee, Wl 


3 


5 


2 


n/a 


8 


2 


Rochester, NY 


21 


10 


5 


6 


9 


26 


Springfield, MA 


5 


3 


n/a 


1 


2 


6 



1 Includes a wide range of local and federal governmental agencies, including housing, community development, transportation, and environ- 
mental agencies; police departments; the Small Business Administration; Health and Human Services; and elected officials. In tribal areas it 
can include members of the tribal council, land use planning committees, or other tribal government committees and functions. 

2 Includes academic and think tank organizations, newspapers, and local historians and folklorists. 

3 Includes early childhood education providers and school boards, as well as recreation organizations. 

4 Includes large companies, small business owners, real estate agents, for-profit housing developers, and legal institutions. 

5 Some residents interviewed overlap with other categories in this table, for example, “small business owner” or staff at a local nonprofit. 

In those cases, they have been counted in the column that reflects their broader role in the community, not in the resident column. 



23 



INTRODUCTION TO CASE STUDIES 




INTRODUCTION TO CASE STUDIES 



For the qualitative component of the research, case 
study authors conducted interviews and focus groups 
with a wide range of residents and community stakehold- 
ers in the case study area and its surrounding region. A 
research field guide was developed to provide a research 
framework for the case studies. The research field guide 
identified the types of community stakeholders that were 
to be Interviewed and also made detailed and specific 
recommendations on what questions had to be asked and 
how the interviews should be conducted (the research 
field guide is available online at http://www.frbsf.org/ 
cpreport). For each case study, authors conducted a 
minimum of 15 interviews. While many case study authors 
conducted additional interviews, the field of applied 
qualitative research has identified 15 as the number of 
interviews needed to reveal the key themes or significant 
issues in a community.^ Interviews were conducted based 
on the open-ended questions contained in the research 
field guide, giving researchers the opportunity to tailor the 
interview to the respondents’ expertise. Most interviews 
lasted between one and two hours. In addition, case study 
authors often accompanied respondents on tours of the 
case study area, and observed community meetings or 
other community events. 

Respondents were selected based on their posi- 
tions and on the recommendations of other community 
stakeholders. The exact composition of respondents 
differed depending on the case study community. Inter- 
views were conducted with social services, housing or 
redevelopment agency officials, directors and employees 
of local community development corporations or non- 
profits, researchers at local universities or think tanks, 
business executives, tribal leaders, and representatives 
from financial Institutions or local community develop- 
ment financial institutions. (See Table 1) 

Following the interviews, transcripts of the conver- 
sations were analyzed and coded to group respondent 
comments into general themes or issues. Those issues 
or themes that were mentioned most frequently, and 
across multiple stakeholders, were considered to be 
significant, and elaborated upon using the quantitative 
data as well as secondary sources of information such as 
research articles, newspapers, local reports, and books. 
While this methodology does not purport to Illuminate 
the most important factors contributing to concentrated 
poverty from a quantitative perspective, it does highlight 
which issues are of significant concern to community 
stakeholders. In addition, while only a few Issues are 



highlighted for each case study in this report, many of 
the Reserve Banks are planning to publish lengthier 
reports that can delve more deeply Into these and other 
themes raised during the case study research process.® 
This work also has already Inspired new quantitative 
research projects and Reserve Bank outreach efforts. 

The following 16 case studies represent the first time 
that one study has analyzed a truly diverse group of 
high-poverty areas across the United States. While the 
portraits painted of any one community are necessarily 
Incomplete, taken together they show that concentrated 
poverty persists in many different forms across the coun- 
try, and that the factors contributing to the persistence of 
concentrated poverty are complicated and intertwined. 

This introduction was written by Carolina Reid, commu- 
nity development research manager, Federal Reserve 
Bank of San Francisco. 



Endnotes 

1 chairman Ben Bernanke, Speech to the Greenlining Institute, April 
20, 2006. 

2 For more information on the definition of high poverty and its use 
in social science research, please see the discussion in the Over- 
view. Because of the dispersed nature of the county geography, 
the overall poverty level for some of the counties in this report falls 
below the 40-percent threshold, although each of the counties 
selected contains at least one census tract with a poverty rate of 
40 percent or greater. 

3 In the first step, we limited the analysis to areas with populations 
greater than 10,000 to ensure that they were of sufficient scale to 
contain distinct areas of concentrated poverty. The lower-bound 
population for rural high-poverty communities, however, is 5,000, in 
recognition of their more spread-out character. We also excluded 
tracts that had high poverty rates based on a high number of col- 
lege and university students. Subsequent discussions led us to 
revise our population thresholds, and Greenville, Atlantic City and 
East Austin were included despite having less than 10,000 residents. 

4 For a complete list of indicators and data sources, see Appendix A. 

5 Purposive samples— in which respondents are chosen based 
on their expertise or position within a community— are the most 
commonly used form of non-probabilistic sampling, and their size 
typically relies on the concept of “saturation,” or the point at which 
no new information or themes are observed in the data. Qualita- 
tive researchers have estimated that for non-probabilistic samples, 
saturation can occur within the first 12 interviews, although basic 
elements for major themes are present as early as six interviews. 
See Greg Guest, Arwen Bunce, and Laura Johnson, “Flow Many 
Interviews Are Enough? An Experiment with Data Saturation and 
Variability,” Field Methods 18(1) (2006): 59-82. 

6 Longer case studies will be posted online along with the final 
synthesis report. 



24 




Fresno, California: 



the West Fresno neighborhood 



■ OVERVIEW 



In 1977, the Fresno City Council approved a community plan for West Fresno, 
then a neighborhood of just over 15,000 people in the largest city in Califor- 
nia’s San Joaquin Valley. The plan noted that the neighborhood, at that time 
called Edison, “has always been a unique community with a rich heritage,” 
but warned somewhat presciently that “the social and economic viability 



which once existed has been damaged by forces which 
threaten to transform racial segregation into economic 
segregation.” Out-migration of the middle class was a 
trend that, if “allowed to continue, will eventually trans- 
form an ethnic community into a low-income ghetto.”' 
Nearly 30 years later, an article in the Fresno Bee 
grimly described West Fresno as “the neighborhood 
where dreams go to die” and “a forgotten corner of a 
sprawling city.”^ While these characterizations may be 
journalistic hyperbole. West Fresno has in fact followed 
a different trajectory than other areas in the city. Physi- 
cally cut off from the rest of the city by Flighway 99, West 
Fresno appears to be increasingly isolated socially and 



economically as well. It was one of the neighborhoods 
that accounted for Fresno’s 2005 ranking as home to 
the highest concentration of poverty in the nation.'^ This 
statistic was particularly startling because of Fresno’s 
location— not in the Rust Belt or Appalachia, but in the 
richest farming region of a state that at the time had the 
world’s eighth-largest economy."* 

■ BACKGROUND 

The San Joaquin Valley (“the Valley”) is by all accounts 
an “agricultural paradise,” a fact that has shaped the 
regional character in considerable ways.^ With year-round 
employment in farming and related industries, the Valley 



25 



FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 



TABLE 1 

Comparison Statistics 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970® 


43.5 


18.9 


Poverty rate 2000*’ 


51.1 


22.9 


Income 


Median household income® 


$18,257 


$34,725 


Demographics 


Population 2000“* 


16,875 


799,407 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000® 


6.8 


93.5 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000* 


% White 


2.2 


39.7 


% Hispanic/Latino 


45.1 


44.0 


% Black/African-American 


38.0 


5.0 


% Residents under age 


39.7 


32.1 


% Single-parent households*’ 


30.1 


12.7 


% Foreign born, 2000* 


29.3 


21.1 


% Population in same house as five years ago* 


55.0 


51.0 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000** 


62.7 


32.5 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000* 


3.1 


17.5 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005'" 


45.5 


38.0 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


48.1 


42.8 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


22.7 


11.8 


% Adults in the labor forceP 


45.3 


59.9 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 2000 p 


39.5 


56.5 


% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


58.7 


47.6 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized" 


42.0 


11.6 


Median value for owner-occupied units® 


$57,540 


$104,900 


Median year structure built* 


1964 


1974 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004° 


50.6 


31.0 


% Credit files with high credit scores'* 


28.2 


51.4 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005*" 


55.4 


33.0 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005” 


24.9 


17.1 




has historically drawn, and continues to attract, migrant 
and immigrant labor, with the largest group In recent 
years arriving from Central America.® In addition, thou- 
sands of Hmong refugees have resettled in the Valley 
over the past 20 years.^ Thus, the region’s population 
diversified and grew significantly during the 20*^ century. 
The Valley’s population has also become markedly more 
urbanized.® The population in the Fresno metropolitan 
statistical area (MSA) grew by nearly 113 percent between 
1970 and 2005 to just over 877,000 residents.® 

Although there has been some industrial diversifica- 
tion and job growth over the past few decades, agriculture 



and related services still represent a disproportionately 
large share of the region’s economy relative to the state’s.” 
Overall, earnings are lower in the Valley than In California; 
this holds true even in the Fresno metropolitan area. Since 
1990, the average wage per job in the Fresno MSA has 
been only 65 to 75 percent of the state’s." Unemployment 
has been a perennial issue in the Valley, and while unem- 
ployment figures have improved recently, unemployment 
rates in both the Valley and Fresno have stood at nearly 
twice the state figures for the past 10 years.'® In addition, 
the relatively low level of educational attainment has been 
a persistent issue; in 2000, nearly 33 percent of those 18 



26 




and older in the Valley had less than a high school educa- 
tion, compared with 24 percent in the state.” 

The industrial and wage structures of the Valley, as 
well as limited skill and educational levels— particularly 
within the newly arrived immigrant population— have had 
significant implications for the overall economic health of 
the region. One measure of this is the Valley’s poverty rate, 
which in 2000 exceeded that of every other region in Cali- 
fornia. In the Fresno MSA, the poverty rate was just over 
23 percent, over one and a half times that of the state.” 
But Fresno is not just a uniformly poor city in a poor 
region. Data from the 2000 census show stark socioeco- 
nomic contrasts between West Fresno and the rest of 
the metropolitan area. (See Table 1) Indeed, the neighbor- 
hood of West Fresno, located on the city’s southwestern- 
most edge, is by a number of measures one of its most 
distressed areas, reflecting a distinct pattern of geo- 
graphic separation and isolation. (See Figure 1) 

The neighborhood of West Fresno, historically called 
“the Westside,” dates back to the 1880s. Since its begin- 
nings, it has hosted successive waves of immigrant and 
minority settlers for reasons including its relatively low 
housing costs, discrimination in Fresno’s housing market, 
and proximity to outlying agricultural employment 



opportunities.” Flistorical records indicate that the 
neighborhood’s early business ventures and community 
gatherings centered on nearby Chinatown. However, the 
1950s and 1960s saw the construction of Highway 99 on 
the edge of the neighborhood and a downtown urban 
renewal program, both of which demolished homes and 
businesses in and around Chinatown and physically cut 
off the neighborhood from the northeasterly growth in 
Fresno that was to occur over the next several decades. 

Historical records of the neighborhood’s economic 
conditions compared to the rest of Fresno are mixed, 
but they point to an economic disconnect from the city. 
One researcher noted that in the years following World 
War II, disparities in education and skill levels, along with 
labor market discrimination, largely limited the predomi- 
nantly black and Hispanic residents of the Westside to 
low-wage positions such as farm workers, janitors, and 
housekeepers.” But other historical records and personal 
accounts paint a more nuanced picture of neighbor- 
hood conditions. The city’s 1977 Edison Plan, for instance, 
noted that “although the neighborhood’s housing market 
may have been discriminatory, the local economic mar- 
ket was not.”'’’ Longtime Fresnans indicate that Westside 
residents historically engaged in a variety of professions 



FIGURE 1 



Geographic patterns of isolation in Fresno 




Poverty rate 

(Census 2000) 

Below National Average (11.3%) 
11.3-20 percent 
20-40 percent 
Higher than 40 percent 
I I West Fresno census tracts 




Non-Hispanic white population 

(as percent of census tract population, 2000) 
Less than 25 percent 
25-50 percent 
50-75 percent 
Greater than 75 percent 
i i West Fresno census tracts 



27 



FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 





FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 



and achieved varying levels of economic success.'® Pros- 
perity in the neighborhood is most evident in the stretch 
of large homes built along Kearney Boulevard in the mid- 
1960s by black professionals committed to living in and 
improving the community.'® 

Today, the neighborhood is composed primarily of 
minority racial and ethnic groups that struggle with low 
wages, high unemployment, and limited educational 
attainment.®® The immigrant population is higher in the 
neighborhood than in the city as a whole. In 2000 nearly 
30 percent of neighborhood residents were foreign-born; 
of those, almost half had not arrived in the United States 
until the 1990s.®' In 2000, neighborhood residents were 
significantly more likely to be employed in farming and 
production than in managerial jobs. (See Figure 2) All of 
these factors contribute to the neighborhood’s extremely 
high concentration of poverty; the poverty rate in West 
Fresno has hovered around 40 percent for much of the 
past several decades, rising to 51 percent in 2000.®® 
Interviews and data point to a number of other 
issues that are linked to the neighborhood’s high levels 
of poverty. Housing-related factors have played a role in 
fostering economic segregation, as publicly subsidized 
low-income housing units were historically concentrated 
in West Fresno®® and continue to be built there. Between 
2000 and 2004, nearly 40 percent of all Low Income 
Housing Tax Credit units built in the city of Fresno as set- 
asides for low-income households were located in West 
Fresno.®"* Other poverty-related issues in the neighborhood 




FIGURE 2 

Workforce in selected occupations, 2000 




Agricultural Service Business and 

occupations occupations professional 

occupations 



SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 



include the weak skills of its working-age adults;®® large 
numbers of both documented and undocumented immi- 
grants;®® high rates of teen pregnancy and the prevalence 
of single-parent households;®'' poor physical and mental 
health;®® inadequate supportive services for homeless 
people;®® and increased gang activity and violent crime.®® 
In addition, while those who grew up on the West- 
side recall its vitality and general feeling of community 
cohesion, the residents and community advocates 
interviewed for this report indicated that these elements 
have to some extent disappeared. “There used to be 
businesses— there used to be a sense of community,” 
said one advocate. “Neighbors knew one another and 
would look out for one another’s kids. Now, we can’t say 
that. I don’t know how to get that back.”®' 



■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Each of the factors noted in the preceding section are 
interrelated and contribute to high levels of poverty 
in West Fresno. But community leaders and residents 
interviewed for this case study consistently highlighted 
three issues that are particularly challenging for the com- 
munity. First, for a number of reasons, the investment 
environment— for commercial development as well as for 



28 




market-rate and mixed-income housing development— in 
the neighborhood is weak. Second, neighborhood youth 
are not being provided quality education and skill devel- 
opment opportunities, leading to difficulties in overcom- 
ing generational poverty. Third, community organizations’ 
capacity to address the range of factors contributing to 
concentrated poverty is limited. 

Investment Environment 

Starting in the 1970s, most private and public invest- 
ments were made in the areas northwest of downtown 
Fresno. According to one community leader, this signaled 
“the beginning of the demise of the downtown area, 
which also directly impacted West Fresno.’’^^ Businesses 
that existed in West Fresno before the implementation of 
the urban renewal plans were not rebuilt,^^ and commu- 
nity leaders noted that for many years, traditional market 
analysis deemed the neighborhood an area that could 
not support new commercial and retail offerings.^” 

In 1999, however, following extensive community 
organizing efforts and lobbying by community advocates, 
a new shopping center opened on the edge of the 
Westside.^^ Kearney Palms, the first major commercial 




construction project in the neighborhood in decades, 
includes West Fresno’s first supermarket. Obtaining 
financing for the development from both the city and 
banks was a challenge because the project was perceived 
as an overly risky venture. Contrary to that perception, 
Kearney Palms is thriving, and its anchor supermarket 
outperforms the chain’s other regional stores.^® 

This type of project, though, has yet to be replicated 
in the neighborhood. In response, Fresno West Coali- 
tion for Economic Development (FWCED), a community 
development corporation (CDC) that grew from the activ- 
ism surrounding the development of Kearney Palms and 
which remains the neighborhood’s only CDC, has advo- 
cated a re-examination of residents’ purchasing power.^^ 
“We are not looking at anything radical here,” said the 
coalition’s director. “We’re looking to demonstrate the 
business-case argument that this neighborhood can sup- 
port more projects like Kearney Palms.” 

Community advocates noted that the neighborhood’s 
lack of banking services ties into its lack of commercial 
development and other reinvestment activities. Accord- 
ing to neighborhood advocates, the Community Rein- 
vestment Act is “not talked about or understood here 
[in Fresno].” The difficulties in obtaining financing for 
development projects like Kearney Palms, they added, 
reflect the rule rather than an exception.^® Financial insti- 
tutions have historically not located bank branches in the 
neighborhood. Indeed, until 2006, the neighborhood was 
without even an automated teller machine.^® According to 
some interviewees, the lack of bank services hinders not 
only large-scale investment activities, but also the abili- 
ties of individuals and households to build wealth.® Resi- 
dents have limited access to financial education services 
that might help them repair damaged credit histories 
and gain a better understanding of the long-term costs 
of using payday lenders and rent-to-own shops.'" 

Interviewees also believe that the perception and real- 
ity of criminal activity— particularly gang and drug-related 
crime— in the neighborhood have contributed to dimin- 
ished investment and development. Although West Fresno 
is widely considered to be a high-crime area, police 
department data indicate that its overall levels of crime 
are not significantly higher than in other areas of the city. 
Crimes in this neighborhood are more frequently violent, 
however, and tend to generate wide community concern, 
according to the district police captain.® Residents say 
that criminal and gang-related activity is a serious issue 
in the neighborhood and that many forbid their children 



29 



FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 






FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 




The Boys and Girls Club in West Fresno provides a safe, posi- 
tive environment for area youth, offering a range of activities 
from sports and games to after-school tutoring. 



to play outside because of safety concerns.''^ Community 
leaders point out that these factors have contributed to 
the neighborhood’s struggles in attracting new businesses 
and housing development.'*'’ 

Youth and Education 

West Fresno faces significant issues concerning its 
young people. Neighborhood advocates note that gen- 
erational cycles of poverty seem to be fed In part by the 
limited range of constructive educational and leadership- 
building activities for children and youth."*® “Our youth 
have so much talent,” said one community advocate, “but 
they are not being nurtured in a positive way. They all 
have skills, but someone needs to help bring those out.”"*® 

This issue has a number of facets. For starters, the 
West Fresno school district is in a period of transition 
after mismanagement triggered a state government 
takeover in 2003.'**' While improvement plans are under 
way,"*® some interviewees pointed out that the district 
schools still struggle to provide basic materials, such as 
textbooks, and to attract and retain qualified teachers."*® 
“The education piece is very complicated,” said one 
community leader. “But not enough resources are being 
put into [West Fresno] schools from Fresno Unified, and 
they don’t have good leadership.. .or enough recruitment 
of good teachers— perhaps through an incentive pro- 
gram— to get them to teach there and stay there.”®® 

Academic achievement in local schools diverges 
notably from city and state averages. In 2000, only 



14 percent of West Fresno Elementary students were 
reading at grade level, compared with 29 percent in the 
Fresno Unified School District and 45 percent in Califor- 
nia. District data indicate that both math and reading 
proficiency levels have increased somewhat over the 
past few years, but West Fresno Elementary still lags 
considerably behind the city and the state.®' Limitations 
in English language skills, which affect one-fifth of West 
Fresno residents versus one-tenth of residents city- 
wide,®® tie into school readiness and proficiency scores, 
as evidenced by some 40 percent of elementary school- 
children who are learning English in school.®® 

In addition, student dropout rates are a problem in 
West Fresno, as they are throughout the Fresno Unified 
School District.®"* Interviewees suggested that West Fres- 
no’s high dropout rates are tied to both the prevalence of 
teen pregnancy and the lure of gang activity.®® While both 
issues can have a lifelong impact on teens, the gang 
issue has extreme consequences: Advocates noted that 
not only do many of West Fresno’s youth become gang 
members, but also that they often get caught— literally— 
in crossfire in the neighborhood.®® 

Outside of school, there are few places where neigh- 
borhood youth can engage in leadership and skill-building 
activities. The West Fresno unit of the Boys and Girls Club 
provides one of the few positive and safe environments 
for young people, offering after-school tutoring, sports, 
games, and life-skills classes for kids aged six to 18. Since 
reopening in late 2006 after a major renovation, the club 
operates at capacity and, on average, reaches 100 to 150 
kids each day— a fraction of the number of children who 
are eligible to participate. There are few job opportunities 
in the neighborhood for youth to gain workforce-prepared- 
ness skills, and other social and recreational facilities— for 
example, libraries, malls, movie theaters, and swimming 
pools— are limited or non-existent. 

Organizational Capacity 

Nearly all community leaders noted that capacity 
issues keep neighborhood organizations from increasing 
the scale and scope of their work. Interviewees commonly 
discussed one facet of this issue: lack of funding. “Fresno 
lacks visibility,” said one. “We’re subsumed under L.A. 
and the Bay Area and, along with the rest of the Valley, 
are left out of consideration for philanthropic funds as well 
as state and federal dollars. It’s hard to change concen- 
trated poverty with limited resources.”®* Indeed, a study of 



30 




philanthropic activity in the Valley, for instance, showed that 
while there has been some improvement since the mid- 
1990s, the region’s grant dollars per capita in the region 
were just over $17 in 2002, compared with $47 statewide.^® 

Many stakeholders also said existing funds are not 
always effectively spent. “Funders often miss the mark,” 
said one community advocate. “They pick the wrong 
entities to invest in or don’t allow enough flexibility with 
their funding to fashion effective solutions.”®® Com- 
munity Development Block Grant (CDBG) dollars are a 
particularly contested source of funding. Over the past 
decade, only a small fraction of CDBG dollars have been 
granted to agencies outside of city government, while 
a significant amount of funding has been allocated to 
the police department and other city agencies for crime 
suppression, code enforcement, and infrastructure 
improvements.®® While they agreed that these services 
are important to the neighborhood, representatives of 
nonprofit organizations expressed frustration that CDBG 
funds were being directed in these ways.®' 

However, even if the neighborhood received a large 
infusion of capital, advocates indicated that there are a 
number of obstacles that might hamper its use toward 
addressing neighborhood challenges. “If Bill Gates 
wanted to give $1 billion to the neighborhood, could we 
use it?” asked one community advocate. “Do we have a 
vision as far as how we’d use it for comprehensive devel- 
opment? Do we have an action plan?”®® In addition to the 
lack of a clear strategy to improve current conditions, 
others noted that the neighborhood also faces chal- 
lenges that have arisen from fragmented leadership and 
little political will to work on changing the status quo. The 
interviewees also noted the need for resource alignment 
and follow-through.®® 

Tied to the above, noted interviewees, are some 
shortcomings among nonprofits and community build- 
ers, including gaps in technical skills and the need for 
resources devoted to strategic planning as well as for 
sophisticated financial management and budgeting.®'’ 
“There are all sorts of examples out there of well-inten- 
tioned groups that are good at delivering services on 
a day-to-day basis,” said one community leader. “But 
to take it to the next level we need to help build their 
organizational capacity— build an ongoing training and 
mentoring program for these nonprofits. The problem is 
that nobody wants to fund that.”®® 

The circular nature of the relationship between 
organizational capacity and the level of funding received 



by community-based organizations was noted by other 
stakeholders. “Nonprofits here can’t compete with [San 
Francisco] Bay Area organizations on funding propos- 
als,” one community advocate said. “The writing is not as 
sophisticated and the applications aren’t as strong.”®® In a 
related vein, two community development financial institu- 
tions recently established in the Central Valley have indi- 
cated that, while they have interest in directing resources 
to support economic development in West Fresno, they 
have already experienced some difficulty finding loan- and 
investment-ready projects in the neighborhood.®'’ 

■ INTERVENTIONS 

A number of efforts are under way at both regional and 
municipal levels to address some of the issues noted 
above. One major effort, the Regional Jobs Initiative, 
aims to further diversify the economy and better equip 
the region’s workforce for advancement up the earn- 
ings ladder. Formed in 2004, the initiative is develop- 
ing resources that support local industry clusters, such 
as manufacturing, energy, and health care, with a goal 
of creating 30,000 new jobs in the Fresno region by 
2009. A sister project is the Human Investment Initiative, 
which is linked to the Fresno Business Council and aims 
to develop career and technical education and better 
align skill development with the needs of the region’s 
employers.®® Similarly, the Fresno Economic Development 
Corporation recently formed an alliance with the Work- 
force Investment Board to develop a strategy to enhance 
vocational training and help youth gain the knowledge 
and skills needed for the region’s current and future job 
offerings.®® 

The mayor’s office also recently launched a number 
of initiatives targeting low-income areas of Fresno. The 
“10 X 10” plan is aimed at improving and increasing the 
city’s affordable housing stock. A gang prevention and 
intervention initiative seeks to address gang-related 
issues throughout the city. And a new Municipal Restora- 
tion Zone was established in late 2006 to help stimulate 
business development and job creation in low-income 
neighborhoods. Incentives offered through this program 
are added to those already offered through longstand- 
ing Enterprise and Empowerment Zones that encompass 
West Fresno.™ 

In addition, a number of entities, including the Office 
of Community and Economic Development at California 
State University, Fresno, and the newly formed Fresno 



31 



FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 



FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 



Works for Better Health Advocacy Center, are joining 
forces to develop an asset map of the neighborhood 
and its surroundings that will be used to design a strate- 
gic plan for West Fresno. Social Compact will provide a 
market analysis of Fresno for this project to help uncover 
hidden markets and promote investment opportunities.^' 
The Advocacy Center will also serve to monitor local, 
state, and federal economic and community development 
policy, and aims to provide workshops and other training 
opportunities for community leaders and residents.’’^ 

In West Fresno, several housing and community 
development projects are in the planning and construc- 
tion phases. These include a Hope VI development, 
other new housing from the Fresno West Coalition for 
Economic Development, and a charter school and rec- 
reational facility being developed by the Fresno County 
Economic Opportunities Commission. In addition, discus- 
sions are under way about a Family Resource Center to 
house a number of community amenities such as child 
care, health referral services, and workforce support. 

■ CONCLUSION 

These efforts demonstrate the growing interest in Fresno 
to work collaboratively to increase investment— in hous- 
ing, commercial development, and human capital— both 
regionally and at the neighborhood level. Many com- 
munity leaders are hopeful that Fresno has crossed 
the threshold for positively addressing community and 
economic development issues.^'^ “Essentially what’s hap- 
pening is that people are starting to go after the major 
systems— schools, human services, criminal justice— and 
really trying to transition them from being disabling to 
empowering, all for the sake of Improving neighborhoods 
of concentrated poverty,” said one civic leader.^'* 

The need to strengthen capacity to achieve these 
transformations, however, is still great. In addition, efforts 
must be made to ensure that West Fresno’s particu- 
lar needs and Interests are accounted for In emerging 
regional economic development initiatives. Resources 
directed toward such efforts can help build and sustain 
the momentum of residents and community-serving 
organizations seeking to tackle the host of interrelated 
challenges in the neighborhood and beyond. 

This case study was prepared by Naomi Cytron, senior 
research associate, Federai Reserve Bank of San Francisco 



Endnotes 

1 City of Fresno, Department of Planning and Inspection, “Edison 
Community Plan 1977,’’ May 1977. 

2 Russell Clemings, “Plans for an Upscale Community Sparked 
Enthusiasm in West Fresno, but Residents Have Yet to See Results; 
Waiting for Paradise,” Fresno Bee, November 9, 2003. 

3 Alan Berube and Bruce Katz, “Katrina’s Window: Confronting Con- 
centrated Poverty Across America” (Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution, 2005). 

4 “California Agriculture: Highlights 2006,” California Department of 
Food and Agriculture, 2007; “2006 Cal Facts: California’s Economy 
and Budget in Perspective,” Legislative Analyst’s Office, 2006. 

5 Michael Teitz, Charles Dietzel, and William Fulton, “Urban Develop- 
ment Futures in the San Joaquin Valley” (San Francisco: Public 
Policy Institute of California, 2005). 

6 Tadlock Cowan, “California’s San Joaquin Valley: A Region in 
Transition” (Washington, DC: Congressional Research Service, The 
Library of Congress, 2005). 

7 Source: “Arrivals from Laos to California October 1982 through 
September 2003” (2004). California Department of Social Services, 
Refugee Programs Bureau. Available at http://www.dss.cahwnet.gov/ 
refugeeprogram/Res/pdf/HmongRefugees/HmongArrivals_ 
82-03.pdf 

8 Michael Teitz, Charles Dietzel, and William Fulton, “Urban Develop- 
ment Futures in the San Joaquin Valley.” In 1970, the census clas- 
sified 70 percent of the Valley’s population as urban; by 2000, this 
figure had risen to 87 percent. While this increase reflects some 
changes in the way the census determines urban and rural popu- 
lations, the bulk of the Valley’s population is distributed among 

a number of small cities. The five largest of these cities grew 172 
percent from 1970 to 2000. During this same period, the rest of the 
Valley grew 77 percent. 

9 American Community Survey, 2005. 

10 Michael Teitz, Charles Dietzel, and William Fulton, “Urban Develop- 
ment Futures in the San Joaquin Valley” (San Francisco: Public 
Policy Institute of California, 2005). 

11 Bureau of Economic Analysis, Regional Economic Accounts. 

12 Bureau of Labor Statistics. 

13 Tadlock Cowan, “California’s San Joaquin Valley: A Region in 
Transition.” 

14 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

15 City of Fresno, Department of Planning and Inspection, “Edison 
Community Plan 1977,” May 1977. Ramon D. Chacon, “A Case Study 
of Ghettoization and Segregation: West Fresno’s Black and Chi- 
cane Community During the 1970s,” Working Paper No. 12, Stanford 
Center for Chicano Research, Stanford University, 1986. 

16 U.S. Census Bureau, Censuses 1970 and 1980. According to the 
census, in both 1970 and 1980, over 40 percent of the population 
in West Fresno was employed in farm or non-farm labor or service 
occupations. In contrast, in the city at large, 20 percent of the 



32 



population was employed in these fields. Similarly, 10 to 15 percent 
of West Fresno’s workforce in these years was employed in techni- 
cal, executive, or managerial positions, whereas in the city at large, 
just over 25 percent of those employed were in these fields. 

17 City of Fresno, Department of Planning and Inspection, “Edison 
Community Plan 1977,” May 1977. 

18 Roger Palomino, Executive Director, Fresno County Economic Oppor- 
tunities Commission. Personal interview in Fresno, September 6, 2007. 

19 Vanessa Colon, “Residents Loyal to West Fresno; Kearney Bou- 
levard's Professionals Strive to Give Back to Community,” Fresno 
Bee, January 5, 2007. 

20 u.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

21 Ibid. 

22 Ibid. 

23 City of Fresno, Department of Planning and Inspection, “Edison 
Community Plan 1977,” May 1977. 

24 Low Income Flousing Tax Credit Database. 

25 Ashley Swearengin, Executive Director, Office of Community and 
Economic Development, Fresno State University. Personal inter- 
view in Fresno, January 25, 2007. Steve Geil, President and CEO, 
Economic Development Corporation of Fresno County. Telephone 
interview, May 15, 2007. Peggy Chiok, Economic Development Ana- 
lyst, City of Fresno Economic Development Department. Personal 
interview in Fresno, January 24, 2007. 

26 Janie Frantz, Community Relations Liaison, Fresno Unified School 
District, and Tony Diaz, Community Relations Liaison, Fresno 
Unified School District. Personal interviews in Fresno, February 
23, 2007. Rey Leon, Senior Policy Analyst, Latino Issues Forum. 
Personal Interview in Fresno, January 26, 2007. 

27 Janie Frantz, Community Relations Liaison, Fresno Unified School 
District. Personal Interview in Fresno, February 23, 2007. Tommy 
Lowe, Program Staff, West Fresno Boys and Girls Club. Personal 
interview in Fresno, April 12, 2007. 

28 Yolanda Randles, Director, West Fresno Flealth Care Coalition. 
Telephone interview, April 23, 2007. 

29 David Belloumini, Southwest District Captain, Fresno Police Depart- 
ment. Personal Interview in Fresno, April 11, 2007. 

30 Tommy Lowe, Program Staff, West Fresno Boys and Girls Club. 
Personal interview in Fresno, April 12, 2007. Roger Palomino, Execu- 
tive Director, Fresno County Economic Opportunities Commission. 
Personal interview in Fresno, September 6, 2007. 

31 Yolanda Randles, Director, West Fresno Flealth Care Coalition. 
Telephone Interview, April 23, 2007. 

32 Luisa Medina, Development Director, Central California Legal Ser- 
vices. Personal interview in Fresno, February 23, 2007 

33 Richard Keyes, Community Advocate. Personal interview in Fresno, 
April 12, 2007. Roger Palomino, Executive Director, Fresno County 
Economic Opportunities Commission. Personal interview in Fresno, 
September 6, 2007. Jeff St. John, “A Voice for West Fresno; George 
Finley Began Community Work during LBJ’s 'War on Poverty.' Fie 
Flasn't Stopped,” Fresno Bee, November 15, 2006. 



34 St. John, “A Voice for West Fresno.” Ann M. Simmons, “Two Worlds 
in One City; Fresno Is Starkly Divided Between Well-Off and Poor. 
The Poverty Isn’t New, but Aid Seekers Are: Families with Two 
Workers,” Los Angeles Times, February 19, 2006. 

35 Available at http://www.policylink.org/EDTK/FlealthyFoodRetailing/ 
ToollnAction.html#!. 

36 Keith Kelley, President and CEO, Fresno West Coalition for Economic 
Development; and Tate Flill, Vice President, Fresno West Coalition for 
Economic Development. Personal interviews in Fresno, January 24, 
2007. Sara Fledgepeth Flarris, League of Women Voters and Fresno 
Flousing Alliance. Personal interview in Fresno, February 22, 2007. 

37 George Flostetter, “Retail Story Is Less Glowing When It Comes 
to West Side,” Fresno Bee, March 19, 2006. Keith Kelley, Personal 
interview in Fresno, January 24, 2007. 

38 Dennis Woods, President and CEO, United Security Bank. Telephone 
interview, August 16, 2007. Chris Schneider, Executive Director, 
Central California Legal Services, and Luisa Medina, Development 
Director, Central California Legal Services. Personal interviews in 
Fresno, February 23, 2007. Alice Rocha, Business Development 
Loan Officer, Northern California Community Loan Fund, Central 
Valley office. Personal Interview in San Francisco, May 18, 2007. 

39 In 2006, Fresno County Federal Credit Union received an award in 
part for installing the neighborhood's first automated teller machine. 

40 Janie Frantz, Community Relations Liaison, Fresno Unified School 
District, and Tony Diaz, Community Relations Liaison, Fresno Uni- 
fied School District. Personal Interviews in Fresno, February 23, 
2007. Samuel Norman, Director of Operations, The Rios Company, 
and Angie Rios, Principal, The Rios Company. Personal interviews 
in Fresno, April 12, 2007. 

41 Janie Frantz, Community Relations Liaison, Fresno Unified School 
District, and Tony Diaz, Community Relations Liaison, Fresno Unified 
School District. Personal interviews in Fresno, February 23, 2007. 

42 David Belloumini, Southwest District captain, Fresno Police 
Department. Personal interview in Fresno, April 11, 2007. Fresno 
Police Department Monthly Crime Data, May 2007. Available at 
http://www.fresno.gov/NR/rdonlyres/8FBB5131-9B45-4EFl-A3FB- 
4442C44571F9/3603/052008.pdf. Also, Pablo Lopez, “Killings 
Inflame West Fresno Tension; Activists Question One City Council 
Member's Resolve to Fight Gangs,” Fresno Bee, June 25, 2007. 

43 Personal interviews with community residents conducted on April 
13, 2007. 

44 Tate Flill, Vice President, Fresno West Coalition for Economic 
Development. Personal interview in Fresno, January 24, 2007. David 
Belloumini, Southwest District Captain, Fresno Police Department. 
Personal interview in Fresno, April 11, 2007. 

45 Tommy Lowe, Program Staff, West Fresno Boys and Girls Club). 
Personal interview in Fresno, April 12, 2007. Alice Rocha, Business 
Development Loan Officer, Northern California Community Loan 
Fund, Central Valley office. Personal interview in San Francisco, 

May 18, 2007. Yolanda Randles, Director, West Fresno Flealth Care 
Coalition. Telephone interview, April 23, 2007. 

46 Yolanda Randles, Director, West Fresno Flealth Care Coalition. 
Telephone interview, April 23, 2007. 

47 Assembly Bill 38— West Fresno Elementary School District. Spon- 
sor; Sarah Reyes/2003-2004 Legislature. 



33 



FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 



FRESNO, CALIFORNIA 



48 Fiscal Crisis and Management Assistance Team, “West Fresno 
Elementary School District Assessment and Improvement Plan: 
Third Progress Report, 2005.” 

49 Janie Frantz, Community Relations Liaison, Fresno Unified School 
District. Personal interview in Fresno, February 23, 2007. Samuel 
Norman, Director of Operations, The Rios Company. Personal 
interview in Fresno, April 12, 2007. Veda Ramsay-Stamps, Managing 
Partner, The Ramsay Company, and Regional Coordinator, Fresno 
Works for Better Health. Personal interview in Fresno, April 13, 2007. 

50 Veda Ramsay-Stamps, Managing Partner, The Ramsay Company, 
and Regional Coordinator, Fresno Works for Better Health. Per- 
sonal interview in Fresno, April 13, 2007. 

51 West Fresno Elementary School District, “School Accountability 
Report Card Grades K-5: Data from the 2004-2005 School Year 
Published During 2005-2006.” It is worth noting that Edison High 
School, the neighborhood’s lauded magnet school, can boast 
above-average performance, but neighborhood students attending 
the school have not performed as well as students who are bused 
in from other areas of the city, according to Luisa Medina, former 
School Board President and Development Director at Central Cali- 
fornia Legal Services. 

52 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000: Percent of residents over age 5 
reporting that they do not speak English well. 

53 West Fresno School District website, available at 
http://www.westfresno.net/about_district.htm. 

54 Christina Vance, “The Diminishing Class of 2007; As Graduation 
Approaches for Many Students, There Are More Who Won’t Be 
Walking,” Fresno Bee, June 3, 2007. 

55 Virginia Rondero Hernandez, Kathleen Curtis, and Petra Sutton, “Teen 
Births: An Analysis of the Epidemic of Teen Births in San Joaquin 
Valley Communities” (Fresno: Central California Children’s Institute, 
California State University at Fresno, 2004). In 2001, West Fresno had 
the second highest rate of teen pregnancies of all communities in 
the Valley. 

56 Tommy Lowe, Program Staff, West Fresno Boys and Girls Club. 
Personal interview in Fresno, April 12, 2007. Alice Rocha, Business 
Development Loan Officer, Northern California Community Loan 
Fund, Central Valley office. Personal interview in San Francisco, 

May 18, 2007 Ely Portillo, “West Fresno Combats Gangs; Basketball 
Tournament Planned as Alternative for At-Risk Youths,” Fresno Bee, 
July 3, 2007 

57 Keith Kelley, President and CEO, Fresno West Coalition for Economic 
Development. Personal interview in Fresno, CA, January 24, 2007. 

58 James M. Ferris and Elizabeth Graddy, “Philanthropic Activity in Cali- 
fornia’s Central Valley: 1996-2002” (Los Angeles: The Center on Phi- 
lanthropy and Public Policy, University of Southern California, 2004). 

59 Samuel Norman, Director of Operations, The Rios Company. Per- 
sonal interview in Fresno, April 12, 2007 

60 Veda Ramsay-Stamps, Managing Partner, The Ramsay Company, 
and Regional Coordinator, Fresno Works for Better Health. Personal 
interview in Fresno, April 13, 2007. CDBG data from City of Fresno 
Consolidated Annual Performance and Evaluation Report (CAPER) 
2004 and 2006, and from analysis of 1998-2000 CDBG data 
provided by Rollie Smith, Field Office Director, Department of Hous- 
ing and Urban Development. Personal interview in Fresno, January 
25, 2007 



61 Veda Ramsay-Stamps, Managing Partner, The Ramsay Company, 
and Regional Coordinator, Fresno Works for Better Health. Personal 
interview in Fresno, April 13, 2007. Gwen Morris, Senior Director, One 
by One Leadership. Personal interview in Fresno, January 26, 2007. 

62 Tate Hill, Vice President, Fresno West Coalition for Economic Devel- 
opment. Personal interview in Fresno, January 24, 2007. 

63 Keith Kelley, President and CEO, Fresno West Coalition for Eco- 
nomic Development, and Tate Hill, Vice President, Fresno West 
Coalition for Economic Development. Personal interviews in Fresno, 
January 24, 2007 Ashley Swearengin, Executive Director, Office of 
Community and Economic Development at California State Univer- 
sity, Fresno. Personal interview in Fresno, January 25, 2007 Luisa 
Medina, Development Director, Central California Legal Services. 
Personal interview in Fresno, February 23, 2007. 

64 Alice Rocha, Business Development Loan Officer, Northern Califor- 
nia Community Loan Fund, Central Valley office. Personal interview 
in San Francisco, May 18, 2007. Ashley Swearengin, Executive 
Director, Office of Community and Economic Development, Fresno 
State University. Personal interview in Fresno, January 25, 2007. 

65 Luisa Medina, Development Director, Central California Legal Ser- 
vices. Personal interview in Fresno, February 23, 2007. 

66 Alice Rocha, Business Development Loan Officer, Northern Califor- 
nia Community Loan Fund, Central Valley office. Personal Interview 
in San Francisco, May 18, 2007. 

67 Alice Rocha, Business Development Loan Officer, Northern Califor- 
nia Community Loan Fund, Central Valley office. Personal interview 
in San Francisco, May 18, 2007. Tracewell Hanrahan, Regional Direc- 
tor, Pacific Community Ventures, Central Valley office. Telephone 
interview, March 22, 2007. Both organizations are considering 
providing technical assistance to local nonprofits as an alternative 
to straight financial investment. 

68 Jeff St. John, “Program Focuses on Human, Social Side of Jobs 
Equation,” Fresno Bee, March 3, 2007 

69 Steve Geil, President and CEO, Economic Development Corpora- 
tion of Fresno County. Telephone interview. May 15, 2007. 

70 City of Fresno website, available at http://www.fresno.gov/ 
Government/De pa rtmentDirectory/EconomicDevelopment/ 
IncentiveZones/MunicipalRestorationZone/default.htm. 

71 Ashley Swearengin, Executive Director, and Allysunn Williams, 
Associate Director, Office of Community and Economic Develop- 
ment, California State University, Fresno. Personal interviews in 
Fresno, September 6, 2007 For more information about Social 
Compact, see website available at http://www.socialcompact.org/. 

72 Veda Ramsay-Stamps, Managing Partner, The Ramsay Company, 
and regional coordinator, Fresno Works for Better Health. Personal 
interview in Fresno, April 13, 2007. 

73 Luisa Medina, Development Director, Central California Legal Services. 
Personal interview in Fresno, February 23, 2007. Ashley Swearengin, 
Executive Director, and Allysunn Williams, Associate Director, Office of 
Community and Economic Development, California State University, 
Fresno. Personal interviews in Fresno, January 25, 2007 

74 Ashley Swearengin, Executive Director, Office of Community and 
Economic Development, California State University, Fresno. Per- 
sonal interview in Fresno, January 25, 2007 



34 







mmh 



m 4 '^ 



■ OVERVIEW 



In its heyday, Cleveland was a major industrial center with more than 900,000 
residents. Today, plagued by a steady loss of manufacturing jobs and a sub- 
sequent outflow of its central city population, Cleveland is an example of 
both Rust Belt decline and suburbanization. The city’s economic situation has 
been deteriorating since the 1950s and was probably most dramatized by the 



city’s high-profile bankruptcy in 1978— the first time a city 
had defaulted on its debt since the Great Depression. 

While the loss of jobs and people has been a chal- 
lenge, the city of Cleveland has had some success 
In diversifying its economy. A number of high-quality 
institutions— universities, medical centers, corporations, 
and foundations— have worked collaboratively toward 
and contributed significantly to revitalizing the city. As 
former mayor Michael R. White said, “This is a town of 
partnerships.”' 

In Cleveland’s Central neighborhood, the subject of 
this case study, many community development organi- 
zations have tried to turn the neighborhood around. In 
fact. Central is unique in this report in terms of its high 



number of community development organizations.^ The 
following case study discusses the history and current 
condition of this neighborhood along with the challenges 
facing its residents. 

■ BACKGROUND 

For well over a century, Cleveland’s Central neighborhood 
has been a first stop for working-class people new to the 
area. Aptly named. Central, one of 36 neighborhoods in 
Cleveland, is located very close to downtown. The first 
settlers included German immigrants who farmed the 
land in the mid-1800s. As Cleveland evolved into a major 
industrial center, the area attracted Austro-Hungarian, 



35 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970’’ 


43.9 


8.9 


Poverty rate 2000*’ 


65.1 


10.8 


Income 


Median household income'’ 


$8,657 


$42,776 


Demographics 


Population 2000'* 


12,208 


2,148,143 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000® 


-54.8 


-7.4 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 


% White 


5.3 


74.6 


% Hispanic/Latino 


1.3 


3.4 


% Black/African-American 


91.9 


19.1 


% Residents under age 189 


40.9 


25.4 


% Single-parent households*’ 


69.7 


9.5 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


1.3 


5.3 


% Population in same house as five years ago' 


45.5 


60.2 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000^ 


45.2 


17.0 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


4.2 


23.9 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005'" 


50.7 


78.3 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


34.2 


70.5 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


28.6 


5.3 


% Adults in the labor forced 


50.0 


64.3 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 2000'’ 


8.2 


68.1 


% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


41.1 


39.2 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized" 


40.0 


14.5 


Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$76,346 


$120,844 


Median year structure built' 


1952 


1964 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


49.4 


19.5 


% Credit files with high credit scores” 


20.1 


61.6 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


24.7 


28.2 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005“ 


43.3 


23.7 




Italian, Polish, Jewish, and Russian immigrants, many of 
whom found work at nearby steel mills and foundries. 
Cleveland, and Central in particular, was also a primary 
destination for many African Americans who migrated 
North in the early part of the 20th century. Central 
became the most populous neighborhood in Cleveland, 
numbering 62,367 residents in 1930.^ 

Today, the population is less than one-fifth of that, 
hovering around 12,000. (See Table 1) The population is 
primarily young, black, and poor, and families are domi- 
nated by single mothers.'* Central’s poverty rate in 2000 
was a striking 65.1 percent— the highest among all of the 



communities profiled in this report. Central’s oldest and 
youngest residents are much poorer than their counter- 
parts in surrounding Cleveland and the metro area. (See 
Figure 1) 

The high levels of poverty in Central are the result 
of a complicated mix of factors, but historical housing 
policies have clearly played an important role in shap- 
ing the geographic distribution of poverty. Like other 
immigrant neighborhoods at the turn of the 20th cen- 
tury, Central had substandard housing and poor living 
conditions.^ In the 1930s, these overcrowded tenement- 
housing conditions led Cleveland City Councilman Ernest 



36 




Bohn to establish public housing as a replacement for 
unsafe, tumbledown structures.® In 1933, the state of 
Ohio chartered Cuyahoga Metropolitan Housing Author- 
ity (CMHA) as the first public housing authority in the 
nation. The CMHA located more than half of the county’s 
public housing units within the Central neighborhood.^ 
Slum clearance in the 1950s and 1960s resulted in further 
physical changes to the neighborhood, as did freeway 
construction and the razing of older housing and com- 
mercial structures to make room for Cuyahoga Commu- 
nity College and other institutions.® 

The legacy of these policies continues to this day.® 

As of February 2007, Central is still home to the largest 
concentration of public housing in Cuyahoga County; in 
2000, 40 percent of Central’s rental housing units were 
publicly subsidized. This concentration of subsidized 
housing goes a long way toward explaining why Cen- 
tral has such a high percentage of low-income house- 
holds. In 2000, 80 percent of households in Central had 
incomes of less than $20,000, compared with just 20 
percent in the Cleveland metro area. Indeed, the major- 
ity of Central’s households— 60 percent— had incomes 
of less than $10,000. And there is very little economic 
integration. Cniy 6 percent of the households in Central 
are considered middle class— defined as those earning 
between $35,000 and $75,000— compared with 38 per- 
cent in the metro area. (See Figure 2) 



FIGURE 1 



Poverty rates, 2000 



V 

I— 

cr 

LU 

> 

O 

Q. 



C3 

z 

> 



O 

cr 

LU 

CL 



100 

90 

80 

70 

60 

50 

40 

30 

20 

10 

0 



■ Central ■ Cleveland ■ Cleveland metro 




Children Elderly Single mothers 

with children 

SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 



FIGURE 2 

Income distribution, 2000 




Less than $10,000 to $20,000 to $35,000 to $50,000 to $75,000 
$10,000 $19,999 $34,999 $49,999 $74,999 or more 

SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 



■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Central faces a complex and intertwined set of chal- 
lenges related to these high levels of poverty. These chal- 
lenges range from low levels of educational achievement 
and employment to a lack of affordable housing, high 
rates of crime and drug activity, poor health, and limited 
access to financial services. Interviews with residents and 
stakeholders, alongside an analysis of publicly available 
data, point to the link between educational achievement 
and job readiness as critically important to understanding 
the high levels of poverty in the neighborhood. 

Education 

Educational attainment in Central is very low.” CnIy one 
in two adults in Central has graduated from high school, 
and levels of academic achievement are substandard at all 
but one of the neighborhood’s schools. Central stakehold- 
ers and residents alike voiced grave concerns about the 
issue of education, citing its insufficient quality in the com- 
munity as well as the critical role it plays in helping people 
move out of poverty. In particular, interviewees expressed 
their frustration with a system that seems to be failing at 
multiple levels. “How does a kid keep moving from grade 
to grade and no one has noticed that he can’t read or write 
or do math?” asked Larry Wonzo, recreation center director 
and Central resident. “Someone has been lacking in their 
job, whether it’s the parents, the teachers, or.. .the kids.” 



37 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 



The Cleveland Metropolitan School District faces 
many challenges in educating the city’s schoolchildren— 
challenges that are magnified in the high-poverty Central 
community." District-wide, 100 percent of students are 
considered economically disadvantaged.'^ Children in 
Cleveland’s public schools also experience high rates of 
mobility, with mobility among students in Central schools 
higher than in the district.'^ Data from a 2004 study show 
that mobile students scored, on average, 51.2 points lower 
than their less-mobile counterparts.''' These high rates 
of student mobility— coupled with having to address the 
needs of socioeconomically disadvantaged children— 
have affected schools’ ability to focus on the curriculum.'® 
Schools are also overwhelmed by the varied roles they 
must play in the community. “Schools are being asked to 
deal with things they shouldn’t have to,” noted Council- 
woman Phyllis Cleveland.'® “It’s a restaurant, it’s a social 
service agency, it’s a disciplinarian. ..teachers are busy 
simply trying to keep order. They can’t focus on their 
basic job of educating and teaching children.” 

These challenges likely result in low academic 
achievement. As a district, Cleveland Metropolitan fails 
to meet federal average yearly progress (AYP) stan- 
dards."^ The Cleveland Metropolitan School District was 
put on “academic watch” after the 2005-2006 testing 
cycle for its index score of 71 out of 120, well short of the 
goal of at least 100.'® Central’s schools mirror the dis- 
trict’s overall poor performance. Of the four elementary 
schools in Central, none met AYP minimums in math or 
reading. Under state standards, three of the elementary 
schools are in “academic emergency,” with the fourth 




on academic watch.'® Central’s two high schools— 

East Technical High School, currently in “academic 
emergency,” and Jane Addams Business High School, 
designated “effective”— show markedly different results 
from each other, presumably because Jane Addams 
enrolls students from across the district who must meet 
admission criteria and maintain academic and atten- 
dance standards.®® 

The lack of access to a high-quality public education 
means that many of Central’s children lack basic skills. 
“Kids aren’t trying and parents aren’t reinforcing that 
education is important, that you need to learn. ...to com- 
pete in this flat world,” noted Councilwoman Cleveland. 
The end result is children who “don’t read and write very 
well,” she added. “They don’t have basic computational 
skills. These are just the basics that you need to func- 
tion in society.” Even those with a high school diploma 
are seen as having insufficient skills to be successful in 
the labor market. Robin Smalley, director of placement 
services at Vocational Guidance Services (VGS), a local 
nonprofit that provides job training, said that many Cen- 
tral adults with high school diplomas test at third-grade 
levels in math and reading. As a result, they require 
remedial training before they can obtain even entry- 
level employment.®' 

Other indicators point to additional educational chal- 
lenges facing Central’s youth. For instance, children in 
single-parent families or whose mothers have less than a 
high school education are far more likely to lack readiness 
for kindergarten.®® In the early 1990s, over half of Central’s 
birth mothers had not finished high school. By the early 
2000s, this figure had improved slightly to 46 percent.®® 

Efforts are under way to reform Cleveland’s public 
schools and to help schools and children meet academic 
achievement levels. In 2006, the new CEO of the Cleve- 
land Metropolitan School District, Dr. Eugene Sanders, 
introduced a proposal for the next five years that includes 
uniforms, single-gender schools, an academy geared 
toward at-risk males, and summer school for low-perform- 
ing students in the district. While not specific to Central, 
the community stands to gain from the proposal’s suc- 
cess. In addition, Cuyahoga Community College has part- 
nered with the CMSD and East Technical High School on 
several initiatives aimed at encouraging post-secondary 
education.®'' In 2004, more than 900 of the district’s 2,300 
graduates (41 percent) continued on to post-secondary 
education.®® Nearly half of those who continued their edu- 
cation attended the community college. 



38 




Employment and Job Readiness 

Low levels of educational attainment seem to explain 
part of another issue in Central: a disconnect between 
employment opportunities and the job readiness of many 
of Central’s working-age residents. In 2000, just half 
of the Central population age 16 and older was in the 
labor force, compared with two-thirds of the population 
in the Cleveland metro area. Unemployment in Central 
was nearly 29 percent, almost six times the rate of the 
Cleveland metro area (5.3 percent). Disability rates in the 
community are also high.^® 

Northeastern Ohio has suffered from the well- 
documented move away from manufacturing toward a 
more service-oriented economy. Manufacturing jobs in 
Cuyahoga County dropped from 265,000 in 1970 to about 
132,000 in 2000.^’’ At the same time, service-sector jobs 
increased from 167,000 jobs to 338,000 jobs. A notable by- 
product of this change is a greater share of jobs that pay 
considerably less: In 2000, a manufacturing job in Cuya- 
hoga County paid an average annual wage of $65,000, 
while a service-sector job paid approximately $38,000.^® 
Manufacturing is not the only industry to experi- 
ence job losses in the region. Cuyahoga County saw job 
losses in every major industry sector between 2000 and 
2005, except for education and health services, where 
there was an increase of 11 percent, or nearly 13,000 
jobs.®® In Central, Zip Business Pattern data show that 
between 2000 and 2004, there was a loss of 5,885 jobs 
and 147 establishments, among them retail, manufactur- 
ing, finance, and insurance establishments.” 

Still, jobs are available. The Midtown Corridor, which 
overlaps the north end of the Central neighborhood, is 
home to nearly 250 companies. At the south end, the 
Maingate district houses many industrial and manufac- 
turing businesses, including the largest center of whole- 
sale food distributors in Ohio. The county’s two largest 
employers— the Cleveland Clinic and University Hospi- 
tals— employ almost 45,000 and are located less than 
two miles from the neighborhood.®' In fact, demand for 
workers in the healthcare industry within the Cleveland 
metro area is projected to increase by more than 23,000 
jobs between 2004 and 2014.®® The Center for Health 
Affairs notes that the need for healthcare workers in the 
Cleveland area continues to outpace supply.®® 

The challenge, however, is that many of Central’s 
residents lack the necessary skills for these job opportu- 
nities. Many nonprofits and service agencies have been 



working to bridge this gap. VGS, located in the Central 
community, is a 116-year-old nonprofit that provides 
job-readiness training, transitional employment, and job 
placement for both disabled and economically disadvan- 
taged individuals.®'* According to Smalley, individuals in 
impoverished communities don’t lack the desire to work; 
instead, they lack some of the basic job-readiness skills— 
such as appropriate communication skills in the interview 
process, punctuality, and proper attire— necessary for 
successful employment.®® 

Smalley added that many Central residents enter- 
ing job training programs have never held a steady job, 
resulting in some anxiety over getting and maintaining a 
job. She likened the process of acclimating to the culture 
of work to being dropped into China: “I don’t know how 
to speak the language; I don’t know anything about the 
culture. I don’t know where to go to try and get a job and 
communicate that I’m capable of doing something.” Trans- 
portation and child care are additional barriers, according 
to both Smalley and a study that examined welfare reform 
and access to job opportunities in the Cleveland area.®® 

Other organizations and agencies have also 
launched programs aimed at helping Central residents 
find jobs.®’’ The city of Cleveland and Cuyahoga County 
operate Employment Connections, which provides 
workforce development services to job seekers and 
employers.®® In addition, Cuyahoga Community College 
designs programs for individuals to continue building job 
skills and aim for long-term careers.®® These programs 
are important to help residents move into jobs that pay 
a living wage. “Even if you graduate from high school 
now, most of the jobs that are available are not going 
to get you above poverty,” noted the Friendly Inn’s Gerri 
Burns, who has worked in the Central community for 29 
years. “So until we get people into training beyond high 
school— real, meaningful training programs that will lead 
to guaranteed employment that pays over $12 an hour— 
they’re going to be poor.”'*® 

Affordable Housing 

In addition to quality education and job readiness, 
affordable housing is a pressing need in Central. Nearly 
everyone living in Central (92 percent) rents, compared 
with 32 percent in the Cleveland metropolitan area. More 
than 41 percent of the renters in Central have a hous- 
ing cost burden, and 24 percent have an extreme hous- 
ing cost burden.'" Vacancy rates in Central’s public and 



39 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 




Through HOPE IV, some of Central’s most deteriorated public 
housing high-rises were demolished and rebuilt into resi- 
dences that resemble townhomes. 



subsidized housing are very low. In the county, applicants 
on the waiting list for public housing numbered nearly 
8,800 as of February 2007.''^ The issue of affordable hous- 
ing appears to be more related to residents’ low levels of 
income than to the rental costs. The City of Cleveland’s 
Consolidated Plan for 2005-2010 states that “housing 
costs in Cleveland are lower than in most other major cit- 
ies.” However, the report continues, there are “thousands 
of households in Cleveland whose incomes are insufficient 
to pay the basic cost of decent housing.”''^ According to 
Central’s councilwoman, even with the amount of public 
and subsidized housing in the area, she gets calls “all the 
time” from constituents looking for affordable housing. 

Coupled with this high demand for affordable hous- 
ing is the problem of vacant and abandoned properties. 
Nearly one in five (18.7 percent) of the neighborhood’s 
housing units were vacant in 2000, with the vacancy rate 
in some census tracts within Central hitting 30 percent. 
Instead of providing much-needed housing options for 
residents, these vacant properties are instead attracting 
criminal activity such as drugs and prostitution, noted 
Central’s councilwoman. “No one wants to live next door to 
these properties,” she commented, “and eventually peo- 
ple, when they can, they get away.” Vacant homes affect 
more than the property values of remaining properties, 
she continued: “People see that [vacancy] as a sign that 



their neighborhood is going down.” Vacant properties also 
provide a powerful disincentive to real estate developers, 
since vacant properties signify weak market demand. 

However, Central is starting to see an increase in pri- 
vate residential development, spurred in part by policies 
designed to remedy the unintended consequences of 
concentrated subsidized housing. Through the HOPE 
VI program, some of the oldest and most deteriorated 
public housing complexes in the neighborhood were 
demolished and rebuilt, transforming the high-rise brick 
buildings into residences that resemble townhouses.'*'’ 

In addition, Cleveland was one of six cities nationwide 
that received federal funding from the Homeownership 
Zone Initiative (HOZ). This $18.6 million grant is contribut- 
ing to the construction of 465 market-rate single-family 
homes— the largest market-rate construction project in 
the city since the 1940s.''® This joint effort among Burten, 
Bell, Carr Development, Inc., HUD, the city of Cleve- 
land, and the Cuyahoga Metropolitan Housing Authority 
(CMHA) is effectively leveraging public and private dol- 
lars for new investment in housing in Central. 

The new housing is also fostering some optimism 
among Central’s residents and stakeholders. Local 
funder India Pierce Lee observed, “You drive through 
there and it’s like a new city being reborn quietly.”''® It 
is also bringing a more diverse mix of income levels 
into the community, as well as helping retain some of 
Central’s residents who would otherwise leave the com- 
munity. “When they started building the houses, that 
helped,” stated Gerri Burns. “A number of people who 
lived in public housing actually bought houses in the 
community and stayed.” 

Crime and Health 

Maintaining this momentum of private investment 
will require overcoming the obstacles of crime and drug 
activity. Central has one of the highest rates of violent 
crime in the city of Cleveland, though it has decreased 
since 1990.''^ Youth living in the Central community are 
twice as likely as their counterparts in the city of Cleve- 
land and three times as likely as Cuyahoga County youth 
to be involved in the juvenile justice system.’’® 

When asked how crime has changed over time, recre- 
ation center director Larry Wonzo, who grew up in Central, 
remarked that crime has always been higher in this 
neighborhood, but the accessibility to guns has made 
the crimes more violent. “It used to be fistfights,” he said, 



40 






FIGURE 3 

Causes of death, 2003 



FIGURE 4 

Credit ratings of files with credit scores, 2004 



600 



< 500 



O 400 



300 



^ 200 



100 



I Central ■ Cleveland ■ Cuyahoga County 




Heart Cancer Stroke 
disease 



COPD* 



SOURCE; Social Indicators 2003; Community Health (Cen- 
ter for Community Solutions) 

'Chronic obstructive pulmonary disease 



O 

cr 



70 



60 - 



50 



40 



30 



20 



10 



I Central ■ Cuyahoga County ■ Cleveland metro 




Low or 
subprime 



Middle 



High or prime 



SOURCE; Federal Reserve Board of Governors 



“and then came crack cocaine and people started pick- 
ing up guns.”'*^ Another resident added, “Nowadays kids 
can get weapons anywhere.. .it’s like one phone call away.” 
Drug activity is also an issue. In 2005 the drug 
arrest rate in Central was twice the rate in Cleveland as 
a whole.=° A major turning point in this community came 
with the rise of crack cocaine use. Councilwoman Cleve- 
land, who like Wonzo grew up in Central, noted, “When 
crack cocaine hit our community it had an effect like 
nothing else. Unlike other drugs like heroin, it took the 
mothers out of the homes, [leaving] their children unat- 
tended for hours or days.” Babies themselves are often 
born addicted; their mothers are unable to adequately 
nurture them; and, in the words of the Councilwoman, as 
“young adults and teenagers [they] struggle with chal- 
lenges— intellectually, behaviorally, and emotionally.” 
Councilwoman Cleveland indicated it is a chal- 
lenge for her to develop programs or initiatives for youth 
because of the influence of gangs in the area. “You’ve 
got to deal with each group where they are, first of all, 
because you can’t mix them no matter how well intended 
you are,” she said. “I don’t feel like I’m making enough 
headway in [developing programs], but it’s really impor- 
tant.”^’ Funding these programs is an issue as well. “One 
of the really hard things is to find the money to do things.” 
Health issues represent still another challenge for 
Central residents, who report poorer overall health and 



less access to health insurance than county residents as 
a whole. Four out of every 10 Central adults rated their 
health as poor or fair, compared with two out of every 10 
county adults.®^ Central residents also have higher rates of 
death from common diseases than residents of Cleveland 
and Cuyahoga County.^’^ (See Figure 3) Health insurance 
coverage is also limited. In 2001, the percentage of adults 
who were uninsured in the Central community was over 
25 percent, compared with less than 10 percent in Cuya- 
hoga County.^'’ Uninsured adults were far more likely to 
use the hospital’s emergency department for routine care 
and less likely to have visited a doctor in the past year.^^ 

Financial Services 

Access to credit also remains difficult for many living 
in Central. Almost 50 percent of the credit files in Central 
had too little credit history, or were too thin, to receive 
a credit score. Of those with credit scores, a majority of 
Central residents have low or subprime scores, as shown 
in the chart. (See Figure 4) In 2005, the denial rate for 
mortgages in Central was 43 percent, almost double the 
rate for the Cleveland MSA (23.7 percent). Yet for borrow- 
ers who qualified for a mortgage, the Home Mortgage 
Disclosure Act (HMDA) data provide some indication that 
lenders are extending loans to Central homeowners: 
Three-fourths of the loan applications in Central were 



41 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 



made by those with low to moderate incomes, and more 
than half (52 percent) of those loans were approved.^® 

In addition, borrowers purchasing a home in Central in 
2005 were slightly less likely than Cleveland borrowers to 
receive a high-priced loan.^^ 

Residents have local access to financial services 
primarily through a KeyBank branch that opened In 2005 
and a U.S. Bank branch that has served the neighbor- 
hood for 25 years “ Breaking from traditional banking 
practices, KeyBank developed a checking account with 
no maintenance fees or minimum balance requirements, 
catering to clients who are on Chex Systems or who fre- 
quently use check-cashing facilities.®^ Representatives 
of U.S. Bank acknowledged the difficulty of providing 
products and services in a neighborhood with such 
low Incomes.^ The lack of financial knowledge among 
residents also contributes to this challenge.®' While pay- 
day and check-cashing establishments do not number 
among Central businesses, several corner convenience 
stores provide check-cashing services. 

■ CONCLUSION 

As this case study demonstrates. Central faces many 
challenges. Even though it has a community develop- 
ment Infrastructure with engaged nonprofits, local 
government, and banks, there has been relatively little 
progress In tackling the challenges associated with 
poverty in Central over the past 30 years. Central has 
seen many programs and Initiatives implemented to 
address Issues related to poverty both In Central and in 
the broader community. Most no longer exist; some have 
recently begun.®^ As one Central resident stated, “I’ve 
been in this community, actually living on this property, 
for 29 years now. I haven’t seen a program that’s still in 
existence or been consistent in this community because 
they start a lot of programs.” 

Yet the neighborhood seems to be gaining some 
traction recently with new housing construction (both 
affordable and market-rate); retail revitalization, including 
Arbor Park Place, which includes the first grocery store 
in the community in more than 40 years; and promising 
reforms in job training and education. There is also opti- 
mism in the Central community, both for new initiatives 
under way and for the abundant job, educational, and 
cultural opportunities available nearby. Several inter- 
viewees feel quite positive about Central’s future. One 
young male college student who grew up and still lives 



in Central said, “The neighborhood has definitely got- 
ten better over the years. The crime rate has definitely 
[gone] down. The drug rate has definitely [gone] down. 
And It seems that a lot of kids are going to school more 
now than at previous times.” In the end, however, those 
trying to improve the economic conditions in Central will 
have to contend with the fact that this neighborhood’s 
economic fate is intertwined with the wider regional 
economy that continues to struggle.®® 

This case study was prepared by Lisa Nelson, senior 
policy analyst, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland. 



Endnotes 

1 Bruce Adams and John Parr, Boundary Crossers: Case Studies of 
How Ten of America’s Metropolitan Regions Work (College Park, MD; 
The James MacGregor Burns Academy of Leadership Press, 1997). 

2 Chief among these Institutions are St. Vincent Charity Hospital, a 
safety-net provider that has been in the community for 140 years; 
Vocational Guidance Services (VGS), a vocational training and job 
placement services organization; Friendly Inn, a social services 
agency active in the area for more than 100 years; two youth- 
oriented recreation centers; Burten, Bell, Carr Development Inc., a 
major driver of local retail and residential development; Cuyahoga 
Community College; and several long-standing places of worship, 
including St. John AME (African Methodist Episcopal) Church, the 
first African American church in the city of Cleveland (The Encyclo- 
pedia of Cleveiand History, May 22, 2007). 

3 See the Welcome to Central section of the Living in Cleveland 
Center’s website, and Howard Whipple Green, “Census Tract Street 
Index for Cleveland Metropolitan District and Cuyahoga County,” 
Fourth Edition, 1944. 

4 According to the 2000 census, 40 percent of Central’s residents 
are younger than 18; 94 percent are African American; and 65 
percent are impoverished. Among families with children under the 
age of 18, fully 88 percent are headed by single mothers. Married- 
couple households comprise only 7 percent of the households in 
Central, compared with almost 29 percent in Cleveland and nearly 
50 percent in the metro area. 

5 In 1904 the Chamber of Commerce issued a report highlighting 
Central’s poor living conditions. Available at http://www.nhlink.net/ 
neighborhoodtour/central/ntour.htm. 

6 Information on CMHA history available at http://cmha.net/ 
information/cmhahistory.aspx. 

7 Christopher G. Wye, “The New Deal and the Negro Community: 
Toward a Broader Conceptualization,” Journal of American History 
59(3) (1972): 621-39. 

8 Available at http://www.nhlink.net/neighborhoodtour/centrai/ntour.htm. 

9 Wye, “The New Deal and the Negro Community.” 

10 Just 54 percent of those age 25 and older in Central have a high 
school diploma, compared with 69 percent in the city of Cleveland 



42 



and 83 percent in the Cleveland metro area. A mere 4 percent of this 
age group in Central has a bachelor’s degree, compared with 11 per- 
cent in the city and nearly 24 percent in the Cleveland metro area. 

11 The district changed its name from Cleveland Municipal School 
District to Cleveland Metropolitan School District in April 2007. 

12 Ohio Department of Education, 2005-2006 School Year Report Card. 
Available at http://www.ode.state.oh.us/reportcardfiles/2005-2006/ 
DIST/043786.pdf. The 2006-2007 report cards released in August 
2007 show the Cleveland Metropolitan School District has moved up 
to the “Continuous Improvement” designation. 

13 Mobility refers to students who change schools at least once during 
an academic year. Mobility data were taken from the Ohio Depart- 
ment of Education’s iLRC Power Users Report available at http://ilrc. 
ode.state.oh.us/Power_Users.asp (accessed March 2007). The mobil- 
ity rate for the district for 2005-2006 school year was 18 percent. 

With the exception of Jane Addams students, who had a mobility rate 
of 9 percent, mobility among students in Central schools was higher 
than in the district, ranging from 23 percent to nearly 30 percent. 

M Sandra Clark, “Mobile Students Score Lower on State Test,” Cata- 
lyst Cleveland, March/April 2001, 4-5. 

15 Research has shown that high levels of residential mobility can have 
a negative impact on children’s academic achievement and can dis- 
rupt teaching in the classroom. Doris R. Entwisle, Karl L. Alexander, 
and Linda Steffel Olson, Children, Schools, and Inequality (Boulder: 
Westview, 1997). 

16 Phyllis Cleveland, Councilwoman for Ward 5, which includes the Cen- 
tral neighborhood. Personal interview in Cleveland, February 1, 2007. 

17 Standards are set by the federal government through the No Child 
Left Behind Act. Specific percentages of students in 10 student 
groups are required to meet proficiency goals in reading and 
mathematics. If any goal is missed, the school does not meet AYR 

18 Ohio Department of Education, 2005-2006 School Year Report 
Card. Available at http://www.ode.state.oh.us/reportcard. 

19 “Academic emergency” indicates that the school met eight or 
fewer of the 14 state indicators, scored less than 70 on the Perfor- 
mance index, and failed AYP requirements. 

20 Ohio Department of Education, 2005-2006 School Year Report 
Card. Available at http://www.ode.state.oh.us/reportcard. Accord- 
ing to data provided by the Cleveland Metropolitan School District, 
approximately 50 (or 9.8 percent) of the 509 students enrolled in 
Jane Addams during the 2006-2007 school year lived in the Central 
neighborhood. The 2006-2007 report card shows that the designa- 
tion for Jane Addams fell from Effective to Continuous Improvement. 

21 Robin Smalley, Division Director, Placement Services, Vocational 
Guidance Services. Personal interview in Cleveland, February 2, 2007 

22 Sharon Vandivere, et al., “Indicators of Early School Success and 
Child Well-Being,” Crosscurrents, 3, October 2004. 

23 NEO CANDO system. Center on Urban Poverty and Community 
Development, MSASS, Case Western Reserve University. Available at 
http://neocando.case.edu/cando/index.jsp (accessed April 10, 2007). 

24 TRI-C has several initiatives to engage students in post-secondary 
education, including Fligh Tech Academy, which is geared to devel- 
oping both academic and technical skills of select CMSD high 
school students. Students take college-level courses while still in 



high school. Tech Prep is a program that assists high school 
students in gaining skills and training for future careers in technol- 
ogy. The Education Talent Search is a program that encourages 
high school students to continue in school, to graduate, and to 
continue on to vocational programs. 

25 Information provided by Dr. Jennifer A. Spielvogel, Vice President, Plan- 
ning and Institutional Effectiveness, Cuyahoga Community College. 

26 According to the 2000 census, over one-third (34.1 percent) of 
working-age males in Central had a disability, compared with 26 
percent in Cleveland and 17 percent in the metro area. Women and 
elderly residents of Central also experience higher rates of disabil- 
ity than their counterparts in Cleveland and the metro area. 

27 Source: Regional Economic Information System, Bureau of Economic 
Analysis, U.S. Department of Commerce, Table CA25. Available at 
http://www.bea.gov/bea/regional/reis (accessed April 19, 2007). 

28 Data extracted from the Regional Economic Information System, 
Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA), U.S. Department of Com- 
merce, Tables CA25 and CA05 Available at http://www.bea.gov/ 
bea/regional/reis (accessed April 19, 2007). It should be noted the 
figures reported include both full- and part-time employment. 
According to BEA, the service sector includes industries primar- 
ily engaged in providing a wide variety of services for individuals, 
business and government establishments, and other organiza- 
tions. Hotels and other lodging places; establishments provid- 
ing personal, business, repair, and amusement services; health, 
legal, engineering, and other professional services; educational 
institutions; membership organizations, and other miscellaneous 
services, are included. 

29 “Workforce Analysis, Employment Connection.” Available at http;// 
lmi.state.oh.us/wia/archive/2007/EmploymentConnection.pdf 
(accessed April 2007). 

30 Three zip codes (44103, 44104, and 44115) cover all of the Central 
neighborhood and parts of adjoining neighborhoods. Zip Business 
Pattern data available from the U.S. Census Bureau. 

31 Crain’s Cleveland Business, “Largest Employers in Cuyahoga 
County,” 28(10), March 12-18, 2007, 22. 

32 Cleveland-Elyria-Mentor MSA Job Outlook to 2014 prepared by 
the Ohio Department of Job and Family Services, Bureau of Labor 
Market Information, Office of Workforce Development. Avail- 
able at http://lmi.state.oh.us/proj/projections/MSA/Cleveland.pdf 
(accessed April 2007). 

33 The Center for Health Affairs, “Healthcare: The Heartbeat of 
Northeast Ohio,” Policy Snapshot, April 2007. Available at http:// 
www.chanet.org/NR/rdonlyres/864931C8-7CAF-4E0E-A9F4- 
86A7739A7FCC/357/HealthcareHeart beatofNortheastOhio.pdf 
(accessed August 2007). 

34 VGS offers training in retail, child care, computer skills, and custo- 
dial and building maintenance. 

35 Robin Smalley, Division Director, Placement Services, Vocational 
Guidance Services. Personal interview in Cleveland, February 2, 2007. 

36 A study examining welfare reform and access to job opportuni- 
ties estimated that a majority (80.4 percent) of the entry-level job 
openings between 1995 and 2005 in the Cleveland metro area lay 
outside the city of Cleveland and nearly half were outside Cuya- 
hoga County. Public transportation users would be at a disadvan- 
tage in reaching these jobs compared to those with automobiles. 



43 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 



For example, this study found that those commuting by automobile 
had access to nearly six times as many jobs as public transit 
commuters. Only 35 percent of Central residents own a car, 
according to the 2000 census. See Neil Bania, Claudia Coulton, 
and Laura Leete, “Welfare Reform and Access to Job Opportunities 
in Cleveland Metropolitan Area,” in Multi-City Access to Opportunity 
Study, Michael Rich, ed. (Atlanta: Emory University, 2000). 

37 The Job Match Empowerment Zone (EZ) program operated for 10 
years, until funding ended in January 2006. Funding for the Youth 
Opportunity Program was also eliminated after 10 years of assist- 
ing youth in the EZ to complete high school, develop job skills, and 
obtain and maintain employment. 

38 Information on this resource can be found at http://www.workforce. 
cuyahogacounty.us/en-US/employment-connection.aspx. 

39 TRI-C’s Breaking Through: Health Care Career Pathway Program, for 
example, allows individuals with just sixth- and seventh-grade reading 
and math levels to enter the healthcare field through a state tested 
nursing assistant (STNA) prep course. Students gain basic skills and 
knowledge before taking the next steps to become a certified STNA. 
The Pathway program is designed to encourage individuals to suc- 
cessively build on their skills and education, enabling them to move 
from STNAs up to higher-paying positions in the healthcare industry. 

40 Gerri Burns, Executive Director, Friendly Inn, located in the Central 
neighborhood. Personal interview in Cleveland, January 23, 2007. 

41 Housing cost burden is defined as a household paying more than 30 
percent of its income for housing. Extreme housing cost burden is a 
household paying more than 50 percent of its income for housing. 

42 Data provided by Scott Pollock, Director of Planning and Develop- 
ment, Cuyahoga Metropolitan Flousing Authority (CMHA). 

43 The Consolidated Plan, 2005-2010. Housing and Community 
Development Needs Assessment & Five Year Strategic Plan for the 
City of Cleveland, Ohio, Approved by HUD - June 10, 2005. 

44 In partnership with CMHA, Burten, Bell, Carr encouraged the con- 
struction of single-family public housing units dispersed through- 
out the neighborhood and encouraged amenities atypical of public 
housing, such as designated parking spaces outside units and the 
inclusion of private patios. 

45 Cleveland was awarded the HOZ grant in 1997 and construction of 
the new homes began in 2000. This mixed-income development 
will be contained entirely within the Central neighborhood. 

46 India Pierce Lee, Program Officer, The Cleveland Foundation. Per- 
sonal interview in Cleveland, March 9, 2007 

47 NEO CANDO system. Center on Urban Poverty and Community 
Development, MSASS, Case Western Reserve University, available at 
http://neocando.case.edu/cando/index.jsp (accessed April 16, 2007). 
See methodology and caveats regarding crime data contained in NEO 
CANDO available at http://neocando.case.edu/cando/pdf/Cleveland 
PoliceDatalndicators.pdf. The violent crime rate dropped from 5,773 
per 100,000 population in 1990 to 2,681 per 100,000 in 2005. 

48 The rate of juvenile delinquency in Central was 158 per 1,000 
youth compared with 91 per 1,000 youth in Cleveland and 65 per 
1,000 youth in Cuyahoga County Juvenile delinquency data were 
extracted from the NEO CANDO system. Center on Urban Poverty 
and Community Development, MSASS, Case Western Reserve 
University, available at http://neocando.case.edu/cando/index.jsp 
(accessed April 16, 2007). 



49 Larry Wonzo, Director, Lonnie Burten Recreation Center, located in 
the Central neighborhood. Personal interview in Cleveland, Febru- 
ary 9, 2007 

50 NEO OANDO system. Center on Urban Poverty and Community 
Development, MSASS, Case Western Reserve University, available 
at http://neocando.case.edu/cando/index.jsp (accessed April 16, 
2007). There were 2,871 drug arrests per 100,000 in Central com- 
pared with 1,369 per 100,000 in Cleveland. 

51 Phyllis Cleveland, Councilwoman, Ward 5. Personal interview in 
Cleveland, February 1, 2007. 

52 The Center for Community Solutions engaged the Gallup Organi- 
zation to survey a sample of Cuyahoga County adults, ages 18 to 
64, regarding a range of issues related to health and health care. 
Three neighborhoods were over-sampled, including Central. The 
survey is called the Cuyahoga Family Health Survey 

53 The death rate data referenced here came from a report entitled 
“Social Indicators 2003: Community Health prepared by the Center 
for Community Solutions and the United Way.” Ail rates are age- 
adjusted unless otherwise noted. 

54 Center for Community Solutions’ analysis of the Cuyahoga Family 
Fiealth Survey data. 

55 Ibid. 

56 Low- to moderate-income borrowers are those with incomes 
less than or equal to 80 percent of the Cleveland MSA's median 
income. High-income applicants are those with incomes greater 
than 80 percent of the metro area’s median. 

57 Analysis of the 2005 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) 
showed that of the 56 home purchase originations in Central, only 
nine applicants (16 percent) received a high-priced loan com- 
pared with 55 percent for Cleveland applicants. High-cost loans 
were more likely for refinance loans in Central— 52 percent, or 11 
applicants, received a high-priced loan. In Cleveland, 44 percent of 
refinancing loans were high priced. 

58 In addition, there are five credit unions located within Central, 
three of which are affiliated with churches. 

59 Woody Allen, Urban Initiative Officer, Key Bank. Personal interview 
in Cleveland, March 16, 2007. Chex Systems, Inc. provides deposit 
account verification services to its financial institution members to 
aid them in identifying account applicants who may have a history 
of account mishandling (for example, people whose accounts were 
overdrawn and then closed by their bank). For more information 
regarding Chex Systems see https://www.consumerdebit.com/ 
consumerinfo/us/en/chexsystems/faqs.htm. 

60 Patricia Ramsey, vice president, community development, U.S. 

Bank, and Carolyn Gamble, branch manager, U.S. Bank. Personal 
interviews in Cleveland, April 25, 2007. 

61 Both KeyBank and U.S. Bank offer financial literacy programs to 
Central residents and work with residents to raise their awareness 
of the earned income tax credit (EITC). 

62 Building Healthy Communities (BHC) is focused on addressing the 
needs of the residents in the Central community. Started in 2003, 
this resident-driven initiative focuses on three issues of concern to 
residents: cancer prevention and early detection; access to health 
care and transportation; and parental involvement with children. 
The Sisters of Charity Foundation of Cleveland recently introduced 



44 



a vision and pian of action that wiil piace speciai emphasis on 
addressing the root causes and effects of poverty in the Central 
neighborhood. In 2005, Cleveland State University was awarded 
a $1.3 million grant from the National Institutes of Health to fight 
obesity in the Central community and use findings to assist other 
poor communities; see http://www.csuohio.edu/today/051129.html. 

63 Cleveland ranked as the lowest income city over 250,000 
residents, according to the most recent census figures. The 
median household earns $26,535 per year. Source; Census 
Bureau’s American Community Survey. 



45 



CLEVELAND, OHIO 



46 




■ OVERVIEW 



Little Haiti owes its name to the concentration of Haitian immigrants who 
settled in this Miami neighborhood in the 1970s and 1980s. For Haitians in 
South Florida and throughout the United States, the neighborhood main- 
tains great historical, cultural, and social significance, since it represents 
the heart of Haitian migration to the U.S.^ Little Haiti’s history is the story 



of the thousands of Haitian immigrants who have estab- 
lished new lives in Miami-Dade County, especially those 
who arrived after 1980.^ While residents of Little Haiti 
represent only a small portion of the estimated 189,000 
Haitians and Haitian Americans living in South Florida, 
the enclave contains one of the largest concentrations 
of these populations living at or below the poverty line.^ 
And, unlike other ethnic communities that have achieved 
greater integration in South Florida,'' Little Haiti has 
remained socially and economically isolated from Miami’s 
greater metropolitan area.® 



■ BACKGROUND 

The city of Miami, with a population of approximately 
330,000, was ranked the poorest large city in the United 
States following the 2000 census, with a poverty rate 
of 28 percent.® Haitians are among the poorest demo- 
graphic groups in the region. The poverty rate for Hai- 
tians in Miami-Dade County (30 percent) is almost twice 
the overall poverty rate in the county (18 percent). One- 
third of all Haitian households in Miami-Dade County are 
considered low income.’’ 



47 




MIAMI, FLORIDA 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Little Haiti 



Miami MSA 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


23.6 


13.3 


Poverty rate 2000® 


44.4 


14.0 


Income 


Median household income® 


$15,277 


$40,320 


Demographics 


Population 2000® 


18,607 


5,007,564 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000® 


8.4 


123.9 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 


% White 


2.4 


44.1 


% Hispanic/Latino 


13.7 


34.0 


% Black/African-American 


62.6 


18.1 


% Residents under age 189 


31.2 


23.6 


% Single-parent households® 


35.1 


9.5 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


47.1 


35.0 


% Population in same house as five years ago' 


53.9 


49.1 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000'' 


61.6 


23.8 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


3.8 


24.1 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005"' 


26.7 


49.7 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


30.9 


57.6 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


19.0 


6.7 


% Adults in the labor force'' 


51.3 


58.7 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


19.0 


66.0 


% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


56.8 


48.5 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized" 


18.9 


8.4 


Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$69,742 


$128,411 


Median year structure built' 


1963 


1977 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


44.1 


24.5 


% Credit files with high credit scores" 


33.4 


58.6 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005"“ 


64.4 


40.8 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005" 


28.7 


19.3 



Little Haiti is a rather well-delineated neighborhood 
of some 19,000 residents on the northern boundary of 
Miami. It is difficult to obtain a precise demographic and 
economic profile of Little Haiti and the greater Miami- 
Dade County, however, for several reasons. First, Miami 
is a gateway city with a large transient population that is 
often difficult to capture in official statistics. Immigrants— 
in particular those who are undocumented— have been 
historically underrepresented in census data. Second, 
there is a strong informal economy throughout Miami- 
Dade County that is predominantly cash driven and 
therefore hard to measure. Third, the Haitian population 



is not statistically distinguished from the greater Black or 
African-American population in census figures, so many 
demographics concerning the Haitian population are 
based on estimates that vary in accuracy.® That said, esti- 
mates suggest that 45 percent of Little Haiti’s population 
is Haitian or Haitian-American.® 

Little Haiti is much poorer than Miami as a whole. 
According to the 2000 U.S. census, the poverty rate in Little 
Haiti was over 44 percent, more than three times that of the 
Miami-Fort Lauderdale Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) 
(14 percent). The median household income in Little Haiti 
($15,277) was less than half the median household income 



48 





in the Miami-Fort Lauderdale MSA ($40,320). The unem- 
ployment rate in the community is 19 percent, compared 
with 7 percent in the MSA. Sixty-two percent of adults over 
25 in Little Haiti do not have a high school diploma; only 4 
percent have a bachelor’s degree.” 

Housing costs have had a significant impact on low- 
income residents in Miami, with almost half (48 percent) 
spending more than 30 percent of their household income 
on housing costs in 2000." Since then, the housing cost 
burden has increased because of real-estate appreciation 
throughout South Florida over the past five years.” (See 
Figure 1) In Little Haiti, these trends have a greater effect 
on housing affordability for its low-income residents. The 
vast majority of residents in Little Haiti are renters, and 
57 percent of renters spent more than 30 percent of their 
income on housing.” Housing quality in the community is 
poor, and most of the homes are small (less than 1,200 
square feet). In addition, many have been illegally subdi- 
vided and have un-permitted structures on the property. 
Overcrowding is a serious problem, with families pooling 
funds or sharing units in order to afford housing. 

Housing affordability will likely worsen for Little Haiti’s 
residents if gentrification pressures in the neighborhood 
intensify. Miami has been significantly transformed in 
the past five years by aggressive redevelopment of the 
city’s urban neighborhoods. With very little undeveloped 
land remaining, developers are looking at older neigh- 
borhoods, such as Little Haiti, as new candidates for 



development.'” Interviewees expressed concerns about 
the displacement of Little Haiti’s residents; according 
to Rasha Soray-Cameau, administrator for the City of 
Miami’s Little Haiti Neighborhood Enhancement Team 
Office, residents who are pushed out of Little Haiti will 
find it very difficult to locate alternative housing.” More- 
over, for Haitians dependent on the Creole-speaking 
services accessible only in Little Haiti, displacement from 
the neighborhood could have deeper consequences for 
their well-being.” 

Addressing the issues facing Little Haiti is particularly 
challenging because of Haitians’ unique perspective on 
poverty. Despite living close to or below the poverty line 
in South Florida, many Haitian immigrants do not con- 
sider themselves poor. Comparatively, many are better 
off in the United States than in their homeland, which has 
suffered decades of political and economic instability; 
Haiti is currently the poorest nation in the Western hemi- 
sphere. However, perhaps as a result of this more positive 
perception of their situations, Haitians are slow to seek 
services aimed at improving their social and economic 
standing. In a study of Haitian immigrants in Miami- 
Dade, a survey found that no more than 5 percent of the 
individuals surveyed applied for benefits, even though 80 
percent of them were eligible.” Noted Jacques St. Louis, 
a homeownership counselor at the Little Haiti Housing 
Association, “They see that they are making $12,000 a 
year, and they think that’s good money.’’” In addition, 



FIGURE 1 

House price appreciation in the Miami- 
Miami Beach-Kendall metropolitan area 




49 



MIAMI, FLORIDA 



MIAMI, FLORIDA 



Haitian immigrants are reluctant to accept charity unless 
their situation is dire.'^ According to Francoise Penha 
at the Human Services Coalition, accepting any form of 
assistance— especially services and programs aimed at 
helping the neediest, such as food stamps— is a cause for 
personal shame among the Haitian poor.™ 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

A number of significant issues emerge when looking at 
poverty in Little Haiti. Chief among them are residents’ 
isolation due to immigration policy, language, and culture; 
lack of jobs and economic development; low levels of civic 
engagement; poor financial management skills and knowl- 
edge; and concerns about youth, education, and health. 

Isolation Due to Immigration Policy, 

Language, and Culture 

Barriers in the immigration process have made it 
harder for Haitian immigrants to establish themselves in 
the United States. U.S. immigration policy toward Haitian 
nationals has been more restrictive than policy toward 
the majority of other Caribbean immigrants.^' Haitians are 
often challenged on their requests for residency and tend 
to remain undocumented, hiding from detection by immi- 
gration enforcement agencies.™ Because of a heightened 
fear of deportation in the Haitian community. Little Haiti’s 
immigrant residents are unlikely to seek assistance from 
outside organizations for fear of drawing attention to the 
immigration status either of themselves or family mem- 
bers living with them.™ In addition, many Haitians eligible 
for public assistance will not apply because they fear that 
the U.S. Citizenship and Immigration Services will label 
them a “public charge” and, as such, they will be denied a 
future request for residency or citizenship.^'' 

Language skills are another significant challenge 
both for Haitian immigrants and the organizations 
that serve them. Most community and social services 
agencies in the Miami area have bilingual staff fluent 
in Spanish and English, which greatly helps Spanish- 
speaking immigrants seeking assistance. Haitians’ native 
language, however, is Creole, which is the only language 
many immigrants from Haiti speak when they arrive in 
the United States.™ This creates a major barrier both for 
Haitians struggling to access services and find jobs and 
for non-Haitians seeking to help or employ them. Com- 
pounding the problem, low-income Haitian immigrants 
are frequently not literate in Creole, so English classes 



often must begin with teaching Haitians how to read and 
write in their native language.™ While much of everyday 
life in Little Haiti is transacted in Creole, outside Little 
Haiti and other communities with high Haitian concentra- 
tions there are very few businesses, service agencies, 
or healthcare providers with Creole-speaking staff. As a 
result, the majority of Haitian immigrants stay within Hai- 
tian social and economic circles in order to transact their 
daily business, a situation that restricts options for hous- 
ing, employment, and transportation. In interviews, Little 
Haiti residents pointed to a perceived lack of information 
reaching residents about resources that exist outside of 
the community’s boundaries. Likewise, those outside the 
Haitian community may not fully understand the needs 
of low-and moderate-income residents of the immigrant 
enclave and the challenges they face in accessing estab- 
lished assistance programs. 

To aid with the language barrier, many Haitian adults 
rely on their children as translators when seeking assis- 
tance. However, children are not always knowledgeable 
enough to make the interpretation accurate or effective. 
Tessa Painson of Catholic Charities’ Toussaint L’Ouverture 
Community Center observed that relying on interpret- 
ers to communicate personal information with service 
agencies is a significant barrier to assistance for Haitian 
immigrants. There is great potential for miscommunica- 
tion between the agencies seeking to help Haitian immi- 
grants and the individuals in need of such assistance.™ 
Poor language skills also restrict the opportunity for 
Haitian immigrants to earn a living and provide for their 
families. Studies show that immigrants who do not mas- 
ter the new language are perceived as less educated 
and intelligent and are therefore offered less favorable 
employment opportunities.™ These findings are echoed 
by Leoni Hermantin, a representative of Sant La Haitian 
Neighborhood Center, who reported that Haitian appli- 
cants are often offered lower salaries and less opportu- 
nity for advancement because of this bias.™ 

In addition to language barriers, the Haitian immi- 
grant community has cultural traits that contribute to its 
social isolation. Representatives from several commu- 
nity-based and social services organizations noted that 
many Haitians do not readily trust agencies or individuals 
providing assistance, and that, despite strong family net- 
works, Haitians keep personal information very closely 
guarded, even from family and close friends.™ Thus, Hai- 
tian immigrants are not likely to ask for assistance, even 
if they are eligible for it.^' 



50 



Organizations that have had success reaching the 
Haitian community have used creative outreach strategies. 
One organization working to address domestic violence 
issues, for instance, used brochures and posters designed 
by a Haitian artist, as well as a color scheme and an art 
style that are distinctly Haitian, to educate the community.^^ 

Jobs and Economic Development 

While the reported 2000 unemployment rate in Little 
Haiti was 19 percent,^^ the majority of the community 
agencies interviewed for this case study emphasized the 
additional underemployment in the area.^'* Many people, 
these individuals noted, work in very low-paying jobs, 
sometimes on a part-time or temporary basis, and are 
forced to work two or three jobs to manage the cost of 
living in Miami. Furthermore, many Haitian immigrants 
are employed in tourism-dependent industries, such as 
hotels and restaurants, that customarily lay off workers 
during slow business periods or seasons.^® Thus, many 
of those living in poverty in Little Haiti are working poor. 
Budgeting, saving, and investing are far-off consider- 
ations for these individuals and families existing on a 
fraction of what is needed to live comfortably in the 
Miami-Dade area. 

While focus-group participants identified access 
to jobs as a top priority,^® significant barriers exist to 
adequate employment in the community, including limited 
English language skills, insufficient access to education 
and vocational training, and uncertainty over immigra- 
tion status. Employees without documentation have 
found themselves taken advantage of by employers who 
demand unreasonable hours or maintain poor work con- 
ditions.^^ Finally, Haitian immigrants are frequently unfa- 
miliar with U.S. labor laws and their rights as workers.^® 

One important avenue for creating jobs in Little Haiti is 
business growth within the community. Haitian immigrants 
have shown a strong entrepreneurial spirit, launching 
numerous businesses in Little Haiti. There is opportunity 
both to expand existing businesses in the community and 
to assist the many other immigrants who have expressed 
an interest in starting their own businesses. Because of 
a strong preference in Little Haiti for culturally oriented 
businesses, existing business owners believe that they 
can better meet the cultural and language needs of local 
consumers while also providing affordable goods and serv- 
ices for the community.^^ “Haitian businesses are closely 
held,” observed Frangois Guillaume, director of the Haitian 



American Chamber of Commerce, “so they can adapt and 
benefit from a cultural advantage that will allow them to 
respond quickly to developing market opportunities and 
offer niche services.”''” 

While opportunities to expand local business exist, 
there is also a significant need to educate and counsel 
entrepreneurs. According to Rasha Soray-Cameau, the 
lack of knowledge of U.S. business practices, including 
required financial reporting, tax payments, licenses, and 
permits, prevents Haitian immigrants from accessing 
needed credit as well as grants to start or expand their 
businesses.'" The rising rents triggered by gentrification 
will also be an obstacle for new and existing businesses 
in Little Haiti. 

Civic Engagement 

With its tradition of strong families, the Haitian com- 
munity provides an important safety net for residents 
of Little Haiti. However, Haitians are also known for their 
reluctance to work together as a larger community.'*^ 
Community service agencies cited this lack of com- 
munity cohesiveness as an obstacle to their efforts to 
advocate collaboratively for resources and policy change 
to help improve the neighborhood.'’” 

The organization that brings the community together 
most effectively is the Catholic Church, which provides 
many services to the Haitian community.'*'’ For example, 
the Catholic Charities branch of the Roman Catholic 
Archdiocese of Miami operates a day-care and pre- 
school center that serves more than 500 children. The 
old school building that houses this center also houses 
the Toussaint L’Ouverture Community Center, which pro- 
vides a variety of social services and English language 
instruction to residents of Little Haiti. 

Notre Dame d’Haiti Catholic Church, located adja- 
cent to the old school building, is the heart of the South 
Florida Haitian Catholic community. According to Father 
Reginald Jean-Mary, the pastor of Notre Dame d’Haiti, 
weekend church services bring close to 4,000 con- 
gregants to Little Haiti from across South Florida, illus- 
trating that multigenerational Haitian families still identify 
with the Little Haiti community.'’” Together, Notre Dame 
d’Haiti and the Toussaint L’Ouverture Center conduct 
outreach and offer programs that provide information, 
education, counseling, and other services to promote 
the social and economic well-being of individuals and 
families in the community. Father Jean-Mary pointed out 



51 



MIAMI, FLORIDA 



MIAMI, FLORIDA 



that, while more could be done by working with addi- 
tional partners to attract resources to Little Haiti, the 
community is wary of outside organizations that do not 
understand it and may not act in its best interest. Conse- 
quently, he is very careful in choosing partners. “I guard 
the integrity of the church and the trust that our parish- 
ioners have in the church very carefully,” he said.'*® 

Managing Money and Credit 

Although residents in Little Haiti value banking serv- 
ices, they feel they do not have access to or would not 
benefit from having a personal bank account. Residents 
appear to view bank accounts as a means of keeping 
their money, rather than managing it; in either case, their 
belief that substantial assets are needed to benefit from 
an account precludes many from even considering open- 
ing one. As one Haitian focus-group participant pointed 
out when asked about access to banking services, “Why 
does one need a bank account if one doesn’t have a 
job?” Most Haitian immigrants did not have access to 
banking in Haiti; thus, the use of banking services is not 
a part of family or community culture. Also, the structured 
banking system within the United States and the types of 
products and services offered by banks and credit unions 
are often viewed as complicated and cumbersome. The 
banking services Haitian immigrants reported needing 
most— remittances, for example— either aren’t provided 
by the local banks or can be procured more conveniently 
at local money transfer service outlets. Finally, there are 
very few Creole-speaking bank employees in Little Halti.'’^ 
Community residents expressed disappointment that a 
Bank of America branch in Little Haiti that had Creole- 
speaking staff has not reopened since being damaged in 
a 2005 hurricane. 

While not all residents of Little Haiti make use of main- 
stream financial services, those interviewed for this case 
study report all agreed on the importance of savings and 
expressed an interest in a variety of investment goals. 
Including homeownership, business start-up, and higher 
education.''® Consumer Credit Counseling Services (CCCS) 
has partnered with Catholic Charities to offer budgeting 
and credit counseling in the Toussaint L’Ouverture Com- 
munity Center. However, despite marketing efforts in Little 
Haiti, residents are still largely unaware that CCCS offers 
services in Creole, reported Carmel Mortimer of CCCS.''® 

Many Haitians also look outside formal financial 
institutions for access to credit. They regularly borrow 



small amounts of money from family and friends, a credit 
activity that functions effectively because of Haitians’ 
strong commitment to family and the high value placed 
on personal honor. One community credit structure used 
by Haitian immigrants is a rotating savings pool called an 
Eso, a longstanding cultural practice that many Haitians 
consider sacred. In an Eso, a group of friends or family 
members In the community contributes a certain amount 
into a savings pool each week. Each member of the 
group then receives the entire amount in the pool in turn. 
Members can use the pool to make a down payment on 
a house, pay for a trip, or cover other expenses.®® 

Youth, Education, and Health 

A close family structure provides a solid safety net for 
Haitian youth. The stability of Haitian families is threatened, 
however, by the multigenerational process of adapting to 
a new culture and society. While foreign-born immigrants 
tend to hold on to their culture, their first-generation 
offspring acclimate quickly to American culture, largely in 
order to adapt during the school years.®' Another threat to 
family stability is the growth of Haitian youth gangs, which 
form to protect members from non-Haitian youth.®® 

Education poses another challenge. Edison High 
School, the high school serving Little Haiti, has the worst 
graduation rate and performance record in the county.®® 

A desire for better education leads many Haitian families 
to either leave Little Haiti or place their children in private 
schools. The Catholic Church provides access to private 
schools, often at reduced tuition or via scholarships to 
those less able to afford such an education. The church 
and other organizations in Little Haiti also offer after- 
school programs, youth groups, and volunteer activities. 

The Miami-Dade public school system has made 
significant efforts to reach out to the Haitian community. 
The school system recently launched a community out- 
reach initiative called the Parent Academy that provides 
information and workshops on a variety of family enrich- 
ment subjects designed to help struggling families and 
to improve the quality of life within the home. Many of 
these classes, as well as attendant informational materi- 
als, are offered in Creole. A goal of this initiative is to 
increase parental involvement In the schools, which 
is particularly Important in an isolated community like 
Little Haiti. Schools with Haitian-American students now 
employ Creole-speaking teachers and are incorporating 
Haitian culture into lesson planning. 



52 



Health care is another particular concern among 
Haitian immigrants. Many lower-income individuals arrive 
in the United States with existing medical problems or 
without standard U.S. immunizations and preventive 
healthcare histories. Poverty also increases health risks 
triggered by overcrowded housing, unsanitary conditions 
in dilapidated homes or workplaces, poor nutrition, and 
lack of preventive health care. Moreover, a number of 
significant barriers thwart low-income individuals from 
accessing needed health care, including a lack of health 
insurance, documentation requirements, and high fees 
for healthcare services.^'' 

■ CONCLUSION 

Little Haiti is a microcosm of the Haitian immigrant expe- 
rience in South Florida. The enclave provides a supportive 
environment for Haitian immigrants as they make their 
transition to the United States. While the neighborhood is 
closely aligned with the social and cultural preferences of 
its Haitian residents, this cultural supportiveness may also 
contribute to the economic isolation of these individuals, 
who find it easier to remain within the community than to 
learn to maneuver within the larger world. Programs and 
services aimed at helping Haitian immigrants increase 
their English language proficiency, improve their educa- 
tional attainment, job skills, and employment opportuni- 
ties, and strengthen their financial position will allow Little 
Haiti’s residents to better acculturate and assimilate into 
the greater Miami economic and social community. The 
need for this assistance is even more critical as gentrifi- 
cation pressure on Little Haiti grows. 

This case study was prepared by Ana Cruz-Taura, senior 
project and communication supervisor, and Jessica 
LeVeen Farr, regionai community deveiopment manager, 
Federai Reserve Bank of Atianta. 



Endnotes 

1 South Florida includes Miami-Dade, Broward, and Palm 
Beach counties. 

2 The 1980s exodus from Haiti coincided with the Mariel Boatlift 
from Cuba, when many Haitians tried to take advantage of the 
U.S. policy at the time, particularly in Miami, to blend in with the 
Cuban immigrants in camps set up to process families arriving by 
the thousands. This latest wave of immigrants from Haiti, like many 
since then, included Haiti’s poorest, those unable to leave the 
island in previous years and desperate to escape the conditions 
they were living in. Shortly after Mariel, the political situation in 



Haiti worsened, and boats full of Haitians kept arriving in Miami, 
the closest established enclave to the country. Hence, the study of 
Haitian enclaves in Miami begins, for the most part, with the 1980s. 

3 Research Institute on Social and Economic Policy (RISEP). 

4 For example, Little Havana, a neighborhood in West Miami estab- 
lished by Cuban immigrants to the United States. 

5 Philip Kretsedemas, “Language Barriers and Perceptions of Bias: 
Ethnic Differences in Immigrant Encounters with the Welfare Sys- 
tem,” Journal of Sociology and Social Welfare 32(4) (2005): 109-23. 
Rebecca Sohmer, “The Haitian Community in Miami-Dade: A Grow- 
ing the Middle Class Supplement” (Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution, 2005). 

6 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

r Sohmer, “The Haitian Community in Miami-Dade: A Growing the 
Middle Class Supplement.” Low-income refers to households earn- 
ing less than $18,000. 

8 Leonie Hermantin, Director of Research and Strategic Planning, 
Sant La Haitian Neighborhood Center. Personal interview in Miami, 
March 1, 2007. Census information is problematic to use in deter- 
mining accurate assessments of Haitian populations as there is no 
separate category for Haitians; they are typically categorized with 
African Americans. 

9 Haitian American refers to second-generation individuals of Haitian 
descent born in the United States. 

10 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

11 Ibid. 

12 “According to the National Association of Realtors, some areas in 
South Florida have seen 46 percent price appreciation in the past 
year, compared with a national price appreciation of 9 percent for 
the same period. The average house price in the second quarter 
of 2005 in Miami was $315,700, up 28 percent from a year prior,” 
from John Bibish IV and Jesse M. Keenan, “Real Estate Market 
Fundamentals in South Florida,” Wharton Real Estate Review, Fall 
2005, available at http://www.ruden.com/assets/attachments/44. 
pdf (accessed June 2007). 

13 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

14 BusinessWeek recently identified Little River, part of the Little Haiti 
neighborhood, as one of the top 10 “Most Up & Coming Neighbor- 
hoods” in the 10 biggest cities nationwide. BusinessWeek identified 
neighborhoods that had seen the most median house-value appre- 
ciation in the past five years to find the neighborhoods that are 
still affordable but have a recent history of significant appreciation. 
According to BusinessWeek, the Little Haiti neighborhood saw a 
five-year price change of 244 percent and, because of its proximity 
to the Design District and downtown Miami, is ripe for gentrifica- 
tion. Maya Roney, “America’s Next Hot Neighborhoods,” Business- 
Week, March 6, 2007, available at http://www.businessweek.com 
(accessed June 2007). 

15 Rasha Soray-Cameau, Administrator, City of Miami Little Haiti 
Neighborhood Enhancement Team Office. Personal interview in 
Miami, April 19, 2007. 

16 The majority of Haitians in Little Haiti speak Haitian Creole, which 
is a French-based dialect used by the majority of the island 
nation’s population. 



53 



MIAMI, FLORIDA 



MIAMI, FLORIDA 



17 Philip Kretsedemas and Ana Aparicio, “Introduction,” in Immigrants, 
Welfare Reform, and the Poverty of Policy, Philip Kretsedemas and 
Ana Aparicio, eds. (Westport, CT: Praeger, 2004). 

18 Jacques St. Louis, Homeownership Counselor and Loan Adminis- 
trator, Little Haiti Housing Association. Personal interview in Miami, 
May 7, 2007. 

19 2005 per capita income in Haiti ($1,680) is the lowest in the 
Western hemisphere, and 59.5 percent of the adult population 
has no formal education. Income Data: Population Reference 
Bureau, “World Population Sheet,” available at http://www.prb.org/ 
pdf05/05WorldDataSheet_Eng.pdf. Education Data: UNESCO Insti- 
tute for Statistics, available at http://www.uis.unesco.org. 

20 Francoise Penha, Human Services Coalition. Personal interview in 
Miami, December 11, 2006. 

21 According to Alex Stepick, Professor of Anthropology, Florida Inter- 
national University, the Cuban and Haitian experiences, overall, 
have been very different. 

22 Alex Stepick, Carol Dutton Stepick, and Philip Kretsedemas, 

“Civic Engagement of Haitian Immigrants and Haitian Americans 
in Miami-Dade County” (Florida International University, 2001). 
Available at http://www.wkkf.org/pubs/Devolution/Pub3670.pdf 
(accessed February 2007). 

23 The Miami Herald recently ran a series of articles focused on the 
increase in Haitian immigrant deportations and the impact of the sud- 
den loss of family members on the children, spouses, and extended 
family that remain in Miami. “Haitian Activist Presses for Legal Rem- 
edy,” Miami Herald, May 23, 2007, 1A. Additionally, Reverend Reginald 
Jean-Mary, pastor of the Notre Dame d'Haiti Catholic Church, says 
that his congregation makes regular collections to help support the 
children and families where a principal wage-earner or care-giver 

is hastily deported. Reginald Jean-Mary, Pastor, Notre Dame d’Haiti 
Catholic Church. Personal interview in Miami, March 14, 2007. 

24 when residency and citizen applications are reviewed by U.S. Citizen- 
ship and Immigration Services, an applicant’s dependence on certain 
subsidies and benefits may result in the applicant’s being labeled a 
“public charge” and receiving less favorable consideration. 

25 Haitian Creole is a French-based dialect used by the majority of 
the island nation’s population. 

26 Tessa Painson, Program Administrator, Catholic Charities of the Arch- 
diocese of Miami, Inc. Personal interview in Miami, April 9, 2007. 

27 Ibid. 

28 Alex Stepick, Pride Against Prejudice: Haitians in the United States 
(Upper Settle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, 1998). Available at http:// 
www.worldlanguage.com/Articles/60.htm. 

29 Leonie Hermantin, Director of Research and Strategic Planning, 

Sant La. Personal interview in Miami, March 1, 2007. Sant La is one 
of the many Haitian-American community organizations in South 
Florida that provide assistance to the Haitian immigrant community. 

30 Community stakeholder interviews conducted in Miami, December 
11, 2006. 

31 In a study of Haitian immigrants in Miami-Dade, a survey found 
that no more than 5 percent of the individuals surveyed applied for 
benefits, even though 80 percent of the survey respondents were 
eligible. Kretsedemas and Aparicio, “Introduction.” 



Michel Sainvil, Executive Director, Center of Information and Orien- 
tation, Inc. Personal interview in Miami, May 7, 2007. 

U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

Interviews with several community agencies conducted at Human 
Services Coalition of Dade County, Inc. offices December 11, 2006. 

Stepick, Pride Against Prejudice: Haitians in the United States. 

Focus group meeting conducted April 17, 2007 at Catholic Charities 
of the Archdiocese of Miami, Inc., Pierre Toussaint Center. 

Stepick, Dutton Stepick, and Kretsedemas, “Civic Engagement of 
Haitian Immigrants and Haitian Americans in Miami-Dade County.” 

Paola Pierre, Director of Administration, Human Services Coalition 
of Dade County, Inc. Personal interview in Miami, May 17, 2007. 

Interviews with Little Haiti business owners on NE 2 Avenue in 
Little Haiti conducted during the week of February 19, 2007. 

Frangois Guillaume, Director, Haitian American Chamber of Com- 
merce. Personal interview in Miami, May 29, 2007. 

Rasha Soray-Cameau, Administrator, City of Miami Little Haiti 
Neighborhood Enhancement Team Office. Personal interview in 
Miami, April 19, 2007. 

Stepick, Dutton Stepick, and Kretsedemas, “Civic Engagement of 
Haitian Immigrants and Haitian Americans in Miami-Dade County.” 

Tessa Painson, Program Administrator, Catholic Charities of the 
Archdiocese of Miami, Inc. Personal Interview in Miami, April 16, 
2007. Alex Stepick, Professor, Florida International University. Per- 
sonal interview in Miami, February 14, 2007. 

Stepick, Dutton Stepick, and Kretsedemas, “Civic Engagement of 
Haitian Immigrants and Haitian Americans in Miami-Dade County.” 

Reginald Jean-Mary Pastor, Notre Dame d’Haiti Catholic Church. 
Personal interview in Miami, March 14, 2007. 

Ibid. 

Focus group meeting conducted April 17, 2007, at Catholic Chari- 
ties of the Archdiocese of Miami, Inc., Pierre Toussaint Center. 

Ibid. 

Carmel Mortimer, Credit Counselor, Consumer Credit Counseling 
Services. Personal Interview, May 10, 2007. 

Harriet Johnson Brackey, “Esos Based on Trust Benefit the Com- 
munity” Miami Herald, May 1, 2005, El. 

Alejandro Portes and Min Zhou, “The New Second Generation: 
Segmented Assimilation and its Variants,” Annals of the American 
Academy of Poiiticai and Social Science 530(1) (1993): 74-96. 

Officer Nerrin, Little Haiti Neighborhood Enhancement Team. Per- 
sonal interview in Miami, April 20, 2007. 

Only 5.4 percent of the students at Miami Edison Senior High are 
considered proficient in reading, and only 24.6 percent are profi- 
cient in math. This is significantly lower than the statewide reading 



32 

33 

34 

35 

36 

37 

38 

39 

40 

41 

42 

43 

44 

45 

46 

47 

48 

49 

50 

51 

52 

53 



54 



proficiency rates for 10th graders (32 percent) and statewide math 
proficiency rate for 10th graders (65 percent). Source: School Mat- 
ters, available at http://www.schoolmatters.com. 

54 Miami-Dade County Immigrant Access Task Force, May 2002. 



55 



MIAMI, FLORIDA 



56 



■ OVERVIEW 



On April 24, 1964, the day President Lyndon Johnson declared war on pov- 
erty, he was photographed with Tom Fletcher’s family on the porch of their 
home in Martin CountyJ That image, which appeared in newspapers across 
the country, became an icon of the 1960s’ efforts to eradicate poverty. In his 
declaration, Johnson stated that his administration was “just not willing to 



accept the necessity of poverty.” They would fight pov- 
erty, he stated, “in all its forms, in all its causes, and we 
intend to drive it underground and win that war.”^ 

At the time, Martin County epitomized much of what 
indigent communities suffered from: isolation, poor educa- 
tion, lack of employment, and, of course, very low incomes. 
The county’s per capita personal income was about 35 
percent of the national average.^ Today, although its pov- 
erty rate is less extreme than it was in the 1960s, Martin 
County is still one of the poorest in the United States and 
continues to face many of its historical challenges. 



■ BACKGROUND 

In the early 1800s, settlers migrated from the Virginias 
and Carolinas to settle a remote, desolate wilderness in 
eastern Kentucky. They farmed the land and built school- 
houses in hopes of sustaining a prosperous life in the 
mountainous area. Traders ferried goods to the settlers 
by way of the Tug Fork of the Big Sandy River. In 1870, 
settlers lobbied the Kentucky state legislature to estab- 
lish Martin County, named for Congressman James P. 
Martin, a native of Prestonsburg.*’ 



57 



MARTIN COUNTY, KENTUCKY 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Martin County 



Kentucky non-metro 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


55.9 


33.9 




Poverty rate 2000® 


37.0 


21.1 


Income 


Median household income® 


$18,279 


$27,275 


Demographics 


Population 2000® 


12,578 


1,756,697 




% Population change, 1970 - 2000® 


34.1 


26.3 




Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 




% White 


98.9 


94.6 




% Hispanic/Latino 


0.3 


0.9 




% Black/African-American 


0.1 


3.3 




% Residents under age 189 


28.1 


24.1 




% Single-parent households® 


13.6 


8.1 




% Foreign born, 2000' 


0.1 


0.9 




% Population in same house as five years ago' 


69.2 


60.8 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000'' 


46.0 


34.2 




% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


9.0 


11.3 




% Students proficient in reading, 2005"' 


22.5 


57.0 




% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


29.1 


71.9 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


12.8 


7.0 




% Adults in the labor force'' 


37.4 


54.6 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


79.4 


75.2 




% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


46.3 


37.7 




Median value for owner-occupied units® 


$62,100 


$66,911 




Median year structure built' 


1980 


1977 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


22.8 


19.6 




% Credit files with high credit scores" 


48.3 


53.0 




% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005*" 


46.9 


32.4 




Mortgage denial rate, 2005" 


43.0 


29.0 



Located in far eastern Kentucky, Martin County is 
part of the federally designated Appalachian region; 
it is bordered by Johnson, Floyd, Pike, and Lawrence 
counties. The city of Inez is the current county seat. The 
county’s remoteness, mountainous topography, and inad- 
equate infrastructure isolate residents from each other 
and from the surrounding communities and resources. 
Though Martin County’s elevation is not particularly high 
(it ranges from 550 to 1,606 feet above sea level), little 
flat land exists in the extremely rocky area, making devel- 
opment difficult.^ Streams and tributaries of the Tug Fork 
River run through the narrow valleys, called “hollers,” that 
mark the landscape in Martin County. Much of the lower- 



lying area, found mostly at the base of these narrow 
valleys, is prone to flooding. 

Martin County’s population of approximately 12,600 is 
clustered in many very small communities, each made up 
of several dozen to several hundred people. Unlike many 
rural counties, Martin County has not suffered significant 
population loss. (See Table 1) Between 1970 and 2000, 
its population grew from 9,377 to 12,578, although 2005 
estimates show a slight decline, to 12,215, since 2000.® 
Racially, Martin County is almost entirely white (98.9 per- 
cent). While Martin County’s racial composition changed 
very little between 1990 and 2000, other rural counties 
in Kentucky saw their Flispanic populations nearly triple 



58 





FIGURE 1 

Poverty rate in Martin County, 1970-2000 




1970 1980 1990 2000 

SOURCE: Geolytics Neighborhood Change Database 



> 

33 



O 

O 

c 



m 



c 

O 

-< 



over this period, albeit from a very small base (from 5,370 
to 15,784). 

Martin County flourished in the 1970s because of 
increased coal production and skyrocketing coal prices. 
By 1980, per capita personal income had increased to 
80 percent of the national average, up 46 percent from 
1970.^ New businesses opened in Inez and roads were 
improved, accommodating greater travel into and out 
of the county. As a result, Martin County experienced a 
decline in its poverty rate from 56 percent in 1970 to 27 
percent by 1980. (See Figure 1) 

The county’s relative prosperity was short-lived, how- 
ever. Along with a national recession, the 1980s brought a 
near-collapse of the coal industry, undoing much 
of the previous decade’s economic growth. figure : 
Businesses in Inez began to close, coal produc- 
tion slowed, and unemployment rose steadily.® 

By 2000, the county’s per capita income had 
dropped to roughly 55 percent of the national 
average, and the poverty rate had risen to 37 
percent. More than half (53.3 percent) of its 
households had incomes of less than $20,000, 
and about 30 percent of its households had 
incomes of less than $10,000. 

Economically, Martin County still relies heavily 
on coal production. In 2004, 40 percent of the 
county’s wage income came from mining.® As 
illustrated in Figure 2, the number of jobs and 
the total volume of coal production in eastern 
Kentucky have been decreasing steadily. In addi- 
tion, advances in technology have led to greater 
coal production with less labor. As a result, the 



productivity of eastern Kentucky’s mines reached an all- 
time high in 2000 of 3.86 tons per miner per hour, more 
than double the 1981 rate of 1.76 tons per miner per hour.” 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

A number of interconnected, complex issues affect Martin 
County residents’ ability to move out of poverty. Apart 
from the declining coal industry, Martin County residents 
have extremely limited employment options, and many 
lack the skills and training to find and keep the jobs that 
are available. The effects of multigenerational poverty 
also loom large; many residents are the second or third 



Eastern Kentucky coal production and 
employment, 1980-2004 



40.000 

35.000 

30.000 

25.000 

20.000 

15.000 

10.000 
5,000 
0 



O 

Z) 

Q 



< 

o 

o 

u. 

o 

CO 




SOURCE: Kentucky Office of Energy Policy, Kentucky Coal Facts: 
2005-2006 Guide 



59 



NUMBER OF COAL WORKERS 




MARTIN COUNTY, KENTUCKY 



FIGURE 3 



Employment rates of disabled working-age 
males, 2000 



Working-age males with a disability, 2000 




SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 



60 T 




Martin Region Non-metro Kentucky 
County Kentucky 



SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 



generation in their families to be on welfare. In addition, the 
county’s remote location means that many residents feel 
cut off from opportunities that exist in the wider region. 

The Scarcity of Good Full-Time Jobs 

As noted earlier, Martin County’s economy is still 
driven largely by coal production, yet today only 20 per- 
cent of employed residents work in the natural resources 
and mining sector. Consider that less than 30 years ago, 
in 1980, when mining employment peaked, half of the 
county’s employed adults worked in that sector. Indeed, 
the county has experienced a decline of nearly 400 jobs 
since 2003, mostly in the natural resources and mining 
sector." Only two areas, both service related, showed 
employment growth between 2001 and 2005.'^ 

As the mining sector’s share of jobs has decreased, 
jobs in service industries and in trade, transportation, and 
utilities have risen in prominence. In 2000, the largest 
proportion (27 percent) of employed county residents 
worked in schools, the home healthcare industry, clinics 
or doctors’ offices, and child-care facilities, followed by 25 
percent in trade, transportation, and utilities. This shift has 
meant a decline in average wages. In 2000, for example, 
mining jobs paid an average annual wage of about 
$58,800, compared with $16,140 for service-sector jobs.’^ 

Unlike many other non-metropolitan Kentucky coun- 
ties, where manufacturing accounts for nearly 20 percent 
of jobs, Martin County’s manufacturing accounts for only 
about 4 percent of employment opportunities. In most 
cases, jobs lie outside Martin County. As one resident 



said, “If you want a good [paying] job, you have to go 
somewhere else.” The opening of a new federal prison 
in 2001 raised hopes for new jobs, but only a few of the 
prison’s 400 positions went to county residents. Some 
were new hires who lived in the region, but many were 
already prison employees who were transferred from 
other facilities and settled in surrounding counties. “I’m 
sure less than 10 percent of all [prison] employees are 
actually from Martin County,” noted one economic devel- 
opment stakeholder. 

Ready and Able Workforce 

Martin County unemployment rates are higher than 
in other parts of the state, reflecting in part the lack of 
a broad range of employment opportunities. In 2000, 13 
percent of the labor force in Martin County was unem- 
ployed, compared with 7 percent unemployment in all of 
Kentucky’s non-metro counties and 6 percent statewide. 

Even more striking, however, is the extremely low 
labor-force participation rate in Martin County. In 2000, 
only 37 percent of the population age 16 and over partici- 
pated in the labor force. This is significantly lower than 
the labor-force participation rates in non-metro counties 
in Kentucky (55 percent) and in the state (61 percent). 

One reason for these low labor-force participation 
rates is the high rate of disability affecting the Martin 
County workforce. (See Figure 3) Although having a dis- 
ability does not preclude individuals from holding a job, it 
does make them less likely to be employed or participate 
in the labor force and more likely to have lower incomes. 



60 




receive income through government assistance pro- 
grams, and live in poverty.''* In 2000, nearly 44 percent 
of the county’s working-age males (16 to 64 years old) 
had a disability; of those, just 16 percent were employed. 
Thirty-five percent of the county’s working-age females 
were disabled and, like their male counterparts, only 16 
percent of the disabled were employed. Nationally, the 
counties with the highest disability rates were concen- 
trated in the coal mining areas of Kentucky, West Vir- 
ginia, and Virginia, according to a 2003 Census Bureau 
report.'^ Martin County also had a comparatively high 
number of workers’ compensation claims from non-fatal 
occupational injuries (229), representing approximately 
2 percent of its population, a higher rate than any of the 
surrounding counties and more than double Kentucky’s 
rate (0.9 percent).'® 

Health issues are also a concern. Regional data show 
a high incidence of chronic disease as well as behavioral 
risk factors that contribute to the onset of illness."’ Thirty- 
seven percent of residents in the Big Sandy Area Devel- 
opment District (BSADD)— composed of Martin and the 
nearby counties of Johnson, Floyd, Pike, and Magoffin— 
characterize their general health as fair or poor, com- 
pared with 24 percent in Kentucky and about 15 percent 
nationally. The incidence of some chronic illnesses is also 
higher for residents of the district. Approximately 13 per- 
cent of them report suffering from asthma and 10 percent 
with diabetes, higher than the percentages in Kentucky 
(9.5 percent asthma and 7 percent diabetes) and national 
figures (7.5 percent asthma and 6.8 percent diabetes).'® 

Overall educational attainment is lower in Martin 
County than in non-metro counties across Kentucky, 
further limiting employability. Nearly half of Martin County 
residents aged 25 and older lack a high school diploma, 
compared with 34 percent of the state’s non-metro 
counties. Only 9 percent of Martin County residents hold 
a bachelor’s degree. At the elementary and secondary 
levels, the county ranks at or below average on several 
tests: No Child Left Behind, Commonwealth Accountabil- 
ity Test, and national-norm-referenced instruments such 
as the California Test of Basic Skills. The county met only 
six of 13 goals under No Child Left Behind. All the sur- 
rounding counties met 11 or more goals. 

Recent increases in drug activity in the county may 
be exacerbating employment difficulties. Cne stake- 
holder believes that greater emphasis on workplace drug 
testing in mining and the service sector has led to many 
job applicants failing the required tests. Drug arrests in 



Martin County rose from three per 1,000 persons in 2003 
to 14 per 1,000 persons in 2005.'® Cver this three-year 
period, the incidence of drug offenses increased more in 
Martin County than in the surrounding region. Although 
the increase in drug arrests may result from regional 
initiatives’ tougher enforcement standards,®® some of the 
county’s residents perceive an escalating prescription 
drug problem. Cne resident commented, “Almost every 
week since January, somebody’s died of a drug overdose 
in this county.” 

Efforts to help connect Martin County residents to 
jobs are under way, but their scale is limited. Training and 
development for the county’s workforce is provided by 
two agencies: the Big Sandy Community Action Part- 
nership and the Kentucky State Cffice of Employment 
and Training. The latter provides assistance through a 
program called Kentucky Works. As of April 2007, 60 
residents were involved in that program, which engages 
individuals in group job searches and work-readiness 
activities. The success rate among the Martin County par- 
ticipants, however, has been low. Since 2005, just three of 
them have been placed in permanent employment.®' 

Isolation and Multigenerational Poverty 

The county’s topography is partly responsible for 
its limited development opportunities. The mountains, 
coupled with the area’s many streams and other water- 
ways, make site preparation for facilities costly. Denise 
Thomas, a community and economic development 
associate with the Big Sandy Area Development District, 
noted that developable land is limited “just by the nature 
of the terrain.”®® In addition, much of the county is only 
indirectly accessible from the two main roadways and 
lies on land that cannot be reached by public water and 
sewage lines. The scarcity of developable land and the 
lack of infrastructure also hamper new housing construc- 
tion. “One thing that’s happened to us in Martin County 
[is that] access to utilities has prevented a lot of devel- 
opment,” observed Eric Ratliff, a housing planner with 
Mountain Housing Corporation.®® 

The county’s mountainous topography also serves 
to isolate residents physically. Few roads connect Martin 
County with surrounding communities, limiting the flow 
of people into and out of the county and contributing 
to residents’ overall sense of disconnection from the 
world outside. “Kids grow up and they have not been out 
of Martin County to see what life is like,” noted Phyllis 



61 



MARTIN COUNTY, KENTUCKY 



MARTIN COUNTY, KENTUCKY 



Vanhoose, community services coordinator for Big Sandy 
Community Action Program.^"' “They just grow up and fol- 
low in their parents’ footsteps. I see a lot of [families with] 
three generations coming in here for the same thing— 
they need more exposure to different ways of life.” Some 
residents believe the extension of State Route 645 across 
Martin County into West Virginia, currently under way, will 
help increase the county’s exposure and accessibility. 

The county has few of the amenities that might 
attract outsiders. Its restaurants and small, locally owned 
retail business are mostly clustered in and around the 
towns of Inez and Warfield. Sit-down dining choices are 
extremely limited. The shopping landscape includes 
three grocery stores, a few convenience stores, dollar 
stores, a video store, and a hardware store; there are no 
department or clothing stores. Many residents said they 
use facilities and businesses outside the county for their 
shopping, entertainment, and recreational needs. “You 
have to go outside Martin. ..[we] go to Wal-Mart in Paints- 
ville for stuff,” explained one married female resident. 

“We feel like we’re the forgotten county,” noted another 
resident. Community leaders hope that such feelings of 



isolation may be mitigated by the amenities available 
in the new Roy F. Collier Community Center in Inez. The 
center, which provides a state-of-the-art movie theater, 
fitness center, children’s indoor play area, and a venue for 
residents’ entertainment, is also attracting regional users. 

In 2000, roughly 70 percent of Martin County residents 
five years of age and older were living in the same house 
they’d occupied in 1995; 89 percent had been living in the 
county since then. This lack of mobility— coupled with the 
scarcity of jobs for lower-skill residents— has contributed to 
the perception that poverty is a “fact of life” in the county. 

While little data exist to show how many successive 
generations are trapped in poverty, anecdotal evidence 
from stakeholders and residents indicates that multigen- 
erational poverty is an important issue. “Growing up here 
there’s always been poverty,” noted Christ! Kirk, execu- 
tive director of the Martin County Economic Development 
Authority. “You’ll find there are certain families [where] 
nothing has changed.”^^ 

“It’s generational,” added Phyllis Vanhoose. “[There’s 
a perception that] ‘Mommy and daddy got by without 
working so I can get by without working.’ We have a lot 







r 






Mountainous topography and a paucity of roads ieading into and out of Martin County contribute to residents’ sense of isoiation. 



62 





of people who come in here who are 18 to, let’s say, 30 
who have zero income, who receive food stamps. We 
give them assistance to heat their house; they just live 
like that.”^® Anecdotal information also suggests that 
members of extended families depend on each other for 
financial support. As one resident admitted, “My mama 
and [family] they do help pay my bills, but I feel guilty for 
what I take from them.” 

Dependency on social welfare programs is high in 
the county. Forty-eight percent of its households report 
no earned income, compared with 33 percent for rural 
Kentucky. Almost 13 percent of the county’s households 
receive public assistance income and 19 percent receive 
supplemental security income (SSI). By comparison, 
just under 4 percent of all Kentucky households receive 
income from public assistance. Nearly 50 percent of 
county residents are eligible for Medicaid benefits, com- 
pared with about 21 percent in the state.^^ Thirty percent 
of county residents received food stamps in 2002, com- 
pared with 20 percent in the non-metro counties and 11 
percent statewide.^® 

The issues of welfare dependency and overcom- 
ing multigenerational poverty were raised in interviews. 

“I think a lot of people are used to [poverty] and they’re 
comfortable with it,” observed Denise Stepp, coordinator 
of the Warfield Elementary School’s Family Resource Cen- 
ter. “It’s like they’re comfortable where they’re at. They’re 
satisfied with drawing welfare. I don’t know how to break 
that cycle.”^® 

The combined lack of opportunity and hope also 
manifests itself in residents’ limited participation in com- 
munity activities. “Most people are just not active in the 
community. So how do you gauge what people want and 
what people need if they’re not active, if they don’t talk. If 
they don’t look for options and all of these things? They 
just stay where they are and just continue down their 
little road and nothing ever changes,” stated Kirk.“ At 
least one resident saw a distressing lack of dreams and 
aspirations among the county’s residents to live beyond 
what they have experienced their entire lives. “Where are 
Martin County’s poets, writers, artisans, and musicians?” 
lamented longtime resident Linda Booth.®' “I can’t believe 
God distributed talent based on geography.” 

Housing and Asset Development 

Unlike several of the urban communities described 
in this report, Martin County’s housing and credit issues 



revolve around a preponderance of mobile housing units, 
rather than a high proportion of publicly subsidized rental 
housing. Indeed, most of the county’s households (79.4 
percent) own their homes— a larger percentage than the 
non-metro counties of Kentucky (75.2 percent) and the 
state (70.8 percent). Nearly 40 percent of these Martin 
County homes are mobile, or manufactured, homes.®® 
Despite a longstanding negative perception, mobile 
homes can offer an affordable means of homeownership 
to many low-income rural families.®® 

In fact, most of the homeowners in Martin County 
do not carry a mortgage. According to the 2000 census, 
about 68 percent of the county’s residents owned their 
homes outright, a substantially higher rate than that of 
the region (57 percent). According to HMDA data, Mar- 
tin County residents who wish to finance the purchase 
of a home appear to have access to credit. They tend 
to request loans for mobile homes more often than 
residents in Kentucky’s non-metro counties as a whole. 

In 2005, there were 458 home loan applications in the 
county: 59 percent of them for one- to four-family houses 
and 41 percent for manufactured housing. In contrast, 85 
percent of the home loan applications in the non-metro 
counties of Kentucky were for one- to four-family houses 
and only 15 percent were for manufactured housing. In 
Martin County, more than half the applications for mort- 
gage loans for manufactured housing (54 percent) were 
denied; of the loans that were originated, two-thirds 
were high cost.®” (Results do not reflect lending activity 
for Martin County’s two local financial institutions, since 
neither financed any loans reportable under the Home 
Mortgage Disclosure Act for this period.) Curiously, of the 
county’s successful applicants for manufactured hous- 
ing loans, almost 19 percent did not take the loans after 
being approved by the lending institutions.®® 

Martin County residents enjoy relatively good access 
to financial services. Two local financial institutions— Inez 
Deposit Bank and Family Savings Bank— provide Martin 
County residents with access to a range of additional 
financial services. H&R Block also operates a facility in 
Inez. No credit unions or check-cashing establishments 
are located in the county. 

■ CONCLUSION 

The ongoing challenge for Martin County is to find ways 
to expand its economy. Coal production, though declining 
overall, continues to drive the economy. “We try to expand, 



63 



MARTIN COUNTY, KENTUCKY 



MARTIN COUNTY, KENTUCKY 



but it’s harder than you think,” noted one business leader. 
“[We’ve] got the crutch of coal to rely upon.” 

The state government is using the coal severance 
and non-coal mineral reimbursement tax to try to redirect 
some coal Income to projects that diversify Kentucky’s 
economy. Under this program, a portion of tax dollars 
paid to the state for extracting coal and non-coal miner- 
als is returned to the producing counties to help diversify 
their economies.^® Martin County averages $4.4 million a 
year in allocated coal and mineral tax dollars.^^ Its recent 
purchases and projects financed with coal severance tax 
dollars include new fire trucks, sewer improvements, and 
construction of a community center, public library, health- 
care clinic, and substance abuse center for women. 

The Big Sandy Area Development District has also 
designed a comprehensive regional strategy for eco- 
nomic development in 2006. It Includes several of Martin 
County’s projects, such as sewer and water extensions, 
roadway improvements, office building construction, and 
fire safety enhancements.^® The county has also received 
help from the Appalachian Regional Commission, which 
is charged with assisting economic and social develop- 
ment In the Impoverished rural areas of Appalachia. From 
1966 to 2006, the commission awarded Martin County 
$2.3 million for development projects, most of which 
was spent on water and sewer infrastructure, followed 
by health, housing, and economic development.®® More 
important, these funds leveraged an additional $22.8 mil- 
lion for the county in federal, state, and local funds. 

Still, a comprehensive strategy for economic devel- 
opment and alleviating poverty there remains elusive. As 
in President Johnson’s day, Martin County remains one of 
the poorest areas in Appalachia and one of the poorest 
counties in the nation. 

This case study was prepared by Jeff Gatica, senior com- 
munity affairs advisor, Federai Reserve Bank of Cieveiand. 



Endnotes 

1 Dan A. Black and Seth G. Sanders, “Labor Market Performance, 
Poverty, and Income Inequality in Appalachia,” Appalachian Regional 
Commission, September 2004. Available at http://www.arc.gov/ 
images/reports/labormkt/labormkt.pdf 

2 Lyndon B. Johnson, Remarks at the Johnson County Courthouse, 
Paintsville, Kentucky, 1964. The American Presidency Project at the 
University of California, Santa Barbara; available at; http;//www. 
presidency.ucsb.edu/ws/?pid=26190. 

3 Bill Straub, “From war on poverty: from LBJ to Clinton,” Cincinnati 
Post, July 3, 1999. 



4 Henry P. Scalf, Kentucky’s Last Frontier (Tennessee: The Overmoun- 
tain Press, 1966). 

5 University of Kentucky, The Kentucky Atlas and Gazetteer. Available 
at http://www.uky.edu/KentuckyAtias/kentucky.html. 

6 U.S. Census Bureau, American Community Survey, 2005. Popula- 
tion estimates by county are available at http://www.census.gov. 

7 Kelvin M. Pollard, “Population Growth and Distribution in Appa- 
lachia: New Realities,” Population Reference Bureau and the 
Appalachian Regional Commission, 2005. Appalachian Regional 
Commission, “Labor Market Performance, Poverty, and Income 
Inequality in Appalachia,” 2007; available at http://www.arc.gov/ 
index.do?nodeld=2469 (accessed November 1, 2007). 

8 Jill Riepenhoff, “Homeward Bound Columbus Native Plants Roots 
in Birthplace of ‘War on Poverty,’” Columbus Dispatch, September 
26, 1999, 10A. 

9 Kentucky Office of Energy Policy, Kentucky Coal Facts: 2005-2006 
Guide; available at http://www.energy.ky.gov/NR/rdonlyres/D1789895- 
658E-404F-BEA0-99ED4F4AC835/0/CoalFacts200506.pdf. 

10 Kentucky Office of Energy Policy, Kentucky Coal Facts: 2005-2006 
Guide. 

11 Kentucky Education Cabinet, Office of Employment and Training, 
May 14, 2007. 

12 Kentucky Education Cabinet, Office of Employment and Training, 
May 14, 2007. Education and health services, not including public 
education, increased by 60 jobs. Leisure and hospitality employ- 
ment increased by 40. 

13 Regional Economic Information System, Bureau of Economic Analy- 
sis, U.S. Department of Commerce, Tables CA25 and CA05. 

14 U.S. Census Bureau, “Disability and American Families: 2000,” Cen- 
sus 2000 Special Reports, Department of Commerce, July 2005. 

15 U.S. Census Bureau, “Disability Status: 2000.” Census 2000 Brief, 
Department of Commerce, March 2003. 

16 Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services, 2002 Kentucky 
Counties Health Indicators; available at http://chfs.ky.gov/NR/ 
rdonlyres/07433E82-7D28-4A4F-A338-06FCACD076C9/0/ 
Summary.pdf. 

17 CDC Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) Report, 
2004 (accessed online at the Kentucky Cabinet for Health and 
Family Services). C. Wang and W. A. Satariano, “Self-rated current 
and future health independently predict subsequent mortality in 
an aging population,” Journal of Gerontology Series A; Medical Sci- 
ences (62) (2007): 1428-34. 

18 CDC Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (BRFSS) Report, 
2004 (accessed online at the Kentucky Cabinet for Health and 
Family Services). 

19 Kentucky Justice and Public Safety Cabinet, Sourcebook of Crimi- 
nal Justice Statistics, 2005. 

20 In April 2003, Operation UNITE (Unlawful Narcotics Investigations, 
Treatment and Education) was launched to address drug issues 
in several Kentucky counties, including Martin. UNITE works to 
rid communities of illegal drug activity through undercover drug 
investigations, provides support for substance abusers and their 



64 



families, and educates the public about the dangers of drug use 
(more information available at http://www.operationunite.org). 

21 Office of Employment and Training, Kentucky Works Program. 

22 Denise Thomas, Community and Economic Development Associ- 
ate, Big Sandy Area Development District. Personal interview in 
Martin County, February 14, 2007. 

23 Eric Ratliff, Housing Planner, Mountain Housing Corporation. Per- 
sonal interview in Martin County, February 14, 2007. 

24 Phyllis Vanhoose, Community Services Coordinator, Big Sandy 
Community Action Partnership. Personal interview in Martin 
County, January 9, 2007 

25 Christ! Kirk, Executive Director, Martin County Economic Development 
Authority. Personal interview in Martin County, February 14, 2007. 

26 Phyllis Vanhoose, Community Services Coordinator, Big Sandy 
Community Action Partnership. Personal interview in Martin 
County, January 9, 2007 

27 Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services, 2002 County 
Health and Social Indicators. 

26 Kentucky Cabinet for Health and Family Services, 2002 County 
Health and Social Indicators. 

29 Denise Stepp, Coordinator, Family Resource Center, Warfield 
Elementary School. Personal interview in Martin County, February 
28, 2007. 

30 Christ! Kirk, Executive Director, Martin County Economic Development 
Authority. Personal interview in Martin County, February 14, 2007. 

31 Linda Booth, Resident. Personal interview in Martin County, 

January 2007 

32 By comparison, just over two-thirds (67.9 percent) of the hous- 
ing stock is single-family homes in the other non-metro counties 
and nearly one-quarter (22.9 percent) is mobile homes. Similarly, 
single-family homes comprise 68 percent of the housing stock 
in the state of Kentucky, while mobile homes comprise a smaller 
percentage (14.1 percent) of the housing stock. 

33 A nationwide study found that 80 percent of mobile-home resi- 
dents owned their residences. Population Reference Bureau, 
available at http://www.prb.org/Articles/2004/ 
ManufacturedHomesaBigFactorinRuralHomeownershipinUS.aspx. 

34 The number of originations for manufactured housing in Martin 
County was 24. 

35 2005 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data. 

36 Two specific programs— the Local Government Economic Develop- 
ment Fund (LGEDF) and the Local Government Economic Assis- 
tance Fund (LGEAF)— allocate a portion of state-collected coal 
severance tax dollars back to the producing counties. 

37 Kentucky Governor’s Office for Local Development. 

38 Comprehensive Economic Development Strategy-Martin 
County Projects. 

39 Appalachian Regional Commission, May 23, 2007. 



65 



MARTIN COUNTY, KENTUCKY 



66 



■ OVERVIEW 



Sweeping grasslands of the high plains dominate the eastern landscape 
of the Blackfeet Reservation in Montana. Rising westward into the rug- 
ged Rocky Mountains, the reservation’s high plains reach elevations up to 
9,000 feet. This breathtaking natural landscape provides an uncharacter- 
istic backdrop for the reservation’s impoverished communities. While the 



reservation’s remote, rural landscape is not typically 
associated with a geographic setting for concentrated 
poverty, its residents experience many of the same 
issues associated with concentrated poverty in urban 
communities, such as limited employment opportunities, 
high levels of welfare dependency, insufficient housing, 
and few services or community amenities. As one tribal 
housing official explained, the vast open spaces can be 
misleading. Some reservation neighborhoods, he said, 
“look like inner-city slums, just spread out over a much 
larger area.”' 



■ BACKGROUND 

The Blackfeet Reservation— home to the largest of 
Montana’s Native American tribes, the Southern Piegan 
Blackfeet— is located in a remote, sparsely populated 
region of northwestern Montana. The reservation, which 
covers nearly 1.5 million acres, is larger than the state of 
Delaware.^ It is bordered by Canada to the north and Gla- 
cier National Park to the west and encompasses much of 
Glacier County and the northwestern portion of Pondera 
County. Slightly more than 10,000 people live there, of 



67 




BLACKFEET RESERVATION, MONTANA 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Blackfeet Reservation 



Montana non-metro 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


n/a 


14.6 




Poverty rate 2000*’ 


33.8 


15.3 


Income 


Median household income'’ 


$24,566 


$32,434 


Demographics 


Population 2000^* 


10,115 


573,885 




% Population change, 1970 - 2000'’ 


n/a 


27.8 




Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 




% White 


13.8 


89.8 




% Hispanic/Latino 


1.3 


1.7 




% Native American 


80.6 


6.5 




% Residents under age 189 


38.2 


25.7 




% Single-parent households*’ 


20.9 


7.7 




% Foreign born, 2000' 


1.9 


1.8 




% Population in same house as five years ago' 


63.3 


55.1 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000*' 


25.6 


13.6 




% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


13.5 


23.2 




% Students proficient in reading, 2005"' 


22.8 


66.0 




% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


10.4 


56.9 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000'’ 


22.6 


6.6 




% Adults in the labor forced 


60.7 


63.9 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


55.5 


70.9 




% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


31.0 


48.6 




Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$61,518 


$94,737 




Median year structure built' 


1976 


1976 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


29.0 


19.4 




% Credit files with high credit scores" 


41.8 


64.8 




% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


14.3 


21.2 




Mortgage denial rate, 2005* 


41.3 


18.9 



whom approximately 8,500 are enrolled members of the 
Blackfeet tribe.^ (See Table 1) 

The main community on the reservation and the seat 
of the tribal government is the town of Browning, where 
roughly half of the reservation’s population lives. Yet even 
Browning feels isolated, not only from the other commu- 
nities on the reservation but also from the surrounding 
region. Cut Bank (population 3,000), the closest off-res- 
ervation town, is 35 miles away; Great Falls, the closest 
metropolitan area, is 142 miles southeast of Browning. 
While the reservation does boast some geographic 
advantages, specifically related to tourism and ranching, 
it remains distant from established urban centers and the 



opportunities and amenities they provide. The region’s 
weather can be inhospitable and contributes to the sense 
of isolation: temperatures during winter can drop to 40 
degrees below zero Fahrenheit, and winds typically blow 
across the plains at 50 to 60 miles per hour. 

Unlike many other remote rural areas that are losing 
residents, the reservation’s population increased 
almost 20 percent between 1990 and 2000, adding just 
over 1,600 people. This growth was a product both of 
in-migration and a higher-than-average birth rate.” Overall, 
reservation residents are young, with nearly 40 percent 
of them under the age of 18, compared with 26 percent in 
Montana’s non-metro areas as a whole. 



68 





In addition to having a younger population, the 
reservation has a poverty rate of 34 percent, significantly 
higher than the neighboring counties of Flathead (13 
percent) and Pondera (19 percent). In the non-reservation 
portions of Glacier County, the poverty rate is roughly 
14 percent. While the poverty rate on the reservation 
remains high, the 1990s saw a significant decline in the 
poverty rate, which was estimated at around 50 percent 
in 1989.= 

The reservation’s continuing high poverty rates are 
driven by a number of factors, not least of which is the 
lack of private-sector activity and jobs. The U.S. Depart- 
ment of Agriculture (USDA) described Glacier County’s 
economy in 2004 as “government-dependent,” with low 
levels of employment and significant housing stress.® 
Public program and census data from 2000 support 
this conclusion. In that year, the unemployment rate on 
the reservation was nearly 23 percent, compared with 7 
percent in non-metro Montana.^ Reservation households 
were also far more likely to receive public assistance (20 
percent of households, compared with only 3 percent in 
non-metro Montana). Educational attainment on the reser- 
vation is also low. In 2000, one-quarter of the adult popu- 
lation lacked a high school diploma or equivalent, nearly 
double the 14 percent rate in rural Montana as a whole. 

The Blackfeet Reservation also faces significant 
housing problems, similar to those in many other Native 
American communities.® The homeownership rate on the 
reservation was 56 percent in 2000, at least 15 percentage 
points lower than the state overall. Housing conditions are 



also poor. According to the USDA, at least 30 percent of 
the reservation’s households lived in housing that lacks 
complete plumbing and/or kitchen facilities.® Overcrowd- 
ing is also prevalent on the reservation.” 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Our analysis of publicly available data, along with inter- 
views of residents and stakeholders, suggests that the 
reservation’s remote location and institutional develop- 
ment— namely, the federal management of trust land and 
the tribe’s governance structure— have impeded eco- 
nomic development there." Inadequate housing is also 
an issue that many residents raised in interviews. These 
three issues— governance, economic development, and 
housing— are explored below. 

Governance 

Federal policies and political reforms that sought to 
impose a governance structure on the reservation and 
manage reservation lands helped to shape the current 
poverty conditions there in two important ways.’® First, 
the passage of the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA) in 
1934 made significant changes in the tribal leadership 
structure.’® The IRA established both a constitution and 
a tribal council, both of which were alien to the non-hier- 
archical, inclusive leadership models that the Blackfeet 
had traditionally followed. This tribal council structure, 
which remains in force today, bears responsibility for 
a significant share of reservation activities, serving as 
both the executive and legislative bodies of the tribe and 
overseeing all economic and social welfare programs. 




The remote Blackfeet Reservation, encompassing an area 
larger than the state of Delaware, is home to some 8,500 mem- 
bers of the Southern Piegan Blackfeet tribe. 



69 



BLACKFEET RESERVATION, MONTANA 






BLACKFEET RESERVATION, MONTANA 



The tribe’s IRA constitution may have been adequate 
when it was adopted, but its separation of powers is 
not strong enough to meet the complex responsibilities 
of the current tribal government and economy, accord- 
ing to many interviewees. This has limited economic 
development on the reservation by creating an uncertain 
business environment for private-sector investment. For 
example, policies that originated with a particular tribal 
council or council member are sometimes rescinded 
if that council is not re-elected. The council can also 
intervene in the tribal court’s decisions because there is 
no official, mandated separation between the court and 
the council. Knowing that the council can influence or 
overturn the court’s decisions makes lenders and inves- 
tors wary. “Banks won’t sign a contract that’s made on 
the reservation,” noted one tribal elected official. “The 
lenders believe it’s better to sign contracts off the reser- 
vation because they are more protected; they’re covered 
by state law and not tribal law.” 

Second, the compulsory system of reservation land 
and resource management, which has been in effect 
on the reservation since the late 1800s, gives manage- 
ment responsibilities to the Department of the Interior, 
which holds roughly two-thirds of the reservation’s 
land in trust for the tribe or individual members. Land 
held in trust cannot be sold or encumbered by a lien 
unless the transaction is first approved by the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs (BIA), often a lengthy undertaking. This 
legacy of trust land management continues to influence 
the reservation’s economy in many ways, including on 
land’s availability as an asset for economic and hous- 
ing development. One community development leader 
called it “an old dinosaur system that’s supposed to be 
the guardian of Indian people.” She stated that “all of 
our land and assets were given to the Department of the 
Interior to manage, and we had no access to our assets. 
People could not get any type of loan using the land 
as collateral.” While opinion varies about how trust land 
should be managed, there is general agreement on the 
importance of protecting Indian land and sovereignty. 

Economic Development 

The reservation’s lack of economic development and 
limited employment opportunities are more recent chal- 
lenges. Several residents interviewed recalled that, before 
the 1970s, the reservation had a viable and vibrant econ- 
omy, with several grocery stores, two drugstores, hotels. 



a car dealership, a skating rink, and numerous other small 
businesses. According to one tribal official, most of the 
businesses that the tribal government acquired following 
the passage in 1975 of the Indian Self-Determination and 
Education Assistance Act eventually failed or contracted 
partly because the tribe lacked the necessary financial 
resources and capacity to operate them.” 

With so few businesses on the reservation today, resi- 
dents have limited access to goods and services. Noted 
one, “It can take four hours round-trip to go grocery shop- 
ping.” Interviewees described the modest grocery store 
in Browning— the only one located on the reservation— in 
less than favorable terms for its perceived high prices and 
mediocre food quality. Other retail businesses, such as 
automobile repair, clothing, and hardware stores, are few 
or non-existent. Some interviewees reported making round 
trips of nearly 300 miles to Great Falls to buy groceries 
and other goods at Wal-Mart and other discount stores. 

The lack of private enterprise also limits job oppor- 
tunities on the reservation. Interviewees described an 
economy where many employment opportunities stem 
from federal programs. Employment in government agen- 
cies— both tribal and federal— amounts to approximately 
1,800 jobs on the reservation, with the tribal government 
providing 800 of them.'^ The largest private employer is 
the non-Indian-owned grocery store in Browning, which 
employs 49. The reservation has approximately 60 other 
privately owned businesses. In total, however, these 
businesses create too few job opportunities for resi- 
dents, and many of the jobs that exist on the reservation 
pay low wages. Furthermore, some residents reported 
encountering additional barriers, including discrimination, 
when looking for off-reservation employment. 

Interviewees expressed a number of reasons for 
the lack of private Indian-owned enterprises. One of the 
greatest barriers to establishing a business is the lack of 
access to credit and capital. In particular, interviewees 
noted that the trust status of tribal land hinders business 
development by making it difficult to mortgage land or 
buildings, to get business start-up capital, or to use equity 
in non-business property for financing.'*^ One business 
owner said that after 33 years of running his business, 
he still cannot get an operating line of credit because he 
lacks collateral. Getting loans that require equity up front 
is especially difficult. “It’s easier to not have to borrow at 
all,” he stated. A local bank director pointed out that poor 
credit scores'^ are a major problem not only for consumers, 
but also for potential entrepreneurs on the reservation. 



70 



and that financial education and credit counseling could 
improve their creditworthiness. 

Numerous other barriers to business development 
on the reservation also exist, ranging from inadequate 
infrastructure to the absence of zoning and building 
codes. For instance, the reservation lacks adequate 
buildings for commercial ventures, and the main street in 
Browning is a checkerboard of private and trust lots with 
a substantial number of vacant or underutilized build- 
ings. The lack of viable commercial space is now being 
addressed through a new lot policy, which requires lot 
owners to establish a code-conforming business within 
three years; if nothing has been built within that period, 
another potential business may bid on the land. While 
this policy holds promise, a community member noted 
that it is essential that initiatives such as this remain in 
place beyond the expiration of a particular tribal council 
member’s term. 

Tribal institutions and community values also act as 
barriers to economic development, according to several 
interviewees. For example, some Native American busi- 
ness owners felt that they would be violating accepted 
social norms if they created independent sources of 
income or wealth. As one community development 
leader noted, “If you’re a private business owner, you’re 
seen as being rich.” Another interviewee maintained 
that, at times, a conflict between the values of commu- 
nity sharing and those of individual wealth accumula- 
tion has influenced tribal bodies’ decisions. She noted 
that in the past, the tribal council has sometimes inter- 
vened in tribal court rulings and other proceedings by 
deciding that those with greater means should provide 
goods or services to those with less, regardless of the 
material facts of the case. The resulting uncertainty has 
negatively affected prospective business opportunities. 
However, she acknowledged that in recent years, the 
tribe has been taking steps toward establishing a more 
consistent and business-friendly climate and promot- 
ing collaboration among agencies on the reservation. 

One such collaboration is Forward Blackfeet, an initiative 
driven by individuals and groups on the reservation that 
aims to advance the tribe economically in part through 
the creation of partnerships among Blackfeet’s different 
development entities. 

Efforts are also under way to increase job opportuni- 
ties on the reservation. The recently established Blackfeet 
Manpower program, for example, is creating employment 
partnerships with employers and businesses both on and 




Much of the reservation’s housing is substandard, 
owing in part to residents’ lower incomes, the 
region’s harsh climate, and a complicated land-trust 
system that hampers housing development. 



off the reservation. One of its projects involves Glacier 
National Park, a spectacular and hugely popular tourist 
destination that shares a border with the reservation. The 
U.S. Department of the Interior is the major federal gov- 
ernment employer for the park; Glacier Park Industries 
(GPI) is a private, seasonal employer that operates all the 
hotels in the park on both the Canadian and Montana 
sides. In a turnaround from previous years, the Blackfeet 
Manpower program is now working with GPI and other 
private-sector employers to recruit employees from 
the reservation. The program director reported that as 
of March 2007, employers had already interviewed and 
hired 150 Blackfeet residents for positions at all levels for 
the year’s tourist season, which runs from early April until 
mid-October. 

Housing 

The reservation’s weak economy, coupled with 
residents’ low incomes, has had a negative impact on 
the number and quality of homes built on the reserva- 
tion. A tribal housing official stated that residents’ low 
income “prohibits development of housing at all levels 
and affects every aspect of life.” As a result, the housing 
stock, both public and private, is generally substandard, 
and the many manufactured and mobile homes on the 
reservation do not hold up well in the harsh climate. 

Several banks, located on or adjacent to the reserva- 
tion, offer residents basic financial services.'® One major 
factor affecting the quality and quantity of housing on 
the reservation has been a lack of mortgage financing. 
Residents and community leaders noted that residents’ 
lower incomes and poorer credit files discourage lenders 



71 



BLACKFEET RESERVATION, MONTANA 




BLACKFEET RESERVATION, MONTANA 



from offering mortgages, as does the trust status of a 
significant portion of reservation land. Access to credit 
remains a significant challenge on the Blackfeet Reser- 
vation, limiting both homeownership and opportunities 
for housing development. According to a comprehen- 
sive study by the Fannie Mae Foundation, the volume of 
housing credit activity on the Blackfeet Reservation is 
low compared with the U.S. Nationwide, there were 367 
mortgages per 1,000 occupied housing units in 2000; 
on the Blackfeet Reservation, the comparable figure was 
122.’® Moreover, denial rates for mortgage loans on the 
reservation were significantly higher than in rural Mon- 
tana as a whole. 

Flousing maintenance and specific environmental 
problems are also concerns for the tribe. Some of the 
properties require environmental remediation because of 
past contamination. In addition to external environmental 
problems, a 2004 study by the U.S. Department of Flous- 
ing and Urban Development (FlUD) documented mold and 
moisture problems in the public housing stock on several 
reservations, including Blackfeet.®® In 2004, substandard 
housing conditions combined with mold prompted sev- 
eral homeowners to file a civil suit against FlUD and the 
Blackfeet Flousing Authority (BFIA) for damages. 

Many of those interviewed identified both underuti- 
lization of public programs and federal funding cuts as 
important issues that further worsen the substandard 
housing situation. For example, programs that help bor- 
rowers finance homes, such as FlUD’s Section 184 Loan 
Guarantee Program,®’ are often underutilized because 
of a lack of qualified participants. Federal funding cuts 
caused a former tribal-sponsored down payment pro- 
gram to end. Similar cuts have also affected the BFIA’s 
ability to maintain its properties.®® 

There have been some recent signs of improve- 
ment in housing conditions on the reservation. The BFIA 
recently completed four rental housing projects using 
low-income housing tax credits and has engaged several 
supportive financial partners to help develop a multimil- 
lion-dollar line of credit for the tribe for housing develop- 
ment. BFIA expects to make the line of credit available 
for use in the next two years. 

■ CONCLUSION 

Recent poverty interventions on the reservation have 
focused on addressing key issues in tribal governance and 
land status, as well as the current shortage of jobs and 



housing opportunities for residents. There are signs that the 
tribal government recognizes the need to address govern- 
ance concerns. In 1999, the tribe chartered the Siyeh Cor- 
poration to independently manage some of its enterprises. 
The corporation’s bylaws insulate it to a large degree from 
the influence of the tribal council. Several tribal members 
mentioned plans for a constitutional reform referendum in 
the near future. Nationally, discussions between tribes and 
the federal government have been under way for some 
time in an attempt to resolve the multifaceted issue of trust 
land management. In addition, Fannie Mae recently began 
to support leasehold mortgage lending on reservations as 
one way to address trust land concerns. 

This case study was prepared by Sandy Gerber, senior 
project manager, Sue Woodrow, senior project director, 
and Michael Grover, project director. Federal Reserve 
Bank of Minneapolis. 



Endnotes 

1 Interviews for this case study were conducted on the Blackfeet 
Reservation between February and March 2007. Because of 
the sensitive nature of many of the discussions, interviewees 
requested that their responses remain anonymous. 

2 The Southern Piegan Blackfeet Tribe is historically one of four 
branches that make up the loose confederacy of the Blackfeet 
Nation. The other branches are now located on reservations in 
southern Alberta, Canada. 

3 For more information on the Blackfeet Tribe, see John C. Jackson, 
The Pikani Blackfeet: A Culture Under Siege (Missoula: Mountain 
Press Publishing Company, 2000). Manataka American Indian Coun- 
cil, “The Blackfeet Nation,” available at http://www.blackfeetnation. 
com/Home%20Page/ history_of_the_blackfeet.htm. “History of the 
Blackfeet Tribe,” available at http://www.neokistomi.com/aboutus. 
html. Edward S. Curtis, “The North American Indian,” Northwestern 
University Digital Library Collections, 2004, available at http://curtis. 
library.northwestern.edu/. 

4 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000; and Montana Department 
of Public Health and Human Services, Vital Events Statistics by 
County, 2005, available at http://www.dphhs.mt.gov/ 
statisticalinformation/vitalstats/index.shtml. 

5 U.S. Census Bureau, Censuses 1990 and 2000. 

6 U.S. Department of Agriculture, “Rural County Typologies 2004,” 
available at http://www.ers.usda.gov/Data/TypologyCodes/2004/ 
all_final_codes.xls (accessed November 29, 2007). 

7 A number of different data sources offer divergent statistics about 
employment conditions on the reservation. Each of these sources 
uses different definitions and techniques to calculate rates, making 
it more difficult to determine truly representative figures. What is 
clear, however, is that unemployment on the reservation is far higher 
than the 7 percent rate seen in Montana's non-metro areas overall. 



72 



8 See, for example, Housing Assistance Council, “Taking Stock: Rural 
People, Poverty, and Housing at the Turn of the 21st Century” 
(Washington, DC: Housing Assistance Council, 2002). 

9 The USDA defines housing stress counties as those in which at 
least 30 percent of households had one or more of these housing 
conditions in 2000: lacked complete plumbing, lacked complete 
kitchen, paid 30 percent or more of income for owner costs or 
rent, or had more than one person per room. 

10 David Listokin, Robin Leichenko, and Juliet King, Housing and Eco- 
nomic Deveiopment in indian Country: Chaiienge and Opportunity 
(Washington, DC: Fannie Mae Foundation, 2004). 

11 The barriers to economic development on reservations have been 
more broadly defined by scholars; see Stephen Cornell and Joseph 
Kalt, “Reloading the Dice: Improving the Chances for Economic 
Development in American Indian Reservations,” Joint Occasional 
Papers on Native Affairs, No. 2003-02, The Harvard Project on 
American Indian Economic Development, John F. Kennedy School 
of Government, Harvard University. Stephen Cornell and Joseph 
Kalt, “Sovereignty and Nation-Building: The Development Chal- 
lenge in Indian Country Today,” PRS 98-225, The Harvard Project on 
American Indian Economic Development, Harvard University. 

12 For more information about how federal policies have influenced 
Indians and Indian reservations, see Felix S. Cohen, Handbook of 
Federai Indian Law (Washington, DC: United States Government 
Printing Office, 2005), and American Indian Policy: Self-Governance 
and Economic Development, Lyman H. Legters and Fremont J. 
Lyden, eds. (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1993). 

13 One goal of the IRA was to establish an optional governance struc- 
ture for the reservation that could make authoritative decisions on 
behalf of the tribe, particularly those decisions involving dealings 
with the U.S. government and those regarding the leasing of land 
and resources to non-Native people. 

14 In 1975, Congress passed the Indian Self-Determination and Educa- 
tion Assistance Act, which allowed tribal governments to contract 
and compact with the federal government to directly administer 
services to its members, including law enforcement, social ser- 
vices, road maintenance, health services, education, and forestry, 
with federal funding that had previously been provided directly 

by federal agencies. The act empowered tribal governments 
effectively. As a result, some non-Indian business owners on the 
Blackfeet Reservation may have been reluctant to renew leases or 
to continue to do business there because of the uncertainty about 
possible land-use policies, preferences, and actions that might 
arise from the newly empowered tribal government. 

15 The tribe owns and operates seven farms and ranches, a casino, 
and the Blackfeet Bison program. Other major employers on the 
reservation include the Browning public schools, the tribally owned 
Siyeh Corporation, Indian Health Services, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 
Blackfeet Housing Authority, and Blackfeet Community College. 

16 While leasehold mortgages on trust property exist, the process, 
which requires federal government approval, is burdensome. 

17 Credit score data for December 2004 obtained by the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis support this claim. A sample of credit 
files for reservation residents reveals that close to one-third have a 
low credit score. 

18 A branch of Native American Bank is located within the reservation 
in the town of Browning. Cff the reservation, the First State Bank 
of Shelby, U.S. Bank, and Wells Fargo Bank are located 60 miles 



east of Browning in the town of Shelby. In addition. Bank of Glacier 
County and Stockman Bank of Montana are located in the border 
town of Cut Bank. 

19 Listokin, Leichenko, and King, “Housing and Economic Develop- 
ment in Indian Country.” 

20 U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, “Mold and 
Moisture Problems in Native American Housing on Tribal Lands: A 
Report to Congress,” 2004. 

21 The Section 184 Indian Home Loan Guarantee program is a mort- 
gage product specifically for American Indian and Alaska Native 
families, tribes, Alaska villages, or tribally designated housing 
entities. Congress established this program in 1992 to facilitate 
homeownership among Native Americans by reducing the credit 
and collateral risk on trust land compared with that on loans for 
properties located off reservations. 

22 This focuses specifically on current cuts that the BHA’s director 
identified for specific programs that he directs. For more informa- 
tion on this trend over time, see Paul Stuart, “Financing Self-Deter- 
mination: Federal Indian Expenditures, 1975-1988,” American Indian 
Culture and Research Journal 14(2) (1990): 1-18. 



73 



BLACKFEET RESERVATION, MONTANA 



74 



0 




■ OVERVIEW 



Empty tobacco warehouses lining the streets of West Greenville are a tan- 
gible reminder of the challenges facing the city that once served as the 
major marketing and processing center for flue-cured tobacco in eastern 
North Carolina. Faced with declines in agricultural and manufacturing jobs, 
Greenville reinvented itself as a university town, emphasizing investments 



in the education and healthcare sectors. This economic 
development strategy has had positive effects: Greenville 
experienced significant population and economic growth 
in the past 10 years. In this regard, the city has found 
a way to diversify its economic base and has avoided 
some of the problems facing other small rural towns in 
the South still coping with the loss of jobs due to the 
mechanization of agriculture. 

However, this revitalization has not yet filtered to 
West Greenville, a neighborhood where the decline of 
the tobacco industry has yielded particularly negative 
effects, in part because of an over-reliance on jobs in the 
now-shuttered warehouses. The community continues to 



struggle with deeply entrenched poverty, high rates of 
unemployment and crime, and low levels of educational 
achievement. In 2004, Greenville developed a compre- 
hensive redevelopment and revitalization plan to address 
these issues in West Greenville, yet the challenges to 
redirecting investment to this community, along with 
overcoming generations of mistrust among community 
residents, are vast. 

■ BACKGROUND 

Greenville, once known as the “Queen City on the Tar,” is 
located in Pitt County, in the eastern part of North Caro- 
lina. Greenville’s history dates back to 1771 when Richard 



75 






GREENVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



West Greenville 



Greenville MSA 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


n/a 


36.2 


Poverty rate 2000“’ 


42.8 


20.3 


Income 


Median household income‘s 


$17,418 


$33,189 


Demographics 


Population 2000^' 


5,197 


152,772 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000® 


n/a 


71.9 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 


% White 


11.1 


59.6 


% Hispanic/Latino 


0.5 


3.7 


% Black/African-American 


85.7 


34.4 


% Residents under age 189 


27.3 


23.8 


% Single-parent households'’ 


20.9 


10.7 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


3.3 


3.8 


% Population in same house as five years ago' 


46.1 


46.7 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000'' 


39.0 


22.0 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


15.9 


23.9 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005"' 


68.6 


80.1 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


28.6 


55.9 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


21.2 


6.8 


% Adults in the labor force'’ 


51.1 


64.8 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


26.0 


60.0 


% Renters with a housing cost burden’ 


45.6 


45.6 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized’’ 


27.2 


11.3 


Median value for owner-occupied units” 


$49,301 


$93,298 


Median year structure built' 


1958 


1983 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


55.6 


32.1 


% Credit files with high credit scores” 


27.2 


52.0 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


71.4 


24.2 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005* 


47.9 


22.0 



Evans, a Pitt County legislator, divided off his plantation 
to form an official town. Originally Martinsborough, the 
town’s name was changed to Greensville in 1787 in honor 
of General Nathanael Greene, the Revolutionary War 
hero, and was later shortened to Greenville.' 

Greenville’s history is tightly intertwined with that of the 
cotton and tobacco industries. Its location on the Tar River, 
a major transportation corridor by the 1860s, led the city to 
prominence. Several established riverboat lines transported 
passengers and goods from the region’s cotton planta- 
tions down to southern ports for shipping to northeastern 
and international markets. In 1890 Greenville built its first 



tobacco warehouse, and the city quickly developed into the 
largest tobacco-processing center in North Carolina. The 
wealth generated by the tobacco plantations led to pros- 
perous times for the small city, and large mansions were 
built to match the growing wealth in the community.^ 

The Great Depression put an end to the city’s pros- 
perity, and by the 1950s, new agricultural technologies 
were further threatening the city’s economic base. 

While tobacco processing remains an important indus- 
try in eastern North Carolina, its scale has been greatly 
reduced. In 1950, the region produced nearly 25 percent 
of the world’s flue-cured tobacco; by 2000, that figure 



76 




had dropped to just over 5 percent.^ Yet unlike many 
cities hit by declines in agriculture and manufacturing, 
Greenville has been able to capitalize on its educational 
assets— in particular, East Carolina University— in redirect- 
ing and diversifying its economy toward knowledge- and 
health-based industries. Greenville has emerged as a 
major industrial and economic center for eastern North 
Carolina and is now home to companies such as DSM 
Pharmaceuticals, Rubbermaid, NACCO Materials Handling 
Group, and ASMO Manufacturing."* Non-farm employment 
earnings in the Greenville metropolitan statistical area 
(MSA) have risen steadily, although the region’s economy 
was negatively affected by the 2001 recession and by 
Hurricane Floyd, which swept through Greenville in 1999 
and damaged more than 1,800 structures to the tune of 
an estimated $90 million.^ (See Figure 1) 

West Greenville, the case study community, is located 
south of the Tar River and west of the city’s railroad 
tracks. The neighborhood of approximately 5,200 resi- 
dents is predominantly African American, and the legacy 
of racial discrimination and the impact of urban renewal 
programs In the 1950s and 1960s still loom large. In 2000, 
the neighborhood poverty rate was more than 42 per- 
cent, twice as high as the poverty rate for the Greenville 
MSA. (See Table 1) One in five households was headed by 
a single parent, and nearly 60 percent of children in the 
community were living in poor households. Between 1990 
and 2000, the population in the case study area grew a 
mere 2 percent, compared with about 35 percent for the 
city and 24 percent for the MSA. 

The community faces significant challenges, not 
least of which is unemployment. In 2000, the unem- 
ployment rate in the community was 21 percent, more 
than three times the unemployment rate in the MSA 
(6.8 percent). Only half of the adults in West Greenville 
participate in the labor force. The community is bereft of 
services and amenities. Residents commented that the 
area lacks access to grocery stores, financial institutions, 
and healthcare facilities. More than half of all credit files 
sampled in the community in 2004 were thin, indicat- 
ing insufficient credit histories that would likely preclude 
those residents from securing a loan. 

Overcoming these challenges and reversing decades 
of disinvestment in this community are an enormous 
undertaking. Carl Rees, an urban planner with the city of 
Greenville, noted that the “price tag to effect comprehen- 
sive and lasting change in this community is extremely 
high.” Any successful efforts, he stressed, must address 



FIGURE 1 

Growth in nonfarm employment earnings 




SOURCE: Haver Analytics, U.S. Bureau of Economic Analy- 
sis: Table SA25, Total Full-time and Part-time Employment 
by Industry 

not only the empty and dilapidated structures in the 
community, but also job growth and human capital devel- 
opment among the residents.® 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

As in many other high-poverty communities, the issues 
facing West Greenville are complicated and interrelated. 
However, interviews with key stakeholders in the commu- 
nity consistently raised three central issues. First, the lack 
of educational attainment in West Greenville is a key factor 
that limits residents’ ability to take advantage of job growth 
in the region. Second, crime levels in the community are 
high and serve as a major deterrent to private investment 
and community cohesion. Third, implementing change 
under the city’s comprehensive redevelopment plan is 
difficult. Residents in the community are concerned that 
the planned changes will not benefit them, and govern- 
ment subsidies and private dollars fall far short of need. 
More capacity and collaboration across a wide variety of 
stakeholders will be necessary to address the issues that 
perpetuate the cycle of poverty in West Greenville. 

Educational Attainment 

As Greenville has moved from an economy based on 
agriculture and tobacco processing to one focused on 



77 



GREENVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA 



GREENVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA 



education and health care, demands for higher skilled 
workers have increased. In 1970, 20 percent of jobs in the 
Greenville MSA were related to agriculture; in 2005, agricul- 
tural employment comprised just 2 percent of all jobs in 
the region. In contrast, the share of jobs in the education 
and health services field in the region doubled, from 14 to 
33 percent between 1970 and 2005. According to Joyce 
Jones, the executive director of STRIVE (Support and Train- 
ing Result in Valuable Employees), an employment training 
program in West Greenville, these jobs require advanced 
degrees and significant technical skills. Many residents 
in West Greenville, she noted, are unprepared to find and 
keep employment in these new industries.^ 

Educational achievement in the community is low, 
despite the presence of East Carolina University and Pitt 
Community College nearby. Thirty-nine percent of the 
residents in the case study community do not have a 
high school diploma. Only 16 percent of residents in the 
case study area have a bachelor’s degree, compared 
with 38 percent for the city of Greenville.® Educational 
achievement in the Greenville MSA is somewhat lower, in 
part because of the rural nature of the region compared 
with the university-influenced city. 

West Greenville’s student proficiency levels on reading 
and math tests also fall below those of the MSA. Schools 
in the community face significant challenges in delivering 
high-quality education, including poor and crowded facili- 
ties, safety concerns, higher rates of teacher turnover, and 
difficulties attracting teachers with advanced degrees.® At 
the middle and high school levels, suspensions— especially 
short-term suspensions used for problems such as insub- 
ordination and chronic tardiness— have emerged as a key 
issue in West Greenville and in schools in Pitt County more 
generally.” In 2005, public schools in Pitt County recorded 
more than 400 suspensions per 1,000 students in each 
of the previous three years, a rate that is double that of 
North Carolina and almost 10 times the national suspen- 
sion rate." Eighty percent of the suspensions in Pitt County 
were among African-American students. This trend is 
troubling because students with multiple suspensions are 
more likely to perform poorly academically and to drop out 
of school.'® In addition, according to Pitt County Schools 
Superintendent Beverly Reep, “The high suspension rate 
represents a community problem, not just a school prob- 
lem, because students who are suspended long term often 
end up in the streets, creating other problems.”'® 

The district is analyzing its suspension policies and 
drawing on existing community resources to ensure that 



students are connected to youth programs and physi- 
cal and mental health services. One innovative program 
in the community. Project Center Stage, a spin-off from 
STRIVE, focuses on youth between the ages of 11 and 
17 who have been suspended from school or who are 
having disciplinary problems. Students in the program 
learn leadership and character skills through computer 
training and group exercises that build self-esteem and 
confidence."' “The kids in the community know where 
they want to go; they just don’t know how to get there,” 
explains the program’s coordinator. “We give them the 
tools to make better choices so that they can start tak- 
ing tangible steps toward their goals.”'® 

Crime 

Interviews with residents in West Greenville high- 
lighted the negative impact of crime on the community. 
Although violent crime rates have declined slightly and 
become more dispersed in recent years, crime rates in the 
police district that incorporates West Greenville are higher 
than those for the city as a whole.'® (See Figure 2) Many 
residents stated that they do not go outside after dark 
for fear of being robbed or caught in a hostile situation. 
Evidence of crime and its impact on the community is evi- 
dent throughout the case study area: Stores and houses 
have bars on the windows, and walls and sidewalks are 



FIGURE 2 

Greenville crime data, 2006 




Note: Part I crimes include murder, rape, robbery, aggra- 
vated assault, arson, burglary, larceny-theft, and motor 
vehicle theft. Part I violent crimes include murder, rape, 
robbery, and aggravated assault. 



SOURCE: Greenville Police Department, 2006 



78 



covered in gang tags. Newspaper and television stories 
often graphically highlight the crimes committed in West 
Greenville, reporting on everything from robberies and 
shootings to drug deals and prostitution rings." 

The high levels of crime in the community deter pri- 
vate investment. In stakeholder interviews, several small 
business owners noted that they moved out of the com- 
munity because they felt that they could not safely keep 
their stores open in the evening. In the words of one 
stakeholder, crime has also contributed to the “break- 
down of the social structure.” Although churches remain 
a strong presence and have been an important partner 
in community development efforts in West Greenville, 
many of the African-American churches have left the 
neighborhood because of safety concerns, further limit- 
ing the community’s ability to rebuild its social fabric. As 
another stakeholder in the community noted, “There’s a 
lack of positive role models in the community, and not 
enough programs.” 

In response to the significant rise in gang violence, 
the local police department has held town hall meetings 
to address residents’ questions and concerns. In 2006, 
the department participated in a joint grant application 
with four other agencies to prevent and reduce gang 
violence and was awarded $185,000 to run two pro- 
grams— Blue Print for Peace and Citizens United Against 
Violence— both of which work to address the root causes 
of youth violence and gang membership.'® 

Urban Revitalization 

In 2004, city voters passed a $5 million bond for 
improvements in West Greenville, allowing the city to 
develop and implement a comprehensive revitalization 
plan for the community.'® The plan recognizes West Green- 
ville’s role as the “heart of the city’s African-American 
community” and seeks to address a wide range of neigh- 
borhood needs, from improving the physical infrastructure 
in the community to helping attract new small businesses 
to the area.®° According to the plan, the goals for West 
Greenville include increasing the levels of homeownership 
in the community, removing blighting influences, improv- 
ing the public infrastructure, creating programs with 
service providers to address the social issues of the com- 
munity, and providing economic development and com- 
mercial opportunities in the area and for its residents. 

The city has already begun to implement certain 
aspects of the plan. One of its key goals is to increase 




homeownership opportunities in the community. Only 
26 percent of the households in the case study com- 
munity own their homes. There has been little new hous- 
ing construction in the neighborhood in recent times; 75 
percent of the housing stock in the case study area was 
constructed before 1980 compared with about 44 percent 
for Greenville as a whole.®' Rees, Greenville’s urban planner, 
said that the city’s goal is to raise the homeownership rate 
in the community to 50 percent. The city is also looking for 
ways to address the abandoned and dilapidated buildings 
in the neighborhood. It is exploring, for example, the pos- 
sibility of turning an abandoned tobacco warehouse into a 
small business incubator, as well as working to establish a 
revolving loan fund for small businesses in the community. 

Implementing this comprehensive plan will be far 
from easy, however. Rees noted that the biggest chal- 
lenge is a financial one and that developing comprehen- 
sive strategies will require significantly more government 
subsidies as well as private investment. “It’s still hard to 
bring private banks and investors into this community,” 
he stated. “It’s a tough market to work in, especially 
since we need to overturn decades of disinvestment.” 

In addition, community residents have voiced 
opposition to the plan. Many of the residents remember 
Greenville’s earlier efforts at “urban renewal” and do 
not trust that contemporary efforts will produce posi- 
tive change for them or their families. According to one 
small business owner in Greenville, D. D. Garrett, African 



79 



GREENVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA 




GREENVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA 



Americans in the 1930s lived in a thriving community 
along prime property on the Tar RIverT^ Grocery stores, 
service stations, coin laundries, and restaurants owned 
by African Americans lined the streets.^^ In the 1960s, 
however, Greenville developed a series of urban renewal 
plans with the intent of stimulating new development.^'’ 
Many African-American residents were relocated from 
the Tar River properties to West Greenville.^^ “As the city 
began to redevelop this part of town,” Garrett recounted, 
“many of the black businesses were forced to move 
and were unable to survive the relocation.”^® Greenville 
thus has historically been a highly segregated town; as 
one interviewee noted, “It was obvious where the white 
communities started and where the black communities 
ended.”^^ This history plays a part in shaping the contem- 
porary discussion of revitalization efforts. 

Many of the current residents are the children and 
grandchildren of the families who lived through the city’s 
first relocation efforts.^® For these residents, revitalization 
is synonymous with relocation, and they have expressed 
concern that they would once again not be able to take 
part in the anticipated appreciation and wealth of the 
area after redevelopment.^® A prominent African-Amer- 
ican leader has criticized the plan, writing, “The West 
Greenville Revitalization Plan is limited and does not sig- 
nificantly address major issues such as access to capital 
for job creation, attracting major employers, or a focused 
effort to improve income in the Black community.”®® 

The city has responded by working with residents to 
allay these concerns and developing a resident anti-dis- 
placement policy and relocation plan. Discussions about 
preserving the unique cultural heritage of the community 
have also helped to build trust among residents. “Resi- 
dents realize that changes in the community are neces- 
sary,” noted Rees. “But change is difficult and people 
need to feel like they are part of the discussion about 
what to do.” 

East Carolina University has also taken on a signifi- 
cant role in the community’s revitalization efforts. Early in 
the city’s redevelopment planning process, Karla Hughes, 
who at the time served as dean of the College of Human 
Ecology, met with Greenville Mayor Don Parrott and other 
city officials to discuss development of an intergenera- 
tional center in West Greenville, a place that would offer 
a wide variety of programs and services to community 
members. In 2007, the intergenerational center opened 
to the public in the former St. Gabriel’s Catholic Church 
and school.®' At the groundbreaking ceremony, Hughes 



explained the college’s motivation for this collaboration: 
“We in the College of Human Ecology are about commu- 
nities. Because this is the neighboring community to the 
university...we felt that there was a natural partnership to 
be had.” 

The center, which is run by Associate Professor 
Lessie Bass, offers tax preparation, counseling, home 
design, nutrition, and other services. Pitt Community Col- 
lege is also a key partner in the center. Its architectural 
technology program has developed a partnership pro- 
gram called “Hard Hats,” which has held student design 
competitions for energy-efficient, single-family dwellings 
to be located In West Greenville. Eventually, the cen- 
ter may expand to include a health clinic, employment 
services, and an after-school program sponsored by the 
Boys and Girls Club, along with a wider selection of adult 
education classes.®® Residents have also been an impor- 
tant partner in shaping the scope of the center’s activi- 
ties. Several residents as well as other local stakeholders 
have formed the Eppes Advisory Board, which will play a 
major advisory role as the project moves forward.®® 

■ CONCLUSION 

The Intergenerational center represents a promising 
strategy for the future of West Greenville, and demon- 
strates that tackling the issues associated with concen- 
trated poverty often requires partnerships that link these 
once-isolated communities to institutional structures in 
the surrounding region. The city of Greenville Is working 
to develop strategic partnerships with the local universi- 
ties, the faith-based community, and local businesses to 
implement a wide range of initiatives in West Greenville, 
from expanding homeownership to stimulating small 
business development. Still, as noted by many stake- 
holders, the success of these initiatives depends on 
overcoming persistent challenges within the community, 
among them decades of distrust and disinvestment in 
the community. 

This case study was prepared by Carl Neely, regional 
community development manager, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Richmond. 



Endnotes 

1 Roger Kammerer and Candace Pearce, Greenville: Images of 
America (Charleston, SC: Arcadia Publishing, 2001). 



80 



2 For a brief history of Greenviiie, see Roger Kammerer, “The Piace 
Caiied Greenviiie," avaiiabie at http://www.uptowngreenviiie.com/ 
about/who_we_are/history/ (accessed June 19, 2007). Fiue-cured 
tobacco is hung in barns or warehouses that expose the tobacco 
ieaves to higher temperatures and smoke for curing. 

3 North Caroiina State University, avaiiabie at http://www.ces.ncsu. 
edu/pitt/ag/tobacco/tobfacts.htmi (accessed December 10, 2007). 

4 See http://www.greenvillenc.gov/about_greenviile/default. 
aspx?id=63 (accessed June 12, 2007). 

5 Brownfields 2007 Grant Fact Sheet, available at http://www.epa. 
gov/swerosps/bf/07arc/r04_nc_greenville.pdf. 

6 Personal interviews conducted with Carl Rees, Urban Planner, 
Greenville Community Development Department, January-June 
2007. Follow-up phone interview conducted December 2007. 

7 Joyce Jones, Executive Director, STRIVE. Telephone interview, 
December 2007. 

8 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

9 Jimmy Ryals, “Performance Challenge: Schools Must Translate Test 
Scores into Action,” The (Greenville) Daily Reflector, March 4, 2007. 
See also North Carolina Department of Education, Education First 
NC School Report Cards, available at http://www.ncreportcards. 
org/src/ (accessed December 2007). 

10 Short-term suspensions last for 10 days or less and may be used 
for such infractions as insubordination, chronic tardiness, and tru- 
ancy, leaving the school grounds without permission, or remaining 
on school grounds after school hours. 

11 In academic year 2005, Vance County had 614 suspensions for 
every 1,000 students; Edgecombe: 541; Flertford: 453; and Pitt; 441. 
“Short-Term Suspensions; Long-Term Consequences; Real Life Solu- 
tions,” Action for Children North Carolina, Raleigh. See http;//www. 
ncchild.org/images/stories/Short-Term_Suspensions;_Long-Term_ 
Consequences;_Real_Life_Solutions.pdf (accessed February 2007). 

12 Action for Children North Carolina, “Short-Term Suspensions; Long- 
Term Consequences; Real Life Solutions” (2007). 

13 Josh Flumphries, “School Discipline Effort Grows,” The (Greenville) 
Dally Reflector, April 26, 2007. 

14 Latisha Gray, “STRIVE's 5th Anniversary Celebration,” see http:// 
www.strivenc.org/news.html (accessed May 2007). Project Center 
Stage is a part of STRIVE. 

15 Personal interview with the STRIVE program coordinator, Decem- 
ber 10, 2007. 

16 Personal communication and data analysis by Rhonda V. Conner, 
Research Analyst, Greenville Police Department, December 2007. 
Crime rates in the downtown area are also high, but the statistics 
are driven by the density of East Carolina University students on 
nights and weekends in the downtown bar area. 

17 “Gang Crime in West Greenville,” see http://www.witntv.com/home/ 
headlines/1374947.html (accessed January 31, 2007). U.S. Depart- 
ment of Justice, National Drug Intelligence Center, “2003 North 
Carolina Drug Threat Assessment,” see http://www.usdoj.gov/ndic/ 
pubs3/3690/heroin.htm (accessed May 2007). March 21, 2007, 
issue of The (Greenville) Dally Reflector. 



18 City of Greenville Police Department, Annual Report 2006. Avail- 
able at http://www.greenvillenc.gov/uploadedFiles/Departments/ 
Police_Dept/lnformation/Stats_and_Grants/Annual%20Report.pdf. 

19 See http://www.reflector.com/search/content/news/stories/2007/12/ 
03/1204soldhomes.html. 

20 The Center City West Greenville Revitalization Plan, January 2006, 
4-2. 

21 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

22 D. D. Garrett, Real Estate Broker and Small Business Owner. Personal 
interview, December 20, 2006. 

23 Ibid. 

24 Roger Kammerer, “The Place Called Greenville,” available at http:// 
www.uptowngreenville.com/about/who_we_are/history/ (accessed 
June 19, 2007). 

25 D. D. Garrett, Real Estate Broker and Small Business Owner. Personal 
interview, December 20, 2006. 

26 Ibid. 

27 Ibid. 

28 Lessie Bass, Ph.D., East Carolina University. Personal interview, 
February 5, 2007. 

29 Ibid. 

30 Reverend Ozie Lee Hall Jr. (2007). Report on the State of the Black 
Community in Pitt County, North Carolina. Report prepared by the 
Local Organizing Committee for the Pitt County Black Leadership 
and Community Roundtable. 

31 The City Council voted to purchase the nearly three-acre St. 
Gabriel's site and lease it back to the university for a small annual 
fee for the purpose of establishing an intergenerational center. The 
$600,000 purchase price was funded with $400,000 from the city 
redevelopment bonds and $200,000 from a private foundation. 

32 See http://www.ecu.edu/che/docs/07_Clean_Up.pdf. 

33 See http://www.ecu.edu/che/News/Echo_Newsletter_Summer_Fall_ 
2006/Echoes-Jan-ll-07/Echoes7o20-%20College%20of%20Human 
7o20Ecology7o20-%20CHE7o20Brings%20lntergenerational7o20 
Center%20to7o20West%20Greenville%20.html. 



81 



GREENVILLE, NORTH CAROLINA 



82 



■ INTRODUCTION 



Atlantic City, located on a barrier island off the coast of New Jersey, 
emerged as a popular beach destination in the late 1800s. The resort was 
so popular that President Teddy Roosevelt once remarked, “A man would 
not be a good American citizen if he did not know of Atlantic City.”^ After 
World War II, however, the city’s prominence as a vacation destination 



declined. In 1976, hoping to breathe new economic life 
into Atlantic City, New Jersey voters legalized casino 
gambling there. 

Thirty years later, there are clear signs that eco- 
nomic activity in Atlantic City has increased. There are 
more jobs, greater numbers of tourists, and a stronger 
real estate market. In 2005, the city attracted 35 million 
visitors, a number surpassed among U.S. cities only by 
Orlando, New York, and Las Vegas.^ That year, casinos in 
Atlantic City provided approximately 46,000 jobs and $5 
billion in gross revenues.^ 

Yet despite the scale of the casino industry, Atlantic 
City continues to experience high poverty and unemploy- 
ment rates.'' According to the 2000 census, poverty in 



Atlantic City was 24 percent, one point higher than in 1970, 
prior to the advent of gambling. The city’s unemployment 
rate was 13 percent, more than double that of New Jersey 
as a whole (5.8 percent). Research suggests that Atlan- 
tic City’s casinos have served as an engine of regional 
growth, but their impact has been uneven. And as the 
statistics on poverty and unemployment suggest, many 
of the city’s residents have been left out of the gambling 
boom. Casinos in Atlantic City have been described as 
“islands unto themselves,” disconnected from the city and 
its residents.'' David Schwartz, a historian who studies the 
casino industry, has argued that, rather than revitalizing 
the neighborhoods around them, “casino resorts have 
further rent the urban fabric of Atlantic City.”® 



83 



ATLANTIC CITY, NEW JERSEY 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Bungalow Park/ 
Marina District 



Atlantic City MSA 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970" 


27.0 


13.0 


Poverty rate 2000® 


41.2 


10.5 


Income 


Median household income" 


$14,114 


$44,082 


Demographics 


Population 2000® 


7,771 


252,552 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000" 


-0.5 


44.3 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000* 


% White 


3.3 


63.9 


% Hispanic/Latino 


11.5 


12.2 


% Black/African-American 


83.8 


16.9 


% Residents under age 189 


35.6 


25.3 


% Single-parent households® 


48.2 


10.1 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


2.2 


11.8 


% Population in same house as five years ago* 


58.0 


57.6 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000® 


43.8 


21.8 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


7.2 


18.7 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005"' 


30.4 


73.4 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


50.0 


77.2 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


17.5 


7.5 


% Adults in the labor forced 


48.9 


64.7 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


15.9 


66.4 


% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


44.6 


41.6 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized" 


63.4 


16.2 


Median value for owner-oocupied units" 


$56,236 


$122,005 


Median year structure built' 


1965 


1973 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


47.4 


20.8 


% Credit files with high credit scores'* 


28.4 


61.0 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005** 


44.1 


25.6 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005“ 


23.9 


18.1 



■ BACKGROUND 

Atlantic City was developed as a beach resort in the 
middle of the 19*'' century, and its success in this role 
lasted until the middle of the 20**' century. The city’s 
location close to Northeastern metropolitan areas of the 
U.S. provided a major advantage to its tourist industry. In 
1939, at the height of its popularity, almost 16 million tour- 
ists visited the resort.'' 

After World War II, however, more affordable airfare 
and the expansion of the interstate highway system 
greatly reduced Atlantic City’s location advantage. By the 



1960s, the city had lost Its cachet as a tourist destination. 
Between 1960 and 1980, its population fell from 59,544 
to 40,199. Most of the population outflow was white, with 
data suggesting that non-elderly white families were 
particularly likely to leave. As population fell and tour- 
ism declined, many restaurants, theaters, and other 
businesses closed. Much of the housing stock became 
dilapidated or was abandoned.® 

In the 1970s, casino advocates maintained that gam- 
bling could revitalize Atlantic City’s tourism and conven- 
tion industry and bring new tax revenues to the state. In 



84 





1976, after a lengthy political process, New Jersey voters 
approved the establishment of commercial casinos in the 
city by referendum; in 1977, the state legislature passed 
the Casino Control Act, which set the framework for gam- 
bling. The city’s first casino opened in 1978. 

Gambling rejuvenated the tourist industry in Atlan- 
tic City. Between 1977 and 1988, the year when the last 
of 12 casinos opened,® the number of jobs there rose 
from 21,000 to 61,900, with almost 70 percent of them 
provided directly by the casino industry.'® Today, casinos 
continue to provide the majority of jobs in Atlantic City, 
approximately 46,000 in 2005, although there have been 
modest declines in the total number of casino jobs in the 
past decade." Expanding the tourism sector continues 
to dominate the city’s economic development strategy, 
which includes numerous plans for the growth of casinos 
and new hotels.'® In addition, market-rate housing is filling 
vacant lots, and restaurants and high-end retail stores 
are being added to the city’s existing enterprises. 

Since the advent of gambling, the city’s population 
has stabilized at about 40,000. Although the city contin- 
ued to lose white residents after 1980, the loss was offset 
by Hispanics and Asians drawn by the city’s jobs. In 1984, 
the New Jersey legislature established the Casino Rein- 
vestment Development Authority (CRDA) to use casino 
revenues to further urban redevelopment in Atlantic City 
and elsewhere in the state.'® By 2004, 1,394 new housing 
units had been built in what had been some of the city’s 
most blighted areas, with 20 percent of the units tar- 
geted to low- and moderate-income households.'"’ 



Nonetheless, significant problems remain. While 
casinos have created employment opportunities, many 
local residents have had difficulty finding jobs or making 
ends meet with the jobs they have. The poverty rate has 
changed very little since the casinos opened.'® In 1970, 
Atlantic City’s poverty rate was 22 percent, compared 
with a national rate of 13 percent. As of 2000, the city’s 
poverty rate was 24 percent while the national rate was 11 
percent, and, as Figure 1 indicates, Atlantic City’s unem- 
ployment rate was also considerably higher than that of 
the nation in that year.'® 

Patterns of disinvestment in some areas of the city 
persist. In 1987, nine years after gambling was approved, 
the city’s master plan"" noted that it was commonplace 
for residents to travel outside the city to shop and find 
services. Even now, 20 years later, there is no large super- 
market in the city.'® At the same time, development pres- 
sures associated with expansion of the city’s tourist areas 
have led to Increasing concerns about housing afford- 
ability and have fueled fears of displacement among 
long-term residents. A number of interviewees indicated 
that much displacement has already occurred, with many 
households moving to other areas of Atlantic County. 

This case study focuses on three contiguous high- 
poverty census tracts in Atlantic City, collectively referred 
to in this report as Bungalow Park/Marina District. The 
area is home to approximately 19 percent of Atlantic 
City’s population, or about 7,800 residents. (See Table 1) 

In 2000, 84 percent of residents in the community were 
black and approximately 12 percent were Hispanic. The 
Hispanic share of the population in the case study area 
doubled during the 1990s. Study area residents tended 



FIGURE 1 

Unemployment trends 




SOURCE: Bureau of Labor Statistics 



85 



ATLANTIC CITY, NEW JERSEY 




ATLANTIC CITY, NEW JERSEY 




Collectively, the Atlantic City case study area contains close to half of the city’s subsidized housing units along with three of its 12 
casinos, including the Borgata (pictured above). 



to be younger than those in the surrounding metropoli- 
tan area, and households were more likely to be headed 
by a single parent. Among family households, nearly half 
(48.2 percent) were single-parent households, compared 
with 10 percent in the Atlantic City metropolitan area. The 
poverty rate in the case study community in 2000 was 41 
percent, almost double that of Atlantic City (23.6 percent) 
and four times as high as the Atlantic City metropolitan 
area (10.5 percent). 

The case study area is home to a number of distinct 
neighborhoods, each with its own identity. Bungalow 
Park is a longtime, stable black neighborhood of modest 
single-family homes with many elderly homeowners and, 
increasingly, new residents buying high-priced water- 
front properties. Another neighborhood is dominated by 
Stanley Holmes, a large public housing project that has a 
reputation for violence and drug activity.'® Back Maryland, 
with a similar reputation for violence and drug activity, is 
characterized by a number of HDD-subsidized, privately 
owned housing projects. Other neighborhoods included 
in the case study area also have a high concentration 



of public housing, some of which is being redeveloped 
under HDD’s HOPE VI program.®® One part of the case 
study area, lying adjacent to the city’s marina, has never 
been developed residentially and is home to three of 
Atlantic City’s casinos. 

One striking aspect of the case study area is its con- 
centration of subsidized housing. In 2000, the case study 
area had almost half (46 percent) of the city’s entire 
portfolio of subsidized housing units, even though just 19 
percent of the city’s population lived there. Homeowner- 
ship in the case study communities is low: in 2000, the 
rate stood at 16 percent. Indeed, the homeownership 
rate in Atlantic City as a whole, at 29 percent, is low. In 
comparison, the Atlantic City Metropolitan Statistical Area 
(MSA) has a homeownership rate of 66 percent. 

Concerns over crime in the community emerged as 
an important issue.®' In three focus groups, residents 
spoke repeatedly about crime and gang activity in their 
neighborhoods and the danger posed to neighborhood 
children.®® One resident said that high crime rates in the 
community are fueled largely by frustration and a lack of 



86 




hope and opportunities. Focus group members stressed 
the need for more free youth activities and school- 
related programs, particularly within their neighborhoods, 
that would provide alternatives to gang membership and 
drug use. They also mentioned the need for drug rehabil- 
itation facilities and therapeutic services for both adults 
and young people. 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Residents and other interviewees pointed to a number of 
key issues associated with the high levels of poverty in 
their neighborhoods, including unemployment, low rates 
of labor-force participation, and low high school gradua- 
tion rates. Residents also spoke about disinvestment in 
their community, noted the dual issues of gentrification 
and displacement, and expressed frustration at their 
perceived lack of political representation. 

Jobs 

One of the paradoxes in Atlantic City is that, despite 
its abundance of employment opportunities, the city still 
suffers from a high unemployment rate. Estimates sug- 
gest that anywhere between 300 and 1,000 jobs in Atlan- 
tic City— many of them entry-level positions— go unfilled 
at any given time.^^ Data on worker characteristics in the 
casino industry, where most of the city’s jobs are located, 
suggest that about half of casino jobs require only a 
high school diploma and that a substantial proportion of 
casino jobs do not have even that requirement.^” 

A lack of the critical skills necessary for employ- 
ment was often cited as a reason why some area resi- 
dents cannot obtain or keep a job. This lack of work 
skills is related to limited educational achievement. More 
than 40 percent of residents over 25 in the case study 
community lack a high school diploma, compared with 
22 percent in the Atlantic City MSA, and high school 
graduation rates among the study area’s youth are low. 
(Atlantic City’s graduation rate is 15 percentage points 
lower than the state average, despite per-pupil spend- 
ing that was about $1,500 higher than the state average 
in 2005-2006.) Reasons cited for low graduation rates 
included tensions among different factions of Atlantic 
City’s young people; the lure of selling drugs; and the 
stigma that often attaches to high-achieving students 
in low-income areas. In addition, one service provider 
commented that area students, who come directly from 
their neighborhood elementary schools to a high school 



shared with students from more affluent communities 
outside Atlantic City, were unprepared for the competi- 
tion they faced.^^ 

Residents of the case study area face other barriers 
to finding and keeping employment that may be more 
specific to the casino industry. New Jersey laws barring 
applicants with criminal records from many casino jobs 
limit work opportunities for some.^*^ Staff at a workforce 
development agency noted that many residents cannot 
pass the drug tests required for many casino positions. 
The round-the-clock nature of casino work may also 
make it difficult for employees with children, particularly 
single parents, to keep a job. Interviewees frequently 
cited an absence of inexpensive, safe child care that 
would make it easier for parents to work weekend and 
evening shifts. 

Efforts are under way to help link local residents to 
casino jobs. One particularly large-scale example has 
been a job-training effort sponsored by the Borgata 
Casino. As part of a community benefit agreement, the 
Borgata committed to train and hire 2,000 unemployed or 
underemployed Atlantic City residents. It made an ini- 
tial investment of $1 million in the program. By 2003, the 
Borgata had renovated a building on Atlantic Avenue to 
house the training center, and by March 2007 the casino 
reported that it had trained and placed 2,100 residents, 
primarily in the gambling industry. Many in the com- 
munity hailed the program as a success. After more 
than fulfilling its initial obligation, the Borgata extended 
the training program to fill new positions created by the 
casino’s recent expansion. 

Success in increasing local employment in the 
gambling industry, however, may not be sufficient to help 
residents escape low-income status. As in Atlantic City’s 
days as a beach resort, many of the jobs available to 
residents are low-skilled, low-paying positions. Average 
annual wages (including tips) in the leisure/hospitality 
industry in Atlantic County in 2004 were $28,840, higher 
than the state average for that industry but lower than 
most of the other industries in the county, including con- 
struction, manufacturing, education, and business serv- 
ices.^® Multiple interviewees noted that they or someone 
they knew held two or three jobs to make ends meet. 

In its beach resort days, Atlantic City was characterized 
by high seasonal unemployment, and that seasonality 
persists to some degree, although it is less severe than 
in pre-gambling decades. 



87 



ATLANTIC CITY, NEW JERSEY 



ATLANTIC CITY, NEW JERSEY 



Community Development Efforts 

In addition to the Borgata example, there have 
been other efforts to link the prosperity of the gambling 
industry with community residents. In its early years, the 
Casino Reinvestment Development Authority focused 
on improving the housing stock in Atlantic City and 
elsewhere in the state. It is also a participant in a HUD 
HOPE VI development, which is currently under way and 
is partly located in the case study area. The project calls 
for a one-for-one replacement of 214 public housing units 
as well as 300 units of new market-rate for-sale housing. 
Since the early 1990s, however, CRDA has increasingly 
turned its attention to economic development. Much of 
this activity is devoted to projects that will keep Atlantic 
City competitive as other U.S. communities and states 
allow gambling. Recent projects include hotel expan- 
sions, parking garages, and a retail shopping district. 

Although such projects benefit the casino industry, 
many residents are concerned that needed capital and 
services are not reaching their neighborhoods. Fur- 
thermore, they do not believe that improvement efforts 
directed at local residents are well coordinated. Many 
organizations appear to be working independently; con- 
versations with interviewees suggest a lack of collabora- 
tion between the city and nonprofits, among nonprofits, 
and among programs operated by the Atlantic City Hous- 
ing Authority and private management companies. 

In addition, despite the substantial revenues that 
Atlantic City’s casinos generate for the city each year, 
the perception is that these revenues will not be spent 
in ways that best serve the interests of the city and its 
neighborhoods. This perception is supported by the 
city’s ongoing corruption problems. A recent Philadel- 
phia Inquirer article noted that “one third of last year’s 
city council members are either in prison or on its [sic] 
way there. Four of the last eight mayors have been 
arrested on corruption charges.’’^® In interviews, resi- 
dents expressed frustration that their elected repre- 
sentative and city officials did not adequately represent 
their interests. Service providers, equally frustrated, were 
concerned that the dysfunction in city government was 
harming the city’s residents. 

Dislocation and Gentrification 

Residents of the case study area also expressed 
deep concern about their ability to keep living in Atlantic 
City in the face of casino-related development. Asked 



what she thought her neighborhood would be like in 10 
years, one area resident responded, “We’ll all be moved 
out, and Atlantic City will be a mega resort.” 

Residents’ fears have a number of sources. In the 
Back Maryland neighborhood, for example, where hous- 
ing is HUD-subsidized but privately owned, interviewees 
expressed concern that when the owners’ contractual 
obligations with HUD to maintain the housing for low- 
income households expire, the units will be removed 
from the low-income stock. Four projects, containing 375 
units and owned by a single entity, had 2007 expiration 
dates.®® In late 2006, these four projects were placed on 
the market. While no deal materialized, the possibility of 
the sale has raised serious concerns about displacement 
among Back Maryland residents. New Jersey’s limited- 
dividend law has provisions requiring that low-income 
units built under the law’s auspices be maintained as 
low-income housing after the HUD requirement expires. 
However, it is not yet clear whether steps taken under 
these provisions will be effective in preserving this stock. 
In addition, at least one privately owned low-income 
housing tax credit project has recently been sold and 
its units may be removed from the low-income housing 
stock, according to an interviewee. 

Rapid house-price appreciation in Atlantic City in 
recent years has further contributed to area residents’ 
fears that housing affordability will become an increas- 
ingly severe problem.®' Moreover, affordability problems 
may also arise as a result of the state-mandated prop- 
erty tax revaluation scheduled for Atlantic City in 2008. 
The city has not undergone a revaluation in more than 
two decades, and homeowners, particularly elderly 
residents on fixed incomes, are deeply concerned that 
the revaluation will raise taxes so high that they will no 
longer be able to live in the city. While New Jersey has 
programs that may assist elderly and low-income home- 
owners affected by the revaluation, the programs’ avail- 
ability does not appear to be widely known, based on 
interviewees’ comments. 

■ CONCLUSION 

Atlantic City presents a particular challenge. Despite 
the abundant low-skill jobs that casinos have created, 
the city’s unemployment rate remains high, and it is still 
unclear how much of the casinos’ economic benefits spill 
over into the case study area. Lack of worker readiness, 
casino hiring rules, and low educational levels continue 



88 



to keep many community residents from finding and 
maintaining employment. In addition, there is increasing 
concern that casino-led development pressures could 
lead to displacement of poor households. 

Such development, along with new construction of 
market-rate housing in the HOPE VI project, would serve 
to reduce the concentration of poor households in the 
case study area, but not because of more job opportuni- 
ties and rising incomes for the area’s current residents. 
These types of change, even though they would lower 
the concentration of poverty in Atlantic City, would not 
resolve the conundrum of a city in which the gambling 
industry has created a large number of jobs, yet the 
unemployment rate remains high. 

This case study was prepared by Harriet Newburger, 
community deveiopment research advisor; Keith Roiiand, 
community deveiopment advisor; and John J. Wackes, 
community deveiopment speciaiist, aii of the Federai 
Reserve Bank of Phiiadeiphia; and Anita Sands, principai, 
ARi Pianning & Research, inc. 



Endnotes 

1 Charles A. Stansfield, Vacationing on the Jersey Shore: Guide to the 
Beach Resorts, Past and Present (Mechanicsburg, PA: Stackpole 
Books, 2004). 

2 Orlando Convention and Visitors Bureau, available at http:// 
www.orlandoinfo.com/b2b/research/annual_report.cfm; Las 
Vegas Convention and Visitor Authority, available at http://www. 
Ivcva.com/press/press-releases-2006.jsp?pressld=507; NYC and 
Company, available at http://www.nycvisit.com/content/index. 
cfm?pagePkey=57; and New Jersey Casino Control Commission, 
available at http://www.state.nj.us/casinos/financia/histori/docs/ 
fourth_quarter_2006.xls. 

3 New Jersey Casino Control Commission, Economic Impact Report 
Atlantic City Gaming Industry Year End, 2006. Available at http:// 
www.state.nj.us/casinos/financia/histori/docs/fourth_quarter_ 
2006.xls. 

4 Paul Teske and Bela Sur, “Winners and Losers: Politics, Casino 
Gambling, and Development in Atlantic City,” Review of Policy 
Research 10(2-3) (1991): 130-37. 

5 Denis P. Rudd, “The Social Impacts of Atlantic City Casino Gaming,” 
in Legalized Casino Gaming in the United States: The Economic and 
Social Impact, Cathy H. C. Hsu, ed. (New York: Hapworth Hospitality 
Press, 1999). 

6 See David Schwartz, “Jurisdiction Summary: Atlantic City, New Jer- 
sey,” at the Center for Gaming Research, excerpts adapted from 
David G. Schwartz, Suburban Xanadu: The Casino Resort on the Las 
Vegas Strip and Beyond (New York: Routledge, 2003). 

7 Bryant Simon, Boardwalk of Dreams (New York: Oxford University 
Press, 2004). 



8 Population data drawn from 1960 and 1980 censuses. Other mate- 
rial drawn from Klinger Kise Franks Straw, “Atlantic City Master 
Plan, Final Report,” prepared in association with Arthur D. Little, 

Inc., TAD Associates/Day and Zimmerman, D.S. Winokur Associates, 
Inc., Kelly/Maiello, and Robert C. Leventhal, Esq., for the Atlantic 
City Planning Department, 1987. See also endnote 7. 

9 With the exception of one year in which the number of casinos 
briefly rose to 13, the number of casinos in Atlantic City remained 
at 12 between 1988 and 2006, although casino ownership some- 
times changed. In November 2006, a casino closure reduced the 
number to its current level of 11 casinos. 

10 Thomas P. Hamer, “Economic Impact of the New Jersey Casino 
Industry,” prepared for the Casino Association of New Jersey, Sep- 
tember 1995. 

11 New Jersey Casino Control Commission, “Atlantic City Gaming 
Economic Impact Report,” prepared quarterly. Available at http:// 
www.state.nj.us/casinos/financia/. 

12 Plans call for as many as four more casinos investing more than $4 
billion in the city by 2012. Suzette Parmley, “Hilton's Plans Reflect a 
Larger-Scale Atlantic City,” Philadelphia Inquirer, April 25, 2007. 

13 In describing the purposes of the Casino Control Act, the New 
Jersey legislature stressed the role of casino gambling as a unique 
tool for the urban redevelopment of Atlantic City. In furtherance of 
this goal, the legislature created CRDA, amending the Casino Con- 
trol Act in 1984 to create an entity that would administer the rein- 
vestment of a portion of gaming industry revenues in Atlantic City 
and throughout New Jersey. The amendment specified that CRDA’s 
funds were to be used to benefit low- and moderate-income house- 
holds, and in support of that goal, CRDA initially focused its funding 
on housing. Starting in the early 1990s, however, a series of further 
amendments allowed CRDA funds to be used for activities that 
support casino development and expansion. CRDA is now primarily 
engaged in economic development activities; much of its funding is 
directed to maintaining a competitive edge for Atlantic City as the 
city faces competition from gambling in neighboring states. 

14 Yvonne Bonitto-Doggett, “Casino Reinvestment Development 
Authority; Playing the Right Hand in Atlantic City,” New Jersey 
Municipalities, November 2004. Available at http://www.njslom.org/ 
featart1104.html. 

15 According to the 1990 census, the poverty rate for Atlantic City 
was approximately 25 percent. 

16 While the 2000 U.S. Census reports different unemployment rates 
for Atlantic City and the nation than those reported by the Bureau 
of Labor Statistics, census data also show a large gap between 
the Atlantic City rate and that of the nation. This chart also raises 
an interesting question about Atlantic City post-gambling, namely, 
why did the gap between Atlantic City and U.S. unemployment 
rates suddenly open up so widely in the beginning of the 1990s 
after it had narrowed so much in the initial years of gambling? 
While the issue cannot be adequately addressed within this case 
study, it does warrant further investigation. 

17 Kilnger Kise Franks Straw, “Atlantic City Master Plan, Final Report,” 
prepared in association with Arthur D. Little, Inc., TAD Associ- 
ates/Day and Zimmerman, D. S. Winokur Associates, Inc., Kelly/ 
Maiello, and Robert C. Leventhal, Esq., for the Atlantic City Planning 
Department, 1987. 

18 Several supermarkets have opened and closed over the years. 

Many interviewees mentioned the lack of a supermarket (and other 



89 



ATLANTIC CITY, NEW JERSEY 



ATLANTIC CITY, NEW JERSEY 



important and desired services) in this city of over 40,000 residents. 
Food shopping entails a bus or car ride off the island. According to 
the 2000 census, 65 percent of households in the study area do not 
have a car. 

19 Stanley Holmes is owned by the Atlantic City Housing Authority 
(ACHA) and consists of 419 units for families and the disabled. 

20 of these units, 817 are in public housing owned by ACHA, primarily 
in family projects. The remaining 948 subsidized units in the study 
area are privately owned. Most of these privately-owned units 

are in Back Maryland and were built around the same time by a 
single developer on previously undeveloped land. The number of 
assisted units in place today may be somewhat lower as the result 
of HOPE VI redevelopment. Data available from U.S. Department of 
Housing and Urban Development, A Picture of Subsidized House- 
holds, 2000. Available at http://www.huduser.org/picture2000/ 
index.html. 

21 Both violent and property crime rates in Atlantic City are signifi- 
cantly higher than they are in the surrounding metropolitan area. 

In part, this reflects the fact that, as a tourist destination, Atlantic 
City’s daily population is much higher than its resident population. 
As noted in a 2000 GAO report examining gambling in Atlantic 
City, “Visitors become part of the pool who may both commit and 
become victims of crime and therefore should be added to the 
resident population when calculating the crime rate.” See “Impact 
of Gambling: Economic Effects More Measurable Than Social 
Effects,” GAO/GGD-00-78, 2000. Even when such an adjustment is 
made, Atlantic City’s crime rate is higher than that of New Jersey 
as a whole. 

22 Interviews and focus groups for this case study were conducted 
in Atlantic City from March to May 2007. Because of the sensitive 
nature of many of the discussions, interviewees requested that 
their responses remain anonymous. 

23 New Jersey State Employment and Training Commission, “Ready 
for the Job: Understanding Occupational and Skill Demand in New 
Jersey’s Tourism and Hospitality Industry.” Report prepared by the 
John J. Heldrich Center for Workforce Development at Rutgers 
University, 2004. 

24 Bureau of Economic Research, Rutgers University, “Limitations in 
the Workforce: A Survey and Study,” prepared for the New Jersey 
Casino Control Commission, October 1998. 

25 Spending data are available at http://www.state.nj.us/education/ 
guide/2007/csgsearch.shtml. Data on 2005 and 2006 graduation 
rates can be accessed at http://education.state.nj.us/rc/nclb06/ 
reports/01/01 1 0/01 -01 1 0-010. htm I 

26 These laws once applied to all employees of casinos but were 
relaxed for some categories of workers in 1995. The 2004 annual 
report by Trump Atlantic City Associates states that “requirements 
[related to worker character] have resulted in significant com- 
petition among Atlantic City casino operators for the services of 
qualified employees.” Report available at http://sec-fiiings-exhibits. 
realdealdocs.com/Form-lO-K-Annual-Report/1885-TRUMP-ATLANTIC- 
CITY-ASSOCIATES-10-K-834393/?qrtr=-q1_2004/. 

27 According to Eric Reynolds, who directed the program, the training 
center provides employability skills, assessments of aptitudes and 
abilities, information on jobs likely to be available and career paths 
that go with those jobs, and computer orientation training. 

28 New Jersey Department of Labor and Workforce Development, 
“Southern Regional Community Fact Book: Atlantic County Edition.” 



Report produced by the Division of Labor Market and Demo- 
graphic Research, 2006. 

29 Wayne Parry, “In Corruption, Atlantic City's No. 1, Ex-Council Prez 
Only the Latest to Fall,” Philadeiphia Inquirer, March 17, 2007. 

30 In general, in return for HUD subsidization of privately owned 
properties, their owners agree to maintain them as part of the low- 
income stock for a specified period, most often 30 years. Accord- 
ing to the National Housing Trust, this affordability requirement was 
due to expire in 2007 for 375 units in the privately owned subsi- 
dized stock in Back Maryland. An additional 232 units in Atlantic 
City have a 2009 expiration date. Available at http://www.nhtinc.org. 

31 Based on its quarterly survey of house prices in U.S. metropoli- 
tan areas, the National Association of Realtors reported that “in 
the fourth quarter [of 2006], the largest single-family home price 
increase was in the Atlantic City, N.J. area, where the median price 
of $339,800 was 25.9 percent higher than a year ago.” See “Fourth 
Quarter Metro Home Prices & State Sales Likely Have Hit Bottom,” 
February 14, 2007, available at http://www.realtor.org/press_room/ 
news_releases/2007/mhp_2006q4_sales_likely_have_hit_bottom. 



90 



■ OVERVIEW 



Unlike most of the case study communities in this report, Austin, located 
in central Texas, is one of the fastest-growing cities in the United States. 
Between April 2000 and July 2006 the population of the Austin-Round 
Rock Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) rose 21 percent, to more than 1.5 
million.^ According to the Austin Business Journal, the MSA is one of the 



hottest new job markets for young professionals, add- 
ing about a thousand jobs every month over the past 
five years.^ 

The region’s strengthening economy has contributed 
to a booming real estate market. As little as 10 years ago, 
Austin was recognized as an MSA with one of the best 
housing affordability indexes in the country.^ Today, it has 
one of the most expensive housing markets in Texas.'’ 
Median house values in the city have increased from 
$144,500 in 2000 to $190,800 by June 2007.= 

East Austin,” the focus of this case study, is just east 
of downtown and Interstate 35, the city’s major thor- 
oughfare. Historically, East Austin has been perceived by 
some as a “no man’s land,” populated mostly by minority 



residents and isolated economically, socially, and 
politically from the rest of the city. Since the late 1990s, 
however, the economic growth in the Austin MSA has led 
to significant gentrification in the community. What was 
once an area of concentrated poverty is now experienc- 
ing rapid investment and demographic and economic 
change, with affluence and poverty juxtaposed through- 
out East Austin. 

Managing this rapid change while ensuring that 
long-term community residents benefit from the area’s 
economic upturn is an ongoing struggle. “We’re trying to 
reignite the economic and cultural life of this community 
without displacing the majority of the people who have 
lived and worked here for years,” said Byron Marshall, 



91 




AUSTIN, TEXAS 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


37.5 


20.7 


Poverty rate 2000® 


45.6 


11.1 


Income 


Median household income® 


$15,678 


$48,950 


Demographics 


Population 2000® 


5,724 


1,249,763 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000® 


-27.4 


213.3 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 


% White 


4.5 


60.7 


% Hispanic/Latino 


44.1 


26.2 


% Black/African-American 


50.7 


7.7 


% Residents under age 189 


36.6 


25.4 


% Single-parent households® 


34.1 


8.0 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


16.5 


12.2 


% Population in same house as five years ago' 


57.4 


39.4 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000'' 


54.4 


15.2 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


11.6 


36.7 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005"' 


81.5 


87.5 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


75.0 


81.7 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


12.5 


4.0 


% Adults in the labor force'' 


51.1 


71.3 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


37.1 


58.2 


% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


41.0 


42.4 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized" 


50.4 


4.6 


Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$58,259 


$128,100 


Median year structure built' 


1960 


1983 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


57.8 


27.5 


% Credit files with high credit scores" 


29.8 


55.1 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005"“ 


33.3 


19.4 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005" 


24.1 


17.0 




president and CEO of the Austin Revitalization Authority. 
“It’s a balancing act.”^ 

■ BACKGROUND 

East Austin has long been economically and racially 
segregated from the rest of the city. In 1928, the city of 
Austin institutionalized segregation through its master 
plan. This plan forced minority residents to move to 
East Austin using such measures as cutting off utilities 
to blacks living in Freedmen settlements at the city’s 
periphery and in other parts of the city, as well as moving 



their churches to East Austin and its neighboring com- 
munities. City leaders also pushed the relatively few 
Mexican immigrants out of downtown by relocating their 
churches and building Santa Rita Courts, the nation’s first 
federally funded housing project, in East Austin.® 

Starting in the 1970s and 1980s, middle-class fami- 
lies who could afford to move out of the East Austin area 
often did, drawn by the suburbs’ better schools and 
amenities. Some kept their homes in East Austin and 
became landlords, while others cut their ties completely. 
Left behind were low- and moderate-income households, 
mostly black and Hispanic.® In 1970, the poverty rate in 



92 





the community stood at about 38 percent; by 1990 it had 
risen to 52 percent.'® 

By 2000, East Austin’s poverty rate had dropped to 
46 percent, yet census data show that its residents were 
still predominantly low-income, minority families. Histori- 
cally African American, the neighborhood gained a large 
percentage of Hispanic households in the 1980s and 
1990s. In 2000, 51 percent of East Austin’s population was 
black and 44 percent Hispanic. Unemployment stood 
at 13 percent, triple the rate in the MSA (4 percent), and 
only half of the community’s working-age population was 
in the labor force. The median household income was 
$15,678, less than a third of the MSA’s median household 
income. (See Table 1) 

Since the census lacks more recent data available 
at the neighborhood level, it is hard to assess how these 
demographic and economic indicators have changed 
in the past seven years. Yet on the ground, evidence of 
economic change in East Austin is impossible to miss. 
Longtime residents’ new neighbors have higher incomes 
and are moving into brand-new or renovated homes; 
high-end cafes, boutiques, and a new Wells Fargo bank 
branch have all followed them into the neighborhood." 

No longer a “no man’s land,” East Austin is now per- 
ceived as cool, hip, and edgy, and its proximity to down- 
town only enhances its appeal. 

One measure of these changes is the jump in 
property and land values in recent years. From 2000 to 
2005, tax-assessed values of single-family properties 
increased by more than 100 percent in the zip code that 
encompasses East Austin.'^ According to Paul Hilgers, 
the City of Austin’s director of neighborhood housing 



and community development, a house bought in 1997 for 
$100,000 sold in 2005 for $300,000, and vacant lots that 
sold for $4,000 to $7,000 in 1998 now sell for $80,000. 

These changes are part of significant gentrification 
pressures in the neighborhood that threaten to displace 
many of the community’s longtime residents. At the 
same time, the neighborhood is still struggling with many 
of the challenges common to areas with high poverty 
levels. Sixty percent of the school district’s enrollees are 
economically disadvantaged, and educational attainment 
in the community remains low.'® 

Crime is an issue as well. According to Austin Police 
Department Gang Unit Director Sergeant Vanzura, there 
is more crime in East Austin than in other parts of the 
metropolitan area.'’’ Gang members living east of 1-35 
often target immigrant day laborers, particularly on 
Fridays, said the sergeant. He explained that many day 
laborers receive their wages in cash on Fridays, making 
them vulnerable targets in part because many do not 
deposit their money in a financial institution.'® 

Efforts to address the crime in East Austin are hin- 
dered by a troubled relationship between the police 
department and East Austin’s longtime residents, who feel 
police have historically ignored the neighborhood and 
that, when enforcement does occur, treatment of minori- 
ties is different from treatment of whites. Nelson Linder, 
president of the Austin branch of the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), stated, 
“The situation between the police and the minority com- 
munities is definitely worsening.” A recent incident involv- 
ing a white officer shooting and killing a black man in East 
Austin has led to “a lot of frustration,” Linder said, and the 
situation is “close to boiling over.” 

Deterioration of race relations between the police 
department and minority communities has attracted the 
attention of the Civil Rights Division of the U.S. Department 
of Justice, which is investigating police use of force.'® The 
city has taken steps to improve race relations through its 
African-American quality of life committees, whose initia- 
tives focus on arts, culture, and entertainment; business 
and economic development; employment and education; 
health; neighborhood sustainability; and police and safety.'^ 
Despite the recent proliferation of local cafes and 
restaurants in East Austin, access to supermarkets can 
be limited. Two of the neighborhoods share a single 
supermarket.'® Fast food and convenience stores, which 
typically carry far fewer fresh food offerings than super- 
markets, abound. Access to health care is also an issue. 



93 



AUSTIN, TEXAS 




AUSTIN, TEXAS 




A strong regional economy has led to significant changes in East Austin. Managing this rapid change while ensuring that long-term 
community residents benefit from the area's economic upturn is an ongoing struggle. 



The U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 
(HHS) has designated East Austin as a medically under- 
served area, without enough primary care physicians to 
meet the needs of the local population.'® 

The neighborhood must also contend with its indus- 
trial legacy. Residents and community groups expressed 
serious concerns about the potential health effects of 
industrial pollution in the community. The East Austin 
environmental advocacy organization People Organized 
in Defense of Earth and Her Resources (PODER) high- 
lights a number of environmental hazards in the neigh- 
borhood that still exist today, including pollution from a 
benzene-emitting fuel-storage facility that was closed in 
1993, industrial plants located near elementary schools, 
and a number of small paint and body shops.®® 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

East Austin faces major challenges— as well as oppor- 
tunities— as it weathers changes in its housing market 
and business climate while maintaining the community 
that many impoverished residents call home. Interviews 
and an analysis of the data gathered for this case study 
revealed three key issues that are pivotal in the city’s 
move forward; gentrification, challenges to small busi- 
nesses, and civic engagement. 

Gentrification 

Local residents saw gentrification coming 10 years 
ago, but it has accelerated over the past several years. 
“The market hit the east side of town like a hurricane,” 



said Paul Hilgers. “There’s not much you can do to stop 
the market forces.” He pointed out the dilemma of gentri- 
fication— those moving have “great opportunities,” he 
noted, but longtime residents do not.®' 

Vacant lots and modest, run-down houses are selling 
at previously unheard-of prices, making them unafford- 
able for longtime residents. Locals see properties being 
flipped, and white-collar professionals without children 
are moving into expensive condos and houses that are 
newly renovated, expanded, or brand-new. What had 
been largely a one-story landscape is going vertical. 
These developments have driven up land and housing 
values exponentially.®® 

As the face of housing in East Austin changes, the 
increase in housing values has led to new affordability 
pressures, particularly among low-income residents who 
remain in the community.®® Home values in East Aus- 
tin have increased an estimated 117 percent from 1999 
to 2005, compared with the city’s increase of just 30 
percent.®'' Increased property values are likely to affect 
renters, too. A 2007 report on East Austin published by 
the University of Texas School of Public Affairs states that 
“as property values increase, the problem [of affordabil- 
ity] for renters will only become worse.”®® 

The production and supply of affordable housing 
units fall far short of demand. In early 2007, 4,000 families 
were on the waiting list for public housing and 6,000 fam- 
ilies were on the Section 8 waiting list.®® Even for those 
who are able to get vouchers, it is becoming increasingly 
difficult to find housing options near downtown that will 
accept them, forcing residents to find affordable housing 



94 






farther away. As low- and moderate-income families move 
away from East Austin and become more dispersed, they 
are farther from the social services and social networks 
they depend on for their quality of life.^^ 

Rising property values have also led to difficulties 
for low-income homeowners facing increased property 
taxes. One couple explained that for the past three years, 
their property taxes have risen approximately $500 annu- 
ally.^® Although the associated house-price apprecia- 
tion has increased homeowners’ wealth on paper, their 
incomes have not increased at a commensurate rate 
that enables them to pay their property taxes, and mov- 
ing elsewhere in the metropolitan area to “cash out” on 
their increased home equity is not always optimal. Other 
neighborhoods within Austin are also expensive, and 
cheaper locales are far from downtown and its employ- 
ment opportunities and amenities. 

Increased property taxes have also affected people 
who have inherited their families’ homes.®® Local resident 
M.H. Lopez recently inherited a house from her mother 
who had paid annual property taxes of $900. When her 
mother died and the house was reassessed to reflect its 
current market value, the property tax bill rose to $8,000.®° 

For people like Ms. Lopez, being unable to afford 
staying in East Austin where their relatives live and their 
lives are centered is an issue that goes beyond the pock- 
etbook. In 2005, Amanda Anderson inherited the home 
she grew up in. “Like the homes of many black families 
in East Austin, it holds special significance because [my] 
parents sacrificed to buy it in an era when banks made 
few loans to minorities,” she explained.®' 

Challenges to Small Businesses 

Small businesses in East Austin have shared resi- 
dents’ struggles to ride the wave of gentrification and 
socioeconomic changes in the community. Soaring rents 
are one of the main challenges.®® From 2000 to 2005, the 
median value of commercial property rose approximately 
60 percent on 11"' Street and 53 percent on 12"' Street, 
East Austin’s major corridors for business development.®® 
Higher rents have driven some businesses out of the 
neighborhood. According to a local funder, the mix of 
businesses has changed as a result of the community’s 
demographic shifts. In particular, African American- 
owned businesses have been leaving East Austin for 
places such as Pfiugerville, where rents are cheaper and 
a large number of African Americans are moving.®"' 



Staff at PeopleFund, a microlender that works with 
more established micro- and small businesses in East 
Austin, reported that its clients would like to increase 
their ability to network with other local businesses and 
create an East Austin business district with a distinct 
identity that will draw customers. BiGAUSTIN, another 
microenterprise lender, noted that some owners of 
mom-and-pop shops are reluctant to ask for help when 
their businesses are flagging. The owners feel that 
would oblige them to share personal information with a 
stranger.®® Others have sought technical assistance and 
improved their financial health to the point where they 
become “bankable.” Still, some do not feel comfortable 
with banks, so they continue working with BiGAUSTIN, 
which has a loan ceiling of $50,000.®° 

Jessica Flores, a longtime small business owner in 
East Austin, said there is resentment “because newcom- 
ers can access credit, and yet we had to go over hurdles 
to squeeze a penny.” One difference between newcom- 
ers and longtime residents, she noted, is that “non- 
minorities have a better networking system— it extends 
beyond the neighborhood.” She added, “The difficulty 
with East Austin is that you typically deal with individu- 
als who aren’t as educated and informed or trusting, and 
are therefore easily intimidated or ignored. It is those 
barriers that contribute to their hesitation in unifying and 
developing a strong voice.”®'' 

To help local businesses learn how to survive and thrive 
in this quickly changing environment, PeopleFund runs the 
Focus East Insight Forum Series, which informs East Austin 
small business owners about local economic and political 
trends. The city also has a program called Commercial 
Preservation and Revitalization that covers four zones, all in 
East Austin. It provides up to $20,000 in loans to nonprofits 
and new and existing businesses that relocate to the neigh- 
borhood. The loans can be used for equipment, inventory, 
vehicles, predevelopment costs, leased property improve- 
ments, buildings, land, and other expenses.®® 

Civic Engagement 

Residents and business owners in East Austin 
reported that it is hard for them to get their voices heard 
by city government. Language, education, and trust can 
all be factors. For instance, some stakeholders noted 
that residents may not understand or trust what commu- 
nity and political leaders tell them, and they tend to be 
uncomfortable debating or raising issues because that 



95 



AUSTIN, TEXAS 



AUSTIN, TEXAS 



would reveal their lack of knowledge or understanding. 

A few groups have tried to help the community organize 
to approach the city as a unified voice, but these efforts 
have, in the words of one resident, “fizzled out.” The 
general feeling is that there is no use talking to City Hall 
because “it will do what it wants anyway,” said Flores.^® 

The lack of confidence in city government contrib- 
utes to low voter turnout in the community.''® Community 
leader Mark Rogers, executive director of Guadalupe 
Neighborhood Development Corporation, said, “There’s 
a sense that is instilled in longtime residents that the 
city is not there to serve you.”'" Rogers also said that the 
community’s residents simply lack trust in local govern- 
ment.'*® He cited police shootings of minorities, along 
with the city’s inaction or delay in installing streetlights 
and paving streets and sidewalks in East Austin. “So resi- 
dents think, ‘What’s the sense of participating?”’ 

Complicating the lack of civic engagement is Aus- 
tin’s political structure. It does not have single-member 
City Council districts; instead, all members are elected 
at-large (citywide). As reported in the Austin Chronicle, 
since the 1970s there has been a “gentleman’s agree- 
ment” that, of the seven city council members, one will 
be black and one will be Hispanic.'*® As a result. Impover- 
ished neighborhoods do not necessarily have specifically 
designated representatives who can advocate for and 
address their community’s needs.'*'* 

To help Integrate residents’ viewpoints into com- 
prehensive neighborhood development plans, the City 
Council in 1997 approved a neighborhood planning 
process. Each neighborhood plan is a blueprint of local 
stakeholders’ shared vision for their community.'*® When 
developers want to invest in an Austin neighborhood, 
they must look at its plan; if the proposed development 
Is at odds with the plan, they must confer with the neigh- 
borhood planning team, whose function is to represent 
the neighborhood.''® 

The neighborhood plan is developed by a team of 
local residents, who also approve or reject development 
proposals and present their perspective to city staff, 
who then make their own recommendation to the city 
planning commission. The commission, in turn, makes a 
recommendation to the City Council, which votes on the 
proposal. This is where community influence is weakest. 
Because the neighborhood plans are not legally enforce- 
able, the planning team’s influence is limited, and their 
effectiveness varies across political landscapes, pro- 
posed developments, and time. However, the better 



organized and the more vocal and eloquent a team is 
and the more people it represents, the more clout its 
recommendations have in presentations to the city’s 
staff, planning commission, and council members. 

■ CONCLUSION 

Austin’s city government has developed several strate- 
gies to increase the supply of affordable housing and 
to mitigate gentrification’s displacement of low- and 
moderate-income households in East Austin. One 
program, SMART Housing, allows the city to expedite 
reviews and waive fees for developers as incentives 
to create new single-family, multifamily, and mixed-use 
developments that include a percentage of reasonably 
priced units that meet the city’s standards for acces- 
sibility, transit-oriented design, and green building.'**' In 
addition, the city’s “McMansion” ordinance attempts to 
preserve the character of neighborhoods in the city core 
by requiring new construction to be compatible in scale 
with the existing neighborhood.'*® The city also has a $55 
million affordable-housing bond program to fund the 
financing, acquisition, development, or rehabilitation of 
safe, clean, and affordable housing.'*® Finally, a mixed-use 
redevelopment project at East Austin’s former Robert 
Mueller Municipal Airport will add 2,400 multifamily units 
and 2,200 single-family houses, 25 percent of which will 
be affordable.®® 

In addition, the creation of a Homestead Preserva- 
tion District in East Austin will enable the city to use three 
tools to promote housing affordability: the Homestead 
Land Trust, Homestead Preservation Reinvestment Zone, 
and Homestead Land Bank. The land trust enables the 
city and nonprofit community development corporations 
to purchase and hold land for residential housing to main- 
tain affordability in perpetuity via 99-year leases.®* The 
Homestead Preservation Reinvestment Zone is a standard 
tax increment financing (TIF) zone with a few exceptions. 
The main distinction is that this zone has been created to 
encourage the development of owner-occupied afford- 
able housing by improving infrastructure directly related 
to the affordable housing project.®® The third tool is the 
land bank, which speeds up the process of clearing titles 
to abandoned or foreclosed lots. Once operational, this 
tool will allow the city to avoid holding a public foreclo- 
sure sale and Instead directly transfer the lot to the land 
bank; a nonprofit community development corporation 
can then purchase the land to build affordable housing.®® 



96 



As the volume of investment in East Austin climbs, 
however, a growing number of low- and moderate- 
income households are dispersed outside the city limits, 
farther from the service providers and social networks 
they have relied on for their quality of life.^'' For elderly 
and disabled individuals on fixed incomes and house- 
holds that do not want to leave their family homes, gen- 
trification has been an unwelcome change. At the same 
time, residents who are dispersing to the suburbs have 
access to other community assets, such as new schools 
and more vibrant employment opportunities. For East 
Austin, the question remains: Will government, the private 
sector, and community leaders be able to manage the 
community’s changes in a way that gets the “balancing 
act” right? 

This case study was prepared by Elizabeth Sobel, com- 
munity affairs specialist, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas. 



Endnotes 

1 “Austin Among Top 20 Fastest Growing Regions in U.S.,” Austin 
Business Journai, Aprii 13, 2007. Avaiiabie at http://starkserious. 
wordpress.com/2007/04/13/east-austin-is-going-to-get-a-2-biiiion- 
deveiopment/. 

2 ibid. 

3 “The State of the Nation’s Housing 2007,” Joint Center for Housing 
Studies, Harvard University. 

4 Oniy Coiiin County, which is outside of Daiias, had a higher median 
house vaiue in 2007. Avaiiabie at http://recenter.tamu.edu/data/hs/ 
trends4.htmi (accessed December 11, 2007). 

5 Data downloaded from the Real Estate Center at Texas A&M Uni- 
versity. Available at http://recenter.tamu.edu/data/hs/hs140b.htm 
(accessed December 11, 2007). 

6 The boundaries of East Austin are not defined in the same way 
by all people. For this case study area, we included the neighbor- 
hoods of Central East Austin and Rosewood. Quantitative data for 
East Austin are compiled from the U.S. Census and refer to either 
census tracts 48453000802 and 48453000804, or zip code 78702. 
Qualitative observations generally refer to the general area east 

of 1-35. 

7 K. Anoa Monsho, “From East Austin to East End, Gentrification in 
Motion,” The Good Life: A Monthly Journal of Austin Stories, Novem- 
ber 2004, 38-44. 

8 Karen Riles, Austin History Center. Telephone and e-mail interviews. 

9 Ibid. 

10 Geolytics (2000). Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB) Tract 
Data from 1970-2000. 



11 ATMs are rare in East Austin. Wells Fargo built a branch there 
about five years ago, but before that, there were none. Qne local 
organization surmised that while this situation may be attributable 
to the perceived security issues, it is likely to change because 
there is a lot of mixed-use development growing in East Austin, 
which is attracting banks to the area. In the meantime, the only 
ATM options are at a few convenience stores that charge high 
fees. In the second half of 2007, Wachovia Bank opened two 
branches in East Austin. 

12 Data from Paul Frank and Ryan Robinson of the city of Austin. For 
details, see “Single Family Taxable Value, Percent Change: 2000 
to 2005,” Travis Central Appraisal District, June 2007, available at 
http://www.ci.austin.tx.us/census/downloads/sf_tax_perc.pdf. 

13 Austin ISD Community Demographics and Classroom Profile, avail- 
able at http://www.schoolmatters.com (accessed November 2007). 

14 Sergeant Vanzura, Austin Police Department. Telephone interview, 
April 17, 2007. 

15 Ibid. 

16 Tony Plohetski and Patrick George, “Feds Investigate Austin Police: 
Justice Department to Review Use of Force,” Austin American- 
Statesman, June 2, 2007. 

17 In 2005, City Manager Toby Hammett Futrell submitted the African 
American Quality of Life Scorecard to the mayor and City Council. 
The scorecard showed how the black community falls far behind 
the rest of Austin in business ownership, educational attainment, 
family income, homeownership, and social and cultural infrastruc- 
ture and has higher rates of incarceration and poverty. Qut of this 
report emerged community-based recommendations to address 
these problems. Six teams implement them. For details, see 
“African American Quality of Life Initiative,” Austin City Connection, 
June 2007, available at http://www.ci.austin.tx.us/aaql/. 

18 This refers to the neighborhoods of Central East Austin and Rose- 
wood. A tour of Austin reveals that there are not many grocery stores 
downtown and those that do exist in the metropolitan area are not 
easily accessible or convenient without a car from East Austin. 

19 The designation of medically underserved areas is based on the 
number of primary care physicians, the percentage of elderly 
and people below the poverty line, and the infant mortality rate. 
Rosewood and Central East Austin were specifically designated as 
medically underserved areas. 

20 In the 1960s the Holly power plant was built in a Hispanic neigh- 
borhood of East Austin. PQDER Executive Director Susana Almanza 
says that since then, area residents have developed cancer, 
tumors, respiratory conditions, learning disabilities, and hearing 
loss. In 1998 the city promised it would close the plant by 2005, 
but it was not until September 30, 2007, that it officially closed. 
According to PQDER, some of the community’s suggestions are to 
expand a nearby baseball field and park to the site or build an arts 
and community center there. PQDER Board Member Daniel Llanes 
said, “Residents expect the city to do all of the follow-through 
associated with cleanup, including removing anything toxic or nox- 
ious that could affect the water or neighborhood.” Austin Energy 
said that it expects it will take up to three years to take down the 
plant. Source: Daniel Mottola, “Holly Power Plant to Close, Really!” 
Austin Chronicie, July 13, 2007. 

21 Paul Hilgers, Director of Neighborhood Housing and Community 
Development, City of Austin. Telephone interview, December 4, 2007. 



97 



AUSTIN, TEXAS 



AUSTIN, TEXAS 



22 In Travis County, from 2005 to 2007, the zip code with the highest 
percentage gain in appraised vaiues was one that inciudes East 
Austin. The median home vaiue increased 42 percent. Marty Toohey, 
“Home Vaiue Jump Exacts Heavy Price: Travis Appraisais Hitting 
Some Especiaiiy Hard," Austin American-Statesman, June 17, 2007 

23 Lyndon B. Johnson Schooi of Pubiic Affairs, “Community Change 
in East Austin,” Poiicy Research Project Report, Number 160, 2007. 
Avaiiabie at http://www.utexas.edu/ibj/pubs/isbn/0-89940-773-9/. 

24 These data are for Zip code 78702, which inciudes Centrai East 
Austin and Rosewood. “Community Change in East Austin,” Lyndon 
B. Johnson Schooi of Pubiic Affairs, The University of Texas at Aus- 
tin, Poiicy Research Project Report, Number 160. Avaiiabie at http:// 
www.utexas.edu/lbj/pubs/isbn/0-89940-773-9/. 

25 Lyndon B. Johnson School of Public Affairs, “Community Change in 
East Austin.” 

26 Note that these are families, not individuals, so they represent 
thousands more. Also, 4,000 and 6,000 should not be added 
together because some families may be on both lists. 

27 To see how social services and community resources are dis- 
bursed throughout the Austin-Round Rock MSA, see the Central 
Texas Opportunity initiative, commonly referred to as “opportunity 
mapping,” conducted by the Kirwan Institute for the Study of 
Race and Ethnicity, Ohio State University. John A. Powell, Jason 
Reece, and Samir Gambhir, “The Geography of Opportunity: Austin 
Region,” March 2007, available at http://kirwan.gripserver3.com/ 
publicationspresentations/publications. 

28 Telephone interview with resident. May 24, 2007. 

29 Increases in property taxes do not affect elderly homeowners or the 
disabled because they have access to a property tax deferral program. 

30 M. H. Lopez, community resident. Telephone interview, June 21, 2007. 

31 Marty Toohey, “Home Value Jump Exacts Heavy Price: Travis 
Appraisals Hitting Some Especially Hard,” Austin American- 
Statesman, June 17, 2007. 

32 PeopleFund explains the effects of rising real estate costs: “It is an 
established fact that rents have gone up. Basically, families have 
been cashing out and moving further out to buy bigger, newer 
homes. A lot of business owners have been following these migra- 
tion patterns.” Brad White, PeopleFund, e-mail, November 30, 2007. 

33 “East Austin Development: Changing Corridors,” East Austin Eco- 
nomic Summit 3, PeopleFund. 

34 Brad White, PeopleFund, e-mail, November 30, 2007. 

35 The “BiG” in “BiGAUSTIN” stands for “business investment growth.” 
BiGAUSTIN is an East Austin nonprofit organization that provides 
training, technical assistance, and business loans. Its customer 
base is new and existing small businesses. Since its founding, 

it has served the low- and moderate-income minority market. 
According to its president Jeannette Peten, in the last years it 
has worked with more than 7,000 entrepreneurs, disbursed more 
than $4.2 million in loans, and assisted in creating and sustaining 
more than 1,600 jobs in the local economy. The loan cap for new 
businesses is $15,000 and for businesses one year or older it is 
$50,000. For more information, see http://www.bigaustin.org. 

36 Local microlenders report that they see clients throughout Austin 
who have been turned down by mainstream banks because of such 



problems as poor credit history, no steady or strong income, few or 
no assets for collateral, unrealistic sales projections, and a lack of 
knowledge about what it takes to make a business succeed. 

37 Jessica Flores, Co-owner of an East Austin vehicle collision repair 
shop, Paint Care & Body, Inc. Telephone interview. May 24, 2007. 

38 For details, see “City of Austin Program Guidelines CP&R Busi- 
ness Loan Program (CP&R BLP),” Austin City Connection, June 
2007, available at http://www.ci.austin.tx.us/housing/downloads/ 
CP&R%20brochure.pdf. 

39 Jessica Flores, Co-owner of an East Austin vehicle collision repair 
shop. Paint Care & Body, Inc. Telephone interview, November 28, 2007. 

40 Travis County election results. For specific examples of the per- 
centage of registered voters who voted, go to http://www.co.travis. 
tx.us/county_clerk/election/results.asp. Precincts 124 and 126 are 
the precincts that most closely overlap East Austin. 

41 Mark Rogers, Executive Director, Guadalupe Neighborhood Devel- 
opment Corp. Telephone interview, June 20, 2007. 

42 Ibid. 

43 This is commonly known. References to it are made in local 
publications, including Wells Dunbar, “Beside the Point: Redistrict- 
ing Comes Home,” Austin Chronicie, September 21, 2007, Michael 
King, “Point Austin: Gentlemen’s Disagreement: Back to the Future 
at City Hall,” Austin Chronicle, July 28, 2006, and Amy Smith, 
“Hispanic Chamber Honors Eastside Pioneer,” Austin Chronicie, 
January 30, 2004. Michael Jim Harrington, director of the Texas 
Civil Rights Project, mentions this agreement in a recent article by 
John Moritz, “Police Shootings Worsen Racial Tensions in Austin,” 
Fort Worth Star-Teiegram, June 10, 2007. 

44 Mark Rogers, Executive Director, Guadalupe Neighborhood Devel- 
opment Corp. Telephone interview, December 4, 2007. 

45 Plans include formal amendments that focus on capital improve- 
ments, land use, transportation, urban design, zoning, and other 
aspects of development intended to complement and enhance 
neighborhood character. 

46 By ordinance, the planning team has to consist of at least one 
property owner, business owner, renter, and representative from a 
neighborhood association. In the best-case scenario, this team is 
well-organized and cohesive, easy to contact, responsive, solicits 
community feedback, and represents the diversity of community 
voices when deciding to support or reject a developer’s proposed 
amendment. For a more in-depth description of the entire process, 
see “Overview of Neighborhood Planning,” Austin City Connection, 
June 2007 available at http://www.ci.austin.tx.us/zoning/overview_ 
np.htm. 

47 In this case, reasonably priced means that units are sold or rented 
to households with incomes at or below 80 percent of Austin’s 
median family income; these households would spend no more 
than 30 percent of their income on housing. Since April 2000, 
builders and developers have constructed more than 8,000 new 
units of SMART housing in the city. Green Building Program, June 
2007, available at http:// www.ci.austin.tx.us/ahfc/smart.htm. 

48 “Austin OKs Ban on Larger Homes in Certain Neighborhoods,” 
Austin Business Journal, June 9, 2006. To see the ordinance and 
its boundaries, go to “Development Regulations,” Austin City 
Connection, June 2007, available at www.ci.austin.tx.us/zoning/ 
sf_regs.htm. To get a sense of the location and intensity of the 



98 



first stage of tear-downs and rebuilds in Austin, see http;//www. 
ci.austin.tx.us/census/downloads/Demolits_moveoffs.pdf 

49 The city will issue general obligation bonds allocated over seven 
years to raise the $55 million. Of this, $33 million will be allocated 
to affordable housing for the elderly on fixed incomes, minimum- 
wage earners, people with special needs, and people making the 
transition out of homelessness. In this case, affordability means 
30 to 50 percent of median family income, which is $21,350 and 
$35,550 for a family of four, respectively. The remaining $22 million 
will be allocated for creating affordable homeownership for first- 
time home buyers and families earning 50 to 80 percent of the 
median family income and paying for home repairs for households 
with low incomes. For details, see “Bonds Mean More Affordable 
Housing for Austin Residents,” Austin City Connection, November 8, 
2006, available at http://www.ci.austin.tx.us/housing/2006/bonds. 
htm (accessed June 2007); “Retooling Affordable Housing Strate- 
gies: Case Studies of Local Finance Options,” Banking & Community 
Perspectives, Issue 1, 2007, available at http://www.dallasfed.org. 

50 In this case, affordable means that renters who earn 60 percent 
of the city’s median family income and homeowners who earn 80 
percent of the city’s median family income qualify. For details, see 
“Mueller,” June 2007, available at http://www.muelleraustin.com/ 
overview.html. 

51 What is unique about community land trusts is that even though 
the family owns the house, the underlying land is owned by the 
nonprofit and leased to the family pursuant to a long-term lease, 
which is generally for $1. All units would be sold to households 
with up to 70 percent of median family income. Forty percent of 
these units must be sold to families that have up to 50 percent 
of median family income. Of the remaining 60 percent of units, 

10 percent of these units would be sold to families with up to 30 
percent of median family income. The homeowner is responsible 
for paying taxes on the value of the structure but not the land. 
Gerardo Castillo, Chief of Staff, Office of State Representative 
Eddie Rodriguez. E-mail interview, June 28, 2007. 

52 The city's housing department or nonprofit community development 
corporations within the district boundaries would qualify for TIF 
funds for the purposes of constructing affordable housing if the units 
have at least a 30-year period of affordability: 25 percent of housing 
units would be occupied by families with incomes that are 30 per- 
cent of median family income and 50 percent of the units would be 
occupied by families with incomes 50 percent below median family 
income. Gerardo Castillo, Chief of Staff, Office of State Representa- 
tive Eddie Rodriguez. E-mail interview. May 30, 2007. 

53 Carlos Calle, Legislative Aide, Office of State Representative Eddie 
Rodriguez. Telephone and e-mail interviews. For more information, 
see http://www.legis.state.tx.us/tlodocs/79R/billtext/doc/HB00525E. 
doc (pages 18-23). 

54 To see how social services and community resources are dis- 
bursed throughout the Austin-Round Rock MSA, see the Central 
Texas Opportunity initiative, commonly referred to as “opportunity 
mapping,” conducted by the Kirwan Institute for the Study of 
Race and Ethnicity, Ohio State University. John A. Powell, Jason 
Reece, and Samir Gambhir, “The Geography of Opportunity: Austin 
Region,” March 2007. Available at http://kirwan.gripserver3.com/ 
publicationspresentations/publications. 



99 



AUSTIN, TEXAS 



100 



McKinley County, New Mexico: 

Crownpoint 



■ OVERVIEW 



Crownpoint, located in a remote, rural county in northwestern New Mexico, 
is the largest community in two of the poorest census tracts in the state. 
Encompassing some 1,500 square miles between the Navajo Reservation to 
the west and the northeastern corner of McKinley County, Crownpoint cov- 
ers sparse deserts, pihon-studded ridgelines, and high plains. This thinly 



populated area has just over four people per square 
mile. While the views are open and free, the land itself is 
marked by a unique and complex land ownership pattern 
that is a legacy of U.S. and Native American policies. 

The interaction of land policies and dispersed 
population shapes much of the area’s economic life 
and opportunities. The nearly 6,500 people in the area 
rely on a lone grocery store with a single automated 
teller machine (ATM) for local retail and financial serv- 
ices. The nearest cities offering more than just basic 
provisions— Gallup, Grants, and Farmington, New Mexico, 
and Window Rock, Arizona— are all more than an hour’s 
drive from Crownpoint. Nearly half of the population 
lives in poverty, the effects of which are compounded by 



limited access to basic services such as reliable roads, 
electricity, and water. 

■ BACKGROUND 

An initial profile of the case study area was developed 
using publicly accessible state and national data, and 
augmented with personal interviews with nearly two 
dozen residents and stakeholders.' By a number of 
measures, the Crownpoint case study area, whose 
population is almost exclusively Native American, is more 
disadvantaged than the state’s rural areas overall. (See 
Table 1) The median household income in Crownpoint 
in 2000 was $18,736, almost 36 percent less than that 



101 



McKinley county, new Mexico 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Crownpoint 



New Mexico non-metro 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


n/a 


26.0 




Poverty rate 2000“’ 


45.6 


20.6 


Income 


Median household income'’ 


$18,736 


$29,322 


Demographics 


Population 2000^“ 


6,445 


596,824 




% Population change, 1970 - 2000'’ 


n/a 


42.9 




Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 




% White 


4.4 


48.0 




% Hispanic/Latino 


0.9 


44.0 




% Native American 


93.4 


4.3 




% Residents under age 189 


40.2 


28.0 




% Single-parent households'’ 


20.3 


11.1 




% Foreign born, 2000' 


0.1 


7.2 




% Population in same house as five years ago' 


75.5 


57.3 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000'' 


38.6 


24.4 




% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


12.5 


17.8 




% Students proficient in reading, 2005'" 


30.7 


48.9 




% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


23.9 


27.6 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000'’ 


23.5 


8.1 




% Adults in the labor forceP 


45.8 


56.8 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


64.6 


72.4 




% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


16.2 


39.7 




Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$18,317 


$75,042 




Median year structure built' 


1982 


1975 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


16.6 


19.3 




% Credit files with high credit scores” 


20.7 


36.0 




% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


33.3 


27.6 




Mortgage denial rate, 2005* 


46.2 


26.5 



for non-metro New Mexico. Indeed, poverty is endemic 
in Crownpoint. In 2000, nearly half (45.6 percent) of all 
residents reported incomes below the poverty line. While 
this represents a slight decline in poverty since 1990 
(47.8 percent), since 1970 the surrounding county has 
experienced poverty levels exceeding 35 percent. Chil- 
dren and the elderly in the case study area are especially 
affected by poverty. More than half of the case study 
area’s children live in poverty, almost twice the number 
in non-metro New Mexico, along with more than a third of 
Crownpoint’s elderly residents, compared with approxi- 
mately 15 percent in non-metro areas of the state living 
in poverty. (See Figure 1) 



Households in Crownpoint depend more on govern- 
ment assistance than in New Mexico’s non-metro areas 
as a whole. The number of households in the case study 
area reporting wages as a source of income is actually 
slightly higher than in non-metro regions across the state, 
but more than one in five of Crownpoint’s households 
receive public assistance. This rate is almost four times 
greater than the non-metro average. Finally, the num- 
ber of households reporting self-employment income is 
barely a third of that for non-metro New Mexico. 

Unemployment in the area is extremely high. Based 
on U.S. census data, the area’s unemployment rate of 24 
percent was nearly three times that of non-metro New 



102 




Mexico as a whole. Moreover, the unemployment rate 
for the area reported by the census may be a conserva- 
tive estimate. A 2003 study by the Navajo Department of 
Economic Development estimated that unemployment in 
the case study area could be as high as 65 percent.^ The 
difference can be accounted for in two ways. First, the 
census data treat discouraged, able-bodied adults who 
have quit looking for jobs as out of the workforce, and 
therefore they are not counted as unemployed. In con- 
trast, the Navajo Department of Economic Development 
included discouraged, able-bodied adults as unemployed. 
Second, a study by the Bureau of Indian Affairs found that 
subsistence economic practices and the lack of tele- 
phones, permanent addresses. Social Security numbers, 
and English speaking skills inhibit an accurate employ- 
ment count among Native American populations.^ 

Finally, the occupational and educational data for 
Crownpoint suggest that there may be a mismatch 
between the jobs available and the skills of the area’s 
population. The number of professional jobs in the area 
is disproportionately large relative to non-metro New 
Mexico. Four of every 10 jobs, in fact, and two-thirds of 
local industries are in high-skill sectors such as educa- 
tion, health, social services, and public administration,'' 
figures that are twice those in non-metro New Mexico 
overall. And while these positions generally pay well, they 
often require advanced education and, in many cases, 
work experience. Few residents in the case study area 
have the education or experience needed for these 
jobs. Well over a third of adults living in the case study 
area lack a high school diploma, and just over 5 percent 
of Navajos in Crownpoint have a bachelor’s degree or 
higher. As a result, many of the area’s high-skill jobs are 



FIGURE 1 




All individuals Children Elderly Native American 

SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 



likely to be occupied by people who relocate to Crown- 
point or by commuters from outside the case study area. 

Industries that might employ such a large number of 
individuals with limited education are scarce. Retail trade, 
entertainment, and food services comprise just over 6 
percent of all jobs in the case study area. This is less than 
one-third the average for non-metro New Mexico. The 
lack of low-skill employment opportunities may contribute 
to the area’s low number of jobs per resident— 39 jobs 
for every 100 adults— and high unemployment rate. This 
paucity of opportunities may also contribute to substan- 
tial commute times for the locals who do find jobs. Of the 
residents in the case study area who have jobs, almost 
one-quarter of them commute 60 minutes or more to 
work, compared to only 6 percent of non-metro New 
Mexicans overall who commute that far. 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Issues underlying concentrated poverty and its effects 
in Crownpoint range from broad and systemic— including 
regulatory and procedural barriers in accessing services, 
coordination among government agencies and service 
providers, and limited locally available retail services 
and entry-level job opportunities— to those specific to 
individuals, among them dependence on government 
assistance, impaired health, low educational attainment, 
and limited financial stability. 

In particular, four dominant issues arose from 
interviews with Crownpoint residents and stakeholders: 

1) the role of geographic isolation in limiting access to 
services and employment opportunities; 2) the effects 
of land status on economic development efforts; 3) poor 
housing conditions; and 4) the limited availability of 
financial services. Geographic isolation and land status, 
a combination somewhat unique to Crownpoint, appear 
to contribute to poor housing conditions and the limited 
availability of financial services in the region. 

Isolation 

Interviewees mentioned isolation as a key fac- 
tor in perpetuating poverty in the case study area. 
Crownpoint is characterized by low population density, 
limited transportation and infrastructure for utilities, 
and remoteness. Taken together, these factors tend 
to limit access to basic social services and amenities, 
especially for residents living outside of the immediate 
Crownpoint area. 



103 



MCKINLEY COUNTY, NEW MEXICO 



McKinley county, new Mexico 



The high cost of transportation limits the trips that 
residents can make and reduces their ability to access 
needed services. A recent study of Navajo women and 
their children in the eastern part of the Crownpoint 
area found that a lack of transportation was the most 
common reason cited for missing an appointment to 
obtain benefits from the Special Supplemental Nutrition 
Program for Women, Infants, and Children.^ Staff at the 
Indian Health Service (IHS) hospital in Crownpoint cor- 
roborated this finding, noting that many patients miss 
appointments because of transportation problems. Like- 
wise, some service providers can have difficulty reaching 
their clients. IHS staff observed that it is often difficult, if 
not impossible, for emergency vehicles to reach remote 
residents because of poor road conditions. 

The area’s isolation is reinforced by limited access 
to basic utilities. Many basic services routinely avail- 
able in less isolated areas, such as electricity, water, and 
telephones, are unavailable in large parts of Crownpoint 
because costs to extend these services are often prohibi- 
tive. Census data show that more than 50 percent of the 
area’s households lack telephone access, compared with 
only 6 percent nationally. According to the Federal Com- 
munications Commission, the great distances combined 
with sparse population make extending wired telephone 
services “challenging, if not infeasible.” These limitations 
are reinforced by residents’ limited ability to pay for 
services.® Similarly, other studies suggest that one-third 
of households lack electricity^ or easy access to safe 
drinking water.® 

Finally, economic development specialists with the 
Navajo Eastern Business Development Office have noted 
that isolation limits the opportunity for additional retail 
services. In most rural areas in Navajo lands— including 
the Crownpoint area— only “necessity retail,” such as 
laundries or gas stations, are likely to succeed.® The lack 
of opportunities to expand local retail trade beyond the 
basic necessities limits the population’s ability to attain 
entry-level jobs or to create self-employment opportuni- 
ties. The lack of local retail outlets also means that much 
of the local income is spent outside the Crownpoint area. 
A Navajo Nation report found that as much as 71 percent 
of all income in the case study area is spent in the dis- 
tant market centers of Gallup, Grants, and Farmington.'® 

Local Land Status and Checkerboarding 

Land status is a key factor inhibiting economic 



development in the case study area, according to mem- 
bers of the Crownpoint land use planning committee, 
the Navajo Eastern Business Development Office staff, 
and several financial institution representatives. Isola- 
tion and its associated costs are reinforced by a mixed 
pattern of land ownership referred to as “checkerboard- 
ing.” Currently, land in Crownpoint is under the ownership 
and control of a wide range of institutions, including the 
Bureau of Land Management, the Bureau of Land Recla- 
mation, the Department of Defense, the U.S. Postal Serv- 
ice, the National Park Service, the State of New Mexico, 
the Navajo Nation, individual Navajos, and private owners. 
This mix of owners results in land ownership maps of the 
region that look like a checkerboard— hence the term. 

Individual Navajos acquired ownership through an 
allotment of tribal land, with ownership continuing from 
1887 to 1934." Today, these land allotments, along with 
land still owned communally by the Navajo Nation, are 
held in trust by the U.S. government. While the trust 
status was designed to protect tribal owners’ rights to 
the land and its revenue, it has added another layer of 
complexity to any transaction involving trust land.'^ 

Owing to Native Americans’ traditionally limited use 
of wills, as well as to restrictions on the transfer of land 
held in trust, ownership rights to the allotted lands were 
commonly passed down equally from generation to gen- 
eration by individuals to their heirs.'® As a result of this 
ownership division, a parcel of land that at the time of 
allotment had one clear owner may now have more than 
100 owners who hold the land as tenants in common. 
Each tenant has equal and undivided ownership interest 
in the full parcel.''* 

This checkerboard of land ownership has a nega- 
tive effect on its economic value. According to the U.S. 
Department of the Interior, checkerboarding creates the 
following difficulties: 

• Individual landholdings within the check- 
erboard are often too small or inacces- 
sible to be economically useful. 

• Land transactions are costly and time 
consuming, especially when they involve 
trust lands with large numbers of often 
unknown or untraceable owners. 

• Obtaining rights-of-way to access “land- 
locked” parcels may require multiple 
permits from differing jurisdictions. This 
hindrance increases both the costs of 



104 



obtaining rights-of-way as well as the 
difficulties in enforcing them. 

• Large-scale land use planning is effec- 
tively impossible given the number of 
federal, state, local, and tribal govern- 
ments with responsibility over different 
parcels within the area. As a result of 
jurisdictional issues, each parcel may 
be affected by different or overlapping 
codes and regulations.'^ 

Organizations working within the case study area 
reported similar difficulties caused by the land owner- 
ship status. Representatives from Crownpoint’s Land 
Use Planning Committee cited it as a constraint on the 
planning of the town’s growth and use of resources; 
much of the undeveloped land in and around Crown- 
point, they reported, is out of the committee’s control.'® 

A representative of a financial institution also noted that 
investment in the area was constrained in part by the 
land status, which complicates lending for both business 
and personal uses because of the difficulties in obtaining 
clear titles and effective collateral. Finally, land allotted 
to individual families was done so for a particular use, 
often grazing. Changing the purpose of the land use— 
from grazing to, for example, retail or housing— triggers a 
regulatory process that can take months or even years to 
complete, significantly deterring investment, assuming all 
of the owners can even be located. 

Housing 

Homeownership, often a driver of individual wealth, 
is much less pronounced as a means of asset accumu- 
lation in Crownpoint. Inadequate housing stock, limited 
financing options, and constraints on appreciation due to 
restrictions on the ownership and transfer of trust lands 
all act against housing’s ability to generate significant 
wealth for households. 

Crownpoint has a slightly lower homeownership 
rate than non-metro New Mexico, about 65 percent and 
72 percent, respectively. More than four in five home- 
owners"’ in the case study area, compared with just 
under half of non-metro New Mexico, live in houses with 
significant problems, such as incomplete plumbing or 
kitchen facilities. Nearly one-quarter of housing units are 
overcrowded, more than 10 times the rate in non-metro 
New Mexico. 




Poor housing conditions in the case study area 
affect both housing costs and housing values. Very few 
residents are burdened by housing costs in Crown- 
point. Cniy about 15 percent of owners and 16 percent 
of renters pay more than 30 percent of their income 
toward housing. In comparison, 19 percent of owners 
and 40 percent of renters in non-metro New Mexico as a 
whole pay more than 30 percent of their income toward 
housing. However, 68 percent of Crownpoint’s houses 
are valued at less than $40,000, compared with only 19 
percent in non-metro New Mexico. In fact, the median 
housing value in the Crownpoint area is just $18,317, or 
one-quarter that of non-metro New Mexico. 

The area’s high percentage of manufactured housing 
also constrains wealth-building opportunities. Manufac- 
tured homes make up 30 percent of all owner-occupied 
units, compared with 20 percent in New Mexico as a 
whole.'® From 1990 to 2000, manufactured housing in 
Crownpoint accounted for almost half of all new owner- 
occupied housing. 

Land status and financing options contribute to the 
higher demand for manufactured housing in the case 
study area, according to interviewees. Simply put, it’s 
often easier and requires less initial capital to secure a 
manufactured home than a site-built one. Approval of 
a home site lease on trust land requires a house to be 
in place within a certain period of time; while trust land 
can be used to secure a mortgage, the process can be 
difficult, lengthy, and more costly for inexperienced bor- 
rowers. Dealers of manufactured homes provide more 
accessible financing, albeit with higher interest rates. 



105 



MCKINLEY COUNTY, NEW MEXICO 





McKinley county, new Mexico 



and a pre-made house can be placed on a property 
more quickly than a site-built one. Research has found, 
however, that manufactured houses tend to lose value 
unless the owner can buy and sell the underlying land.'^ 
Since trust land cannot be bought or sold, residents who 
own manufactured housing on trust land are more likely 
to own an asset that loses value over time. 

Financial Services 

A wide range of interviewees mentioned financial 
services as another important issue in the area. Of primary 
concern was the effect of high-cost financial services on 
individuals and families. Alternative financial services pro- 
viders, such as payday lenders, title loan companies, and 
check cashers, are abundant in the major market towns 
closest to Crownpoint. A 2002 study found that these 
towns— Gallup, Grants, and Farmington— had the highest 
ratios of payday loan stores to residents in the state. On a 
per capita basis, the number of payday loan stores was six 
times greater in these communities than in the rest of the 
state.^° In addition to the many payday and title lenders, 
other retail establishments have begun offering related 
financial services. Convenience stores, manufactured- 
home dealers, and used-car dealers now offer tax refund 
anticipation loans, which allow customers to purchase 
products by assigning their future tax refunds.^' 

Financial services representatives and social services 
providers involved with credit counseling noted that many 
residents are attracted to these vendors. Many individu- 
als need quick cash to cover emergencies and shortages 
at the end of the month, and their financial needs can 
be met readily by vendors with prominent locations and 
convenient hours. The interviewees stressed, however, 
that interest rates are high and residents often find them- 
selves struggling or unable to pay off burgeoning debts. 

Traditional financial services are very limited. There 
are no bank branches in the case study area. The only 
ATM is located in Crownpoint’s lone grocery store. Inter- 
viewees suggested that limited incomes may restrict 
area residents from qualifying for bank accounts. Poor 
credit scores may also restrict access to banking serv- 
ices. Almost 17 percent of all residents in the case study 
area have no credit score, while more than half with 
credit scores are classified as low or subprime.^^ In addi- 
tion, several bank representatives and social services 
providers noted that financial literacy is extremely low. 
Residents may therefore be less able to understand and 



compare the products and services offered by finan- 
cial services providers. These combined challenges of 
limited access to traditional financial services, low credit 
scores and income, and limited financial literacy make it 
extremely difficult for Crownpoint residents to access the 
resources they need to build savings and wealth, which 
in turn makes it more difficult to escape poverty. 

■ CONCLUSION 

Each of the four dominant issues discussed herein— 
isolation, land status, housing, and financial services— 
present significant challenges for local development. 
They also make it more difficult to address poverty in 
Crownpoint. 

Crownpoint’s geographic isolation limits infrastruc- 
ture, discourages retail services, and hampers the 
provision of social services. Residents must often go to 
other communities to seek employment or retail services. 
While some opportunities may be available for economic 
growth, the checkerboard land status complicates the 
development of these potential projects. Land trust 
status makes it arduous to transfer land from one use 
to another. Trust status further restricts residents from 
using property as collateral, reducing residents’ abil- 
ity to obtain mortgages and driving up the demand for 
manufactured housing. The area’s inadequate housing 
stock, characterized by overcrowding and limited basic 
services such as water and electricity, constrains house 
values and further limits housing’s value as a wealth- 
building asset for residents. Finally, the lack of main- 
stream financial services, poor credit scores, and limited 
financial literacy may cause residents to use alternative 
financial service providers. The interest rates on these 
products make it more expensive for residents to bor- 
row, limiting their ability to save or improve their credit 
scores. Low credit scores contribute to an inability to get 
banking services and mortgages, further hindering asset 
development. 

Any one of these four dominant issues could make 
it difficult to overcome poverty in a region. Together, 
they keep poverty in Crownpoint both intractable and 
concentrated. 

This case study was prepared by Steven Shepelwich, 
senior community affairs advisor, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Kansas City, and Roger Zalneraitis, research associate, 
formerly of the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City. 



106 



Endnotes 

1 Demographic statistics are from the U.S. Census Bureau uniess 
otherwise noted. The data profiie was then used in conjunction 
with a review of the reievant iiterature to guide on-site interviews 
with 23 iocai individuais in professionai and ieadership positions 
at key institutions. The interviewees worked in the fieids of sociai 
service, education, housing, financiai services, business deveiop- 
ment, and iand use pianning. They were seiected based on their 
positions and on the recommendation of peers knowiedgeabie 
about the case study area. 

2 Division of Economic Deveiopment, The Navajo Nation, “2002- 
2003 Comprehensive Economic Deveiopment Strategy of the 
Navajo Nation.” 

3 Bureau of indian Affairs Labor Market Report (1997), cited in N. 
Pindus, W. Hiiiabrant, J. Earp, and M. Rhoades, “Overcoming Chai- 
ienges to Business and Economic Deveiopment in indian Country,” 
Mathematica Poiicy Research, inc., August 2004. 

4 High-skiiied industries are defined as pubiic administration, educa- 
tion, sociai services, and heaith services. Low-skiiied industries are 
defined as retaii trade and arts, entertainment, and food services. 

5 Joanne McCioskey and Meivatha Chee, “An Ethnographic Study of 
the Factors Affecting the Nutritionai Patterns of Navajo Women and 
Their Chiidren in the WiC Program,” University of New Mexico, June 
22, 2006. 

6 Federai Register, Voi. 70, No. 80. 

7 Cited in Craig Bain, Crystai Baiiantine, Anii DeSouza, Lisa Majure, 
Dean hi. Smith, and Jiii Turek, “Economic and Sociai Deveiopment 
Stemming from the Eiectrification of the Flousing Stock of the 
Navajo Nation,” Working Paper 02-34, Northern Arizona University 
Coiiege of Business Administration, December 2002. 

8 Governor Biii Richardson’s 2007 State of the State Address, 
avaiiabie at http://www.governor.state.nm.us/MEDiA/PDF/ 
StateoftheState2007.pdf. 

9 John Largo, economic deveiopment speciaiist, Navajo Nation 
Eastern Regionai Business Deveiopment Office. Personai interview 
in Church Rock, February, 23, 2007. 

10 Division of Economic Deveiopment, The Navajo Nation, “2002-2003 
Comprehensive Economic Deveiopment Strategy of the Navajo 
Nation.” Gaiiup and Farmington are even farther from the residents 
in census tract 9434. 

11 This aiiotment occurred through the Dawes Act. in addition to 
individuai aiiotments to Native Americans, some 60 miiiion acres of 
tribai iand were soid to non-Native Americans during this period. 

12 EDS, inc., “Trust Business Re-Engineering ‘As-is’ Report,” prepared 
for U.S. Department of the interior. Office of the Speciai Trustee for 
American indians, March 21, 2003. 

13 ibid. 

14 An iiiustrative case cited by the U.S. Supreme Court in 1987 
describes the effects of the fractionation of trust iand on the 
vaiue of interests heid in iand on the Sisseton-Wahpeton Lake 
Traverse Reservation: “Tract 1305 is 40 acres and produces $1,080 
in income annuaiiy. it is vaiued at $8,000. it has 439 owners. 



one-third of whom receive iess than $.05 in annuai rent and two- 
thirds of whom receive iess than $1. The iargest interest hoider 
receives $82.85 annuaiiy. The common denominator used to com- 
pute fractionai interests in the property is 3,394,923,840,000. The 
smaiiest heir receives $.01 every 177 years, if the tract were sold 
(assuming the 439 owners couid agree) for its estimated $8,000 
value, he would be entitled to $.000418. The administrative costs 
of handling this tract are estimated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
at $17,560 annually.” Model v. Irving, 481 U.S. 704 (1987) 481 U.S. 704. 

15 EDS, inc., “Trust Business Re-Engineering ‘As-ls’ Report.” 

16 The McKinley County Land Use Plan noted the difficulty of land use 
planning given that five government agencies had developed their 
own institutional land use plans in the area. See Northwest New Mex- 
ico Council of Governments and Architectural Research Consultants, 
inc. “McKinley County Comprehensive Plan, Phase 2,” prepared for 
McKinley County Department of Planning, December 2005. 

17 Figure refers to homeowners living below 80 percent of the 
median household income. 

18 Data on manufactured housing for rural New Mexico by itself were 
not available. 

19 Kevin Jewell, “Manufactured Housing Appreciation: Stereotypes 
and Data,” prepared for Consumers Union Southwest Regional 
Office, Austin, April 2003. See also William Apgar, Allegra Calder, 
Michael Collins, and Mark Duda, “An Examination of Manufactured 
Housing as a Community- and Asset-Building Strategy,” Report to 
the Ford Foundation by the Neighborhood Reinvestment Corpora- 
tion in collaboration with the Joint Center for Housing Studies of 
Harvard University, September 2002. 

20 Ray Prushnok, “Payday, Heyday! Measuring Growth in New Mexi- 
co’s Small Loan Industry (1990-2001),” New Mexico Public Interest 
Research Group Education Fund, April 2002. 

21 Rapid anticipation loans are short-term loans made using an 
expected tax refund as collateral. 

22 Credit score data were obtained from the Federal Reserve Board 
of Governors and are drawn from a 10 percent sample of ail credit 
records from a major credit bureau in December 2004. The cut-off 
for a high credit rating corresponds to the cut-off in the market for 
prime loans. 



107 



MCKINLEY COUNTY, NEW MEXICO 



108 




McDowell County, West Virginia 




■ OVERVIEW 



Located in the southernmost portion of West Virginia, McDowell County- 
like Kentucky’s Martin County, another of the case studies in this report— 
was among the Appalachian counties targeted by President Johnson’s war 
on poverty^ Poverty in McDowell is not only concentrated but multigenera- 
tional as well, having been passed down since the region’s economy started 



to decline in the 1950s. The problem of poverty here 
is compounded by McDowell’s remote location, its 
continued dependence on the coal industry, and depop- 
ulation of the middle class. Current residents value their 
region’s history, their strong family ties, their personal 
freedom provided by the region’s remoteness, and their 
ability to survive tough circumstances. Nevertheless, 
McDowell County continues to face many economic 
challenges, some of which are outlined below. To date, 
the community’s ongoing efforts have not fully sur- 
mounted them. 



■ BACKGROUND 

Part of the Cumberland Plateau and Mountain region, 
McDowell County is dominated by very steep mountains, 
heavily timbered hillsides, and sinewy roads. Elevations 
range from 875 to 3,400 feet above sea level. Narrow 
plains along some of the many streams that flow through 
McDowell support homes, commercial buildings, and a 
crowded tangle of roads and railways.^ 

The Virginia legislature carved McDowell County out 
of Tazewell County, Virginia, in 1858 and named it for 



109 




MCDOWELL COUNTY, WEST VIRGINIA 



TABLE 1 




Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


35.8 


26.9 




Poverty rate 2000'’ 


37.7 


19.8 


Income 


Median household income'’ 


$16,931 


$27,086 


Demographics 


Population 2000'' 


27,329 


797,741 




% Population change, 1970 - 2000'’ 


-46.1 


2.4 




Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 




% White 


87.3 


95.4 




% Hispanic/Latino 


0.4 


0.6 




% Black/African-American 


11.5 


2.7 




% Residents under age 189 


23.3 


22.2 




% Single-parent households'’ 


13.8 


7.2 




% Foreign born, 2000' 


0.5 


0.7 




% Population in same house as five years ago' 


75.7 


65.7 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000^ 


50.0 


28.2 




% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


5.6 


11.8 




% Students proficient in reading, 2005'" 


66.2 


77.7 




% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


57.3 


71.7 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000'’ 


14.4 


8.6 




% Adults in the labor forced 


32.4 


51.0 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 2000'’ 


80.1 


77.8 




% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


48.2 


41.4 




Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$22,600 


$64,195 




Median year structure built' 


1954 


1975 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


22.5 


18.9 




% Credit files with high credit scores” 


52.2 


56.0 




% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


39.6 


28.3 




Mortgage denial rate, 2005* 


45.6 


30.8 



Governor James McDowell. In 1861, McDowell County 
(hereafter referred to as McDowell) joined a group of 
western Virginia counties that refused to secede from 
the Union; in 1863 these counties became the newly rec- 
ognized state of West Virginia.^ 

McDowell came to be known as the Free State of 
McDowell. The freedom associated with living in McDow- 
ell is subject to several local interpretations: that the 
census of 1860 records no evidence of slavery being 
practiced there; that McDowell was generally a safe 
place to avoid taking sides during the Civil War; and 
that McDowell was a destination for freed slaves who 



abandoned sharecropping to start a new life working in 
the coal mines.'' 

Since the first load of coal was shipped from the area 
via the Norfolk and Western Railway in 1883, coal mining 
has been the bedrock of private-sector employment in 
McDowell. During its period of greatest economic prosper- 
ity and growth, McDowell was an ethnically diverse and 
equitable community composed of three primary ethnic 
groups: local frontiersmen (e.g., the Hatfields and McCoys) 
and their descendants, black freedmen and their descen- 
dants, and eastern and southern European immigrants and 
their descendents.'^ The lack of a single dominant ethnic 



110 





FIGURE 1 

Population of McDowell County, 1880-2004 




SOURCE: Historical Census Browser, The Geospatial and 
Statistical Data Center at the University of Virginia 



group created a community where every person could 
generally expect the same level of opportunity. The workers 
featured in the photograph below, for instance, earned the 
same wages and had the same opportunities for advance- 
ment, both on the job and in the unions.*^ 

McDowell’s population peaked in the 1950s at around 
100,000 residents. (See Figure 1) With high productivity 
and employment in the mines, community life was busy 
and prosperous for most. Jean Battio, a McDowell his- 
torian, described McDowell’s peak period as ‘“one brief 
shining moment’ of Camelot-economy when King Coal 
was crowned.”^ 



As in Martin County, McDowell was hard hit by the 
subsequent decline of the coal industry. Since the 1950s 
McDowell’s population has steadily dropped, with a brief 
leveling during the 1970s energy crisis, to about 24,300 in 
2000— approximately 25 percent of its peak population.® 
Poverty rates have stayed high throughout this period, 
from about 36 percent in 1970 to nearly 38 percent in 
2000. (See Table 1) As the coal industry declined, coal 
companies divested themselves of services and utilities 
they operated in McDowell. Company-operated transit 
ceased, company stores closed, and utilities run by the 
coal firms were sold off to private entities, which then 




In the 1930s and 1940s, McDowell County’s abundant coal-industry jobs and diverse population contributed to an equitable commu- 
nity; these miners, for example, photographed In 1940, all earned comparable wages. 



Ill 



MCDOWELL COUNTY, WEST VIRGINIA 






MCDOWELL COUNTY, WEST VIRGINIA 



FIGURE 2 

Breakdown of personal transfer payments, 
2005 




SOURCE: Bureau of Economic Analysis, Regional Economic Informa- 
tion System, Table CA35, Personal Current Transfer Receipts McDowell 
County, WV, 2005 

either downgraded or ceased providing services as the 
local population declined.® 

Well-paying work in McDowell is not as easy to get 
as it was during the peak of the coal mining days; in the 
1970s, mining employment comprised as much as 56 
percent of total jobs.'° Coal currently represents 20 per- 
cent of all jobs in McDowell County, and residents doubt 
that employment at the mines will ever return to its peak 
because of labor-saving mining techniques and equip- 
ment." Coal mining offers the highest wages of any sec- 
tor, with an average annual wage of about $56,000, and 
requires a high school diploma and training certificate.'® 
Today, Wal-Mart offers more jobs than any other single 
private-sector employer in McDowell.'® 

Few other entry-level employment opportunities 
exist. Positions with government and social services 
providers often require specialized skills and advanced 
education; according to one local stakeholder, these 
positions are usually filled by candidates recruited from 
outside the community.'^' While the unemployment rate in 
McDowell in 2006 was 8 percent, only about one-third of 
working-age adults (32.4 percent) participate in the labor 
force.'® In addition, in 2000 40 percent of McDowell’s 
working-age population (16 to 64 years of age) claimed a 
disability of some kind.'® 

Government transfer payments have become an 
increasingly important source of income for residents, 



representing about 50 percent of all income in McDow- 
ell since 1999, up from less than 20 percent in 1969.'^ In 
2005, retirement and disability benefits comprised 42 
percent of transfer payments, followed by medical ben- 
efits (34 percent) and income maintenance benefits (18 
percent).'® (See Figure 2) Another key source of income in 
McDowell appears to come from illegal activities, includ- 
ing drug production, resale of prescription medications, 
and fraud.'® 

Poor health is also a concern for McDowell residents. 
One out of every three residents from age 18 to 64 does 
not have health insurance coverage— the lowest rate of 
coverage in West Virginia.®® According to the 2003 West 
Virginia Behavioral Risk Factor Survey Report, McDowell 
residents reported the highest rates of asthma and 
arthritis in the state, the third-highest rate of obesity, 
and the fourth-highest incidence of cigarette smoking. 
These health issues, as well as the high rates of disability 
in the county, may be exacerbated by the occupational 
and environmental hazards that stem from coal mining.®' 
While the effects of environmental hazards, along with 
other public health issues such as illegal drug use and 
depression, are difficult to capture in statistics, all were 
mentioned by local healthcare providers as important 
factors influencing the residents of McDowell. Many 
of these health issues are deeply intertwined with the 
high levels of poverty in the county. As one healthcare 
provider indicated, “In many ways, economic depression 
here causes physical depression.’’®® 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

As McDowell aims to diversify its economy, it must also 
contend with the area’s lack of developable land, unco- 
ordinated community leadership, and an undereducated 
workforce. These issues all play a role in understanding 
and overcoming poverty in the county. 

Land Use 

One key barrier to economic development in McDow- 
ell is the lack of land suitable for new construction. The 
county’s mountainous topography also contributes to 
its vulnerability to natural disasters, such as floods, and 
many low-income families find the cost of flood insur- 
ance prohibitive.®® Between 2001 and 2002, two major 
floods swept through McDowell. “When I say that 85 
percent of our community was damaged or destroyed, 
that’s the truth,” said Franki Patton Rutherford, executive 



112 



director of a local nonprofit that set up a disaster relief 
center in McDowell in the aftermath of the floods. “That 
was the same level of destruction that happened in New 
Orleans.”^'' The floods swept away many homes and dam- 
aged much of the infrastructure along the creek beds 
throughout McDowell. The cost of flood relief and cleanup 
in West Virginia was estimated at $64 million.^^ 

In addition to environmental hazards, current patterns 
of land ownership further hinder the availability of land 
for economic development. Corporations own more than 
75 percent of McDowell’s surface acreage. Many of them 
are absentee land companies that lease the land to coal, 
timber, and natural gas-extraction firms.^® These leases 
can be as short as 15 years, which often means that a 
tenant company invests only within the life of its lease, 
rather than for the long term in the community. 

Despite concern among real estate developers, land 
companies, financial institutions, and policymakers about 
possible constraints to economic development and deals 
throughout the state, no local agency to date has devel- 
oped a master map that cross-plots terrain, flood pat- 
terns, and infrastructure to identify land in McDowell that 
is suitable for new development.^^ Without this collective 
information, it is difficult to assess opportunities in the 
county for new housing, new business facilities, and new 
infrastructure. 

Leadership Capacity 

McDowell’s complicated economic and physical 
landscape requires energetic leadership to manage and 
direct comprehensive change. At present there does 
not appear to be any one entity or coalition of groups 
with both the political power and the will to play this 
role. McDowell’s county government, for example, does 
not conduct comprehensive county-wide planning to 
coordinate community and infrastructure development 
by collecting and analyzing local data, nor does it set 
priorities for community goals and objectives with the 
participation of community residents.^® Also, no entity 
in McDowell analyzes overlapping policy goals, such as 
those for transportation, housing, land use, and environ- 
mental quality. 

There have been some high-level efforts to gener- 
ate a plan for economic improvement. In 1999, McDowell 
County Action Network kicked off the county’s five-year 
participation in the federal Empowerment Zone/Enterprise 
Community (EZ/EC) program with a strategic plan called 



“Rebuilding for the Next Generation.” This plan directed 72 
EZ/EC benchmark projects in McDowell that focused on a 
variety of specific community and infrastructure develop- 
ment needs.^^ In 2007, the Federal Home Loan Bank of 
Pittsburgh started a similar strategic planning process in 
McDowell, albeit on a much smaller scale.^° 

These planning processes have helped build the 
skills and knowledge of a select group of local leaders. 
Yet widespread coordination and sharing of information 
across agencies is still lacking. While public and non- 
profit officials concur that McDowell “has been studied 
to death,”^' many of these studies tend to be out of date, 
issue-specific, or privately commissioned, meaning that 
their findings may not be available to the general public.^^ 
The fact that some agencies have access to certain stud- 
ies while others do not fuels distrust and stymies collab- 
orative efforts, according to Carol Carter, board president 
of SAFE Housing and Economic Development.^^ 

McDowell’s economic diversification efforts illus- 
trate how signals can get crossed among different local 
entities. While some leaders have aggressively pursued 
correctional facilities and landfills to create jobs locally,^"' 
others are pursuing recreational tourism and retiree 
markets to create jobs and encourage growth of small 
businesses in McDowell.^^ Without careful coordination, 
these economic development efforts may conflict with 
one another.^® 

Education and Schools 

Historically, education has been weak in McDowell. 
Educational attainment for people over 25 in McDowell 
is low, with less than 6 percent of the population holding 
a four-year degree. Half of the county’s residents lack 
a high school diploma.^^ A significant challenge facing 
educators in McDowell is the high level of poverty among 
school-age children. About 82 percent of all students in 
McDowell public schools receive free or reduced-price 
lunches.^® 

On top of these challenges, an inspection of McDow- 
ell County public schools by the State Office of Educa- 
tion Performance Audits in October 2001 exposed a 
situation that was “egregious to the point that education 
could not be provided,” according to State Superinten- 
dent David Stewart.®® In November 2001 the West Virginia 
State Board of Education voted to take over McDowell 
County public schools for four years. In its ensuing reor- 
ganization, the McDowell County public school system 



113 



MCDOWELL COUNTY, WEST VIRGINIA 



MCDOWELL COUNTY, WEST VIRGINIA 



retooled its curriculum and retrained teachers with a 
greater emphasis on educating students living in mul- 
tigenerational poverty. In addition, the school system 
now employs a resident curriculum team, which pro- 
vides ongoing training to teachers and administrators 
to develop and refine skills and techniques aimed at 
helping students in multigenerational poverty learn more 
effectively and become more successful in a school 
environment.'’° 

The school system is also working to develop new 
skills among parents. According to McDowell native Jeff 
Nash, who was appointed interim superintendent of the 
McDowell County school system in December 2006, 
parents of families in multigenerational poverty tend 
to think, “It didn’t work for me, why would it work for 
my child?” To counter this mindset, the school system 
conducts parental outreach and education through a 
Title I program, including job-skills training at the school 
board’s offices and on individual school campuses.'*' 
“You’ve got to realize a lot of the parents missed out 
on a whole lot of information and training as they came 
through,” Nash added. “So in one sense, [we’re] almost 
trying to educate two generations or two populations.”''^ 

Compared with state and national averages, test 
scores for McDowell are still below average. However, 
noted Nash, things are improving. “We’ve had 11 out of 13 
schools meet the [Adequate Yearly Progress standards] 
last year. Three or four years ago we had only a couple.”''^ 

Financial Institutions and Asset Development 

Residents in McDowell have relatively good access to 
financial services, and banks in the community are mak- 
ing strides in serving low- and moderate-income families. 
McDowell has three small financial services institutions, 
and two others from neighboring counties also provide 
financial services to residents.'*'' All five offer a full range 
of basic financial services, including ATMs, check cashing, 
savings and checking accounts, mortgages, and business 
and personal loans. Because payday lending is illegal in 
West Virginia, a couple of the local banks in McDowell 
offer small loans, starting at $500, and charge the maxi- 
mum allowable annual percentage rate of 18 percent.'"* 
Two local banks have earned “outstanding” community 
reinvestment ratings from their regulators, while the other 
three received “satisfactory” ratings."*® 

Despite ready access to financial services, the check- 
ered history of banks in the county feeds suspicions of 



financial institutions among residents who prefer to use 
cash or barter."*^ For example, in 1999, the U.S. Office of 
the Comptroller of the Currency closed a McDowell bank, 
the First National Bank of Keystone, after investigators 
were unable to account for nearly half of the $1.1 billion 
in recorded assets. The estimated loss to the Federal 
Depository Insurance Corporation (FDIC) exceeded $780 
million. According to the judge who presided over the 
sentencing of many of Keystone’s local executives, the 
failure of Keystone Bank meant that some individuals lost 
all or a significant portion of their life savings."*® 

In addition to overcoming residents’ distrust of 
financial institutions, efforts aimed at helping individuals 
and families build assets must also take into account the 
high levels of poverty and disinvestment in the county. 

For example, although 80 percent of residents own their 
homes, representatives from the McDowell Redevelop- 
ment Authority estimate that roughly two-thirds of all 
homes in the county are substandard, thus limiting the 
value of these homes as financial assets. The median 
home value in McDowell in 1999 was $22,600, compared 
with the state median of $72,800.'*® Capital for small busi- 
nesses is available in the region, and the West Virginia 
state legislature and the Appalachian Regional Commis- 
sion have also implemented small-business loan programs 
to support entrepreneurship in the region. Still, these 
programs are less likely to reach the more remote and 
distressed rural parts of the county, and additional funding 
as well as broad-based technical assistance is needed to 
help more families in McDowell access these resources.®® 

■ CONCLUSION 

The long-term economic prospects for McDowell will 
depend on how well community and business leaders 
work together to manage the county’s resources in the 
face of regional economic restructuring. The county will 
also require additional leadership development to effec- 
tively implement community development and social 
services programs. These issues echo in many other 
rural areas. In response, a number of public and private 
agencies, including the United States Department of Agri- 
culture and the W.K. Kellogg Foundation, have recently 
begun to promote the development of leadership and 
entrepreneurial capacity in rural areas as a means to 
rebuild economies based on local assets. Indeed, in 
McDowell, building these kinds of capacities and devel- 
oping new avenues for investment will be critical for 



114 



facilitating the expansion of economic opportuity and 
improving residents’ quality of life. 

This case study was prepared by Courtney Anderson 
Mailey, regional community development manager, Fed- 
eral Reserve Bank of Richmond. 



Endnotes 

1 See http;//www.wadsworth.com/history_d/templates/student_ 
resources/053460741 1/sources/old/ch29/29.3. stateoftheunion.html. 

2 Natural Resources Conservation Service, Soil Survey of McDowell 
County, WV. U.S. Department of Agriculture, 1994. 

3 Mark S. Myers, “McDowell County,” in The West Virginia Encyciope- 
dia, Ken Sullivan and Deborah Sonis, eds. (Charleston: The West 
Virginia Humanities Council, 2006). 

4 William Archer, Images of America: McDowell County (Charleston: 
Arcadia Publishing, 2005). This piece of oral history is common 
and emerged in many local conversations and interviews. The 
competing theories are also a common part of local folklore. Per- 
sonal interviews conducted in McDowell County, December 13-15, 
2006, and April 11 and 12, 2007. 

5 Myers, “McDowell County.” 

6 Archer, Images of America: McDoweil County. William Archer, 
Journalist, Bluefield Daily Telegraph. Personal interview in Bluefield, 
December 12, 2006. Reference based on recollection of discus- 
sion with Dr. C. Stuart McGehee, Director of Eastern Regional Coal 
Archives, about a late-1930s study he was reviewing that had data 
related to the wages of coal miners. 

7 Jean Battle, Pictorial History of McDowell County, 1858-1958: From 
Rural Farms to Coal Kingdom (Parsons, WV: McClain Printing Com- 
pany, 2003). 

8 Historical Census Browser, the Geospatial and Statistical Data 
Center at the University of Virginia. Available at http://fisher.lib. 
virginia.edu/collections/stats/histcensus/. 

9 Environmental Financing Center and Appalachian Regional Com- 
mission, Drinking Water and Wastewater Infrastructure: An Analysis 
of Capital Funding and Funding Gaps (Chapel Hill: University of 
North Carolina, 2005). 

10 Bureau of Economic Analysis, Regional Economic Information 
System, Table CA25, “Total full-time and part-time employment by 
NAICS industry, McDowell County, WV 1969-2005.” 

11 Information about job requirements is based on interviews with job 
seekers and representatives of the county school system. Focus 
group with residents of SAFE, a transitional housing center for 
women, in Welch, April 11, 2007. Jeff Nash, Interim Superintendent, 
McDowell County School System. Personal interview in Welch, 
December 14, 2006. 

12 Research Information and Analysis unit of Workforce West Virginia, 
“McDowell County— Employment & Wages 2006,” available at 
http://www.wvbep.org/bep/lmi/ew2006/ew06x047.htm. Information 
about job requirements is based on interviews with job seekers 
and representatives of the county school system. Focus group with 



residents of SAFE, a transitional housing center for women, in Welch, 
April 11, 2007. Jeff Nash, Interim Superintendent, McDowell County 
School System. Personal interview in Welch, December 14, 2006. 

13 West Virginia Labor Market Information, Largest employers can be 
accessed at http://www.wvbep.org/scripts/bep/lmi/OTHRDATA.cfm 

14 Tim Crofton, Director, Tug River Health Clinics. Personal interview 
in Northfork, December 15, 2006. 

15 U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics, “Labor Force Data by County, 2006 
Annual Averages,” Local Area Unemployment Statistics, available at 
ftp://ftp.bls.gov/pub/special.requests/la/laucnty06.txt. U.S. Census 
Bureau, 2000 Census, Summary Tape File 3, Tables P8 and P43. 

16 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

17 Bureau of Economic Analysis, Regional Economic Information 
System, Table CA04, “Personal Income and Employment Summary 
McDowell County, WV 1969-2005,” and Table CA35, “Personal Cur- 
rent Transfer Receipts McDowell County, WV 1969-2005.” Transfer 
payments grew from nearly 19 percent in 1969 to about 51 percent 
in 2005. 

18 Bureau of Economic Analysis, Regional Economic Information 
System, Table CA35, “Personal Current Transfer Receipts McDowell 
County, WV, 2005.” 

19 News reports about local crop seizures and reports from the 
National Drug Intelligence Center indicate that the annual earnings 
of marijuana production alone approximate nearly one-third of the 
size of the formal economy— roughly $160 million in 2006. McDow- 
ell also has a very high arrest rate for fraud (345 fraud arrests per 
100,000)— three times that of West Virginia and the U.S. as a whole. 
The McDoweil County prosecutor's office indicates that residents 
engage in a variety of fraud-related crimes, including insurance 
fraud, arson, and identity theft. 

20 West Virginia Department of Health and Human Resources and the 
Bureau for Public Health, 2003 West Virginia Behavioral Risk Fac- 
tor Survey Report. Available at http://www.wvdhhr.org/bph/oehp/ 
BRFSS%5F2003/appendJ.pdf 

21 Wheeling Jesuit University’s Coal Impoundment Location and Infor- 
mation System shows that McDowell County has experienced two 
coal slurry spills totaling more than 10 million gallons since 2002; see 
http://www.coalimpoundment.org/aboutimpoundments/spills.asp. 

See Ken Ward Jr., “Cleaning Up After Coal,” Charleston Gazette, 
November 10, 2002; available at Mine Safety and Health Admin- 
istration, U.S. Department of Labor and Office of Surface Mining, 

U.S. Department of the Interior, “Coal Waste Impoundments: Risks, 
Responses, and Alternatives,” Report to Congress: Responses and 
Recommendations in the National Research Council’s Report, 2003. 

22 Cheryl Mitchem, Business Manager, Tug River Health Clinics. Per- 
sonal interview in Northfork, December 15, 2006. 

23 Using the flood-risk level of downtown Welch, which is high 
risk, estimates from www.floodsmart.gov show that a one-story, 
single-family home with no basement, valued at $35,000 and with 
contents valued at $10,000, requires an annual premium of about 
$500 plus a $500 deductible using the National Flood Insurance 
Program online estimator available at http://www.floodsmart.gov/ 
floodsmart/pages/premiumesttables_hr_residential.jsp. The 
monthly breakdown of this premium, about $42, constitutes 
approximately 20 percent of the monthly payment on a $35,000 
home with a 30-year fixed mortgage at 6.5 percent, about $220. 



115 



MCDOWELL COUNTY, WEST VIRGINIA 



MCDOWELL COUNTY, WEST VIRGINIA 



2-1 Frank! Patton Rutherford, Executive Director, Big Creek People in 
Action. Personal interview in Caretta, December 13, 2006. 

25 Ryan Keith, “W. Va. Flood Recovery Costs Could Top $64 Million,” 
Associated Press, June 10, 2002. 

26 Barbara Rusmussen, ‘‘Land Ownership,” in The West Virginia Ency- 
ciopedia, Ken Sullivan and Deborah Sonis, eds. (Charleston: West 
Virginia Flumanitites Council, 2006). 

27 Mario Scruggs, Vice President and Community Development 
Specialist, BB&T. Personal interview in Charleston, April 13, 2007. 
Minutes from BB&T Forum, ‘‘Post-Mine Land Use,” 2006. 

28 For a full listing of local government services provided by the 
McDowell County Commission, go to 

http://www.mcdowellcountycommission.com/contact_us.html. 

29 Available at http://www.rurdev.usda.gov/cdp/ezec/ezec/wv/ 
mcdowell.html. 

30 Media advisory available at http://www.fhlb-pgh.com/media-center/ 
press-releases/2007/news_pr_031207.html. 

31 Ibid. 

32 Ibid. 

33 Ibid. 

34 Charles Owens, “Returning to McDowell, Manchin Witnesses ‘Dream’ 
Realized,” Bluefieid Daiiy Telegraph, May 8, 2007, available at http:// 
www.bdtonline.com/archivesearch/local_story_128203423.html. 
Charles Owens, “Lid Not Shut on McDowell County Landfill Project,” 
Biuefieid Daily Telegraph, March 28, 2007, available at http://www. 
bdtonline.eom/archivesearch/local_story_087203607.htmi. 

35 Charles Owens, “New ATV Trail System Spurs Tourism Transformation 
in McDowell,” Bluefieid Dally Telegraph, March 20, 2007, available at 
http://www.bdtonline.com/archivesearch/local_story_079155315.html. 
Carol Carter, Board President, SAFE Housing and Economic Develop- 
ment, Inc. Personal interview in Welch, April 11, 2007. Sharon Walden, 
Executive Director, Stop Abusive Family Environments. Personal 
interviews in Welch, December 15, 2006, and April 11, 2007 

36 Charles Owens, “Landfill Controversy a Setback Amid Several 
Major Gains for McDowell County,” Bluefieid Daily Telegraph, March 
14, 2007, available at http://www.bdtonline.com/archivesearch/ 
local_story_073115904.html. 

37 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

38 National Center for Educational Statistics, 2003-2004, available at 
http://www.greatschools.net/cgi-bin/wv/district_profile/28. 

39 Linda Martin and Beth Spence, “State Takes Over McDowell County 
Schools,” Challenge West Virginia, December 2001. 

40 Jeff Nash, Interim Superintendent, McDowell County School Sys- 
tem. Personal interview in Welch, December 14, 2006. 

41 Title I is a program sponsored by the U.S. Department of Education 
that provides a subsidy to disadvantaged schools. 

42 Jeff Nash, Interim Superintendent, McDowell County School Sys- 
tem. Personal interview in Welch, December 14, 2006. 

43 Ibid. 



44 Ameribank is regulated by the Office of Thrift Supervision. MCNB 
Bank, Inc. is regulated by the FDIC, as is Pioneer Community Bank. 
The Bank of Mingo in Mingo County is regulated by the FDIC. The 
Peoples Bank of Mullens in Wyoming County is a state member 
bank of the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond. 

45 Focus group with representatives from local banks, including Ameri- 
bank, Bank of Mingo, MCNC Bank, Inc., Peoples Bank of Mullens, and 
Pioneer Community Bank, December 14, 2006, in Welch. 

46 Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council Interagency CRA 
Rating Search available at http://www.ffiec.gov/craratings. 

47 Community meeting with representatives from social service 
providers and clients with representatives from Families, Agencies, 
Children Enhancing Services; Stop Abusive Family Environments; 
SAFE Housing and Economic Development, Inc.; Leaps and Bounds 
Development Services, Inc.; McDowell County Relatives as Parents 
Program; One Voice; McDowell County Headstart; and others in 
Kimball, WV, April 12, 2007 

48 Ron Jameson, “Case Study: First National Bank of Keystone,” avail- 
able at http://www.erisk.com/Learning/CaseStudies/FirstNational- 
BankofKeysto.asp. 

49 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. The Redevelopment Authority 
does not collect data on housing conditions in McDowell. Violet Les- 
ter, Executive Director, McDowell County Housing Authority. Personal 
interview in Welch, April 12, 2007. 

50 National Community Reinvestment Coalition and the Appalachian 
Regional Commission, Access to Capital and Credit for Small Busi- 
nesses in Appalachia, 2007, available at http://www.knowledgeplex. 
org/showdoc.html?id=483361. 



116 




■ OVERVIEW 



East Albany is a distressed community in a poor city. Like many rural cities 
in the South, Albany has been moving from an agricultural past to a future 
with a more diversified economy, in the process becoming the retail and 
service hub for Southwest Georgia. A single bridge across the Flint River 
links residents of East Albany to the rest of the city.^ Community stakeholders 



pointed out that the Flint River, which has a long history 
of flooding, serves not only as the geographic divide in 
the city but also as the invisible line that separates the 
“haves” from the “have nets.” The city, they further noted, 
is divided by both class and race.^ 

East Albany has no major commercial or retail 
development and very few social services providers or 
community amenities. Ironically, the city of Albany’s five 
largest employers are located in East Albany, but the 
money earned by their employees is not spent where 
they work; according to Albany City Commissioner Jon 
Howard, “Eighty-five percent of the money made in the 



city is made at industries in East Albany, and 90 per- 
cent of the money is spent outside the community.”^ 
The area’s lack of commercial development means that 
residents from outside East Albany have few reasons 
to visit. Several churches in the community draw indi- 
viduals from across the city to their services, but for 
the majority of Albany residents, it is easy to avoid East 
Albany completely. 

The isolation felt by East Albany residents pervades 
the economic and social fabric of this community. A local 
television station recently aired “Tale of Two Cities,” a 
program documenting the perception by East Albany 



117 




ALBANY, GEORGIA 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



East Albany 



Albany MSA 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970'“ 


21.8 


28.5 


Poverty rate 2000® 


45.3 


21.5 


Income 


Median household income® 


$19,601 


$33,655 


Demographics 


Population 2000® 


10,547 


157,833 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000® 


5.6 


24.5 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000* 


% White 


7.5 


48.8 


% Hispanic/Latino 


0.6 


1.3 


% Black/African-American 


90.9 


48.5 


% Residents under age 189 


33.9 


28.3 


% Single-parent households® 


40.9 


14.0 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


1.1 


1.6 


% Population in same house as five years ago' 


46.7 


55.2 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000*' 


41.0 


26.8 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


5.8 


15.7 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005"’ 


75.6 


82.4 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


74.0 


79.9 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


18.6 


8.4 


% Adults in the labor forceP 


46.6 


60.8 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


36.7 


61.8 


% Renters with a housing cost burden’ 


50.3 


40.3 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized’’ 


26.9 


14.9 


Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$45,151 


$77,502 


Median year structure built' 


1968 


1976 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


44.9 


26.7 


% Credit files with high credit scores” 


23.4 


41.9 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


36.4 


33.6 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005” 


36.0 


23.9 



residents that all of the city’s investment and resources 
are directed toward downtown and the west side of the 
river, while the needs of East Albany are ignored.'* Several 
interviewees referred to a time when the residents were 
called “river rats.” Residents of East Albany do not appear 
to interact much with residents outside the community. 
“Most don’t feel comfortable on the west side of the city,” 
noted Commissioner Howard.^ 

Several other community stakeholders echoed this 
perception; they said that residents of East Albany see 
themselves first as “East Albanians.” As one community 
leader noted, “Many residents of East Albany have never 



left East Albany. It is the only community they have 
ever known.”® 

■ BACKGROUND 

Albany was founded in the early 1800s along the Flint 
River in Southwest Georgia. The river has been a defining 
feature for the city, with good and bad consequences. 
While it helped establish the city as a transportation 
center, it also serves to divide the city, both literally and 
figuratively. The areas east and south of the river have 
always been home to predominantly poor minority 



118 




residents, while the areas to the north and west are 
mostly white and more affluent. 

The Flint River most recently flooded in 1994.’’ The 
1994 flood destroyed parts of downtown Albany and 
South Albany and displaced many jobs and residents; 
however, it also generated new resources for the rede- 
velopment of downtown Albany. Some businesses have 
returned, but the city is still struggling to develop a more 
vibrant downtown. 

Most of the development in recent years has taken 
place outside Albany, and both population and economic 
growth have been directed toward the outer regions 
of the Albany Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) rather 
than downtown. Overall, between 1990 and 2000, the city 
lost almost 2 percent of its population, while the popula- 
tion in the Albany MSA increased almost 8 percent. (See 
Table 1) 

The decline in the city’s population is attributable 
to several factors. First, in the mid-1970s the Georgia 
section of Interstate 75, running some 40 miles east of 
Albany, was constructed; since its completion, much of 
the region’s new growth has occurred near the interstate. 
Second, several large employers in the region closed, 
including Firestone, the U.S. Naval Air Station, and Merck 
Pharmaceuticals. Finally, white residents have migrated 
out from the city to adjacent counties in the MSA.® These 
demographic shifts have led to a significant change in 
the racial composition of the city of Albany and Dough- 
erty County overall. Between 1980 and 2000, Albany 
became a predominantly black city, with African Ameri- 
cans making up 65 percent of the total population. 

The case study area (hereafter referred to as East 
Albany) comprises a community of about 10,500 resi- 
dents living in four distinct neighborhoods: Cremartie 
Beach, East Towne, Columbia Village, and Jackson 
Fleights. The community is almost entirely black (91 per- 
cent). The poverty rate in East Albany in 2000 stood at 
45 percent, double that of the Albany MSA (21.5 percent), 
although both rates far exceed national figures. For black 
households in East Albany, the poverty rate was 48 per- 
cent, almost eight times greater than the poverty rate for 
white households (6.2 percent). 

Fligh teen pregnancy rates and a large proportion of 
single-parent families in East Albany are strongly cor- 
related with the high rates of poverty in East Albany. 
Forty-one percent of households in East Albany are sin- 
gle-parent households, compared with 14 percent in the 
MSA. Almost 64 percent of East Albany’s single-parent 



households are living in poverty. While recent data for 
the case study community are not available, in the city 
of Albany, according to the 2005 American Community 
Survey, the percent of unwed mothers age 16 to 24 (79.6 
percent) was almost three times the national average. 
Most of the individuals interviewed for this case study 
referenced teen pregnancy as a major problem for young 
women in East Albany.® 

The large number of subsidized housing units in East 
Albany also contributes to the community’s economic 
isolation and concentration of poverty. While only 13 per- 
cent of the city’s rental units are in East Albany, over one- 
quarter of the subsidized housing units are located in 
the community. As of 2004, 67 percent of the city’s Low 
Income Flousing Tax Credit (LIFITC) units were located 
in East Albany, and the development of additional LIFITC 
units in the neighborhood is under way.'° 

Many community leaders cite affordable housing 
as one of the biggest needs facing the community- 
in particular, the need for more new homeownership 
opportunities." More than one-third of households in 
East Albany own their homes (36.7 percent), but accord- 
ing to community leaders, many of the buildings are in 
need of rehabilitation.'® According to the 2000 census, 
the median housing value in the community was $45,151, 
approximately 40 percent lower than the median housing 
value in the MSA. There is concern about the number of 
elderly homeowners who are passing on their homes to 
children who no longer live in Albany and to other absen- 
tee landlords who may not maintain the properties. 

Despite East Albany’s need for investment in hous- 
ing, affordable housing developers in the community 
are scarce. The city’s Department of Community and 
Economic Development has overseen the recent develop- 
ment of a new FIOME-funded multifamily housing project 
in the neighborhood. The city also has a housing rehab 
program that is acquiring vacant lots and substandard 
housing with an aim to redevelop them as affordable 
housing.'® Greater Second Mt. Olive Baptist Church, 
the only community housing development organization 
(CFIDO) active in East Albany, is the primary recipient of 
the city’s FIOME funding for CFIDOs. The church, which 
provides homeownership counseling along with housing 
development and other community services, is planning 
to renovate some 300 units of housing on an old military 
base to provide new homeownership opportunities. 

Access to credit and mainstream financial services 
is limited in East Albany. There are no bank branches 



119 



ALBANY, GEORGIA 



ALBANY, GEORGIA 




located in the immediate community, and a tour of the 
community indicated that there are a significant number 
of vendors offering check-cashing services, including 
grocers, liquor stores, pawnshops, and title lenders. Thus, 
residents appear to rely on high-cost alternative finan- 
cial service providers for their banking needs. Almost 45 
percent of residents in East Albany had a thin credit file, 
and of those with a credit history, 58 percent had a credit 
score that was considered low or subprime.''' 

Home lending in East Albany is also very limited, and 
there are very few home purchases occurring in the com- 
munity. East Albany has 7 percent of the population in the 
MSA, but according to 2005 Home Mortgage Disclosure 
Act (HMDA) data. East Albany accounts for just over 1 per- 
cent of all home purchase loan applications and less than 
1 percent of originations for home purchases.'^ 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

In addition to the community’s geographic, economic, 
and social isolation, several key issues emerged as 
contributors to the high level of poverty in East Albany. 
Employment conditions are bleak, with residents disad- 
vantaged by low educational attainment, a lack of job 
readiness skills, and a shortage of suitable jobs. In addi- 
tion, there is a significant lack of leadership and capac- 
ity to address the issues that perpetuate the cycle of 
poverty in East Albany. 



High School, the high school serving East Albany, has 
failed to meet the adequate yearly progress (AYR) stan- 
dards for the past two years because of its low gradu- 
ation rate (under 50 percent), and reading and math 
proficiency are well below the state average. The qual- 
ity of the schools is a significant concern throughout 
Dougherty County; none of the high schools met the AYR 
standards in the 2005-2006 school year.'® 

Low levels of educational attainment are also a sig- 
nificant problem in East Albany. According to the 2000 
census, 41 percent of the population age 25 and older in 
East Albany did not have a high school diploma, com- 
pared with about 27 percent in the MSA. Only 6 percent 
of East Albany residents had a bachelor’s degree. 

Community leaders repeatedly cited improving 
school quality and increasing educational attainment as 
the greatest needs for the city.'^ There is widespread con- 
cern that low educational attainment and the perception 
of a low-skilled workforce will negatively affect the city’s 
opportunities for future economic growth. The Albany 
Area Chamber of Commerce and the Albany/Dougherty 
County school system, together with many private-sector 
and community-based organizations, are working to 
improve school quality, to keep young people in school, 
and to strengthen the connection between education and 
employment. Because of the high rate of teen pregnancy 
in Albany, there is a particular focus on increasing the 
educational attainment of young mothers. According to 
Keisha Davis, director of the East Broad CDC Head Start, 
“The major issue for parents of my Head Start students is 
the lack of education and the need for a GED.”'® 

A number of organizations have been working to 
improve the educational outcomes of girls in the com- 
munity. For example. Girls, Inc., an affiliate of a national 
organization, is helping to reduce teen pregnancy in East 
Albany. The program provides life skills and leadership 
training to young women; in 2006 the program served 
more than 2,200 girls citywide. According to Executive 
Director Lakisha Bryant, the program has been very suc- 
cessful: 100 percent of the girls who have participated 
in the program have graduated from high school, 98 
percent of them without getting pregnant.'® 



School Quality, Educational Attainment, and Youth Issues 

Roor school quality and low levels of educational 
attainment are important factors contributing to concen- 
trated poverty in East Albany. Dougherty Comprehensive 



Employment and Job Training 

Residents in East Albany and throughout the region 
struggle with high rates of unemployment, poor job 
opportunities, and the need for more job training. In East 



120 





Albany, less than half of the working-age population is 
actively participating in the labor force and the unem- 
ployment rate is almost 20 percent. Job and labor-force 
growth rates in Dougherty County and the Albany MSA 
have been significantly lower than the state averages 
in the past 10 years, with most of the growth occurring 
outside the city.“ 

East Albany also suffers from a general lack of 
quality jobs. Many of the residents in East Albany are 
employed in low-skill and low-paying jobs. The workforce 
in East Albany is primarily employed in educational, 
health, and social services (17 percent); manufacturing 
(16 percent); accommodations and food service (15 per- 
cent); and retail (11 percent).^’ 

Despite high unemployment and high poverty rates, 
some job opportunities could be available to residents 
of East Albany. Although manufacturing jobs have been 
declining for the past 10 years, many of the largest 
manufacturing employers that remain in the city are 
located in East Albany, including Procter and Gamble, 
Miller Brewing, Cooper Tires, and, until recently, Merck 
Pharmaceuticals. With Albany-Dougherty County the 
retail and services hub for Southwest Georgia, there has 
been job growth in these sectors. Education, health care, 
and defense are also growing employment sectors.^^ 
Several barriers appear to keep residents of East 
Albany from accessing these jobs. First, with educational 
attainment in the community so low, residents may lack 
the basic reading, writing, and math skills required for the 
newer jobs. “There is not much opportunity for unskilled 
labor with the city’s major employers like Miller Brewing, 
Cooper Tire, and Procter and Gamble,” said Jennifer Clark, 
director of Albany’s Department of Community and Eco- 
nomic Development.^^ Many of the jobs at these compa- 
nies require at least a high school diploma.^'' 

Second, residents need job readiness and job train- 
ing, according to many interviewees.^^ Several such 
programs are now available in the city; the largest, Albany 
Tech, offers workforce training that is responsive to the 
specific needs of area employers. The program has also 
tried to address barriers to job training, developing cre- 
ative outreach strategies to inform the community about 
its programs and partnering with schools and faith-based 
organizations. The placement rate for program gradu- 
ates in their field is 90 percent, and most individuals are 
placed in permanent full-time jobs, many with benefits.^® 
Despite the program’s success, however, participa- 
tion is low, and there are often more jobs than program 



graduates.^^ According to Matt Trice, vice president for 
economic development at Albany Tech, the training pro- 
grams are consistently underutilized. “The biggest issue 
we face at Albany Tech is getting enough people trained 
through our programs to fill the jobs that employers 
make available.”^® 

Third, residents lack knowledge of such job opportu- 
nities. “Many residents of East Albany do not know what 
is available to them, regardless of their education and 
skill level,” added Trlce.^^ According to an administrator at 
Greater Second Mt. Olive Baptist Church, word of mouth is 
a primary source of job information. Given the neighbor- 
hood’s high unemployment rate, however, there is not a 
strong, established network for sharing information about 
available jobs.^° Interviewees suggested that employer 
perceptions and practices may constitute an additional 
barrier to employment; longstanding negative views 
of East Albany and its residents may discourage some 
employers from hiring applicants from the community.^' 

Lack of Community Leadership and Capacity 

Strong leadership is needed to address the myriad 
challenges facing East Albany. However, formal and 
informal leadership in the community is lacking. Albany’s 
Community and Economic Development Department has 
designated East Albany as a neighborhood revitalization 
strategy area and has created a redevelopment plan for 
the communlty.^^ The city has successfully accomplished 
several of the plan’s goals but lacks the resources to fully 
implement it. The city is trying to engage nonprofit part- 
ners, but there are very few in the community.^^ 

According to interviewees. Greater Second Mt. Clive 
Baptist Church, the one active nonprofit community 
development organization in East Albany, is the major 
leader in the community. As noted earlier, the church is 
planning housing and commercial development projects 
in the neighborhood and provides direct services to the 
community. However, it lacks the resources to imple- 
ment a comprehensive strategy to address the issues in 
the community. There are also few informal networks in 
the community, and only one of the four neighborhoods 
in the case study community. East Towne, has an active 
neighborhood association. 

There is also a dearth of business and private-sector 
involvement in the community. Despite the presence of sev- 
eral large, well-known employers in East Albany, only one 
was mentioned by a community leader for Its leadership 



121 



ALBANY, GEORGIA 



ALBANY, GEORGIA 



in a community project.^'’ Finally, banks are not widely 
referenced as significant partners for affordable housing or 
community development activities in East Albany. 

■ CONCLUSION 

Within a city and region facing many economic challenges, 
the obstacles for East Albany are even greater. Always 
one of the poorest communities in the city. East Albany 
has experienced decades of negative stereotyping and 
disinvestment that it must overcome. 

There are some signs of new investment. The Jack- 
son Heights Elementary School was recently renovated 
and a new community center was built in the neighbor- 
hood. The city is working in East Albany to eliminate 
blighted properties, and some new subsidized housing 
has been built or is in the planning stages.^^ East Albany 
also stands to benefit from some changes happen- 
ing in downtown Albany. There has been a significant 
amount of new investment in downtown Albany, includ- 
ing a recently completed hotel and aquarium. The city 
is focused on attracting tourism and new business and 
residential development to downtown. East Albany’s 
proximity to downtown should mean that these projects 
hold some potential for it as well. 

Still, the dynamics of concentrated poverty present 
in East Albany— including low educational attainment, 
a lack of basic job skills, a high rate of teen pregnancy, 
poor housing conditions, and the lack of mainstream 
financial services— create a level of social and economic 
isolation in the community that makes it very difficult for 
residents to take advantage of the opportunities that are 
available. In addition, both the community and the city 
lack the leadership necessary to address the conditions 
that contribute to the concentration of poverty in East 
Albany. The success of interventions depends on partici- 
pants’ commitment; so far, engaging East Albany resi- 
dents has been challenging for some organizations.^® 

This case study was prepared by Jessica LeVeen Farr, 
regionai community deveiopment manager, and Sibyi S. 
Slade, regional community development manager, both 
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta. 



Endnotes 

1 The city’s redevelopment plan for the community proposes a 

second bridge that is supposed to be under construction by 2009. 



However, the project is still in the early planning stages, and sev- 
eral of the individuals interviewed were not optimistic that it would 
ever be completed. East Central Albany Neighborhood Strategy 
Area Urban Redevelopment Plan, City of Albany Department of 
Community and Economic Development, January 2001. 

2 Community stakeholder interviews conducted in Albany, 

March 7-9, 2007. 

3 Jon Howard, City Commissioner, Ward 1. Personal interview in 
Albany, March 7, 2007. 

4 Ben Roberts, “WALB Special Report: A Tale of Two Cities,” 

February 2, 2007, available at http://www.walb.com/Global/story. 
asp?s=6025513 

5 Jon Howard, City Commissioner, Ward 1. Personal interview in 
Albany, March 7, 2007. 

6 Tina Phipps, Program Coordinator, First Steps, Phoebe Putney 
Memorial Hospital. Personal interview in Albany, March 6, 2007. 

7 Georgia Flood Mitigation, available at: http://www.floods.org/ 
publications/mit%20succ%20stories/mssiiiga.htm (July 2007). 

Peter Applebomes, “Flood Threatens to Wash Away Dreams,” 

New York Times, July 16, 1994. 

8 Albany-Dougherty County Comprehensive Plan 2005-2025, avail- 
able at http://www.albany.ga.us/pd/pd_comprenhensive_plan.htm. 

s Meetings with community stakeholders held in Albany, 

March 7-9, 2007. 

10 Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD), A Picture of 
Subsidized Households, 2000. Available at http://www.huduser.org/ 
picture2000/index.html. 

11 Stakeholder meetings held in Albany, March 7-9, 2007; Dorothy Hub- 
bard, City Commissioner, Ward 2. Telephone interview. May 16, 2007. 

12 Jon Howard, City Commissioner, Ward 1. Personal interview in 
Albany, March 7, 2007; Dorothy Hubbard, City Commissioner, Ward 2. 
Telephone interview. May 16, 2007. 

13 Jennifer Clark, Director, City of Albany Department of Community 
and Economic Development. Personal interview, March 5, 2007. 

14 Credit score data were obtained from the Federal Reserve Board 
of Governors and are drawn from a 10 percent sample of all credit 
records from a major credit bureau in December 2004. The cut-off 
for a high credit rating corresponds to the cut-off in the market for 
prime loans. 

15 2005 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data. 

16 AYP standards are set by each individual state based upon the 
federal guidelines set forth by No Child Left Behind. State of Geor- 
gia Governor’s Office of Student Achievement, 2005-2006 Public 
School Annual Report Card, available at http://reportcard2006. 
gaosa.org (May 2007). 

17 Community stakeholder meetings held in Albany, March 7-9, 2007. 

18 Keisha Davis, Director, East Broad CDC Head Start. Personal inter- 
view in Albany, March 6, 2007. 

19 Lakisha Bryant, Executive Director, Girls, Inc. Telephone interview, 
April 25, 2007. 



122 



20 u.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

21 Ibid. 

22 Albany is home to Albany State University, Darton College, and 
Albany Tech. Phoebe Putney Memorial Hospital is the largest 
employer in Albany, which is driving the job growth in the health 
services sector in the city. Finally, the U.S. Marine Corps logistics 
base is in Albany, and it is one of the largest regional employers. 
Albany-Dougherty County Comprehensive Plan 2005-2025, avail- 
able at http://www.albany.ga.us/pd/pd_comprenhensive_plan.htm. 

23 Jennifer Clark, Director, City of Albany Department of Community 
and Economic Development. Personal interview in Albany, 

March 5, 2007. 

24 Greg McCormick, Interim Executive Director, Albany Tomorrow. 
Personal interview in Albany, March 7, 2007. 

25 Community stakeholder meetings held in Albany, March 7-9, 2007. 

26 For example, Albany Tech provides on-site child care for students 
and transportation subsidies to help students get to school. In 
addition, the school has created the “Tech Mobile,” a mobile one- 
stop shop that provides everything needed to get people into their 
programs. Thus, child care and transportation should no longer be 
barriers to access to programs offered at Albany Tech. 

27 Matt Trice, Vice President, Economic Development at Albany Tech. 
Telephone interview. May 2, 2007. 

26 Ibid. 

29 Ibid. 

30 Reverend Heard, Greater Second Mt. Olive Baptist Church. 

Personal interview in Albany, March 7, 2007. 

31 For example, Greg McCormick, acting president of Albany 
Tomorrow and a local business leader, indicated that because 
of the perceived poor quality of Dougherty Comprehensive 
High School, graduates might be overlooked for employment 
opportunities. Greg McCormick, Acting President, Albany 
Tomorrow. Personal interview in Albany, March 7 2007 

32 East Central Albany Neighborhood Strategy Area Urban 
Redevelopment Plan, City of Albany Department of Community 
and Economic Development, January 2001. 

33 The City of Albany’s Consolidated Strategy and Action Plan 
2006-2010, City of Albany Department of Community and Eco- 
nomic Development, 2006. 

34 According to Lakisha Bryant, Executive Director of Girls, Inc., Merck 
Pharmaceuticals has been a strong supporter of the organization 
and its work in East Albany. Lakisha Bryant, Executive Director, 

Girls, Inc. Telephone interview, April 25, 2007. 

35 Jennifer Clark, Director, City of Albany Department of Community 
and Economic Development. Personal interview in Albany, 

March 5, 2007. 

36 Community stakeholder meetings held in Albany, March 7-9, 2007. 



123 



ALBANY. GEORGIA 



124 



■ OVERVIEW 



Lying several miles east of El Paso’s central business district and butting 
up against the fenced border with Mexico is the community of ChamizaL 
This neighborhood includes two of the city’s most important cultural and 
economic features: Chamizal National Memorial, a major community and 
cultural landmark that commemorates the friendship between the United 



States and Mexico, and the Bridge of the Americas, which 
is one of the busiest points of entry into the United States 
from Mexico.^ Even with these two noteworthy anchors, 
however, Chamizai remains isoiated and faces many chai- 
lenging economic, physicai, and sociological problems. 

■ BACKGROUND 

El Paso, the Southwest’s largest border city, is located in 
the seventh poorest metro region in the nation.^ Nearly 
one-fourth of the metro region’s population lives below 
the poverty line. Although the population in the El Paso 
metro area has doubled during the past three decades— 
today it has more than 600,000 residents'*— prosperity. 



unfortunately, has not followed the strong population 
growth. According to recent articles in the El Paso Times, 
residents grumble about the city’s ability to attract only 
low-skill manufacturing and other low-paying, labor-inten- 
sive jobs that offer limited employee benefits. One devel- 
oper mentioned, “This is a low-wage town and always will 
be.” The article cites the poor quality of the city’s schools 
and the lack of job-training programs.** El Paso continues 
to have markedly lower employment earnings than Texas 
and the nation as a whole. And while El Paso faces its 
own daunting obstacles, the neighborhood of Chamizal, 
the subject of this case study, also confronts high pov- 
erty, where such problems are amplified.® 



125 




EL PASO, TEXAS 



Comparison Statistics 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


54.4 


21.4 


Poverty rate 2000® 


58.7 


23.8 


Income 


Median household income® 


$11,362 


$31,051 


Demographics 


Population 2000® 


10,086 


679,622 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000® 


-34.0 


89.2 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 


% White 


2.4 


17.0 


% Hispanic/Latino 


96.2 


78.2 


% Black/African-American 


0.7 


2.7 


% Residents under age 189 


34.8 


32.0 


% Single-parent households® 


26.0 


12.2 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


48.0 


27.4 


% Population in same house as five years ago' 


52.9 


55.2 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000'' 


71.2 


34.2 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


1.9 


16.6 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005"' 


64.1 


80.7 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


55.0 


65.5 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


18.0 


9.5 


% Adults in the labor force'' 


40.9 


56.5 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


21.1 


63.6 


% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


46.7 


43.2 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized" 


55.4 


15.4 


Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$40,596 


$69,600 


Median year structure built' 


1956 


1976 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


36.1 


24.7 


% Credit files with high credit scores" 


50.2 


49.8 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005"“ 


38.1 


31.8 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005" 


52.9 


25.5 




For more than 150 years, Chamizal has been a 
popular place of settlement for Mexican immigrants— 
especially when political turmoil during the Mexican 
Revolution (1910-1917) led to increased migration^— on 
account of its proximity to the Mexican border, availabil- 
ity of affordable land, and employment opportunities.® 

In fact, the neighborhood’s growth was propelled by 
employment opportunities for unskilled laborers. Cham- 
izal flourished in the early 20'*' century as a result of its 
convenience to the border, railroads, and foundries that 
operated near the Rio Grande River.® The neighborhood 
itself is boxed in by major roads and thoroughfares: 



Alameda and Magoffin streets on the north, the Patriot 
Freeway on the east, the Border Highway on the south, 
and a north-south rail connector on the west.'° 

Today, Chamizal continues to have a high concentra- 
tion of transient Spanish-speaking residents. According 
to the 2000 census, Chamizal’s population of more than 
10,000 was 96 percent Hispanic. The foreign-born popu- 
lation is nearly 50 percent, almost all from Mexico, includ- 
ing a large portion from El Paso’s sister city of Juarez." 
Chamizal’s strong ties to the Mexican culture are appar- 
ent in its vibrantly colored structures and murals. Many 
undocumented workers stay in the neighborhood for 



126 





less than three years, get acclimated to the culture, and 
move on to cities likes Dallas, Houston, and Los Ange- 
les, where demand and pay for their services is higher.'^ 
Since 1970 the neighborhood’s population has declined 
34 percent.'^ This drop, noted Bill Schlesinger, executive 
director of the local nonprofit Project Vida, reflects two 
things: stricter enforcement of occupancy limits in the 
neighborhood’s public housing units and reductions in 
the number of units themselves” Even with the popula- 
tion decline, this part of the city is significantly denser 
than the rest of El Paso, with nearly 5,300 residents per 
square mile.'*^ 

Almost 59 percent of residents and 70 percent of chil- 
dren in Chamizal are living in poverty. More than 45 percent 
of households make less than $10,000, and 28 percent 
have household incomes between $10,000 and $19,999.'® 

When compared with the city, the metro area, and the 
state, Chamizal has both a greater percentage of young 
residents and a smaller percentage of working-age adults."’ 
Chamizal households headed by females represent a 
disproportionately high percentage of families in poverty.'® 
This is consistent with other communities along the Texas- 
Mexico border, where larger families and women as heads 
of households typically have lower median household 
income and, as a subgroup, over-represent those who live 
in poverty.'® “We need to change the culture that dictates 
that being a young, single parent is socially acceptable,” 
added Schlesinger. “Teenage pregnancy in our community 
is viewed as a reality, not a problem.”®" 

Many health problems, such as diabetes, heart 
disease, and chronic oral health problems are persis- 
tently high in El Paso. Many residents do not engage in 



preventive health care because they lack health insur- 
ance. Nearly 40 percent of residents in El Paso do not 
have health insurance— the highest rate in Texas.®' “This 
lack of access to health care is most striking,” said Jon 
Law, assistant director at the Center for Border Health 
Research. “El Paso residents in poverty have many more 
risk factors for chronic diseases, yet routinely find them- 
selves unaware of their risks. This is a dangerous trend.” 

In terms of access to goods and services, the local 
business landscape does not include traditional retail 
outlets like those found in most other parts of subur- 
ban El Paso.®® With almost 59 percent of the population 
living below the poverty level, residents’ low disposable 
income reduces the demand for large retail service out- 
lets. Family-owned and -operated small businesses that 
dominate the commercial landscape attract few outside 
residents, according to interviews with business own- 
ers and local observations. Business owners cite poor 
access to credit, undercapitalization, and a lack of out- 
side customers as reasons for not being able to expand 
their businesses.®® 

On a more positive note, crime is not as grave an 
issue as some of the other challenges facing this com- 
munity. In 2006, the Morgan Quitno Press, a publisher 
of state and city rankings, hailed El Paso as one of the 
safest cities in the nation. Based on crime statistics from 
2005, El Paso was ranked third-safest among 32 cities 
with populations of 500,000 or more. The five-year crime 
comparison by the El Paso Police Department rates 
Chamizal as “average” in its index of crime. An El Paso 
police officer who covers the area described the com- 
munity as having its share of property crimes, but noted 
that violent crimes there are becoming increasingly rare. 
“The residents know that if they commit a crime, the con- 
sequences are more severe in low-income communities 
because they not only face jail time but could potentially 
be evicted [from] their public housing, fired for missing 
work, or deported if they are in this country illegally.”®” 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Chamizal has experienced longstanding economic 
stagnation, disinvestment, and the congregation of poor 
families.®® A number of issues emerged from our analy- 
sis of data and interviews as key factors in helping to 
explain the neighborhood’s deep, abiding poverty; these 
issues relate to residents’ lack of access to quality edu- 
cation, jobs, and housing; the community’s physical and 



127 



EL PASO, TEXAS 





EL PASO, TEXAS 



economic isolation from the surrounding region; and the 
need among residents to learn to build wealth. What also 
arose were some insights into what types of interventions 
might work to help improve the community’s situation. 

Education 

“One major factor keeping El Paso poor is our lack 
of education,” stated John Bretting, a professor at the 
University of Texas at El Paso. Poor education obstructs 
integration into U.S. society, Bretting added.^® Low levels 
of educational attainment characterize Chamizal, where 
more than 71 percent of individuals age 25 and older do 
not have a high school diploma and only 2 percent have 
a college degree.^^ 

Mexican immigrants represent the greatest share of 
uneducated residents, since most arrive without a high 
school education. In El Paso, a person with a high school 
diploma and no college earns, on average, about $9,000 
more yearly than a high school dropout. For those lack- 
ing work permits and a formal education, opportunities 
for improving their lives are limited, and poverty can 
easily pass from one generation to the next.^® 

The schools in inner-city El Paso face many obsta- 
cles, including poor student performance, high dropout 
rates, and a culture that places more importance on earn- 
ing an income than on obtaining an education. The four 
schools in Chamizal all ranked below the state average on 
the state standardized exam by an average of 19 percent- 
age points in reading and 17 percentage points in math 
for 2005-2006.^® In the 2005-2006 academic year, the 
Texas Education Agency rated two of the four schools in 
Chamizal as academically unacceptable. Campuses are 
evaluated on performance using the state standardized 
test, completion rate, and annual dropout rates.®® Bowie 
High School, located in Chamizal, has a dropout rate of 
more than 25 percent. Area educators cite limited English 
proficiency and a need to support family as the two most 
common reasons students drop out.®' 

Strong family ties among Hispanic families have not 
translated to active parent participation in the schools. 
Despite an active alumni association, Bowie High School 
is one of very few schools in the city that does not have 
an active parent-teacher association.®® Higher-paying 
employment opportunities in other major cities are also 
attracting El Paso’s most academically accomplished 
graduates, further widening the educational and eco- 
nomic divides within both Chamizal and El Paso.®® 



Job Opportunities 

The neighborhood also suffers disproportionately 
from a low labor-force participation rate. Only 40 per- 
cent participate in labor force, compared with the Texas 
labor-force participation rate of nearly 64 percent.®'* One 
theory is that the language barrier prevents many from 
working; more than 43 percent of Chamizal residents 
over 5 years old do not speak English well or at all.®® With 
language challenges so pervasive in the community, the 
children of Chamizal have trouble learning English. The 
parents’ inability to read and write in English limits the 
academic support their children receive at home. Still, 
some children in the community serve as translators for 
older family members with limited English proficiencies, 
even bridging the technological divide and aiding rela- 
tives with online job applications.®® 

Another theory for the high poverty rate in Chamizal 
relates to the neighborhood’s proximity to Mexico. Local 
economists suggest that the area’s abundance of low- 
skilled workers is saturating the workforce, driving down 
wages and keeping workers from finding employment.®^ 
They mention that, although the United States has a 
proven history and remarkable ability to absorb foreign- 
born workers, it has hit a point of saturation along the 
Texas-Mexico border.®® 

According to interviews with residents, dispropor- 
tionate shares of Chamizal residents participate in the 
informal economy. Day labor, seasonal jobs, unpaid family 
work, and criminal activities— including drug trafficking 
and petty theft— are cited by residents as the most com- 
mon livelihoods in this cash-based micro-economy. Many 
working families also engage in frequent cash- and barter- 
driven activities to supplement low-wage formal work.®® 

Transportation poses an additional obstacle to 
employment among residents of Chamizal. Forty-four 
percent of households do not own a personal vehicle.''® 
Better-paying manufacturing jobs in the plastic mold injec- 
tion, warehousing, and construction industries have moved 
out of the inner city, limiting employment options for 
neighborhood residents without cars. Chamizal’s residents 
find employment mainly with the food processing, janitorial 
services, and construction and maintenance industries.'" 

Project ARRIBA, an El Paso-based economic and 
workforce development program serving all of El Paso 
County, has had success helping residents move out of 
poverty. A labor market intermediary. Project ARRIBA pro- 
vides case management services to clients. Eligibility 



128 



is based on education level, language skills, poverty 
guidelines, and various life barriers faced by prospective 
participants. Since opening in 1999, Project ARRIBA has 
assisted more than 1,000 individuals in obtaining skills 
that are in demand in the El Paso labor market, leading to 
employment at “a living wage with benefits.”"'^ 

Project ARRIBA incorporates the capacity of local 
training providers, including El Paso Community College 
and the University of Texas at El Paso. Current high- 
demand jobs include positions in the fields of nursing 
and health care, teaching, and information technology. 
Financial assistance can cover tuition-gap financing, 
books, testing fees, child care, transportation, eye exams 
and eyeglasses, and emergency support for rent and 
utilities. “The program should be expanded to more 
systematically target high-poverty neighborhoods like 
Chamizal,” said Roman Ortiz of Project ARRIBA.''^ An addi- 
tional 100 participants would cost an estimated $550,000 
to $600,000 per year."''' 

Housing Quality and Affordability 

Surveys and census data reveal an aging inven- 
tory of housing, both multifamily and owner occupied, 
in Chamizal.''^ Many of the units have not been signifi- 
cantly rehabilitated since they were built in the 1930s 
and 1940s; they also lack aesthetic appeal, garages, and 
adequate square footage, making them less attractive 
to potential home buyers and investors.'’® Contiguous 
vacant properties are not common in this part of El Paso; 
thus, large residential investment is not possible with- 
out significant and costly demolition or condemnation. 
Attracting larger scale, market-rate infill would require a 
substantial subsidy or private foundation support, back- 
ing that is not readily available in El Paso.'”’ 

Poor yard maintenance and code violations, includ- 
ing curbside car repairs, junk piles, and debris on lots, 
degrade the community and give it the appearance of 
abandonment and neglect. Cargo-carrying 18-wheel 
trucks entering and exiting Mexico bisect the neighbor- 
hood, causing vibrations that affect the structural integ- 
rity of many of the older masonry homes.''® According to 
Comprehensive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS) 
data, nearly 60 percent of the renter-occupied units and 
35 percent of owner-occupied units have housing prob- 
lems, meaning that the properties lack complete plumb- 
ing or kitchen facilities or they have one or more persons 
per room, an indicator of overcrowding.''® 




This underpass artwork commemorates El Paso native Ruben 
Salazar, a Mexican-American journalist. Strong ties to Mexico 
are apparent in the neighborhood's many colorful murals. 



Many families live in the nearly 1,500 units of subsi- 
dized housing that are concentrated in Chamizal.®° This 
concentration has greatly affected local poverty rates.®' 
One of the first federally funded public housing develop- 
ments in the country was Tays, which was built in Chamizal 
during the 1940s. Tays, along with the Ray Salazar Public 
Housing Complex, is home to more than 500 families.®® 
Even with the large number of subsidized units in 
Chamizal, where the housing cost burden is controlled, 
cost remains a concern for residents who are renting. 

The 2000 census revealed that nearly 47 percent of rent- 
ers in Chamizal were experiencing a housing cost bur- 
den, defined as paying more than 30 percent of income 
for housing.®® Others “double up” with friends or relatives 
to make ends meet, an arrangement that is more cultur- 
ally accepted among Mexican-American families.®'' 
Policymakers have recognized the need to provide 
more housing options in the area, which has a homeown- 
ership rate of less than 25 percent. Community stakehold- 
ers encourage home purchases for revitalization. While 
homebuyer fairs and down-payment assistance programs 
for the area are common, Chamizal has limited supply and 
market demand for single-family homes.®® The neighbor- 
hood revitalization plan®® for Chamizal highlights the ben- 
efits of homeownership, calling it “one of the only vehicles 
available in this neighborhood for wealth creation.”®’’ 

House prices have appreciated only slightly over the 
past five years. The average tax value on a single-family 
house in Chamizal is approximately $50,000.®® However, 



129 



EL PASO, TEXAS 




EL PASO, TEXAS 



even at these relatively reasonable sale prices, there is 
a significant gap between prevailing wages in Cham- 
izal and the typical cost of a single-family house. “Many 
of the rental units are cash cows, meaning there is no 
incentive to upgrade the property when they are at 100 
percent capacity,” explained El Paso Affordable Housing 
President Larry Garcia. “The renters are not complaining 
because many are undocumented, poor, and unwilling to 
criticize out of fear of retribution.”^® 

Community Isolation 

According to one community stakeholder, Chamizal 
and other low-income neighborhoods south of Interstate 
10 in El Paso are viewed as a haven for illegal immigrants, 
gangs, and drug activity.®® Such negative perceptions, 
along with economic underdevelopment and physi- 
cal highway construction, have effectively segregated 
Chamizal into one of the most health-, housing-, and 
retail-deprived sections of El Paso, according to a Federal 
Reserve Bank of Dallas economist.®’ Some former resi- 
dents have expressed an unwillingness to move back to 
Chamizal, citing the neighborhood’s poor-quality schools, 
perceived crime, and hard-to-find market-rate housing 
comparable to other parts of El Paso County.®® 

Although the city has invested in upgrading the infra- 
structure around the Chamizal National Memorial, includ- 
ing sidewalks, streets, parks, signage, and drainage, the 
community of Chamizal still falls below the standards of 
a major U.S. city or the suburban areas of El Paso. Munic- 
ipal resources are strained, making it difficult to deal with 
the range of physical, social, and economic problems In 
the area, according to city officials. In addition, business 
and residential parking continues to be a top concern 
among the residents.®® These conditions, fostered by the 
lack of public investment and planning, as well as inertia 
on the part of property owners and residents within the 
community, deter development and add to the overall 
impression that the area is not commercially viable.®'’ 

Despite all the challenges facing the area, Cham- 
izal residents have pride in their neighborhood and are 
optimistic about the future. In fact, the locale is known 
for its family-oriented businesses, neighborhood pride, 
and Bowie High School, which has one of the strongest 
alumni networks in Texas. Many prominent members of 
El Paso’s Hispanic population claim roots in Chamizal 
and keep strong connections to family, friends, and the 
neighborhood itself.®® 



Learning to Build Wealth 

Chamizal has a considerably higher percentage than 
El Paso of residents who are unbanked; many rely on 
alternative financial service providers.®® Without good 
credit or credit in general, they have limited options. At 
least four businesses in the neighborhood are alterna- 
tive financial institutions, and many more are located just 
outside the neighborhood. Only one financial institution— 
a credit union— operates in the immediate community.®^ 
Most of El Paso’s banks and credit unions have a pres- 
ence in the city’s downtown area, a five-minute drive 
from Chamizal.®® 

One Mexican-American resident of the neighbor- 
hood mentioned that “our community is also overrun by 
check cashing, payday lenders, and rent-to-own furniture 
businesses that are draining assets. Our people only ask 
what the monthly payments are, not how much interest 
I’m paying.” 

Minority and low-income families are more likely 
than other families to use alternative financial services.®® 
In Chamizal, marketing of these services is not subtle; 
billboards and oversized signs are plentiful in both Eng- 
lish and Spanish.’’® Access to conventional credit can be 
difficult, as more than 36 percent of Chamizal residents’ 
credit files are too thin to be rated.’’’ The American Asso- 
ciation of Retired Persons (AARP) recently reported that 
Texas has one of the highest subprime lending rates in 
the nation, with El Paso near the top for Hispanic borrow- 
ers. This suggests a systemic problem in the county and 
a need for greater personal financial education. ’’® 

According to Barbara Robles of Arizona State Uni- 
versity, financial education is the foundation for asset 
building among low-income families in distressed neigh- 
borhoods like Chamizal. Avoidance and mistrust of main- 
stream financial institutions, then, present a challenge to 
the financial services industry and to financial education 
outreach initiatives by community-based organizations. In 
interviews, residents noted that currency devaluations and 
the instability of financial institutions in Mexico have nega- 
tively affected their opinions about financial institutions.^® 
“In working with a population with little formal education 
and a lot of mistrust, mastering financial skills is often 
quite daunting,” added Anita Werner of Bank of the West.^'’ 

Understanding income tax responsibilities and 
rights are additional wealth-building skills that could be 
addressed by social services providers in the Chamizal 
area. Studies indicate that the Earned Income Tax Credit 



130 



(EITC), for example, has been successful in providing 
substantial economic relief to the growing Hispanic mar- 
ket. Hispanic families, however, do not take advantage of 
the EITC refund to the same extent as other groups.^^ 

■ CONCLUSION 

Lack of education, economic and social isolation, and 
obstacles to quality housing are major contributors to the 
perpetuation of poverty in Chamizal. Resources to address 
chronic issues are expensive, especially amid recent 
pressure in El Paso to reduce the tax rate in response to 
increases in property assessments. Services are available, 
but, according to Martha Maldonado, Chamizal neighbor- 
hood association president, “Too many of our residents 
are scared, intimidated, or simply uninterested. They fear 
immigration officials, police, or know that their stay in the 
neighborhood is for a short period, so [they ask], ‘What is 
the point?’” Some even choose to walk across the border 
into Mexico for social and health services.^® 

Despite the neighborhood’s sobering demographic 
characteristics and persistent poverty, there is a resil- 
iency and strong sense of community in Chamizal. As 
one resident expressed it, “If I won the lottery, I still 
wouldn’t move out of Chamizal. This is what I know; these 
are my people.”^^ Community planning efforts— with 
bilingual outreach as a component— that focus on access 
to educational opportunities and high-quality affordable 
housing could be the catalyst for change, according to 
local officials.^® “It is an encouraging sign to see com- 
munity groups come together,” observed Jerry Romero, 
director of community development for Wells Fargo-El 
Paso. “Chamizal has been neglected for far too long.”^® 

This case study was prepared by Roy Lopez, community 
affairs speciaiist, Federai Reserve Bank of Daiias. 



Endnotes 

1 The census tracts being reviewed include 0021, 0028, 0029, which 
encompass most of the Chamizal neighborhood as defined by the 
neighborhood association boundaries. “City of Ei Paso Census 
Tracts,” June 2007. Available at http://www.dataplace.org. 

2 “History and Culture of Chamizal,” May 2007. Available at http:// 
www.nps.gov/cham/historyculture/index.htm. 

3 “City of El Paso Poverty Rates,” June 2007. Available at http://www. 
dataplace.org. 

4 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 



Ramon Bracamontes, “Industries Continue to Shutdown, Relocate,” 
El Paso Times, April 1, 2007. 

Bill Schlesinger, Project Vida. Personal interview in El Paso, June 
20, 2007. 

The Urban Land Institute, Avenida Guadalupe, San Antonio, Texas: A 
Redevelopment Plan (Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute, 2005). 

Pew Hispanic Center, “Indicators of Recent Migration Flows from 
Mexico,” 2007. 

Mario Garcia, Desert Immigrants: The Mexicans of El Paso, 1880-1920 
(New Haven: Yale University Press, 1981). 

“City of El Paso-Chamizal Map,” June 2007. Available at http://www. 
ci.el-paso.tx.us/commdev/_documents/chamizal_aerial.pdf. 

U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

Bill Schlesinger, Project Vida. Personal interview in El Paso, June 
20, 2007. 

U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

Bill Schlesinger, Project Vida. Personal interview in El Paso, June 
20, 2007. 

U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

Ibid. 

U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. Young is defined as the popula- 
tion under 18. The working-age population is defined as those 
aged 18 to 64 years old. 

Louie Gilot, “Single Mothers Face Added Difficulties,” El Paso 
Times, April 8, 2007. 

Texas Comptroller of Public Accounts, “Bordering the Future: Chal- 
lenges and Opportunity in the Texas Border Region,” 1998. 

Bill Schlesinger, Project Vida. Personal interview in El Paso, June 
20, 2007. 

Gustavo Reveles Acosta, “Companies That Offer Health Coverage 
Sought,” El Paso Times, May 6, 2007. 

Author’s personal observation, El Paso, February 21, 2007. 

Anita Werner, Bank of the West. Personal interview in El Paso, Feb- 
ruary 22, 2007. 

El Paso Police Officer. Personal interview in El Paso, April 6, 2007. 

Garcia, Desert Immigrants: The Mexicans of El Paso, 1880-1920. 

Gustavo Reveles Acosta, “Dropouts Hurt Themselves, Rest of the 
City,” El Paso Times, April 29, 2007. 

U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

Louie Gilot, “Immigrants Have Toughest Fight,” El Paso Times, April 
15, 2007. 

“Texas Education Agency 2005-2006 Report Cards,” April 2007. Avail- 
able at http://www.tea.state.tx.us/perfreport/src/2006/campus.srch.html. 

Ibid. 



5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 

21 

22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 



131 



EL PASO, TEXAS 



EL PASO, TEXAS 



31 Luis Villalobos, El Paso Independent School District. Personal inter- 
view, March 2008. 

32 Ibid. 

33 Zahira Torres, “Better Jobs in El Paso Would Help Beat Poverty,” El 
Paso Times, April 22, 2007. 

34 u.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

35 M. Robin Dion et al.. Reaching All Job Seekers: Employment 
Programs for Hard-to-Employ Populations (Princeton: Matematica 
Policy Research, 1999). U.S. Census Bureau, 2000 data. 

36 Resident interview in El Paso, June 19, 2007. 

37 Jake Rollow, “Glut of Workers, Lack of Schooling Play Major Roles” 
El Paso Times, April 15, 2007 

38 Maria Padilla, Impact of the Mexican Immigrant Labor Force in the 
United States Economy (Houston: Center for International Studies, 
University of St. Thomas, 2002). 

39 Personal interview in El Paso, March 16, 2007 

40 u.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

41 Ibid. 

42 Roman Ortiz, Project ARRIBA. Personal interview in El Paso, June 
19, 2007 

43 Ibid. 

44 Ibid. 

45 u.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

46 Personal interview conducted in El Paso, March 16, 2007. 

47 Bill Lilly, City of El Paso. Personal interview in El Paso, April 4, 2007 

48 Martha Maldonado, Chamizal Neighborhood Association. Personal 
interview in El Paso, February 22, 2007. 

49 u.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, Comprehen- 
sive Housing Affordability Strategy (CHAS), 2000. 

50 u.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, A Picture of 
Subsidized Households, 2000. Available at http://www.huduser.org/ 
picture2000/index.html. Percentage is calculated by dividing the 
number of HUD-subsidized units by the number of rental housing 
units in the geography. 

51 “City of El Paso Housing Authority: Maps,” May 2007 Available at 
http://www.hacep.org 

52 Ibid. 

53 u.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

54 Personal interview in El Paso, March 17, 2007. 

55 Larry Garcia, El Paso Affordable Housing. Personal interview in El 
Paso, April 4, 2007. 

56 The goal of the revitalization is to concentrate community 
resources in the neighborhood. The city has partnered with neigh- 
borhood residents, business owners, community organizations. 



and educational institutions to create and implement revitalization 
strategies such as tax increment finance districts, targeted reha- 
bilitation, and concentrated private and public investment in small 
businesses. Nonprofit housing developers, such as La Fe Commu- 
nity Development Corporation, El Paso Collaborative, and Project 
Vida, will take part in neighborhood-based strategies 

57 Larry Garcia, El Paso Affordable Housing. Personal interview in El 
Paso, April 4, 2007 

58 El Paso Central Appraisal District, June 2007 Available at http:// 
www.elpasocad.org/search.htm. 

59 Larry Garcia, El Paso Affordable Housing. Personal interview in El 
Paso, April 4, 2007 

60 Martha Maldonado, Chamizal Neighborhood Association. Personal 
interview in El Paso, February 22, 2007. 

61 Robert Gilmer, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, El Paso Branch. 
Personal interview in El Paso, February 23, 2007. 

62 Martha Maldonado, Chamizal Neighborhood Association. Personal 
interview in El Paso, February 22, 2007. 

63 Bill Lilly, City of El Paso. Personal interview in El Paso, April 4, 2007. 

64 Personal interview in El Paso, March 16, 2007. 

65 Ibid. 

66 David Ruiz, Bank of America. Personal interview in El Paso, April 4, 
2007. 

67 Author’s personal observation, El Paso, February 21, 2007 

68 Jerry Romero, Wells Fargo Bank. Personal interview in El Paso, 

April 3, 2007. 

69 Barbara Robles, “Wealth Building in the Borderlands: Linking Tax 
Refunds to Asset Building” College of Public Programs, Arizona 
State University, 2005. 

70 Author’s personal observation, El Paso. February 21, 2007 

71 Credit score data were obtained from the Federal Reserve Board 
of Governors and are drawn from a 10 percent sample of all credit 
records from a major credit bureau in December 2004. The cut-off 
for a high credit rating corresponds to the cut-off in the market for 
prime loans. 

72 Consumers Union, Minority Subprime Borrowers (Austin: Consumers 
Union, 2002). 

73 Personal interview in El Paso, March 16, 2007. 

74 Anita Werner, Bank of the West. Personal interview in El Paso, Feb- 
ruary 22, 2007 

75 Barbara Robles, “Wealth Building in the Borderlands: Linking Tax 
Refunds to Asset Building.” 

76 Martha Maldonado, Chamizal Neighborhood Association. Personal 
interview in El Paso, February 22, 2007. 

77 Ibid. 

78 Bill Lilly, City of El Paso. Personal interview in El Paso, April 4, 2007. 



132 



79 Jerry Romero, Wells Fargo Bank. Personal Interview In El Paso, 
April 3, 2007. 



133 



EL PASO, TEXAS 



134 



■ OVERVIEW 



Springfield— New England’s fourth-largest city behind Boston, Providence, 
and Worcester— was once known as the “City of Firsts.” It was the first to 
develop interchangeable parts and introduce modern manufacturing at 
the Springfield Armory. It was first in devising many technological improve- 
ments in railway and automobile manufacturing in the late 1800 s and early 



1900s. The very first Merriam-Webster dictionary was 
published in Springfield in 1847. And the city is celebrated 
as the birthplace of basketball: In 1968, the Nalsmith 
Memorial Basketball Hall of Fame opened on the campus 
of Springfield College to honor the inventor of a sport 
that was first played there. 

The city’s recent history boasts fewer accomplish- 
ments. Like other Rust Belt cities, Springfield has struggled 
to rebuild its economy following the decline of the manu- 
facturing industry. As evidenced by a 2006 Urban Land 
Institute study, the list of setbacks is long; “Over the past 
15 years, both good things and bad have happened in 
Springfield. ..Over the years, crime has Increased as gangs 



and drug trafficking gained a foothold in the city. Some 
middle-class residents chose to move to the suburbs, as in 
other communities nationally. Some neighborhoods have 
started to slide. Development projects floundered, and cor- 
ruption crept into segments of the public sector.”' 

The story is not all bleak, however. Investigations into 
the corruption scandals have resulted in numerous trials 
and convictions, and new leadership is emerging at the 
municipal level as well as within major public agencies. 

The changes in leadership are creating a more positive 
environment and represent a first step in re-establishing 
the city’s capacity to deal with its problems. According to 
the institute’s report, “City leadership has been rekindled.” 



135 





SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Old Hill, Six Corners 
& South End 



Springfield MSA 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


23.4 


9.4 


Poverty rate 2000*’ 


43.4 


13.1 


Income 


Median household income'’ 


$18,804 


$41,206 


Demographics 


Population 2000'* 


16,962 


680,014 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000'’ 


-16.4 


5.9 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 


% White 


20.7 


79.9 


% Hispanic/Latino 


45.8 


11.2 


% Black/African-American 


28.9 


5.5 


% Residents under age 189 


33.6 


24.3 


% Single-parent households*’ 


45.8 


10.6 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


8.3 


6.7 


% Population in same house as five years ago* 


41.0 


57.9 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000^ 


41.9 


17.6 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


9.3 


25.2 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005"' 


27.4 


50.8 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


13.4 


34.7 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000'’ 


13.8 


5.4 


% Adults in the labor forceP 


48.7 


64.7 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 2000'’ 


19.9 


63.1 


% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


47.9 


40.3 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized" 


34.1 


17.1 


Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$68,899 


$123,103 


Median year structure built' 


1939 


1968 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


11.1 


5.9 


% Credit files with high credit scores” 


36.3 


70.5 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


61.8 


26.6 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005” 


30.5 


20.9 



■ BACKGROUND 

Turning Springfield’s fortunes around will be far from 
easy. Like similar cities in Massachusetts currently 
referred to as “small cities,” “middle cities” or “gateway 
cities,” Springfield has seen a decline in industry, jobs, 
and population over the past few decades.^ Manufac- 
turing jobs, once a vibrant part of Springfield’s history, 
have declined dramatically. In the 30 years from 1970 to 
2000, the percentage of the population employed by the 
manufacturing industry decreased by more than half. 

The number of Springfield’s residents has also declined 



in recent years: Between 1990 and 2000 the population 
declined 3 percent, to 152,082. The city’s racial compo- 
sition also changed. Between 1990 and 2000, the city 
lost 25 percent of its white population, while the black 
population grew 5 percent and the Hispanic population 
grew 56 percent. 

As Springfield’s employment base eroded, poverty in 
the city grew rapidly. The poverty rate in Springfield has 
risen steadily since 1970, from 13 percent to 20 percent 
in 2000, yet the increase in poverty has not been evenly 
distributed. Springfield has one of the highest rates of 



136 




FIGURE 1 



< 

X 

O 



o 

cr 



concentrated poverty in the country; in 
2000, 34 percent of poor residents in the 
city lived in neighborhoods with poverty 
levels exceeding 40 percent.^ 

The case study area is comprised of 
three neighborhoods in Springfield: Old 
Hill, Six Corners, and the South End. These 
three are among the poorest of the city’s 
17 neighborhoods. In 2000, 43 percent 
of the residents in these three neigh- 
borhoods had income levels below the 
federal poverty level. (See Table 1) These 
neighborhoods have also experienced 
more dramatic population changes than 
the city overall. Between 1990 and 2000, 
the population in the case study area 
decreased 11 percent (versus 3 percent 
for the city). The racial and ethnic compo- 
sition of the neighborhoods has changed 
as well. The white population decreased 
47 percent and the Hispanic population 
increased 40 percent over the decade. In 
2000, immigrants accounted for 8 percent 
of the population in the case study com- 
munity. This community is also home to a large Puerto 
Rican population, with 21 percent of its residents born 
in Puerto Rico. Both the city of Springfield and the case 
study area have a higher proportion of Puerto Rican resi- 
dents than Massachusetts as a whole.'* 

The case study area’s proximity to downtown allows 
residents easy access to amenities such as museums and 
restaurants, and a new bike path along the Connecticut 
River. The neighborhoods are also home to several parks. 
In interviews, residents cited these attributes, along with 
their homes and neighbors, as reasons for their fondness 
for the area and for living in the community. 



■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Interviews and data analysis brought out myriad chal- 
lenges facing residents in the case study area, which must 
be considered against the backdrop of a weak regional 
economy. These challenges include limited access to 
living-wage jobs; a lack of education and skills; a weak 
housing market that limits investment in the community 
and asset-building opportunities for residents; and low 
morale among residents combined with a generally nega- 
tive perception of the neighborhoods by outsiders. 



Change in the number of jobs by industry between 1985 
and 2000 




SOURCE: Brookings Institution analysis of Massachusetts state data 



Employment 

It is hard for residents of the case study area to 
find a job— especially one that pays a living wage. Many 
residents in the community lack a high school diploma or 
college degree, limiting their employment opportunities. 
Moreover, there appears to be a mismatch between the 
kinds of jobs people are trained for through government 
programs and the higher-wage jobs that provide a route 
out of poverty. 

In particular, Springfield has experienced a widen- 
ing spatial mismatch between residents’ skill levels and 
available jobs. Between 1985 and 2000, most of the job 
growth has occurred in the metropolitan area, while the 
city of Springfield has lost jobs in industries such as 
manufacturing, construction, and finance. (See Figure 
1) In contrast, most of the job growth in Springfield has 
been in the services sector. Aimee Griffin Mannings, 
executive director of the New England Black Chamber 
of Commerce, observed that residents “tend to have 
multiple jobs to survive because [the] service [industry] 
does not pay well.”^ A recent study by the Pioneer Valley 
Planning Council confirms that Springfield’s residents 
“are heavily concentrated in service and sales or office 



137 



SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS 



SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS 




occupations.”*^ The report further noted that, although 
there are a number of jobs in health care and education, 
Springfield residents tend to be “serving in lower wage 
occupations in these industries.”^ 

The lack of higher-paying jobs in Springfield contrib- 
utes to lower household incomes. The median household 
income in the case study area in 2000 stood at $18,804, 
less than half of the median household income for the 
Springfield Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) ($41,206). 
“How do you manage your life on minimum wage?” asked 
Leslie Lawrence, who works for MassDevelopment, an eco- 
nomic development agency.® James Morton, president and 
CEO of the Greater Springfield YMCA, echoed Lawrence’s 
point: “In this community, livable-wage jobs are even 
harder to find than that baseline [minimum-wage] job.” 

The case study area’s unemployment rate is also sig- 
nificantly higher than the region’s and is especially high 
among specific subgroups. In 2000, the unemployment 
rate for the case study neighborhoods was 14 percent, 
compared with 5 percent for the Springfield MSA. The 
fastest-growing population in the case study area, the 
Hispanic population, has the highest unemployment rate 
of all racial or ethnic groups, with 18 percent of Hispanic 
males and 24 percent of Hispanic females unemployed. 

Skill-building and training programs are available to 
residents. Some are located close to the case study area; 
however, the training opportunities do not always match 
available job opportunities. The Massachusetts Career 
Development Institute in Springfield assists about 1,000 
students per year in getting their GED or certification 
in a specific profession. But completion of the program 
does not necessarily mean that participants are entering 
professions with high-paying jobs. James Morton, former 



director of the institute, observed that “frequently, the 
demands of the job market change, yet it takes consider- 
able time for training dollars to reach the field to provide 
the specific training needed to meet the demand.”^ 

Education 

The prospects do not look much brighter for the next 
generation of workers, due to relatively low educational 
attainment in the case study area. With high truancy 
rates, low graduation rates, and low test scores among 
students, education is not serving as a path to economic 
opportunity for Springfield’s residents. Forty-two percent 
of residents over age 25 in the case study area did not 
have a high school diploma, compared with 18 percent 
for the Springfield MSA. “What kind of job can you get as 
a high school dropout?” asked one interviewee, a lament 
echoed by many other people interviewed for this report. 

The Springfield school district faces significant chal- 
lenges. In 2006, only half (51.2 percent) of the students 
in the district graduated from high school.'° Massachu- 
setts assesses student achievement by a periodic test, 
the Massachusetts Comprehensive Assessment System 
(MCAS). Test scores are low district-wide. Although MCAS 
scores for Springfield students have increased since 
2000, failing rates remain above 25 percent in both read- 
ing and math and are more than double the rates for 
students statewide. Schools in the case study communi- 
ties fare even worse: In the 2005-06 school year, only 27 
percent of elementary school students were proficient in 
reading and just 13 percent in math. More than 80 per- 
cent of the students in schools in the case study com- 
munities receive free or reduced-price lunches. 

Opinions differ on whether the students are failing 
school or the schools are failing the students. In inter- 
views, respondents expressed concern that the local 
schools are not providing the same opportunities for 
children as schools in other parts of the MSA. Munnings 
noted that for schools in these high-poverty neighbor- 
hoods, “Expectations are lower. Opportunities are lower. 
Discipline is a priority as opposed to enrichment.”" 

Others, however, noted that parental engagement in 
the schools is a critical factor in determining academic 
achievement. Some interviewees questioned whether 
parents in the community valued education and made it 
a priority to be involved. Yet for parents juggling multiple 
jobs, participating in school activities may not be a realistic 
goal. “How can you take the time off to go fight for your kid 



138 




in school?” said Mannings. “You cannot, or you put your job 
and family at risk.”'^ Explained the YMCA’s Morton, “Parents 
are busy surviving and probably not getting their children 
the kind of support that they need [compared to chil- 
dren] in affluent communities where parents have greater 
resources and time. If your energies are spent surviving or 
trying to survive, then there is not room for much else.” He 
stressed that he did not mean that poor, low-income fami- 
lies do not value education— “because they do.”'^ 

Schools in the case study area also struggle with 
other challenges associated with the high levels of 
poverty in the community. According to the 2006 Youth 
Risk Behavior Survey administered anonymously at 
schools across Springfield (and statewide), nearly half 
of the students in S*'’ grade at the elementary school in 
the community reported that they felt angry or sad most 
of the time, double the rate of their counterparts across 
the city.''' As the area’s demographics have changed, 
increased enrollment of non-English speakers has also 
presented new curriculum challenges. Twenty-two per- 
cent of the students enrolled in the Springfield school 
district speak a language other than English at home.'" 

In the Old Hill area, several efforts are under way to 
enhance students’ academic experience. Springfield 



College and William N. DeBerry Elementary School, 
for example, partnered 10 years ago on a tutoring and 
mentoring program that has been nationally recognized.'" 
Three nights a week, the mentors and students meet 
at the college, where they work on homework together, 
engage in sports and other activities, and enjoy a meal 
paid for by the college. At the end of the evening stu- 
dents are brought home, where a parent must be present 
at the drop-off. Students have to meet behavioral require- 
ments and academic standards to stay in the program. 
What began with a single unpaid worker now operates 
on a $1.2 million budget and has 150 volunteers. Still, the 
mentoring program faces challenges. According to a pro- 
gram staff member, family relocation presents the biggest 
obstacle, since students who move out of the community 
are no longer eligible to participate in the program. 

The Springfield public school system has also cre- 
ated a Parent and Community Engagement Cffice. Some 
schools have family liaisons that visit families in their 
homes, day or evening, to meet with parents and talk 
about their children’s achievement. The schools’ aim is to 
address the lack of parental engagement by designating 
specific individuals who will be accessible to parents in 
and out of the school setting. 




Springfield’s new bike path starts near the South End bridge and runs along the Connecticut River. The bike path serves not only as a 
means of recreation for area residents, but also as a link to downtown amenities such as museums and restaurants. 



139 



SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS 





SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS 




The City of Springfield has slated several properties in its 
South End neighborhood, where this vacant building is located, 
for priority redevelopment. 



Housing 

Prospects for developing assets in the case study 
area are weak. Fewer than 20 percent of residents own 
their homes, which is a primary vehicle for accumulating 
assets. For those who do own their homes, the median 
home value in the community is $68,899, which is 44 per- 
cent less than the median value in the Springfield MSA. 
(See Table 1) The neighborhoods are also home to a high 
percentage of subsidized housing: One-third of the rental 
housing in the community is HUD subsidized. 

Absentee landlords were cited as a prevalent con- 
cern in the case study area. All three neighborhoods are 
characterized by vacant lots and abandoned or poorly 
maintained buildings. According to 2006 research by the 
Hampden Hampshire Housing Partnership (HAP), the Old 
Hill neighborhood alone had 130 vacant or abandoned 
properties, accounting for almost 8 percent of the case 
study community’s residential units.’^ These empty lots 
and abandoned or dilapidated buildings can have sig- 
nificant negative impacts on communities; for one, their 
presence has been linked to increases in crime.'® Such 
properties are also costly to address. HAP estimates that 
Springfield spent $2 million in one year to demolish vacant 
and run-down buildings, on top of hundreds of thousands 
of dollars the city paid to clean up some of the properties. 

Revitalizing the housing market in the case study 
area will be difficult. David Panagore, chief development 



officer of the Springfield Finance Control Board, noted 
that the concentration of subsidized housing in the 
community had helped to create “ghetto” conditions, 
which led to the subsequent loss of local retail and 
development. “It had the opposite effect it intended, 
by concentrating the families in these neighborhoods 
even after the jobs left,” he said. “It’s not that [afford- 
able housing] policies per se are wrong, but you need 
to take into account local market conditions. If you have 
a thriving economy like Boston, your worry is ‘how can 
I get subsidized housing in there to keep some afford- 
ability?’ In Springfield [subsidized housing] becomes 
the only way you do development. There is no private 
market, so there’s little potential for private investment.”'® 
HAP’s director has noted that affordable homeowner- 
ship policies are also not as effective in weak-market 
communities. In a weak market, homes that are built as 
affordable sell at market rate, yet they come with 30- or 
50-year deed restrictions that keep buyers from building 
equity.®® In his view, these restrictions make the proper- 
ties unattractive to buyers and inhibit efforts to attract 
new families to the community. 

One sign that things may be turning around is the 
recently formed partnership among Springfield Neigh- 
borhood Housing Services, HAP, and Habitat for Human- 
ity. The three organizations plan to build new homes in 
several Springfield neighborhoods, including those in the 
case study area. For example, the housing developers 
plan to build 100 new or rehabilitated energy-efficient 
homes in Old Hill for first-time home buyers over the next 
several years, a neighborhood collaborative initiative 
that also includes the Old Hill Neighborhood Council and 
Springfield College. 

Negative External Perceptions of the Community 

One of the issues that emerged most frequently 
in interviews is the negatively reinforcing relationship 
between unfavorable outside perceptions of the commu- 
nity, the area’s limited ability to attract new investments, 
and residents’ low morale. In numerous conversations, 
residents expressed their opinions that outsiders held 
extremely negative views of their neighborhoods and 
the people living there, and that these contributed to 
a lack of investment in the area as well as low morale 
among residents. 

Often, residents reported, the perception is worse than 
the reality— especially true, many said, as it relates to crime. 



140 





“The perception is that crime is rampant; the reality is that 
if you stay away from drugs, gangs, and guns your chance 
of being a victim is minimized,”^' said the community liaison 
at the Springfield Police Department. Still, despite a recent 
drop in crime levels, the perception persists that crime is 
rampant in the area. In a press conference announcing the 
drop in crime levels, the Springfield police commissioner 
conceded, “It is an uphill battle before Springfield is no 
longer seen as a violent place.”^^ 

According to residents, these negative views influ- 
ence investment in the community. One resident said 
she believed the value of her property was lower than 
in other neighborhoods, since fear of crime limited 
demand for homes in her neighborhood. Another felt 
that these unfavorable impressions deterred commercial 
development, since businesses may not want to open 
in high-poverty, high-crime areas. Residents also noted 
that outsiders’ negative perceptions contributed to low 
morale in the community, which in turn leads to a sense 
that there are limited opportunities for residents and 
few positive prospects for the future. One interviewee 
described the negative perception of the neighborhood 
as the community’s “Achilles heel” in its attempts to 
address issues related to poverty. 

■ CONCLUSION 

Turning around these negative perceptions and improv- 
ing morale in Springfield will require civic and political 
leadership, both of which have been lacking in recent 
years. The city has endured corruption scandals— the 
most visible examples of failed leadership— and strug- 
gled with administrative, budgetary, and management 
challenges. For example, as recently as 2004, Spring- 
field lacked an integrated accounting system, didn’t 
know how many employees were on the city payroll, and 
kept many of its records by hand in ledger books. This 
archaic system made accounting for an estimated $41 
million budget deficit especially difficult for city leaders.^^ 
Ultimately, this lack of government capacity has limited 
the city’s ability to attract new private investment and 
to tackle issues such as poor schools and high levels 
of poverty. Since 2004, however, Springfield has been 
under the oversight of a state finance control board. The 
city has also balanced its budget and begun prioritizing 
projects geared toward revitalizing the local economy 
and promoting neighborhood redevelopment. 



This case study was prepared by DeAnna Green, 
senior community affairs analyst, Federal Reserve Bank 
of Boston. 



Endnotes 

1 Urban Land Institute, Springfield, Massachusetts: Strategies for a 
Sustainable City (Washington, DC: Urban Land Institute, 2006). 

2 Citizens Housing and Planning Association and the Massachusetts 
Association of Community Development Corporations, “State of the 
Cities” (December 2006). Mark Muro et al., “Reconnecting Massachu- 
setts Gateway Cities: Lessons Learned and an Agenda for Renewal” 
(Massine and Brookings Institution, February 2007) Available at 
http://web3.streamhoster.com/mtc/gateway_cities_full.pdf. Jim Ster- 
gios, “Rehabbing Urban Development.” Working Paper 38 (Boston: 
Pioneer Institute for Public Policy Research, February 2007). Available 
at http://www.pioneerinstitute.org/pdf/07_urban_development.pdf. 

3 In comparison. New Orleans’ rate of concentrated poverty before 
Hurricane Katrina was 38 percent. 

4 Springfield city contains 2.3 percent of Massachusetts’ population 
but 17.3 percent of the state’s Puerto Rican-born population. The case 
study communities contain 0.3 percent of Massachusetts’ population 
but 3.4 percent of the state’s Puerto Rican-born population. 

5 Aimee Munnings, Executive Director of the New England Black 
Chamber of Commerce, Inc. Personal interview in Springfield, 
January 18, 2007. 

6 Paul N. Foster et al., A Demographic and Economic Analysis 
of the City of Springfield (West Springfield: Pioneer Valley 
Planning Commission, September 2006). Available at 
http://www.springfieldcityhall.com/planning/fileadmin/Planning_ 
files/Springfield_Market_Study_2006.pdf. 

7 Paul N. Foster et al., A Demographic and Economic Analysis 
of the City of Springfield. 

8 Leslie Lawrence, Vice President, Commercial Lending, Mass Devel- 
opment. Personal interview in Springfield, December 8, 2006. 

9 James Morton, President and CEO, YMCA of Greater Springfield. 
Personal interview in Springfield, February 9, 2007. 

10 Massachusetts Department of Education, City of Spring- 
field Profile, available at http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/home. 
asp?orgcode=02810000&view=enr (accessed November 30, 2007). 

11 Aimee Munnings, Executive Director of the New England Black 
Chamber of Commerce, Inc. Personal interview in Springfield, 
January 18, 2007. 

12 Ibid. 

13 James Morton, President and CEO, YMCA of Greater Springfield. 
Personal interview in Springfield, February 9, 2007. 

14 Springfield School District, Youth Risk Behavior Survey 2006, Pub- 
lic School Grade 5, Springfield, 2006. 

15 Massachusetts Department of Education, City of Springfield 
Profile, available at http://profiles.doe.mass.edu/home.asp? 
orgcode=02810000&view=enr (accessed November 30, 2007). 



141 



SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS 



SPRINGFIELD, MASSACHUSETTS 



16 Dale Lucy-Alien et al., “Springfield College Collaboration with the 
Springfield Public Schools and Neighboring Community,” Peabody 
Journal of Education 75(3) (2000): 99-114. 

17 Peter Gagliardi, “Housing Programs in Weak Market Neighbor- 
hoods,” White Paper No. 36 (Boston: Pioneer Institute for Public 
Policy Research, December 2006). Available at http://www. 
pioneerinstitute.org/pdf/06_housing_programs.pdf. 

18 National Vacant Properties Campaign, Vacant Properties: The True 
Costs to Communities (Washington, DC: National Vacant Properties 
Campaign, 2005). 

19 David Panagore, Chief Development Officer, Finance Control Board. 
Personal interview in Springfield, December 8, 2006. 

20 Peter Gagliardi, “Housing Programs in Weak Market Neighborhoods,” 
White Paper No. 36. 

21 Personal interview with Kathleen Browne, March 7, 2007. 

22 Patrick Johnson, “Springfield’s Violent Crime Declines 16%,” Spring- 
field Republican, March 4, 2007. 

23 B. J. Roche, “Under Control?” Commonwealth, Summer 2005. 



142 




■ OVERVIEW 



Even before World War II, Rochester had established a global reputation 
as a high-tech city. The home-grown companies of Kodak, Xerox, and 
Bausch & Lomb had transformed the industrial landscape and social life of 
the city, creating an image of Rochester as the “smugtown” of upstate New 
York.^ Motivated to promote continued success, business leaders and city 



administrators drafted successive master plans in the 
post-war period to meet the demands of population 
growth, industrial Innovation, and a highly mobile citi- 
zenry.^ Several decades later, Rochester’s landscape 
reflected not only the city’s post-war urban renewal 
efforts, but also the effects of dramatic changes in the 
regional, domestic, and international economies, com- 
bined with the nation’s social unrest. Economic restruc- 
turing and suburbanization had fractured the city’s 
insular labor market and cut Rochester’s population in 
half, effectively reversing Rochester’s trajectory in the 
second half of the 20th century. Once a proud center of 
innovation, the city of Rochester became increasingly 
isolated and distressed. 



The national economic expansion of the 1990s did 
not improve Rochester’s economy. Both the city-wide 
poverty rate and areas of high poverty— defined as tracts 
with more than 40 percent of the population living in pov- 
erty-increased. From 1990 to 2000, Rochester’s poverty 
rate grew from about 24 percent to 26 percent. At the 
same time, the city’s areas of high poverty increased from 
17 to 19 census tracts, affecting nearly a third of Roches- 
ter’s total population. The neighborhoods immediately 
surrounding downtown were most affected. This case 
study focuses on the “crescent” area north of downtown, 
or the Northern Crescent, which comprises four neighbor- 
hoods: Upper Falls and Marketview Heights to the east, 
and Edgerton and Brown Square to the west. 



143 



ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Northern Crescent 



Rochester MSA 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


20.7 


7.5 


Poverty rate 2000'’ 


43.2 


10.5 


Income 


Median household income'’ 


$17,692 


$44,345 


Demographics 


Population 2000'' 


27,831 


1,037,831 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000'’ 


-44.7 


7.9 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 


% White 


17.4 


81.5 


% Hispanic/Latino 


26.3 


4.5 


% Black/African-American 


51.0 


10.4 


% Residents under age 189 


38.9 


25.6 


% Single-parent households'’ 


50.7 


10.0 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


5.9 


5.9 


% Population in same house as five years ago' 


42.5 


58.4 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000'' 


44.4 


15.7 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


5.2 


27.7 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005'" 


39.1 


66.9 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


51.9 


74.8 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000° 


18.2 


5.8 


% Adults in the labor forceP 


54.9 


65.9 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


252 


67.9 


% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


64.3 


45.7 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized" 


20.7 


11.8 


Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$44,821 


$95,506 


Median year structure built' 


1939 


1970 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


63.9 


23.1 


% Credit files with high credit scores" 


29.1 


68.1 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


58.4 


21.1 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005* 


46.5 


25.1 



■ BACKGROUND 

Situated in the center of upstate New York, Rochester 
was settled in 1803 as a commercial way station for 
goods traveling both west and east, and quickly rose to 
prominence as an economic engine for the region.^ Its 
proximity to natural resources— Lake Ontario to the north 
and fertile lowlands to the south, along with the Genesee 
River that bisects downtown— served as the catalyst for 
the development of industries such as agriculture, trans- 
portation, and eventually manufacturing. 



Attracted by job opportunities in Rochester, native- 
born groups and European immigrants flocked to the city 
at the turn of the century. By 1920, more than half of the 
population in the six-county metropolitan area resided in 
Rochester.'' Residential neighborhoods were organized in 
concentric patterns around industrial corridors to meet 
increased housing demand and allow for easy commut- 
ing to employers.^ 

Neighborhood boundaries were marked both physi- 
cally, by the man-made infrastructure being assembled 
to meet the needs of a growing city, and socially, by the 



144 





ethnic and cultural traditions of its arriving residents. The 
Northern Crescent neighborhoods are the oldest settle- 
ments in the city; located directly north of downtown 
and straddling the Genesee River, these neighborhoods 
today are divided into east and west sections.® 

Northern Crescent residents continue to represent 
a higher proportion of minorities and immigrants than 
in Rochester overall. One out of two residents is African 
American, compared to one out of three of the city’s 
population. The east and west sections of the crescent 
have distinct demographics as well: in the east, 60 per- 
cent of residents are African American and 30 percent 
are Hispanic, compared to 36 percent African American 
and nearly 20 percent Hispanic in the west. These dif- 
ferences reflect immigration patterns in the different 
neighborhoods: In the eastern section of the Northern 
Crescent, immigrants have overwhelmingly arrived from 
Latin America, while in the western section, immigrants’ 
countries of origins are Asian and African. 

Northern Crescent residents are younger than 
residents in the city overall and are more likely to be 
part of non-traditional households. Nearly 40 percent of 
residents in the Northern Crescent are under 18 years old 
compared to just over 25 percent in the Rochester MSA. 
(See Table 1) About 51 percent of the households in the 
Northern Crescent are headed by single parents, com- 
pared to just 10 percent in the MSA. 

Northern Crescent residents also earn well below 
what those in surrounding communities earn. The median 



household income was just $17,692, substantially lower 
than the $44,345 household income in the Rochester MSA. 

City-wide, from just 2000 to 2004, there has been an 
overall loss in jobs and establishments.^ This economic 
restructuring has disproportionately affected the manu- 
facturing industry, which had already experienced a steep 
decline in previous decades, from 38 percent of all jobs 
in 1970 to 18 percent in 2000. This 30-year time period 
also saw the share of Rochester’s service-sector jobs 
increase.® Kodak, once the city’s largest employer, has 
been supplanted by the University of Rochester, which 
directly employs more workers than Kodak and spends an 
estimated $145 million on local goods and services.® 

Greater insecurity in employment, low wages, 
and a skills mismatch were chief among the concerns 
reported by residents in the Northern Crescent as well 
as by employers. A recent report issued by the Work- 
force Investment Board and Rochester Works identifies 
key workforce trends as the high rates of underemploy- 
ment, the aging population, and a shortage of jobs for 
technically skilled workers.'® Overall, the area’s earnings 
are 27 percent below the state average, with profes- 
sional, scientific, and technical workers earning less than 
three-fourths of the state average in these occupations." 
Northern Crescent residents are particularly ill-equipped 
to meet the changing higher skill requirements, since 
almost 45 percent lack even a high school diploma. 

Nearly 55 percent of the case study area’s adult popu- 
lation participates in the workforce, though many residents 
are engaged in low-wage work. Some residents reported 
engaging in temporary or underground arrangements to 
make ends meet, despite the higher associated risks and 
unreliability of such jobs. Unemployment and the cyclical 
nature of temporary work have meant increased reliance on 
public and private sources of support. From 2004 to 2005, 
a community assessment report found an increased use of 
emergency shelters and emergency meal providers.’® 

The boulevards of Rochester’s neighborhoods at one 
time featured vibrant business districts with bakeries, 
restaurants, and local specialty shops. Today, many of 
Northern Crescent’s neighborhood businesses struggle 
to stay afloat, relying mostly on residents’ purchases. In 
fact, the city has designated the commercial districts in 
the Northern Crescent as “not currently viable.” Accord- 
ing to local business owners, lack of on-street parking, 
fear of crime in the area, and the low wealth of residents 
are among the chief challenges to attracting new invest- 
ment in these business districts.’® 



145 



ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 




ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 



In the Northern Crescent’s west section, Kodak and 
its subcontracting entities continue to provide lunch- 
time customers for local businesses and an incentive 
for large businesses to locate on the road leading to 
the suburbs. In 2006, however, that area lost one of its 
major grocery stores because of concerns about rising 
crime and declining profits. The east section had been 
without a grocery store for many years, until a grassroots 
campaign in the late 1990s was able to attract a major 
retail outlet to the area. Apart from this small suburban 
complex, the eastern business corridors are dominated 
by ethnic retail shops and corner stores. 

Residents also report that crime is a serious concern. 
Several pointed to a link between criminal activity and 
abandoned commercial and residential properties, some 
of which have been taken over by drug dealers for traffick- 
ing. The threat perceived by residents is serious: Violent 
crimes, while representing only 7 percent of the criminal 
activity in these neighborhoods, increased 18 percent 
from 2002 to 2006.” Community stakeholders reported 
that violence had diminished their engagement in the 
neighborhood, making them more reluctant to spend time 
on their porches and more concerned about traveling 
through the neighborhood to accomplish basic tasks. 

Health is worse for residents in the Northern Cres- 
cent neighborhoods than the city as a whole. Obesity, 
for example, is higher among city residents (25 percent) 
than their suburban counterparts (19 percent).'^ Health- 
care providers and parents working in crescent neigh- 
borhoods reported that their children were even more 
likely to be overweight, which they attributed to a lack 
of both physical activity and access to healthy foods.'® 
Asthma rates in these neighborhoods are also higher 
than in the city as a whole, a consequence perhaps 
of the case study area’s proximity to industrial areas 
and expressways. Finally, the age of the housing stock 
combined with a lack of investment contributes to higher 
lead poisoning among children in these areas. Nearly a 
third of children in these neighborhoods had elevated 
levels of lead in their bloodstreams.'^ Poor health not only 
affects children’s ability to learn, but also poses signifi- 
cant costs to the household. 

Education is also an issue for residents of the 
Northern Crescent, whose neighborhood schools have 
not performed well.'® In one elementary school, almost 
two-thirds of its third graders failed to meet the English 
language arts standard, while just 32 percent of students 
met the math learning standard.'® Students in the nearby 




Rochester’s Northern Crescent neighborhoods are dotted with 
vacant and abandoned homes, which can depress neighboring 
property values and attract unwelcome criminal activity. 



local high school also performed below test standards in 
the same year. Only 4 percent of students tested passed 
the Regents exam for mathematics. The primary reason 
cited for poor performance in schools is the high propor- 
tion of the city schools’ student body living in poverty.®® 
Keeping kids in school is another challenge. In one 
neighborhood elementary school, 17 percent of the stu- 
dent body had been suspended at one point during the 
2005-2006 academic year. The local high school reports 
an annual dropout rate of 25 percent.®' Historically, resi- 
dents of Rochester have been able to find a well-paying 
job in the factory; today’s graduates of area schools no 
longer have the same opportunities. 

Housing in the Northern Crescent neighborhoods 
is mostly rental and often temporary. The stock is more 
likely to be vacant, old, and in generally poor condition 
compared with the total stock available in the city.®® 
According to HUD, seven out of 10 low- and moderate- 
income households in these areas live in housing that has 
at least one of the following problems: lack of complete 
plumbing or kitchen facilities, overcrowding, or a cost 
burden greater than 30 percent of their monthly income.®® 
The decline in the city population reduced the 
demand for existing housing stock. As mentioned above, 
vacant and abandoned buildings are perceived as 
magnets for crime by residents and city officials.®'’ John, 
a former Kodak employee, attributed the two break- 
ins at his house over a six-month period to the lack 
of neighbors created by vacancies.®® Denise, a senior 
homeowner, expressed fear of empty houses next to 



146 




her property. “You don’t know when somebody is going 
to camp in there,” she lamented, “and do something or 
start a fire.”^*^ The city has acquired a significant amount 
of these properties for demolition.^^ 

Homeownership, long an avenue for wealth accumula- 
tion for families, is proving less viable for many Northern 
Crescent families. Low property values have reduced 
owners’ incentives to invest in upkeep and have prompted 
concerns about the value of their original investment.^® In 
2006, the average assessed value for residential proper- 
ties in the case study neighborhoods was below $33,432.^^ 
Across the MSA, about 14 percent of the total loan applica- 
tions were for home improvement and less than 1 percent 
of these loans were made in the Northern Crescent.®° Ray, 
a resident of the case study area’s west section, recently 
bought a house across the street from his mother’s for 
$11,000. He paid just $1,000 more than what his mother 
paid for her house in 1959. 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Interviews with Northern Crescent residents and 
community leaders raised three issues that are key to 
understanding the effects of poverty on residents in 
these once-vibrant neighborhoods of Rochester. They 
include managing and leveraging financial resources, 
high rates of mobility, and connecting institutions to 
communities and residents. 

Managing and Leveraging Financial Resources 

While Crescent neighborhood residents have 
access to banks and credit unions in addition to alterna- 
tive credit providers, physical proximity to mainstream 
financial institutions is not sufficient to engage residents. 
Instead, residents appear to make decisions about using 
specific financial services based on convenience, cost, 
and utility. In interviews. Northern Crescent residents 
revealed a variety of experiences with mainstream 
financial institutions, ranging from having a relationship 
with a bank, to having had a banking relationship at one 
time, to never having had a relationship with a bank. Also, 
the large proportion of residents with no credit scores 
evidences their lack of engagement in the financial 
mainstream.®’ As of 2004, almost two-thirds of credit files 
in the Northern Crescent neighborhoods had too little 
credit history to receive a credit score.®® 

The high value many residents place on flexibility 
combined with typically tight household budgets can 



lead to paying higher prices for goods and services. For 
example, Juanita, a young, single mother of three daugh- 
ters, uses a rent-to-own store to purchase household 
goods. By her calculation, the cost of renting a laundry 
unit ($15 per week over two years) seemed a better 
deal than the cost of using coin-operated Laundromats 
located in a neighborhood two bus rides away ($18 per 
week in addition to travel time).®® On a weekly basis this 
calculation presents a savings; however, the cost of 
renting a washer-dryer unit over two years ($1,560) when 
compared to its retail price ($899) suggests that she 
would be better off buying a unit.®'’ 

Since many residents seem to have an immediate 
need for cash, they often rely on certain forms of credit 
to meet that need. Refund anticipation loans (RALs), for 
example, are loans provided by commercial tax prepar- 
ers based on the refund expected. Not surprisingly, RALs 
are more likely to be used in Rochester’s areas of pov- 
erty. (See Figure 1) Anna, a Northern Crescent resident, 
reported that this type of loan offered a quick way to get 
her money despite its fee of approximately 6 percent of 
her return. Anna used the RAL this year “to catch up on 
some bills,” despite its costing her $242 to prepare and 
process the loan. Andy, a divorced father of two, used 
RALs two years in a row to pay past-due bills and to buy 
a car because he could not wait for the refund itself.®® 

A new market-led initiative under way at Progressive 
Federal Credit Union seeks to address credit problems 
for residents and provide affordable alternatives to high- 
priced loans. The CASH Coalition, a free Earned Income 
Tax Credit tax preparation campaign in Rochester, has 
engaged public and private institutions to help provide 
banking products to underserved clients at tax time and 
to encourage savings.®® 

High Rates of Mobility 

Residents and stakeholders interviewed for the case 
study reported that it was common for residents to move 
frequently.®’' According to the 2000 census, 54 percent of 
residents age five or older in the east section and 63 per- 
cent in the west section had moved in the past five years. 
Nearly half of those moving into these areas came from 
other areas of the county. However, these statistics do not 
fully capture the nature of mobility described in interviews. 

Student stability is measured by the Rochester City 
School District in an effort to monitor the transience of 
the student body. The student stability statistic measures 



147 



ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 



ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 



FIGURE 1 

Earned Income Tax Credit claims that include 
a Refund Anticipation Loan, by Zip code, 2004 




1=1 



0-15 percent 
16-30 percent 
31-45 percent 
46-60 percent 
Northern Crescent 



SOURCE: 2004 Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) data available at 
http://www.brookings.edu/metro/EITC/EITC-Data.aspx 



the number of the same students that remained in 
school for one academic year out of those that had 
enrolled by October.^® In the case study area, student 
stability rates range from a low of 86 percent in the east 
to a high of 97 percent in the west.^® Based on this statis- 
tic, over a five-year period, the east neighborhood school 
would experience a 70 percent change in its student 
body and the west school a 15 percent change if mobility 
remained constant. Reports from Head Start providers 
and health promoters working with families suggest that 
nearly half of their clients move quarterly. 

Residents noted that they often move to a house on 
the same street or in the same neighborhood.''° Some 
residents reported that financial constraints and the local 
support network of family encouraged them to stay in the 
neighborhood. Jennifer, for example, would incur addi- 
tional costs if she moved too far away from her mother, 
who provides day care to her daughters while she is at 



work."" Section 8 vouchers, designed primarily to increase 
access to units in the private market, are also designed 
to reduce the concentration of poor families in particu- 
lar neighborhoods and public housing projects. Voucher 
use in Rochester, however, suggests that given financial 
support to move, residents tend to remain within areas of 
concentrated poverty where rental units are more likely 
to be available."*^ Of the 17,573 tenants using Section 8 
vouchers, 60 percent live in the city of Rochester."*^ 

Moving can pose challenges in providing and receiv- 
ing services.'*'* One bank branch manager said that fol- 
lowing up and communicating with customers regarding 
their finances was difficult because of frequent changes 
in address. Moving can also have an impact on house- 
hold finances, with the loss of security deposits and the 
incurring of additional charges to set up new utilities. 

Connecting Institutions to Communities and Residents 

Community building has long been an important part 
of local philanthropy and activism, exemplified by resi- 
dents George Eastman and Frederick Douglass.'*^ Today, 
Rochester has a vibrant community development sector 
focused on realigning the physical infrastructure with the 
changing local economy.'*® The Rochester Community 
Development Collaborative joined with five foundations 
to provide technical assistance, operating support, and 
project funding for housing and economic development 
projects within the city of Rochester. Between August 
2000 and December 2004, $1.25 million was invested in 
city projects. 

According to an evaluation report conducted by the 
Enterprise Foundation on behalf of the Rochester Com- 
munity Development Collaborative in June 2005, orga- 
nizational capacity for addressing neighborhood issues 
has improved. The Rochester Development Housing 
Fund was established by the Enterprise Foundation to 
facilitate the use of the Asset Control Area Program 
of the Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
This fund seeks to buy vacant houses, renovate them, 
and resell them at affordable prices to low- and moder- 
ate-income households. The program has acquired and 
rehabilitated 267 homes, of which 202 were sold to first- 
time buyers.'**’ 

Despite evidence that community developers have 
an increasingly high level of capacity to put together 
successful deals, challenges in leadership succession 
and institutional cooperation remain. Right now, a highly 



148 




professional community development leadership exists, 
as well as an older grassroots leadership on the verge 
of retirement. While these practitioners address similar 
issues, they do so along parallel lines, collaborating occa- 
sionally and on an ad hoc basis. People- and place-based 
approaches to community development issues are also 
developed in isolation. Capacity at both traditional com- 
munity development corporations and poverty-alleviation 
organizations is highly developed, but requires coordina- 
tion and leadership to define a vision and direction for 
effective implementation and targeted improvements.'*® 

■ CONCLUSION 

Despite its challenges, these neighborhoods have 
important assets that contrast with traditional depictions 
of areas of concentrated poverty. First, there is strong 
neighborhood leadership that has developed with the 
support of city government and private organizations. The 
Neighbors Building Neighborhoods (NBN) initiative, which 
began in 1996, has been the main vehicle for encouraging 
strategic citizen participation in neighborhood revitaliza- 
tion. In recognition of the interdependent and interrelated 
nature of Rochester’s neighborhoods, NBN has worked 
with sectors, or groups of neighborhoods, to provide 
technical assistance in creating a community vision and 
work plan. In the process, informal social networks and 
neighborhood relationships have been leveraged to 
propose projects and seek funding from foundations and 
community development organizations. 

Second, the county has partnered with local commu- 
nity colleges and employers to provide relevant job train- 
ing and development in the region’s key growth industries. 
WIRED (Workforce Innovation in Regional Economic Devel- 
opment), the Finger Lakes regional workforce initiative, 
includes support for scholarships and apprenticeships to 
address shortages of skilled workers in these industries."*® 

Third, these Northern Crescent neighborhoods 
feature a number of notable assets that could serve as 
anchors for development, including the Public Market, 
several parks designed by Frederick Law Olmsted, and 
PAETAC Park soccer stadium.™ These neighborhoods 
also provide their residents with proximity to civic assets 
such as libraries, community services, healthcare facili- 
ties, businesses, and financial institutions. Leaders and 
residents alike are exploring the ways that each of these 
assets can be leveraged to promote greater vitality and 
well-being in these neighborhoods. 



One leader reported, however, that despite their best 
efforts as a community, they were “running to stand still.” 
Reaching beyond the crescent neighborhoods to the city 
and county may provide positive regional connections for 
promoting economic growth and opportunity. 

This case study was prepared by Alexandra Forter Sirota, 
community affairs analyst, and Yazmin Osaki, assistant 
economist, both formerly of the Federal Reserve Bank 
of New York. 



Endnotes 

1 The term “smugtown” comes from the social history of Rochester by 
G. Curtis Gerling, Smugtown USA (Webster, NY: Plaza Publishers, 1957). 

2 Blake McKeivey, Rochester: A Brief History (Lewiston, NY: The Edwin 
Mellen Press, 1984). Blake McKeivey, Rochester: An Emerging 
Metropolis, 1925-1961 (Rochester: Christopher Press, 1961). 

3 Blake McKeivey, “Economic Stages in the Growth of Rochester,” 
Rochester History 3(4) (October 1941): 1-2. 

'I Rolf Pendall, William W. Goldsmith, and Ann-Margaret Esnard, “Thinning 
Rochester: Yesterday’s Solutions, Today’s Urban Sprawl,” Lincoln Insti- 
tute of Land Policy Conference Paper, Product Code: CP00A08, 2000. 

5 Raymond V. Bowers, “Ecological Patterning of Rochester, New 
York,” American Sociological Review 4(2) (April 1939): 180-89. 

6 Interface Studios LLC, Rochester Housing Market Study, 2007, 29-30. 

r According to the U.S. Census Bureau’s Zip Business Pattern Data, 
Rochester’s core lost 93 establishments, a 1.5 percent decline, 
while the entire metro area gained 842 establishments, an 
increase of 5.2 percent, from 2000 to 2004. 

8 According to the 2000 census, the occupations of the employed 
population were roughly split between sales and office occupa- 
tions (13.4 percent) and service occupations (11.9 percent). 

9 Matthew Daneman, “UR Packs a Punch for Area Economy,” Demo- 
crat and Chronicle, June 6, 2007. 

10 Rochester Works, “Preparing a Workforce for the New Economy: 
2004 State of the Workforce Report,” 9. 

11 Rochester Works, 2004, 13. 

12 Action for a Better Community, “Community Assesment 2007.” 
Internal document provided to case study authors by Planning & 
Evaluation Department, Action for a Better Community. 

13 S. Lee, “Neighborhood Commercial Development: Commercial 
District Revitalization Initiatives, Fiscal Year 2004-2005,” City of 
Rochester Neighborhood Commercial Development Team, June 
2005. Interviews with city of Rochester Economic Development 
Department and business owners on Lake and Hudson avenues. 

14 The Federal Bureau of Investigation’s Uniform Crime Reporting 
Program defines property crimes as larceny, theft, burglary, and 
arson. Data on violent crimes for 2002 and 2006 provided by the 
Rochester City Police Department. 



149 



ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 



ROCHESTER, NEW YORK 



15 Monroe County Department of Health, Finger Lakes Health Sys- 
tems Agency, September 2002, 2. 

16 Interviews with community stakeholders. 

17 Monroe County Department of Health, May 2002. 

18 Paytner v. New York, 2003. New York Court of Appeals. Detailed 
information about this litigation available at http://www.nsba.org/ 
site/doc_cosa.asp?TRACKID=&DID=31709&CID=164 (accessed Sep- 
tember 27, 2007). 

19 New York State Department of Education, School Report Card for 
School #6, 2005-2006. See https://www.nystart.gov/publicweb/; 
last accessed September 27, 2007. “Meeting learning standards" is 
defined as the student understanding the content of the subject at 
that grade level. 

20 Paytner v. New York, 2003. New York Court of Appeals. 

21 New York State Department of Education, School Report Card for 
Dr. Freddie Thomas High School, 2005-2006. See https://www. 
nystart.gov/publicweb/ (accessed September 27, 2007). 

22 Block conditions for Edgerton and Brown Square from Bob Breglio, 
“Analysis of Housing Condition and Other Factors in Sector 3 of 
Rochester, NY,” Neighborhood Preservation Coalition of New York 
State, Inc. Block conditions for Marketview Heights from Commu- 
nity Planning Collaborative, “Marketview Heights Neighborhood 
Revitalization Strategy: Making Change Happen.” 

23 Department of Housing and Urban Development, Consolidated 
Housing Authority Strategy. 66.8 percent of households earning 80 
percent or less than the median household income had at least 
one problem with a house in Upper Falls and Marketview Heights, 
while 63.02 percent of households earning 80 percent or less than 
the median household income had at least one problem with a 
house in Edgerton and Brown Square (CHAS 2006). Cost burden is 
defined by a household spending 30 percent or more of its monthly 
income on housing costs, which include utility payments (HMDA). 

24 Vacant buildings represent 21 percent and 18 percent of the hous- 
ing stock in the east and west areas, respectively. 

25 “I have no neighbors.. ..I’ve got houses on either side of me [but] 
the one house is empty.” Interview with John, March 21, 2007. Simi- 
lar stories were shared by other residents. 

26 Interview with resident (Denise), March 8, 2007. 

27 Tony Favro, May 7, 2006. U.S. cities use demolition as a planning 
tool, but results are often problematic. Available at http://www. 
citymayors.com/development/demolition_usa.html. 

28 One homeowner and social-service professional in the Upper Falls 
neighborhood said that he would not invest in his house because 
it had depreciated in value so much that it was not worth half of 
what his family paid for it in the 1950s. 

29 Interface Studio LLC, 2007, Rochester Housing Market Study. 

30 Home Mortgage Disclosure Act data (2005). Number of home 
loan applications by loan purpose. Home mortgage lending 
by demographic group was analyzed in Barbara Van Kerkhove, 
“There’s No Place Like Home: Access to Home Mortgages in the 
Rochester Area in 2004” (Rochester, NY: Empire Justice Center, 
January 2006) and Barbara Van Kerkhove, “The Homeowners 
Insurance Gap: How Race and Neighborhood Composition Explain 



Cost and Access Disparities in Rochester and Monroe County, NY” 
(Rochester, NY: Empire Justice Center, May 2005). 

31 Data on credit scores provided by the Federal Reserve Board, 
based on a 10 percent sample drawn in December 2004 from a 
major credit bureau. 

32 In the east section of the Northern Crescent, 63 percent of the credit 
files are “thin,” while in the west section, 66 percent are “thin” files. 

33 Interview with Mary (resident), February 27, 2007. 

34 The retail price of the washer/dryer unit was taken from the 
Sears catalog. 

35 Interview with Andy Pearl, March 21, 2007. 

36 Progressive Federal Credit Union and M&T Bank have developed a 
curriculum to provide credit counseling and to introduce under- 
served clients to appropriate banking products. 

37 Interviews with community stakeholders. 

38 Student stability rates are defined as the number of students 
attending the same school all year divided by the total enroll- 
ment at the end of October, according to the Basic Educational 
Data System. 

39 Rochester School District Mobility and Stability Data provided by 
Jana Carlisle and cross-referenced with New York State Depart- 
ment of Education, School Report Cards, 2005-2006. 

40 Interview with Zakia and Mary (residents). Interview with Jennifer 
Hudson, March 8, 2007. 

41 Interview with Jennifer Hudson, March 8, 2007. 

42 Interview with Rochester Housing Authority. 

43 Vicki Brown, Rochester Housing Authority: Tenant Profile, Center 
for Governmental Research, May 2007. 

44 Comments shared during brainstorming session on mobility with 
Rochester Advisory Group, March 2007. 

45 Eugene E. DuBois, “The City of Frederick Douglass: Rochester’s 
African-American People and Places” (Rochester, NY: Landmark 
Society of Western New York, 1994). Blake McKelvey, “A History of 
Social Welfare in Rochester,” Rochester History 20(4) (October 
1958): 1-28. 

46 Interviews with community stakeholders. Review of United Way 
funding priorities for Rochester organizations and Rochester Area 
Community Foundation funding. 

47 Jennifer Blake, “Innovations in Community Development: Roches- 
ter Housing Development Fund Corporation: Renovating Houses 
and Rebuilding Lives” (Columbia, MD: Enterprise Community Part- 
ners, Inc., 2006). 

48 Rochester Advisory Group Meetings, March 21, 2007, May 15, 2007, 
and August 21, 2007. 

49 For more information, see http://www.fingerlakeswired.com. 

50 PAETEC Park is a soccer-specific stadium in Rochester, New York, for 
the Rochester Raging Rhinos soccer team of the USL First Division. 



150 







Holmes County, Mississippi 



■ OVERVIEW 



The sprawling Mississippi Delta is a place defined by its contrasts— literary 
giants and uneducated masses, abundant land and a meager economy, 
and, in particular, immense wealth and extreme poverty. Kenneth Dean, 
executive director of the Mississippi Council on Human Relations, described 
a typical poor Delta family of the 1960s as being “actually too poor to 



participate in a poverty program.” These families were 
characteristically large, female-headed households that 
struggled to get by, often on subsistence diets and 
in homes lacking insulation, refrigeration, and indoor 
plumbing.' This was life in the Delta. 

These days, life in this region is not much different. 
Holmes County, Mississippi, situated in the center of the 
state and in the midst of the Delta, is the specific area 
that was researched for this case study report. With 
a 2000 poverty rate of more than 41 percent. Holmes 
County is both geographically and economically iso- 
lated.^ In some ways, time there has stood still. Beverly 
Brown of the Holmes County Health Department relayed 



the story of a 23-year-old woman with three children who 
lives in a trailer with no running water or refrigerator, yet 
pays rent that is 45 percent of her monthly income. Local 
business owner Zelpha Whatley, who departed Holmes 
County for Illinois in 1968, noted, “When I left, the court- 
house clock wasn’t working, and when I came back 30 
years later, it still wasn’t working.” 

■ BACKGROUND 

Historically, the Mississippi Delta was a source of agri- 
cultural bounty. Spanning seven states, the lower Delta 
contains a broad, nutrient-rich alluvial plain situated 
between the Mississippi and Yazoo Rivers in the state of 



151 



HOLMES COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Holmes County 



Mississippi non-metro 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


62.2 


NA 




Poverty rate 2000*’ 


41.1 


22.8 


Income 


Median household income'’ 


$17,235 


$27,921 


Demographics 


Population 2000'* 


21,609 


1,628,497 




% Population change, 1970 - 2000'’ 


-6.5 


14.1 




Racial/ethnic composition, 2000* 




% White 


20.2 


58.2 




% Hispanic/Latino 


0.7 


1.3 




% Black/African-American 


78.2 


39.1 




% Residents under age 189 


32.1 


27.3 




% Single-parent households*’ 


28.6 


12.5 




% Foreign born, 2000' 


0.3 


1.1 




% Population in same house as five years ago' 


68.9 


21.7 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000*' 


40.3 


31.5 




% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


11.2 


14.2 




% Students proficient in reading, 2005"' 


60.9 


74.5 




% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


55.8 


74.4 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000'’ 


17.3 


8.1 




% Adults in the labor forceP 


49.0 


56.4 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


73.3 


73.4 




% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


41.6 


40.7 




Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$44,900 


$61,196 




Median year structure built' 


1974 


1977 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


22.0 


26.3 




% Credit files with high credit scores" 


33.9 


41.0 




% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


41.3 


40.6 




Mortgage denial rate, 2005* 


35.2 


26.6 



Mississippi. For generations Deltans experienced life in 
“a cotton-intoxicated area” where “cotton-growing was 
a secular religion.”^ Rupert Vance described the Delta 
of the 1930s as “the cotton-obsessed, Negro-obsessed 
Delta, the deepest South.”"* The Delta’s plantation-based 
economy led Vance to observe that “nowhere are 
antebellum conditions so nearly preserved than in the 
Yazoo Delta.”^ 

Two social scientists who studied and recorded life in 
the Delta of the 1930s observed that the anachronistic, 
contradictory, and complex social system there was linked 
inextricably to the Delta’s plantation-based economy. 
John Dollard and Hortense Powdermaker documented 



numerous examples of the economic advantages offered 
whites by the existing caste system.** Share-cropping, for 
instance, was the preferred arrangement that supplied 
white land owners with black farm laborers in exchange 
for a share of the crop. Yet one black woman in her fif- 
ties told Powdermaker that in 36 years of farming, she 
and her husband had only cleared money six times. 

Many planters ran commissaries for their workers and 
advanced groceries and needed supplies to them, often 
at an interest rate of 20 to 25 percent. White planters 
rationalized this practice by asserting that the only hope 
of getting blacks to work was to keep them in debt or at 
a subsistence level. Wrote Powdermaker, “[The] rules on 



152 





which the sharecropping system was based were broken 
more often than followed.”^ 

However, as Delta planters increasingly utilized 
mechanization and federal farm programs, the need 
for cheap farm labor diminished. The Delta’s rural farm 
population decreased by 54 percent between 1950 
and 1960.® While cotton continued to reign, the Delta’s 
plantation-based economy changed. 

In 1990, journalist Rheta Grimsiey Johnson described 
the Delta as “the only place left in America with bona 
fide shacks and mansions side by side with not enough 
middle class to blunt the disparity.” Efforts to cultivate 
industry and local businesses met with little success, 
with one local leader observing that “people on Wall 
Street see more attractive investments in Venezuela than 
in the Mississippi Delta.”® Today, the Delta struggles to 
find its place in the modern economy. 

Like other Delta communities. Holmes County has 
followed a path of economic decline. Agriculture was 
predominant until about 30 years ago, and despite the 
presence of several major employers in Holmes County, 
including University Hospital & Clinics, several mobile 
home and modular housing manufacturers, as well as 
suppliers to the automotive industry, the county has lost 
many jobs over the past few decades— and continues 
to do so. For example, manufacturing employment in 
Holmes County fell from 1,021 in 1980 to 624 in 2004.'° 



Overall, private nonfarm employment in Holmes County 
decreased by 14 percent from 2000 to 2005, according 
to the Delta Council’s 2006 Economic Progress Report." 

Unemployment and household income figures in the 
county reflect this trend. Unemployment in 2000 stood 
at 17 percent, and in one area of the county this rate 
approached 31 percent. In comparison, peer counties 
in Mississippi had a 14 percent unemployment rate. The 
median family income in Holmes County in 2000 was 
$21,757— the lowest of the state’s 18 Delta counties. By 
2004, this figure had improved to $27,304, but this only 
bumped Holmes to second-lowest in this ranking.'® 
Holmes County is thus one of the poorest counties in 
one of the poorest regions in the United States. 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Holmes County’s leaders and residents noted three dom- 
inant issues that are key to understanding the concentra- 
tion of poverty in the area. First is the dual problem of 
lack of jobs and lack of skilled workers, which in tandem 
contributes to a stagnant local economy. Second, the his- 
torical legacy of the Delta has created a weak foundation 
upon which to build a modern economy. Third, leadership 
at all levels is inadequate for addressing the most press- 
ing issues that face the community and its residents. 
Finally, a myriad of other challenges— including a two- 
tiered educational system, inadequate housing, and poor 
health— serve as additional barriers to residents of this 
impoverished area improving their lives. 

Lack of Jobs and Skilled Workers 

In interviews many local residents noted the eco- 
nomic growth taking place in other areas of the Delta, 
including the Nissan manufacturing plant in nearby 
Canton. Holmes County, on the other hand, has not been 
able to capitalize on such opportunities; in fact, while 
some Holmes County residents have been able to find 
work at the Nissan plant in Canton, most of the plant’s 
management and many of its workers are from outside 
the region. Many who applied were not even able to get 
into the training program offered by the plant.'® Commu- 
nity advocates also noted that only one Nissan supplier 
has located in Holmes County.'"’ Several community lead- 
ers noted that the county is well-positioned geographi- 
cally to take advantage of the growth of the Jackson 
metro area to the south, with its location along Interstate 
55. But to do so, said one, “The county must change its 



153 



HOLMES COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI 




HOLMES COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI 



image and the perception of it to take advantage of this 
window of opportunity, or the growth [will] bypass it.”'^ 

More troubling for community leaders is the county’s 
lack of a comprehensive economic development plan. 
They point to an industrial park created more than eight 
years ago without an accompanying specific strategy 
to attract businesses there; the park, at present, sits 
empty.'*^ Many noted the need for greater collabora- 
tion. Said one, “[We] can’t get enough people to work 
together to create jobs.”'^ 

In addition, skills have not been adequately devel- 
oped in the local workforce. One well-respected com- 
munity leader said that young people reach the age of 
21 without ever having really worked and lacking the 
skills necessary to sustain themselves, which makes it 
hard for the county to attract industry.'® Dr. Martha Davis 
of the Mallory Health Clinic echoes this sentiment. She 
has seen people who come to the clinic looking for work 
not knowing what job they want or what skills they have 
to offer. While technical training programs are offered 
at Holmes Community College for fields such as weld- 
ing and licensed practical nursing, those students who 
are able to take advantage of these programs struggle; 
typically, only about half of those who start such pro- 
grams complete them.'® Those who do complete training 
programs may have trouble getting connected to a job, 
perhaps due in part, noted several leaders, to the focus 
of some training programs on the number of people 
completing training, rather than on job placement.®® 

Minimum-wage jobs, then, are the norm in Holmes 
County. Many residents catch the “poultry bus” to chicken 
processing plants in Morton and Carthage, MS for night- 
shift jobs that pay on average $7 to $8 per hour.®' eth- 
ers simply don’t enter the workforce. “We’ve had 2 or 3 
generations born into this situation where neither parent 
had a job,” said one community advocate. “The social 
net of the 1960s and 1970s created a lack of respect for 
working and earning what you need.”®® Cne local resident 
observed, “It’s a cycle. If your parents are just sitting 
around watching soap operas, then that’s all you know.”®® 

The Historical Legacy of a Two-Tiered Economy 

The historical legacy of the Delta’s extremes, which 
still echoes today in Holmes County, provides a poor 
foundation on which to build a modern economy. In 1949, 
political scientist V.C. Key observed that “in the agrarian 
economy of the Mississippi sort, no great middle class— 



not even an agrarian middle class— dulls the abrupt- 
ness of the line between lord and serf.”®'* Not much has 
changed in the 2P* century. Consider a recent Washing- 
ton Post article that reported that the nation’s current 
farm policy has “helped preserve a two-tiered economy 
and a widening chasm between the races, according to 
local residents, government officials and researchers.”®® 

Federal farm policy often rewards land owners with 
bigger farms, and these land owners tend to be white. Cf 
the $1.2 billion the federal government spent on agricultural 
subsidies from 2001 to 2005, only 5 percent went to black 
farmers and 95 percent went to large, commercial farms 
that are overwhelmingly owned by white farmers.®® The 
contrast is also great between funds that the Agriculture 
Department awards for subsidies in the Delta versus funds 
that are allocated to rural development programs for hous- 
ing, business development, and infrastructure. From 2001 to 
2005, approximately $1.18 billion went to farm subsidies in 
the Delta, while just $54.8 million went to rural development 
programs in Delta communities.®^ 

Even the new industries that are slowly replacing 
agriculture contribute to a two-tiered wage structure. The 
catfish industry, for instance, provided many jobs in the 
1990s; however, wages were so low that even full-time 
employment did not raise workers above the poverty line. 
One large Delta catfish plant paid an average wage in 
1990 that was more than $4,400 below the poverty-level 
income for a single parent with three children, though 
its personnel department did help employees apply for 
public assistance.®® 

This two-tiered economy lacks a viable middle class, 
hindering cooperative efforts and the growth of com- 
munity institutions that could aid progress. The planter 
economy that dominated the Delta’s social and economic 
landscape for much of the past 100 years did not have a 
need for a middle class; not surprisingly, one has never 
thrived there.®® Because of that lack of a middle class in 
Holmes County, many community leaders see “too great of 
a divide” between whites and blacks.®® This divide perpetu- 
ates the community’s “plantation mentality,” where power 
continues to rest in the hands of a few, creating a culture 
of dependence for the rest.®' At least one community 
stakeholder feels that race relations have improved some- 
what. “I’ve seen where we’ve come from and we’re better,” 
he said, though “we’re still not where we need to be.”®® 

A recurring theme in Holmes County is that this 
two-tiered economy is mirrored in social structures and 
organizations, forestalling the development of trust that 



154 




The Mississippi Delta has been described as a land of great 
contrasts, among them the significant wealth of some resi- 
dents and extreme poverty of others. 



is needed in order for residents to coordinate and coop- 
erate. “People live this way because they are used to it,” 
said one community advocate, “and there is not a vision 
of a different way.”^^ Many local residents and commu- 
nity leaders noted that there were few organizations or 
vehicles for bringing the entire community together and 
even fewer opportunities for young people.^'’ “We must 
come together for the development of the community,” 
explained Robert Clark, “but to do that we must be 
shown a different way of working together.”^^ 

Leadership, Organizational Capacity, and Trust 

The two-tiered structure that permeates the area 
and creates a climate of distrust also deters leaders and 
organizations from fostering cooperation and address- 
ing key issues. Local residents and leaders talked about 
the lack of collaboration in the county. One echoed many 
others in citing a lack of collaboration among the coun- 
ty’s seven municipalities, with each town “doing its own 
thing.”^® A few social services providers talked about the 
need for better coordination or even a one-stop center 
for services for low-income residents.^^ 

Disparities in funding contribute to the climate of 
distrust. Many community leaders expressed that Holmes 
County does not get its fair share of available state 
funding. “With Holmes County being at the bottom, you 
would think money and programs would be coming in,” 
commented Calvin Head of the West Holmes Community 
Development Corporation, “but it seems that Holmes has 



been forgotten.”^® According to several local leaders, 
state funding for programs in Holmes County was not 
enough to meet the county’s needs.®® One said that the 
state paid lip service to the Delta but “their attention is 
on the coast.”''® According to one regional leader. Holmes 
County was part of an Empowerment Zone in the Delta, 
comprising a larger part of the zone geographically but 
receiving less of the actual funding.'" Two leaders of 
state agencies offered a different perspective, point- 
ing out that state funding has been directed to Holmes 
County projects, but that capacity of organizations there 
has not been sufficiently developed.''® 

Another issue is the lack of expertise among— and a 
general shortage of— local organizations. Cne nonprofit 
leader acknowledged that “Holmes could get more, but 
people don’t want to put forth the effort. And with limited 
staff and all you have to do, it’s hard.”''® Local organiza- 
tions may not be fully aware of funding and assistance 
programs that are available. In addition, many programs 
now have greater paperwork requirements, and some 
organizations either lack the expertise to fill out the 
paperwork or else see more costs than benefits in com- 
pleting the necessary forms and documents.'''' And the 
county simply lacks nonprofits, a deficiency pointed out 
by several representatives of state agencies and inter- 
mediaries who were interviewed for this report.''® 

The lack of planning and vision for the commu- 
nity has a significant impact on the capacity levels and 
outlook of residents. One local leader observed, “The 
resources are out there but we are not ready. We have 
not come together to say what we want and to come up 
with a plan.”''® Other community leaders talked about the 
tendency in the county to discuss problems but not to 
develop solutions,''^ while several business and govern- 
ment leaders noted the desire to maintain the status 
quo.''® Several residents pointed to the complete change 
in elected leadership racially from 30 or 40 years ago 
alongside the county’s overall lack of progress.''® One local 
resident talked about becoming dispirited, explaining that 
she and others “would participate in stuff then nothing 
comes of it. It turns me off.” Still another resident said the 
“apathy here is overwhelming.”®® 

Education, Housing, and Health 

Struggling local school systems and low levels of 
educational attainment also pose challenges for eco- 
nomic development in Holmes. Holmes County schools 



155 



HOLMES COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI 





HOLMES COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI 



were under state control for a year after failing to meet 
44 accreditation standards. According to the 2001 
State Report Card for Holmes County Schools, students 
lagged behind the state standards for reading and math 
proficiency and exceeded the state average high school 
dropout rate.^' Many community leaders pointed out the 
continued racial duality in educating the county’s youth, 
with a public school system that is 100 percent African 
American and a local private school that is predomi- 
nantly white.^^ Of Holmes County’s population age 25 and 
older just 60 percent has earned a high school diploma, 
and only 11 percent a bachelor’s degree.^^ 

Inadequate housing conditions also pose a chal- 
lenge for Holmes County. Holmes County has a higher 
percentage of low-income homeowners who live in 
a home with a major issue, such as lack of complete 
plumbing facilities, than peer Mississippi counties.®'' Many 
community leaders spoke of residents without running 
water or electricity.®® A regional housing official noted 
that approximately half of the owner-occupied units in 
the county are in poor condition, yet there is really no 
one addressing the housing quality needs.®® In addition, 
several social services providers noted that many resi- 
dents are burdened by the cost of shelter, and that large 
numbers of local residents live with parents or other rela- 
tives “because they can’t afford their own housing or it’s 
not available In their price range.’’®^ 

In addition, health conditions are grim in Mississippi in 
general, and in the Delta and Holmes County in particular. 
The State of Mississippi sees high infant mortality rates 
and has the highest obesity rate in the country.®® In the 
Delta, the incidence of chronic conditions such as heart 
disease and high blood pressure exceeds the national 
average. Holmes County is among the top 10 counties in 
Mississippi for stroke mortality rates®® and also has one of 
the highest teen pregnancy rates in the state.®® 

In Holmes County, some comprehensive efforts are 
under way to change conditions and improve lives. One 
such effort is spearheaded by the West Holmes Commu- 
nity Development Corporation (CDC), which just com- 
pleted the second year of a broad, integrative program 
to address the challenges of sustainable agriculture, 
youth employment and skills development, and health 
and nutrition concerns for the elderly. First, the CDC got 
several local farmers to agree to set aside some acreage 
for the production of fresh produce. Local youth working 
in a CDC program were then trained to cultivate and reap 
the produce, tasks for which they earned a stipend. The 



CDC arranged for this harvested produce to be eligible 
for the Women, Infants and Children (WIC) vouchers used 
by seniors and low-income residents. A produce market 
set up in front of the local WIC warehouse made access 
to this fresh produce easier for WIC recipients, and also 
afforded the youth Involved in the program to sell the 
produce directly to the public.®' 

■ CONCLUSION 

The Mississippi Delta is indeed a land of contrasts. A 
1990 report by the Lower Mississippi Delta Development 
Commission described the region as a place where “jobs 
are scarce and job skills training almost unknown; where 
infant mortality rates rival those in the Third World; where 
dropping out of school and teenage pregnancy are 
commonplace; where capital for small farmers and small 
businesses is severely limited; where good housing and 
health care are unattainable for many;.. .[and] where illit- 
eracy reigns as a supreme piece of irony: the region has 
produced some of the best writers and the worst readers 
in America.’’®^ 

But change is afoot. One regional effort to promote 
change and growth in the Delta is the Special Task Force 
for the Revitalization of the Delta Region, created by the 
Mississippi legislature in 2006. According to the task 
force’s report, “Mississippi Delta at the Crossroads,” up 
to that time there had been “no long range, state-held 
vision or plan In place to change the Delta.”®® The task 
force is working on initiatives that will impact the entire 
region, including improving housing, creating an eco- 
nomic incentive zone, improving education and daycare, 
developing a cultural tourism initiative, marketing the 
region, creating health insurance plans for children 
focusing on preventive care, and developing a teen preg- 
nancy prevention and parental development initiative.®'' 
The task force will also catalog and coordinate current 
programs in the Delta, with the goal of increasing sup- 
port for work under way as well as for new initiatives. 

While the issues facing residents of Holmes County 
may seem Insurmountable, community leaders are 
optimistic and view the people and natural assets of 
the county as building blocks for a viable community.®® 
“Our greatest strength is our people,” noted Mallory 
Community Health Center’s Dr. Martha Davis. “We could 
do anything we want to do if we could come together 
as one.”®® By addressing its most pressing issues, the 
leaders of Holmes County can position the area to take 



156 



advantage of growth to the south and bring opportunity 
to its residents. 

This case study was prepared by Ellen Eubank, com- 
munity affairs manager, formerly of the Federal Reserve 
Bank of St. Louis. 



Endnotes 

1 James C. Cobb, The Most Southern Place on Earth: The Mississippi 
Delta and the Roots of Regional Identity (New York; Oxford Univer- 
sity Press, 1994), 264. 

2 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

3 David L. Cohen, “Drunk on Cotton,” in David L. Cohen, unpublished 
biography, John D. Williams Library. 

4 Rupert B. Vance, Human Geography of the South (New York, 1935), 
266, 270, as cited in Cobb, The Most Southern Place on Earth. 

5 Ibid. 

6 John Dollard, Caste and Class in a Southern Town, 2nd ed. (New 
York: Harper Bros., 1949), 110-11. Hortense Powdermaker, After Free- 
dom: A Cultural Study in the Deep South (New York: Viking Press, 
1968), 91, 94. 

7 Hortense Powdermaker, Stranger and Friend: The Woys of an 
Anthropologist (New York: W. W. Norton & Company, 1966), 184. 

8 Richard H. Day, “The Economics of Technological Change and the 
Demise of the Sharecropper,” American Economic Review 57(3) 
(June 1967): 427-49. 

9 Cobb, The Most Southern Place on Earth. 

10 Mississippi Department of Employment Security. Available at http:// 
www.mdes.ms.gov/wps/. 

11 Ibid. 

12 Delta Council, “Delta Council Economic Progress Report” (2006). 

13 Dr. Martha Davis, Mallory Community Health Center. Personal inter- 
view in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

14 Dr. Martha Davis, Mallory Community Health Center. Personal 
interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. Sara McLellan, Holmes 
Community College. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 
11, 2007. Zelpha Whatley, Business owner. Personal interview in 
Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

15 Dr. Glenn Boyce. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 12, 2007. 

16 Darrell Williams, BankPius. Personal interview in Holmes County, 
March 22, 2007. Helen Johnson, Citizens for Public Education. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, May 17, 2007. Mary Ellen Pratt, 
University Hospital & Clinics-Holmes County. Personal interview in 
Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

17 Ann Brown, Community Cultural Resource Center. Personal inter- 
view in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. Calvin Head, West Holmes 



Community Development Corporation. Personal interview in 
Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

18 Robert Clark. Personal interview. Holmes County, March 20, 2007. 

19 Sara McLellan, Holmes Community College. Personal interview in 
Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

20 Judge Nelson, Holmes County Schools (retired). Personal interview 
in Holmes County, March 22, 2007. 

21 Janet Land, Central Mississippi, Inc. Personal interview, March 
23, 2007. Henry Luckett, Director, Holmes County Department 
of Human Services. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 
12, 2007. 

22 Mary Ellen Pratt, University Hospital & Clinics-Holmes County. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. Dr. Martha Davis, 
Mallory Community Health Center. Personal interview in Holmes 
County, April 11, 2007. Ann Brown, Community Cultural Resource 
Center. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

23 LaShunkeita Noel. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 12, 2007. 

24 V. O. Key Jr., Southern Politics in State and Nation (New York: 

Knopf, 1949). 

25 Gilbert M. Gaul and Dan Morgan, “A Slow Demise in the Delta: U.S. 
Farm Subsidies Favor Big Over Small, White Over Black,” Washing- 
ton Post, June 20, 2007. 

26 Ibid. 

27 Ibid. 

28 Peter T. Kilborn, “Charges of Exploitation Roil a Catfish Plant,” The 
New York Times, December 10, 1990. 

29 Dr. Luther Brown, Director, Delta Center for Culture and Learning, 
Delta State University. Personal interview. May 16, 2007. 

30 Dorothy Jean Ford-Smith, Chancery Clerk for Holmes County. Per- 
sonal interview in Holmes County, March 23, 2007. 

31 Dorothy Jean Ford-Smith, Chancery Clerk for Holmes County. Per- 
sonal interview in Holmes County, March 23, 2007. Zelpha Whatley, 
Business owner. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 

2007. Mary Ellen Pratt, University Hospital & Clinics-Holmes County. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. Dorothy Tate. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

32 Jimmy Brooks, Hunter Engineering. Personal interview in 
Holmes County. 

33 Janet Land, Central Mississippi, Inc. Personal interview, March 
23, 2007. Zelpha Whatley, Business owner. Personal interview in 
Holmes County, April 11, 2007. Dorothy Tate. Personal interview in 
Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

34 Mary Ellen Pratt, University Hospital & Clinics-Holmes County. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. Ann Brown, 
Community Cultural Resource Center. Personal interview in Holmes 
County, April 11, 2007. Dorothy Jean Ford-Smith, Chancery Clerk for 
Holmes County. Personal interview in Holmes County, March 23, 
2007. Willie March, Sheriff, Holmes County. Personal interview in 
Holmes County. 

35 Robert Clark. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 



157 



HOLMES COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI 



HOLMES COUNTY, MISSISSIPPI 



36 Mary Ellen Pratt, University Hospital & Clinics-Holmes County. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. Dr. Martha Davis, 
Mallory Community Health Center. Personal interview in Holmes 
County, April 11, 2007. Darrell Williams, BankPlus. Personal interview 
in Holmes County, March 22, 2007. Robert Clark. Personal interview. 
Holmes County, March 20, 2007. 

37 Janet Land, Central Mississippi, Inc. Personal interview, March 23, 
2007. Henry Luckett, Director, Holmes County Department of Human 
Services. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 12, 2007. 

38 Calvin Head, West Holmes Community Development Corporation. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

39 Norman Cobbins. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 12, 2007. 
Dorothy Tate. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

40 Darrell Williams, BankPlus. Personal interview in Holmes County, 
March 22, 2007. 

41 Robert Gates. Personal interview. Holmes County, March 20, 2007 

42 Ben Mokry. Personal interview in Holmes County, February 6, 2007. 
David Jackson. Personal interview in Holmes County, February 7 2007. 

43 Calvin Head, West Holmes Community Development Corporation. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

44 Dorothy Jean Ford-Smith, Chancery Clerk for Holmes County. Per- 
sonal interview in Holmes County, March 23, 2007. 

45 Ben Mokry. Personal interview in Holmes County, February 6, 2007. 
David Jackson. Personal interview in Holmes County, February 7 2007. 
Ed Sivak. Personal interview in Holmes County, February 7, 2007. 

46 Zelpha Whatley, Business owner. Personal interview in Holmes 
County, April 11, 2007. 

47 Rose Washington. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 
2007. Dorothy Jean Ford-Smith, Chancery Clerk for Holmes County. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, March 23, 2007. Mary Ellen 
Pratt, University Hospital & Clinics-Holmes County. Personal inter- 
view in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. Dr. Glenn Boyce. Personal 
interview in Holmes County, April 12, 2007 

48 Dorothy Jean Ford-Smith, Chancery Clerk for Holmes County. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, March 23, 2007. Dr. Martha 
Davis, Mallory Community Health Center; Sara McLellan, Holmes 
Community College. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 
11, 2007 Zelpha Whatley, Business owner. Personal interview in 
Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

49 Dorothy Jean Ford-Smith, Chancery Clerk for Holmes County. Per- 
sonal interview in Holmes County, March 23, 2007. Zelpha Whatley, 
Business owner. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

50 Yolanda Rowe. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 
Dorothy Tate. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

51 Mississippi Department of Education. Available at 
http://www.mde.k12.ms.us. 

52 Ibid. 

53 u.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

54 Ibid. 



55 Dorothy Jean Ford-Smith, Chancery Clerk for Holmes County. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, March 23, 2007. Janet Land, 
Central Mississippi, Inc. Personal interview, March 23, 2007 Beverly 
Brown, Holmes County Health Department. Personal interview in 
Holmes County. 

56 Helen Terry, USDA Rural Development. Personal interview in 
Holmes County, March 8, 2007. 

57 Janet Land, Central Mississippi, Inc. Personal interview, March 23, 
2007. Beverly Brown, Holmes County Health Department. Personal 
interview in Holmes County. Dr. Martha Davis, Mallory Community 
Health Center. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 
Henry Luckett, Director, Holmes County Department of Human Ser- 
vices. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 12, 2007 

58 Trust for America's Health. Available at http://www.healthyamericans. 
org/state/index.php?StatelD=MS 

59 Mississippi Department of Health. Available at http://www.msdh. 
state.ms.us/ 

60 Ibid. 

61 Calvin Head, West Holmes Community Development Corporation. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

62 Joyce E. Alien-Smith et al., “America’s Forgotten People and 
Places: Ending the Legacy of Poverty in the Rural South,’’ Journal 
of Agricultural and Applied Economics 32(2) (2000): 322. 

63 Mississippi Delta at the Crossroads, Special Task Force for the 
Revitalization of the Delta Region, 2007 Available at http://www.ihl. 
state.ms.us/drtf/. 

64 Ibid. 

65 Janet Land, Central Mississippi, Inc. Personal interview, March 23, 
2007. Dorothy Jean Ford-Smith, Chancery Clerk for Holmes County. 
Personal interview in Holmes County, March 23, 2007. Darrell Wil- 
liams, BankPlus. Personal interview in Holmes County, March 22, 
2007. Calvin Head, West Holmes Community Development Corpo- 
ration. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. Rose 
Washington. Personal interview in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 

66 Dr. Martha Davis, Mallory Community Health Center. Personal inter- 
view in Holmes County, April 11, 2007. 



158 




Milwaukee, Wisconsin: 

the Northwest neighborhood 



■ OVERVIEW 



Milwaukee has many traditions that speak to the proud multiethnic heritage 
and industriousness of its population. The city has been called both the 
“Deutsch-Athen” (German Athens) and “the largest small town in America.” 
In addition, many know Milwaukee as the home of “beers and gears,” a ref- 
erence to the city’s once-dominant brewery and manufacturing industries. 



In his book The Making of Milwaukee, John Gurda 
asserted that, from the vantage of the early 1960s, the 
city’s future looked bright: “Milwaukee was at a pinnacle,” 
he wrote, “a civic summit that seems all the more impos- 
ing in hindsight.”' 

Indeed, Milwaukee has experienced significant 
economic declines over the past 40 years. Writing in 
2004, the Milwaukee Journal Sentinel reported that “a 
fresh analysis of a half-century of census reports and 
economic data for the nation’s largest cities reveals that 
none of their urban centers fell as far, as fast, as hard,” 
as Milwaukee’s.^ The Journal Sentinel lamented that 



“Milwaukee falls to the bottom of nearly every index of 
social distress.”'" 

The focus of this case study is the Northwest area 
of Milwaukee.'* Tracks for the Milwaukee Road Railroad- 
known as the “Beer Line” for once serving the nearby 
Pabst, Blatz, Schlitz, and Miller breweries— encircle this 
neighborhood northwest of the city’s downtown. The 
Beer Line also “linked foundries, machine-tool shops, 
lumberyards, leather tanneries, and makers of engines, 
castings, shoes, cardboard, aluminum cans, soap, batter- 
ies, furniture, and sausages.”" Today, the tracks that once 
served as the artery carrying the city’s industrial life- 



159 






MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 



TABLE 1 



Comparison Statistics 



Northwest 



Milwaukee MSA 



Poverty Rate 


Poverty rate 1970““ 


18.0 


7.9 


Poverty rate 2000“’ 


48.0 


10.6 


Income 


Median household income'’ 


$19,356 


$45,982 


Demographics 


Population 2000^“ 


23,294 


1,500,741 


% Population change, 1970 - 2000'’ 


-36.1 


6.9 


Racial/ethnic composition, 2000' 


% White 


5.6 


74.4 


% Hispanic/Latino 


3.5 


6.3 


% Black/African-American 


78.8 


15.5 


% Residents under age 189 


47.3 


26.4 


% Single-parent households'’ 


52.7 


9.8 


% Foreign born, 2000' 


7.1 


5.4 


% Population in same house as five years ago' 


42.5 


49.1 


Education 


% Adults without a high school diploma, 2000'' 


46.4 


15.5 


% Adults with a college degree, 2000' 


7.2 


27.0 


% Students proficient in reading, 2005'" 


52.9 


78.7 


% Students proficient in math, 2005" 


37.1 


67.0 


Labor Market 


Unemployment rate, 2000'’ 


22.0 


5.2 


% Adults in the labor forced 


55.7 


68.1 


Housing 


Homeownership rate, 20009 


30.7 


61.1 


% Renters with a housing cost burden' 


56.8 


36.9 


% Rental units that are HUD subsidized" 


10.6 


9.5 


Median value for owner-occupied units" 


$39,904 


$134,759 


Median year structure built' 


1938 


1968 


Access to Credit 


% Credit files that are thin, 2004“ 


50.8 


23.0 


% Credit files with high credit scores" 


17.1 


58.5 


% Mortgage originations that are high cost, 2005" 


62.7 


25.9 


Mortgage denial rate, 2005* 


26.4 


15.9 



blood now seem more like a clamp, restricting the flow of 
economic opportunities to the neighborhood. 

■ BACKGROUND 

Located not far from downtown, Milwaukee’s Northwest 
neighborhood was first settled by German immigrants, 
who started many of the breweries and other manufac- 
turing businesses there. With its readily available jobs, 
the community attracted a large number of African- 
American families after World War II, with the most rapid 



increase, according to University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee 
professor Judith Kenney, occurring “between 1956 and 
1960 when the community grew from 22,000 to 62,000.”*^ 
Today, most of the manufacturing jobs have left, 
although the neighborhood is still the corporate head- 
quarters for Miller Brewing and Harley-Davidson. In 1970, 
manufacturing companies and breweries dominated the 
list of large employers in Milwaukee. By 2004, none of 
them were among the top 10. (See Table 2) Job growth 
in the Milwaukee Metropolitan Statistical Area (MSA) has 
occurred almost entirely in the outlying areas and suburbs. 



160 





contributing to a spatial mismatch between city residents 
and the region’s employment opportunities. While the 
greater Northwest side of Milwaukee, which encompasses 
the case study community, lost 7,265 jobs between 1994 
and 2003, the three surrounding counties of Waukesha, 
Ozaukee, and Washington added more than 50,000 jobs.^ 
The combination of the weak job market in the case 
study community and limited public transportation puts 
many newly created jobs out of reach for Northwest 
Milwaukee residents.® According to a 2004 Milwaukee Fair 
Housing Council report, the region’s public transportation 
system is not adequate to access employment outside Mil- 
waukee County.® Car ownership in the community falls far 
below that of the metropolitan area: 49 percent of African- 
American households in the case study area do not own a 
car, along with 24 percent of white households. In contrast, 
31 percent of black households and only 8 percent of white 
households in the MSA do not have a car.'° 

The impact of the loss of manufacturing jobs on 
the Northwest community is striking. Between 1970 
and 2000, the neighborhood population declined by 
more than a third; most of that loss was middle-income 
families who left for the suburbs. In 2000, nearly half 
(48 percent) of the neighborhood’s population was living 
in poverty, compared to 18 percent in 1970. The poverty 
rate in Northwest Milwaukee is nearly five times that of 
the Milwaukee MSA. Indeed, Milwaukee’s Northwest com- 
munity lags behind the MSA on almost every single mea- 
sure of neighborhood quality: employment, education. 



housing, family stability, public safety, transportation, and 
access to services. 

Accompanying these socioeconomic trends has 
been a significant rise in single-parent households in the 
community. In 2000, 53 percent of the households in the 
study area were headed by single parents, compared 
with 16 percent of households in 1970." Single-parent 
households are much more likely to be poor: in 2000, 
almost 60 percent of female-headed households in the 
community were living below the poverty line. Jason 
DeParle, the New York Times reporter who has written 
extensively on welfare reform and studied low-income 
Milwaukee neighborhoods, wrote, “What’s really miss- 
ing from the family story are stable fathers.”'® Another 
problem in this community is teen pregnancy, which 
has attracted a high level of attention. In 2002, Milwau- 
kee had the second-highest percentage of teen births 
among the 50 largest cities in the nation.'® 

Educational achievement in Northwest Milwaukee is 
also lower than for the school district as a whole. In 2005, 
only 53 percent of the case study area’s students achieved 
proficiency in reading and 37 percent achieved proficiency 
in math, compared to 79 and 67 percent respectively for 
the metropolitan area. Schools in the community face 
many challenges in raising the educational achievement of 
its students, among them the large percentage of stu- 
dents eligible for free or reduced lunch, a lack of parental 
involvement, student use of alcohol and/or illegal drugs, 
and violence.'^' While these challenges reflect high levels of 
poverty in the neighborhood, the school district as a whole 
has also been a focal point of social and political upheaval 
for decades. The schools have tried a number of strategies 
to improve, including desegregation, vouchers to support 
private school choice, charter schools, and, recently, a 
neighborhood-schools model— all with uneven outcomes.'® 

Crime rates in the neighborhood are also a problem. 
In late 2006, Time magazine featured the case study area 
as an example of a dramatic increase in violent crime 
in America’s cities. “It’s as if Milwaukee had reverted to 
a state of lethal chaos,” wrote the author.'® As reported, 
Milwaukee’s annual murders had declined from 130 in 
1996 to a low of 88 in 2004 (an improvement that some 
attribute, in part, to life-saving care that victims get in 
the city’s trauma units'^ before it jumped to 121 in 2005.'® 
Much of the violent crime is concentrated in the North- 
west neighborhood of Milwaukee.'® 

On the housing side, the affordability of housing in 
Milwaukee historically has been less of an issue than 



161 



MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 




MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 



TABLE 2 



Milwaukee’s 10 Largest Employers, 1970 and 2004 
1970 2004 



Company 


Type of Business 


Employees 




Company 


Type of Business 


Employees 


Allis-Chalmers Corp. 


Manufacturing 


11,500 




Aurora Health Care 


Health care 


15,500 


A.O. Smith Corp. 


Manufacturing 


8,000 


Covenant Healthcare System 


Health care 


9,250 


Briggs & Stratton Corp. 


Manufacturing 


7,400 


Roundy’s Inc. 


Grocery 


7,400 


Allen-Bradley Co. 


Manufacturing 


6,500 


Marshall & lisley Corp. 


Banking 


6,800 


Delco Electronics 


Manufacturing 


5,000 


Wisconsin Energy Corp. 


Utility 


6,000 


Harnischfeger Corp. 


Manufacturing 


4,450 


GE Healthcare Technologies 


Health care 


5,800 


American Motors Corp. 


Manufacturing 


4,000 


Columbia St. Mary’s Inc. 


Health care 


5,600 


Jos. Schlitz Brewing Co. 


Brewery 


2,800 


Quad/Graphics Inc. 


Printing 


5,300 


Pabst Brewing Co. 


Brewery 


2,600 


Kohl’s Corp. 


Retail 


5,500 


Miller Brewing Co. 


Brewery 


2,400 


Northwestern Mutual Life 
Insurance Co. 


Insurance 


4,600 



Source: Wisconsin Manufacturers & Commerce; Journai Sentinei research, http://www.jsoniine.com/story/index.aspx?id=281552 



the quality of the housing stock “ Yet in recent years, 
purchase prices for single-family homes in Northwest 
Milwaukee have risen much more quickly than wages, 
placing homeownership out of reach for many of the 
families living in the community.^' Residents in Northwest 
Milwaukee are also likely to pay more for credit: in 2005, 
63 percent of the mortgage originations in the neighbor- 
hood were high-cost loans, compared to 26 percent in 
the MSA. 

Indeed, regulated financial institutions in Milwaukee 
have a mixed record of serving the needs of its inner-city 
residents. In 1988, Milwaukee was identified as having the 
biggest gap in mortgage denial rates between whites 
and non-whites in the country. In addition, the 1992 U.S. 
Appellate Court case NAACP v. American Family Mutual 
Insurance Co. confirmed the presence of redlining and 
homeowners insurance discrimination in Milwaukee’s 
black communities. An absence of basic banking services 
is linked to higher costs for financial transactions for 
working class and minority communities.^^ Today, access 
to financial services for low-income and minority resi- 
dents remains a priority issue in Milwaukee as a whole.^"* 

The lack of access to financial services is particu- 
larly stark in Northwest Milwaukee. For example, just two 
bank branches in the entire case study area serve more 
than 23,000 residents. A third bank branch is located on 
the western border of the area, and two minority-owned 



financial institutions lie just outside the eastern boundary 
of the study area.^^ On the other hand, the case study area 
is heavily populated with nontraditional financial services 
providers, such as currency exchanges, pawnshops, and 
payday lenders. 

■ ISSUES TO CONSIDER 

Northwest Milwaukee struggles with some of the same 
challenges as the other Rust Belt communities in this 
report, including the flight of middle class residents and 
the loss of relatively high-paying manufacturing jobs. The 
Northwest Milwaukee neighborhood must also contend 
with a spatial mismatch between residents and areas 
of high job growth as well as challenges resulting from 
welfare reform. Interviews and research into this commu- 
nity have raised new insights on old problems (e.g., novel 
policies to boost vehicle ownership in order to connect 
workers with jobs) and also raised new challenges facing 
this community, such as the problems associated with 
prisoner reentry. 

Spatial Mismatch 

To a great extent, it appears that inner-city Milwau- 
kee conforms to the spatial mismatch theory that was 
first proposed by John Kain and further developed by 
William Julius Wilson in the latter’s book When Work 



162 








Disappears (1996). Simply put, the spatial mismatch the- 
ory asserts that racial minorities who live in inner cities 
are more likely to be unemployed in regions where new 
jobs are created far away in the suburbs and exurbs.^® 

As described above, Northwest Milwaukee has seen an 
exodus of employment opportunities over the past three 
decades, while most of the job growth that has occurred 
has been in the suburban areas of the MSA. 

In addition, much of the job growth has been in 
industries that require higher levels of education. As 
Table 2 illustrates, where the major employers in Milwau- 
kee in 1970 were breweries and manufacturing plants, in 
2004 the city’s primary employers were concentrated in 
the healthcare and service industries. These factors have 
contributed to the community’s extremely high level of 
unemployment.^® In 2000, the unemployment rate in the 
community was 22 percent, four times that of the MSA. 
The labor force participation rate was also low: only 56 
percent of adults participated in the labor force. 

Spatial mismatch theory also suggests that increased 
competition for local jobs can serve to lower wages.^® 

A 1998 analysis of wage disparities by the Center on 
Wisconsin Strategies, a local think tank, provides evi- 
dence of this effect. Their research showed that workers 
in the same occupational categories in the Northwest 
area of the city made on average $3.36 less per hour 
than workers in the same occupational categories in the 
county.®° Wage disparities by race may also serve as a 
significant barrier to those seeking employment. In When 
Work Disappears, Wilson examined how the gap in wages 




The overgrown rail line that served Milwaukee’s breweries is a 
reminder of the city’s decline from its former dominance in the 
manufacturing and brewery industries. 



between whites and African Americans, combined with 
higher transportation costs to distant jobs, can discour- 
age searching for work in outlying areas.®' 

Several strategies to promote economic develop- 
ment and employment in the area are under way. Mil- 
waukee’s Local Initiatives Support Corporation office has 
created Centers for Family Prosperity (CFPs) to try to 
connect low-income Milwaukee residents to jobs. Build- 
ing on the block club organizing and leadership develop- 
ment work of the Annie E. Casey Foundation’s “Making 
Connections Milwaukee” (MCM) initiative, the CFPs 
strive to create social capital networks that support skill 
development, wealth building, and employment opportu- 
nities in neighborhoods where those networks are weak 
or nonexistent. Employment services at the CFPs are 
designed to provide career assistance in an environment 
in which clients become sources of referrals and assis- 
tance to each other.®® 

In a similar vein, the newly created Urban Entrepre- 
neur Partnership of Milwaukee supports and encourages 
entrepreneurship in the city, with the aim of growing 
businesses to replace employers that have left the city. 
Connecting Northwest Milwaukee residents with those 
opportunities, however, remains a challenge. 

Another innovative program is the Milwaukee-based 
Ways to Work, a nonprofit lender that makes small, low- 
interest auto loans to individuals. The immediate benefit 
is that borrowers expand their access to jobs outside 
their immediate area. It also provides an opportunity 
to build credit and learn financial skills. “Initially, it’s all 
about the mobility,” said Jeff Faulkner, president of Ways 
to Work. “Ultimately, it’s all about the loan.”®® 

Experiments with Welfare 

While unemployment emerged in the interviews as 
one of the key factors affecting poverty in Northwest Mil- 
waukee, interviewees also pointed to underemployment 
and low wages as factors deterring families from getting 
out of poverty. Several interviewees noted that welfare 
reform has had significant impacts— both positive and 
negative— on the community and the families living there. 

The importance placed on welfare reform in this 
case study community can be attributed at least in part 
to the role that Wisconsin has played in framing national 
welfare policy.®” The Wisconsin welfare reform program, 
known as W-2, was implemented in 1994, and eventually 
became the model for the 1996 federal welfare program 



163 



MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 





MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 



TABLE 3 



Tracking Progress of Welfare Reform 
in Milwaukee Zip Code 53206 



53206 Zip Code 
1994 2001 2005 



Families receiving 
AFDC/W-2 


4,779 


744 


742 


Families receiving Food 
Stamps 


4,612 


2,957 


3,357 


Families Covered by 
Medical Insurance 


4,877 


4,081 


4,080 


Families receiving 
Childcare Subsidies 


N/A 


814 


1,056 


EITC Claims 


3,473 


4,597 


4,593 


EITC Avg. Claims/Family 


$2,152'' 


$2,903 


$3,449 



® 1995 data 



Note: Information in this table is gathered from three sources: Lois M. 
Quinn and John Pawasarat, “Tracking the Progress of Welfare Reform 
Quickly: A Model for Measuring Neighborhood Health and Change” 
(Washington, DC: Brookings Institution Center on Urban and Met- 
ropolitan Policy, October 2001). John Pawasarat and Lois M. Quinn, 
“Milwaukee Zipcode 53208: Neighborhood Indicators of Employment 
and Economic Well-Being of Families, Barriers to Employment, and 
Untapped Opportunities” (Milwaukee: Employment and Training Insti- 
tute, University of Wisconsin, 2006). Lois M. Quinn, “New Indicators of 
Neighborhood Need in Zipcode 53206: Neighborhood Indicators of 
Employment and Economic Well-Being of Families, Barriers to Employ- 
ment, and Untapped Opportunities” (Milwaukee: Employment and 
Training Institute, University of Wisconsin, 2007). 

Temporary Assistance for Needy Families (TANF). Under- 
lying these programs is the belief that welfare should be 
temporary (no more than five years) and require recipi- 
ents to work.^^ Among the programs that are supposed 
to work in concert with TANF are the Earned Income 
Tax Credit (to boost income) and subsidies for child 
care and transportation.^® 

Since the advent of welfare reform, the number of 
people across the country receiving welfare benefits has 
dropped dramatically. Between 1996 and 2006, the number 
of families receiving welfare declined by 60 percent, from 
4.41 million to 1.76 million families.®^ Northwest Milwaukee 
has seen a similar drop in the receipt of public welfare 
assistance. While data for the entire neighborhood aren’t 
available, for one of the primary zip codes that falls within 
Northwest Milwaukee, the number of families receiving 
welfare declined from nearly 5,000 in 1994 to 742 in 2005.®® 
In addition, more families have received childcare subsi- 
dies and the Earned Income Tax Credit, both of which are 
complementary policies designed to support work. 




Market-rate housing was recently built in the Lindsay Heights 
area of the city's Northwest neighborhood. 



Nevertheless, the story is not all positive. Data on family 
incomes in the same zip code show that working families 
are falling further behind in trying to make ends meet. (See 
Table 3) Between 2000 and 2005, the real income earn- 
ings of residents in this neighborhood dropped by almost 
19 percent.®® For the Northwest Milwaukee community as a 
whole, the problem of low wages is equally evident. Accord- 
ing to the Census, in 2000 more than half of the house- 
holds in the study area were living on poverty wages'*® and 
almost three-quarters of the households in the study area 
(73.8 percent) were living on low-wage incomes.'" 

These figures demonstrate that a significant chal- 
lenge facing Northwest Milwaukee community leaders is 
the need not only to help residents find jobs, but also to 
help them gain skills and obtain living-wage jobs. The New 
Flope program, which got its start in Milwaukee in 1994, 
provides participants with a broad range of incentives and 
services to help them make the transition from welfare to 
financial self-sufficiency, not just employment. The program 
provides participants with a boost in wages, health care 
(including mental health and counseling), and child care.'*® 

It has had an impressive performance record. According to 
a Brookings Institution discussion paper on the program, a 
random-assignment evaluation of New Hope “showed that 
the program reduced poverty, increased employment and, 
perhaps most importantly, boosted the achievement and 
positive behavior of children.”'*® 

Prisoner Reentry 

A third issue that emerged as important during inter- 
views with community stakeholders is that of prisoner 



164 






reentry. Milwaukee, and particularly Northwest Milwaukee, 
has seen a large number of ex-criminal offenders return 
to the community. An estimated 2,500 individuals living in 
the case study area are ex-offenders. Sixty-three per- 
cent of these ex-offenders have not graduated from high 
school and only 4 percent hold a valid driver’s license.'’'' 
The recidivism rate is also high— for ex-offenders 
between the ages of 25 and 35, one in two will commit 
another crime. 

Interview respondents noted that helping these ex- 
offenders find jobs is a high priority for the community. 
Research has shown that finding and maintaining a job 
after release can reduce the chances of reoffending, 
especially for older offenders, and that the higher the 
wages, the less likely persons released from prison will 
return to crime.'’^ Connecting former prisoners to jobs is 
challenging, however. Most prisoners experience great 
difficulties finding jobs after their release. According 
to research conducted by the Urban Institute, while in 
prison, individuals forfeit the opportunity to gain work 
experience and sever interpersonal connections and 
social contacts that could lead to legal employment 
opportunities upon release.'*® The stigma of their ex- 
prisoner status makes the job search even more difficult. 
A recent survey of 3,000 employers in four major metro- 
politan areas revealed that two-thirds of the employers 
would not knowingly hire an ex-prisoner.'’^ 

David Weiman, an economist who has studied this 
problem extensively, argued in an article published in 
2007 that the changing job market in inner-city neigh- 
borhoods from manufacturing to service-oriented jobs 
makes it especially hard for ex-offenders to find work. 
“The labor supply and demand factors point to a wid- 
ening spatial mismatch between the potential jobs for 
released prisoners and their residential locations,” he 
wrote. As a result, “released prisoners have become 
more economically isolated in the ‘new’ urban labor mar- 
ket with its greater share of low-skilled retail and service 
sector jobs.”'*® 

■ CONCLUSION 

Along with the work-related programs mentioned earlier, 
there appear to be some additional signs of improve- 
ment in Milwaukee. For example, recent completion of 
the Lindsay Heights housing development has demon- 
strated that there is a demand for market-rate housing 
on Milwaukee’s Northwest side.'*® Still, many local leaders 



say they are just barely staying ahead of problems. As 
the Milwaukee Social Development Commission’s CEO, 
Deborah Blanks has observed, “We are laying tracks as 
the train is coming.” To address the impacts of decades 
of disinvestment in Northwest Milwaukee, governments 
and nonprofits will have to seek ways to reconnect the 
neighborhood to the surrounding region and address the 
problems associated with concentrated poverty. 

This case study was prepared by Jeremiah Boyie, com- 
munity affairs program director, Federai Reserve Bank 
of Chicago. 



Endnotes 

1 John Gurda, The Making of Milwaukee (Milwaukee: Milwaukee His- 
torical Society, 2006), 352. 

2 John Schmid, “A Dream Derailed,” Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, 
December 5-7, 2004. 

3 Ibid. 

4 The case study neighborhood consists of eleven census tracts 
adjacent to downtown including: 008800, 008900, 009000, 
009100, 009600, 009700, 009800, 009900, 012000, 012100, and 
012200. The case study area approximates the boundaries of 
the Annie E. Casey Foundation’s Making Connections Milwaukee 
neighborhood. The study area includes all or part of Milwaukee 
neighborhoods known as Sherman Park, Metcalfe Park, Uptown, 
Washington Park, Walnut Hili, Midtown, Martin Drive, and Cold 
Spring Park. It also includes parts of the following Zip codes: 
53205, 53206, 53208, 53210, and 53233. 

5 John Schmid, 'A Dream Derailed,” Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, 
December 5-7, 2004. 

6 Judith T. Kenny, Department of Geography, University of Wisconsin 
-Milwaukee. Available at http://www.uwm.edu/Library/digilib/ 
Miiwaukee/records/picture.html. 

7 Marc V. Levine, The Economic State of Milwaukee’s Inner City: 2006 
(Milwaukee: University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Center for Eco- 
nomic Development, 2006). 

8 Metropolitan Milwaukee Fair Housing Council, “City of Milwaukee 
Analysis of Impediments to Fair Housing” (August 2005). 

9 Ibid. 

10 U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000. 

11 Geolytics Neighborhood Change Database. 

12 Jason DeParle, “Raising Kevion,” New York Times, August 22, 2004. 

13 United Way of Greater Milwaukee, “If Truth Be Told: Teen Preg- 
nancy, Public Health, and the Cycle of Poverty” (Milwaukee: United 
Way of Greater Milwaukee, 2006). 

14 Public Policy Forum, “Public Education in Milwaukee: A Survey of 
Public Opinion” (Milwaukee: Public Policy Forum, September 2006). 



165 



MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 



MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 



15 Ruth Ward, “Reshaping a Nation: Key Dates in the School Integra- 
tion and Civil Rights Movements,” Milwaukee Journal Sentinel, Janu- 
ary 4, 2004. 

16 Kathleen Kingsbury, “Middle America’s Crime Wave,” Time, Decem- 
ber 3, 2006. 

17 Personal Interview conducted in Milwaukee, April 12, 2007. 

18 Police Executive Research Forum, “A Gathering Storm: Violent 
Crime in America” (Washington, DC: Police Executive Research 
Forum, October 2006). 

19 See Violent Crime maps produced by the Nonprofit Center of 
Milwaukee. Available at , http://www.nonprofitcentermilwaukee.org/ 
datacenter/showmap.php?Mapld=212&cboCategories= 
Crime&optYear=2000 (accessed February 11, 2008). 

20 William Fluxhold and Gregory Squires, “Indicators of Flousing and 
Neighborhood Quality: The Lindsay Fleights Area, Community 
Development Block Grant Area, and City of Milwaukee: 1993-1997” 
(Milwaukee: Center for Urban Initiatives and Research, University of 
Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 1999). 

21 John Pawasarat and Lois Quinn, “Legal Action of Wisconsin Report 
on Milwaukee’s Flousing Crisis: Foreclosures, Evictions, and Sub- 
prime Lending” (Milwaukee: Employment and Training Institute, 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2007). 

22 Atlanta Journal Constitution, “The Color of Money,” a four-part 
series published May 1-4, 1988. 

23 National Community Reinvestment Coalition, “Are Banks on the 
Map?: An Analysis of Bank Branch Location in Working Class and 
Minority Neighborhoods” (Washington, DC: National Community 
Reinvestment Coalition, 2007). 

24 As far back as 1920, as the first wave of southern black migrants 
arrived in Milwaukee in sizable numbers, three major institutions 
were created to serve the needs of the newcomers: the Milwaukee 
chapters of both the Urban League and the National Association 
for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), as well as the 
Columbia Building and Loan, owned by an African American and 
founded specifically to provide access to home mortgages for 
blacks who had been shut out of existing banks. See Robert E. 
Weems Jr., “Black Working Class, 1915-1925,” in Thomas Jablonsky, 
ed. Milwaukee Stories (Milwaukee: Marquette University 

Press, 2005). 

25 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, “Summary of Deposits: 
Institution Branch Report.” Available at http://www2.fdic.gov/sod. 

26 For a recent analysis, see Robert L. Wagmiller Jr., “Race and the 
Spatial Segregation of Jobless Men in Urban America,” Demogra- 
phy 44(3) (August 2007): 539-62. 

27 Marc V. Levine, The Economic State of Milwaukee’s Inner City: 2006. 

28 Marc V. Levine, “The Crisis of Black Male Joblessness in Milwaukee: 
Trends, Explanations, and Policy Qptions.” (Milwaukee: University 
of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, Center for Economic Development, 

March 2007). 

29 Roberto M. Fernandez. “Race, Spatial Mismatch, and Job Acces- 
sibility: Evidence from a Plant Relocation.” Kennedy School of 
Government, Summer Inequality Institute. April 2006. Available at 
http://www.ksg.harvard.edu/inequality/Summer/Summer06/papers/ 
Fernandez.pdf. 



30 Center on Wisconsin Strategy, “Milwaukee Jobs Initiative Impact 
Community Labor Force Profile” (1998). The research area, while 
not identical to the case study area, overlaps the Northwest case 
study neighborhood. 

31 Flarry J. Flolzer, Keith R. Ihlanfeldt, and David L. Sjoquist, “Work, 
Search, and Travel Among White and Black Youth,” Journal of 
Urban Economics 35(3) (1994): 320-45. Quoted in William Julius 
Wilson, When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor 
(New York: Random Flouse, 1996). 

32 Leo Ries, Program Director, Local Initiatives Support Corporation 
Milwaukee. Personal interview April 24, 2007 

33 Fredrick Kunkle, “Putting Needy Families on the Road to Suc- 
cess: Qrganization Flelps Working Poor Buy Cars, Build Credit,” 
Washington Post, January 11, 2007, PWQ7 Available at http:// 
www.washingtonpost.eom/wp-dyn/content/article/2007/01/09/ 
AR2007010901599.html. 

34 For a full discussion of how welfare policy and practice inter- 
sected in Milwaukee, see Jason DeParle, American Dream: Three 
Women, Ten Kids, and a Nation’s Drive to End Welfare (New York: 
Penguin, 2005). 

35 u.S. Department of Fleath and Fluman Services TANF Fact Sheet. 
Available at http://www.acf.hhs.gov/opa/fact_sheets/ 
tanf_factsheet.html. 

36 Martha Coven, “An Introduction to TANF.” (Washington, DC: Center 
on Budget and Policy Priorities, 2002). Available at http://www. 
cbpp.org/l-22-02tanf2.htm. 

37 Statement by Sidonie Squier, Director, Qffice of Family Assistance, 
“The Next Phase of Welfare Reform,” before Committee on Ways 
and Means Subcommittee on Income Security and Family Support, 
U.S. Flouse of Representatives, March 6, 2007. Available at http:// 
www.hhs.gOv/asl/testify/2007/03/t20070306a.html (accessed Feb- 
ruary 11, 2008), 

38 These same trends are seen within the other Zip codes that com- 
prise the case study community as well. 

39 Lois M. Quinn, “New Indicators of Neighborhood Need in ZIP Code 
53206: Neighborhood Indicators of Employment and Economic 
Well-Being of Families, Barriers to Employment, and Untapped 
Qpportunities” (Milwaukee: Employment and Training Institute, 
University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee, 2007). 

40 “We define poverty-wage jobs as those jobs paying a wage that is 
insufficient to lift even a full-time (40 hours a week), year-round (52 
week a year) worker to the poverty line for a family of four with two 
children. In 2005 dollars, the ‘poverty wage’ was $9.52 an hour or 
less; if someone worked full time for the entire year at this wage, 
their annual earnings would be $19,802.” Laura Dresser and Joel 
Rogers, “The State of Working Wisconsin” (Madison: University of 
Wisconsin-Madison Center on Wisconsin Strategy, 2006), 33. 

41 A low-wage income is “an income [for a family] below 200 percent 
of the poverty line as defined by U.S. Census Bureau. Recent anal- 
ysis finds that families below 200 percent of the poverty line often 
face serious problems making ends meet, thus 200 percent of 
the poverty line is used as a proxy for economic 'self-sufficiency' 
or ‘family living standard.'” Wisconsin’s 2005 poverty threshold is 
$19,806 for a family of two parents and two children. The low-wage 
income threshold is $39,612. Laura Dresser and Joel Rogers, “The 
State of Working Wisconsin” (Madison: University of Wisconsin- 
Madison Center on Wisconsin Strategy, 2006), 17-19. 



166 



42 Greg J. Duncan, Aietha C. Huston, and Thomas S. Weisner, Higher 
Ground: New Hope for the Working Poor and Their Children (New 
York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2007). 

43 Hans Bos et al., “New Hope: Fulfilling America’s Promise to ‘Make 
Work Pay”’ (Washington, DC: Brookings Institution, December 2007). 

44 Lois M. Quinn, “New Indicators of Neighborhood Need in ZIP Code 
53206,” 19-20. 

45 Christopher Uggen, “Work as a Turning Point in the Life Course of 
Criminals: A Duration Model of Age, Employment, and Recidivism.” 
American Sociological Review 65(4) (2000): 529-46. 

46 Jared Bernstein and Ellen Houston, “Crime and Work: What We 
Can Learn from the Low-Wage Labor Market” (Washington, DC: 
Economic Policy Institute, 2000). James Lynch and William Sabol, 
“Prisoner Reentry in Perspective” (Washington, DC: The Urban 
Institute, 2001). 

47 Harry Holzer, Stephen Raphael, and Michael Stoll, “Will Employ- 
ers Hire Former Offenders? Employer Preferences, Background 
Checks, and Their Determinants,” in Imprisoning America: The 
Social Effects of Mass Incarceration, B. Western, M. Patillo, and D. 
Weiman, eds. (New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2004). 

48 David F. Weiman, “Barriers to Prisoners’ Reentry into the Labor 
Market and the Social Costs of Recidivism” Social Research 74(2) 
(Summer 2007): 597. For more on this point, see Harry J. Holzer, 
Stephen Raphael, and Michael A. Stoll, “The Effect of an Appli- 
cant’s Criminal History on Employer Hiring Decisions and Screen- 
ing Practices: Evidence from Los Angeles,” in Barriers to Reentry? 
The Labor Market for Released Prisoners in Post-Industrial America, 
Shaw Bushway, Michael A. Stoll, and David F. Weiman, eds. (New 
York: Russell Sage Foundation, 2007). John D. Kasarda, “Industrial 
Restructuring and the Changing Location of Jobs,” in State of the 
Union: America in the 1990s, Reynolds Farley, ed. (New York: Russell 
Sage Press, 1995). 

49 Jamaal Abdul-Alim, “Having Faith in Lindsay Heights,” Milwaukee 
Journal Sentinel, March 18, 2006. 



167 



MILWAUKEE, WISCONSIN 



168 



Learning from Concentrated 

Poverty in America: A Synthesis of 
Themes from the Case Studies 



■ INTRODUCTION 

‘‘Some reservation neighborhoods iook iike 
inner-city siums, just spread out over a much 
larger area.” 

—Blackfeet Reservation tribal housing official 

S everal decades of research on concentrated pov- 
erty have focused predominantly on the experi- 
ences of Rust Belt cities in the Northeastern and 
Midwestern United States. This report breaks new ground 
by exploring how concentrated poverty manifests in 
communities across the United States, from the remote 
landscape of Crownpoint and immigrant gateways like 
West Fresno and the Chamizal neighborhood of El Paso, to 
rural areas in Appalachia and smaller cities like Greenville 
and Springfield. It is hard to imagine that the rugged land- 
scape of northwestern Montana would be home to some 
of the most concentrated poverty in the nation, but, as the 
quote above suggests, the Blackfeet reservation grapples 
with many of the same issues confronting the inner-city 
neighborhoods described in most existing studies of con- 
centrated poverty. 

Taken together, the 16 case studies in this report 
paint a more nuanced picture of concentrated poverty 
in America. Some of the themes highlighted in the case 
studies are common across all the communities— lack of 
human capital development, high rates of unemployment, 
inadequate housing— and echo issues raised in classic 
studies of concentrated poverty.' Yet amid these shared 
challenges, the differing histories, economies, and local 
leadership capacities present in these communities yield 



differing emphases on these issues, along with varying 
approaches to resolving them. In this chapter, we examine 
some of the common themes and issues that help us under- 
stand what contributed to the rise and persistence of con- 
centrated poverty in 16 distinct places across the country. 

In addition to the similarities among communities, we 
pay particular attention to their differences. Indeed, there is 
no “magic bullet” intervention that would work equally well 
in places as disparate as Fresno and Martin County. Flous- 
ing policies like FIORE VI— which was designed to address 
problems associated with the concentration of subsidized 
housing and attendant high levels of poverty— are showing 
promise in places like Cleveland’s Central neighborhood, 
according to local stakeholders. Yet the model has little 
relevance for places like the Blackfeet and Navajo reserva- 
tions, or McDowell County, where public housing is not a 
significant feature of the landscape. 

This chapter also highlights what we learned in 
response to the question “how does place matter?” From 
Holmes County to Crownpoint to Milwaukee, the report 
shows that place matters in multiple ways, from the 
ability of neighborhood schools to respond to the chal- 
lenges of educating a largely low-income student body 
to the lack of linkages and networks that allow residents 
to access jobs and other services. This is not to say that 
place alone determines residents’ economic outcomes; 
rather, this chapter points to the collective finding of 
these case studies that socioeconomic conditions in very 
poor neighborhoods are associated with more limited 
opportunities for residents, be it lack of access to high- 
quality schools, fewer jobs, or exposure to higher rates 
of crime. 

One of the key contributions of this report is its 
underscoring of a deep need for additional research that 



169 




SYNTHESIS 



can extend the descriptive findings presented herein. 

In particular, we see a need for additional studies that 
tease out the neighborhood effects of concentrated pov- 
erty and measure the influence of concentrated poverty 
on residents’ economic outcomes, as well as robust eval- 
uations of programs and policies aimed at alleviating the 
problem of being poor in a very poor area. We hope that 
greater awareness of the diverse nature of concentrated 
poverty will drive additional research and more effective 
community development interventions going forward. 

Conducting 16 case studies was no small under- 
taking, and was possible only because of the regional 
nature of the Federal Reserve’s Community Affairs 
function. More than 20 staff members from the Federal 
Reserve System’s Community Affairs offices across the 
country spent three to six months visiting these com- 
munities. They met with stakeholders and interviewed 
residents and community leaders to gather observations 
on the communities’ experiences with, and responses to, 
concentrated poverty. The authors of these case stud- 
ies also conducted data analysis and researched other 
materials (e.g., books, speeches, and reports) in prepa- 
ration for painting a detailed picture of their respective 
communities. 

In conducting their research, each of the case study 
authors kept in mind the following questions: 

• What factors are associated with the develop- 
ment and persistence of concentrated poverty in 
this community? 

• What challenges does concentrated poverty 
pose for affected families and communities? 

• What is the capacity of local organizations to 
address the issues associated with concentrated 
poverty? 

• What strategies are the public and private 
sectors employing to ameliorate concentrated 
poverty and its effects? 

In this synthesis, we revisit and answer these ques- 
tions using insights gleaned from the 16 case studies. We 
also highlight what we did not learn, and what additional 
research is needed in each of these areas. Finally, we 
reflect on what the report’s findings suggest for the 
ongoing role of the Federal Reserve in high-poverty com- 
munities across the nation. 



■ I. FACTORS ASSOCIATED WITH THE 
DEVELOPMENT AND PERSISTENCE OF 
CONCENTRATED POVERTY 

As the overview chapter notes, a wide range of eco- 
nomic, demographic, and social forces have played a 
part in contributing to high-poverty communities. These 
include economic restructuring and change, suburban- 
ization, racial and economic segregation, demographic 
shifts (including immigration and trends in family forma- 
tion), and the consequences of certain federal policies 
and programs. 

Looking across the many complicated and inter- 
related factors associated with the development and 
persistence of concentrated poverty, we identified four 
themes that stood out in most, if not all, of the 16 case 
study communities. 

First, in each of the case studies, it is evident that 
history matters. Communities do not reach extreme lev- 
els of poverty quickly. Poverty and disadvantage in these 
communities have tended to concentrate there over 
many years. 

Second, these high-poverty communities experience 
one or more forms of isolation. The metaphorical expres- 
sion of living on the “wrong side of the tracks” could not 
be more evident in these communities, where residents 
are often physically, socially, racially, and linguistically 
separated from the larger economy and community. 

Third, many of these communities have experienced 
significant demographic changes, including a rise in 
immigrant households, a rise in single-parent families, 
or both. 

Finally, these communities of concentrated pov- 
erty exist within both weak and strong regional econo- 
mies, suggesting that economic growth on its own is 
not enough to eliminate poverty. That said, the relative 
strength of the communities’ respective regional econo- 
mies greatly shapes the nature and magnitude of chal- 
lenges associated with reducing poverty in these places. 

History Matters 

“When I left, the courthouse clock wasn’t 
working, and when I came back 30 years 
later. It still wasn’t working.’’ 

—Holmes County business owner 



170 



The Cuyahoga Metropolitan Housing Authority 
located more than half of the county’s public 
housing units within the Central neighborhood. 

—Cleveland case study 

High-poverty communities did not appear overnight. 
Indeed, most of the case study communities had very 
high poverty rates more than three decades ago. West 
Fresno, El Paso’s Chamizal neighborhood, Cleveland’s 
Central neighborhood. Holmes County, and eastern 
Kentucky’s Martin County all had more than 40 percent of 
their residents living below the poverty line as long ago 
as 1970. (See Figure 1) Those case study neighborhoods 
where poverty had not yet reached the 40-percent thresh- 
old in 1970 were typically a great deal poorer than their 
surrounding communities.^ 

Figure 1 also shows that in many case study com- 
munities, changes in the poverty rate paralleled national 
trends, with poverty levels increasing between 1970 and 
1990 and then decreasing between 1990 and 2000. 

(See overview chapter) In that lattermost decade, some 
of the case study communities— including both urban 
neighborhoods, like Central in Cleveland and West 



Greenville, as well as rural areas such as Holmes County 
and the Blackfeet Reservation— experienced a significant 
drop in poverty. Yet in most of the case study commu- 
nities, poverty rates worsened or stagnated between 
1990 and 2000 despite the decade’s relative prosperity, 
declining national poverty rate, and rather dramatic over- 
all decline in the rate of concentrated poverty.^ These 
places seem to exist far outside the economic main- 
stream, missing national trends that helped to lift many 
families and communities out of very deep poverty. 

The high levels of poverty in these communities are 
the product of long-term, complicated economic and 
social dynamics, as well as deliberate public- and private- 
sector actions. As a result, teasing out the direct causes 
of why these neighborhoods became and remained poor 
is difficult. For example, decisions on where to build new 
subsidized housing or freeways cemented the fate of 
many of these communities. Large publicly subsidized 
housing projects constructed in neighborhoods such 
as Cleveland’s Central, El Paso’s Chamizal, and Atlantic 
City’s Bungalow Park/Marina District in the mid-20th 
century served to “lock in” the low-income profile of these 
neighborhoods, the negative effects of which are still 
visible today. Yet other concurrent processes, such as 



FIGURE 1 



Poverty has worsened in many case study communities over the past several decades 




SOURCE: Geolytics Neighborhood Change Database 



•Poverty information unavailable for certain non-metropolitan geographies in 1970 and 1980. 



171 



SYNTHESIS 



SYNTHESIS 



suburbanization and economic restructuring, also contrib- 
uted to the worsening of poverty in these neighborhoods. 

The two Native American case study areas— Blackfeet 
Reservation, MT and Crownpoint, NM— provide striking 
evidence of the role of history and public policy on the 
current levels of poverty in these areas. For instance, the 
complex and contested history of land rights for Native 
Americans, along with a federal policy that forcibly settled 
tribes to increasingly less desirable land, has greatly 
affected the potential for economic development on 
reservations. 

Isolation 

“Most [from the east side] don’t feel comfort- 
able on the west side of the city.’’ 

—Albany city commissioner 

“It can take four hours round-trip to go 
grocery shopping.’’ 

—Blackfeet Reservation resident 

“We feel like we’re the forgotten county.’’ 

-Martin County resident 

“It was obvious where the white communities 
started and the black communities ended.’’ 

—Greenville resident 

Interviews revealed that, without exception, all of the case 
study communities experience notable isolation from their 
wider regions and from the economic mainstream. From 
roads to redlining to federal Native American land poli- 
cies, each of the communities can point to at least one 
historical factor that has contributed to economic or social 
distance between itself and its surrounding areas. 

Geographic features, which often served as the ini- 
tial isolating force, act as longstanding barriers to the full 
integration of these communities into their surrounding 
economies. The Flint River separates East Albany from 
downtown Albany. Mountainous terrain in Martin County 
isolates that community from others in eastern Kentucky, 
and its residents from each other. The Blackfeet Reserva- 
tion is particularly inaccessible, located 35 miles from the 



nearest off-reservation town, up against both the Rocky 
Mountains and the Canadian border. And the Crownpoint 
area is so remote that half of the area’s households lack 
telephone access. 

But in other cases, the isolating factors were man- 
made. In West Fresno, Cleveland’s Central neighborhood, 
and East Austin, highways cut off the neighborhood from 
nearby downtown areas. Not merely historical accidents, 
many of these highways resulted from urban renewal 
efforts in the mid-20th century that sliced through the 
heart of historically minority residential areas in major 
American cities. Similarly, Northwest Milwaukee is encir- 
cled by a railroad line that once served local industry, but 
now is a figurative clamp around the neighborhood. 

Racial discrimination contributed to the segregated, 
high-poverty contour of many of these communities today. 
At times this was overt, as in the forced resettlement of 
minority populations into East Austin and West Greenville. 

In Greenville, thriving African American-owned businesses 
were relocated to the west of the railroad tracks in the 
1960s under the guise of “urban renewal”; few of these 
businesses survived. At other times, residential discrimi- 
nation was manifested through exclusionary zoning and 
redlining practices that affected African-American resi- 
dents of northwest Milwaukee and other inner-city areas. 

Nearly every case study community exhibits a racial 
and ethnic profile markedly different from its comparison 
area. (See Figure 2) To some degree, these demographic 
disparities can be attributed to economic differences 
among these groups. Yet the legacy of institutionalized 
racism and segregation remains an ongoing concern in 
many of these communities today. 

And even where racial and ethnic disparities result in 
part from residents choosing to live there— as in the case 
of immigrant gateways like Miami’s Little Flaiti— these 
disparities can indicate other forms of isolation. The 
Flaitian residents of that community remain socially and 
linguistically isolated from Miami’s greater metropolitan 
area. While Little Flaiti boasts strong social networks and 
cultural ties, many Haitian immigrants in the community 
speak only Creole, making it difficult for them to access 
jobs and social services. 

In all of its forms, isolation creates myriad problems. It 
means that a resident of the Blackfeet tribe might have to 
travel four hours to get groceries, or that wealthier resi- 
dents of Albany may never travel across the river to shop or 
access services. It also tends to mean that an isolated com- 
munity does not get the appropriate level of attention from 



172 



FIGURE 2 



w 

-< 



Most case study communities have significantly larger shares of racial and ethnic minority 
residents than comparison areas 



O 

O 

o 

CM 

d 



CO z 
I- < 

Z CL 
LU CO 
Q 



X 

cr 
cc O 



CO 



LL LU 

O !z 

£ I 



LU ' 




LU Z 
0. 





TO 


03 


O 






to 


C 

<D 

O 

i5 

c 

03 


N 

E 

03 

O 

6 

(/) 


</) 

23 

LL 

to 


Greenvill 
St Greenvil 


03 

X 


03 

5 

o 

z 

03 


03 


03 


o 


03 


E 


03 


> 

03 

O 


D. 

LU 


C 

(0 

E 

LL 


5 


03 


13 

03 

J 



Urban Case Study Communities 



£ o 
(0 o 

O CO 
^ CD 

O ^ 

CC C 



= ~o 
X i5 

~o CO 
"O 

^ CO 

■P 

Q. o 
w o 

X 

CO 



>^ 


>^ 


C 


c 


3 


13 


o 


o 


o 


o 


(0 


c 


03 




E 


03 


o 




X 





Q 

O 



Rural Case Study Communities — 



SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 



Comparison areas are metropolitan areas for urban case study communities, and statewide non-metropolitan areas for rural case 
study communities 



X 

m 

in 

w 



policymakers. One case in point is Holmes County, which 
has epitomized rural poverty for generations. Not until 2006 
did the State of Mississippi develop a task force to explore 
ways to help that area. From the perspective of Holmes 
County residents, all of the state’s recent policy attention 
had focused on the damage from Hurricane Katrina. 

In several of these communities, isolation also con- 
tributes to a state of hopelessness. In Martin County, one 
resident noted that there is a distressing lack of dreams 
and aspirations among residents to live beyond what 
they have experienced their entire lives. In a place where 
imagination is stunted by isolation, the prospects for 
improvement can seem dim indeed. 

Demographic Change 

In 2000 nearly 30 percent of West Fresno’s 
residents were foreign-born; of those, aimost 
haif hod not arrived in the United States until 
the 1990s. 

—Fresno case study 



“We need to change the culture that dictates 
that being a young, singie parent is socioiiy 
acceptable. Teenage pregnancy in our com- 
munity is viewed as a reality, not a probiem.’’ 

—El Paso nonprofit executive director 

Much of the existing literature on concentrated poverty 
focuses on the experience of African-American house- 
holds In inner-city neighborhoods. Several of the com- 
munities profiled in this report, including Cleveland, 
Milwaukee, Springfield, and Rochester, exhibit the effects 
of similar dynamics: the selective out-migration of middle- 
income white and black households accompanied indus- 
trial decline, leaving these inner-city areas much poorer, 
and with much higher shares of racial and ethnic minori- 
ties, than in 1970. 

The case studies in this report illustrate well that this 
is not the only story associated with concentrated poverty. 
In Miami, for example, the arrival of Haitian immigrants 
into South Florida, peaking in the 1980s, transformed the 



173 



SYNTHESIS 



ethnic profile of what is now the Little Haiti neighborhood. 
Many of these immigrants arrived in the United States with 
limited English language and labor market skills, which 
explains in part the leap in that neighborhood’s poverty 
rate— from 24 percent in 1970 to 48 percent in 1990. 

In fact, immigration transformed entire regions, 
including South Florida, California’s Central Valley, and 
central and south Texas. Recent arrivals may be hard 
workers and risk-takers for venturing far from home, but 
they also tend to be much poorer than their native-born 
neighbors. One question this report raises is whether 
communities like West Fresno and Chamizal remain 
stepping-stones for newly arrived immigrants, or whether 
the level of poverty in these communities has closed the 
gateway to opportunity, leaving families mired in poverty 
generation after generation. In West Fresno, interviews 
suggested that the gateway is closing, and that many 
more new immigrant households get trapped. And as we 
discuss later in this chapter, where local schools struggle 
to respond to the challenges of teaching a poor, low- 
income student body, the development of human capital 
falls behind, making upward mobility that much more dif- 
ficult. Future empirical research that borrows from exist- 
ing studies of multigenerational economic mobility (see 
references in overview chapter) should focus on whether 
residents of high-poverty neighborhoods— including 
those of newly arrived immigrants— are at a greater dis- 
advantage for economic advancement. 

A second key demographic change that has influ- 
enced levels of neighborhood poverty has been the 
increase in single-parent families. From 1970 to 2000, the 
proportion of U.S. births occurring among unmarried moth- 
ers tripled, from 11 percent to 33 percent.'* Though locally 
specific historical data are unavailable, the increase in 
births to unmarried mothers in many of these communi- 
ties appears to be above the national average. In every 
one of the case study communities, single-parent families 
represent a greater share of households than in their wider 
metropolitan or rural areas.^ While multiple factors underlie 
this long-term demographic trend, the high proportion of 
single-earner households with children contributes to the 
concentration of poverty in these communities.® 

The Diverse Economic Context for Concentrated Poverty 

From 1990 to 2000, the total number of people living 
in high-poverty neighborhoods nationwide dropped by 
one-fourth. The strong economic growth and low 



unemployment rates of the 1990s, coupled with lower 
crime and new investment in cities, likely contributed to 
these dramatic declines. Viewed against the backdrop of 
that economic growth, the fact that many of the communi- 
ties profiled in this report struggle with deeply entrenched 
poverty suggests that poverty is not easily overcome by 
improving regional economic circumstances alone. 

Indeed, as the case studies in this report demon- 
strate, concentrated poverty exists in communities with 
strong and weak regional economies alike. It exists in 
communities that have seen considerable job growth, as 
well as in those that have suffered significant employ- 
ment losses and industrial declines. The disparate eco- 
nomic conditions in communities’ respective local and 
regional economies establish a context for their future 
prospects, framing challenges and shaping the types of 
policies that might be effective at reducing poverty in 
these places. 

Weak Markets 

“If you want a good [paying] job, you have to 
go somewhere else.’’ 

—Martin County resident 

The city has designated the commercial dis- 
tricts in the Northern Crescent [of Rochester] 
as “not currently viable.’’ 

—Rochester case study 

“In this community, livable-wage jobs are even 
harder to find than that baseline [minimum- 
wage] job.’’ 

—Springfield head of Greater Springfield YMCA 

For many of the case study communities, regional 
economic decline has been one of the key factors con- 
tributing to concentrated poverty there, consistent with 
the existing literature on high-poverty neighborhoods in 
the Northeast and Midwest. 

Case study communities such as those in Spring- 
field, Rochester, Cleveland, and Milwaukee illustrate the 
relationship between concentrated poverty and regional 
economic decline and de-industrialization.’’ Each of 



174 



these communities’ metropolitan areas saw a steady 
and significant decrease in the percentage of population 
employed in manufacturing jobs between 1970 and 2000. 
(See Figure 3) Each also suffered an absolute decline in 
manufacturing jobs even as their total number of jobs 
expanded. As researchers have argued, the decline of 
manufacturing jobs from these regions has reduced the 
availability of decent-paying employment opportuni- 
ties for workers with lower levels of formal education.® 
Furthermore, while manufacturing jobs did not disap- 
pear completely, overall job growth in these metro areas 
has been sluggish, averaging about half of the national 
annual rate of 2 percent over the 30-year period.® These 
two closely linked phenomena have reduced employ- 
ment opportunities for residents with limited job skills 
and/or lower levels of education, many of whom are over- 
represented in high-poverty neighborhoods. 

This report also shows that cities in the Northeast 
and Midwest are not the only places where concentrated 
poverty exists amid regional economic change and 
decline. In East Albany, for instance, poverty increases 
since 1970 coincided with the region’s loss of several 
large manufacturing plants and population out-migration. 

Other case study communities lie within regions that 
relied historically on natural resource industries, but have 

FIGURE 3 



Some case study communities’ MSAs 
experienced significant de-industrialization 
in the late 20th century 




SOURCE: U.S. Bureau of Economic Analysis, Regional Eco- 
nomic Information System, Table CA25, Total Full-time and 
Part-time Employment by Industry 



undergone similar employment restructuring. Agricultural 
jobs in Holmes County and Greenville and mining jobs in 
Martin and McDowell Counties declined with the advent 
of labor-saving technologies. In several such communi- 
ties, few new industries have arrived to fill the result- 
ing employment gaps. While the cotton industry in and 
around Holmes County never paid wages sufficient to lift 
many local residents out of poverty (as evidenced by the 
county’s poverty rate of 61 percent in 1970), the decline of 
agriculture as a way of life has left the community strug- 
gling with a very high rate of unemployment. 

High-poverty communities in these weak-market 
areas face a particularly thorny challenge: regaining their 
economic footing even as their wider regions struggle 
in the transition to a post-industrial economy. Yet sev- 
eral begin the task with valuable physical and economic 
assets borne of their earlier industrial prowess. Some are 
attempting to leverage these strengths to find niches in 
the new economy and create economic opportunities for 
disadvantaged workers and communities. Rochester, for 
example, is part of a wider regional initiative to enhance 
its competitiveness in a variety of technologies, prod- 
ucts, and services, building on its history of success in 
high-value industries such as optics/imaging, advanced 
manufacturing, and medicine. The Finger Lakes WIRED 
initiative includes support for scholarships and appren- 
ticeships to address shortages of skilled workers in 
these key growth industries.'® 

For all their struggles in the post-industrial economy, 
however, regions like Springfield, Rochester, Milwaukee, 
and Cleveland retain a significant job base, with employ- 
ers in advanced manufacturing, higher education, health 
care, and financial services. And Mississippi’s Holmes 
County is located adjacent to counties that are experi- 
encing manufacturing job growth. 

Other case studies in this report exemplify a more 
dire economic context, where there is no regional employ- 
ment base to fall back on. Perhaps the most daunting 
challenges face those high-poverty communities in highly 
isolated regional markets that have either experienced a 
near-total collapse of their economic function or lacked a 
robust economic function in the first place. 

For example, the economies of McDowell and Martin 
Counties were largely built around “King Coal.” In the mid- 
to late 20th century, the industry employed significant 
shares of the local labor force, providing decent incomes 
for most families. Yet mining employment’s decline in 
the wake of mechanization has not been matched by 



175 



SYNTHESIS 



SYNTHESIS 



employment increases in new industries. Martin County is 
struggling to diversify its economic base with the “crutch 
of coal to rely upon,” in the words of one business stake- 
holder. McDowell County has pursued lower-level land 
uses like prisons and waste management, at distinct odds 
with other strategies to promote recreational tourism 
and retirement housing. The geographic and topographic 
isolation of these communities, along with residents’ low 
levels of income and education, spell an uphill battle to 
attract and retain new firms and new investment. 

Even as these Appalachian counties struggle to regain 
a portion of the strong economic foothold they once had, 
other high-poverty areas struggle to create economic 
opportunity where little has ever really existed. Crownpoint 
was settled in the wake of Navajo tribal land allotments in 
the late 19th and early 20th centuries. But the desert and 
high plains of McKinley County thwarted long-term agricul- 
tural or industrial uses. The few jobs that exist in the area 
today require education levels that many adults— especially 
Native Americans— lack, and most are located in towns that 
are a substantial distance from Crownpoint. The Blackfeet 
Reservation in Montana is perhaps even more isolated. 
Treaties and land encroachments in the 1800s shrank the 
Piegan Blackfeet tribe’s lands into a harsh corner of north- 
western Montana, 35 miles from the closest off-reservation 
town. Of the reservation’s residents who work (less than 
half the adult population), the bulk are employed by tribal 
and federal governments. In addition, the legacy of trust 
land management can further hinder economic develop- 
ment by restricting the use of land as collateral. In these 
communities, it remains a significant challenge to develop 
policies and programs that can stimulate private invest- 
ment, spur economic development, and generate employ- 
ment opportunities for local residents. 

Strong Markets 

‘‘We’re trying to reignite the economic and cul- 
turai iife of this community without dispiacing 
the majority of the peopie who have lived and 
worked here for years.” 

—East Austin nonprofit president and CEO 

‘‘[In 10 years] we’ll all be moved out, and Atlan- 
tic City will be a mega resort.” 

—Atiantic City resident 



While regional economic decline or stagnation 
certainly contributes to concentrated poverty, some 
economically successful regions also contain pockets 
of extreme deprivation. Case study areas in strong mar- 
kets serve as examples of regions in which, although 
population, employment, and/or real estate prices have 
been rising, certain neighborhoods are not reaping the 
benefits of that growth. 

For example, recent years have seen aggressive 
redevelopment in many of Miami’s urban neighborhoods. 
In Little Haiti, however, housing conditions remain quite 
poor, and language and cultural differences create bar- 
riers between the local population and the wider South 
Florida economy. Fresno, while still diversifying economi- 
cally from its agricultural base, has experienced strong 
growth over the past decade or more, benefiting from 
an influx of middle-class residents." Yet the bulk of that 
population and job growth has occurred on the city’s 
north side, with the west side seeing increasing poverty 
and isolation. Like Fresno, the El Paso region boasts a 
growing middle-class population, on both sides of the 
U.S.-Mexico border. Yet the tremendous isolation of the 
Chamizal neighborhood is evident both in its largely poor, 
undereducated, immigrant population as well as in the 
lack of new local investment. A similar pattern affects 
West Greenville, whose location on— quite literally— the 
other side of the tracks has separated it from the popula- 
tion and economic growth that has begun to take hold in 
other parts of the city and region. 

The plight of these case study communities serves 
as a reminder that the long-term exclusion of these 
areas and their residents is not easily overcome by 
improving regional economic circumstances alone. More 
active interventions may be needed to ensure that rising 
regional tides truly lift all boats. 

In other case study communities, such as Atlantic 
City’s Bungalow Park/Marina District and East Austin, 
change is already afoot. Local economic growth has 
created market opportunities to which residents of these 
very poor neighborhoods could possibly respond.'^ In 
addition, efforts are under way to improve the ability of 
local residents to take advantage of these opportunities. 
The agreement with the Borgata Casino to train and find 
employment for Atlantic City residents, for example, and 
the activity of microlenders PeopleFund and BiGAUSTIN 
in East Austin point to demands for labor and financial 
services that could potentially benefit families in these 
high-poverty communities. 



176 



Yet local jobs, while plentiful, may have skill or 
screening requirements that effectively exclude large 
portions of the local labor force in high-poverty areas. 
Furthermore, even when one finds work in the hospitality 
or service industries in places like Atlantic City or Miami, 
the jobs often do not pay enough to escape poverty and 
high-poverty neighborhoods in a city with rapidly rising 
living costs. Economic growth, investment, and house- 
price appreciation in and around these communities 
occurred so rapidly between 2000 and 2006 that resi- 
dents interviewed for the case studies expressed uncer- 
tainty about whether they will truly benefit over the long 
term. Affordable housing options may be in increasingly 
short supply, raising the specter of displacement. 

■ II. THE CHALLENGES OF 
CONCENTRATED POVERTY 

One of the key inquiries in the concentrated poverty 
literature, as discussed in the overview chapter, concerns 
whether and how living in a very poor area creates obsta- 
cles to escaping poverty and achieving self-sufficiency. 
Much evidence from the case studies highlights the 
challenges that can affect low-income persons regardless 
of where they live. Difficulties in finding employment that 
pays a living wage, accessing affordable housing, and 
managing finances to make ends meet are issues that are 
relevant for most of America’s poor, including those who 
live in middle-income or high-income neighborhoods. 

Most of this report’s attention, however, has focused 
on the particular challenges faced by families and com- 
munities where poverty is geographically concentrated 
at rates of 40 percent and above. In conducting these 
case studies, and in particular through Interviews with 
residents and local stakeholders, we found that neigh- 
borhoods do matter. Some of the concerns that emerged 
in case study communities as different as Cleveland’s 
Central neighborhood. West Fresno, and the Blackfeet 
Reservation were strikingly similar, from a lack of high- 
quality schools and worker skills to problems with hous- 
ing conditions, affordability, and location. 

Indeed, the communities profiled in this report share 
serious, simultaneous breakdowns In several areas funda- 
mental to community well-being, impeding their efforts at 
turnaround. Across communities, these problems are not 
always of the same magnitude, or even type. For instance, 
housing problems in some communities relate to high 
concentrations of subsidized rental units, where in others. 



an abundance of low-quality owner-occupied units is the 
issue. Yet the same core issues appear across most case 
studies. The consistency of these themes suggests areas 
in which high-poverty communities of different stripes may 
find a common basis for understanding and resolving their 
myriad challenges. In this section, we examine how local 
stakeholders and residents perceive the main challenges 
associated with being poor in a poor neighborhood. 

Schools and Skills 

“[A] lot of the parents missed out on informa- 
tion and training as they came through. So in 
one sense, [we’re] almost trying to educate 
two generations.” 

—McDowell County public schools interim superintendent 

‘‘[For schools in high-poverty areas] expecta- 
tions are lower. Opportunities are lower. Disci- 
pline is a priority as opposed to enrichment.” 

—Springfield director of New England Black Chamber of Commerce 

‘‘How does a kid keep moving from grade to 
grade and no one has noticed that he can’t 
read or write or do math?” 

—Cleveland’s Central neighborhood recreation director 

‘‘The major issue for parents of my Head Start 
students is the lack of education and the need 
foraGED.” 

—East Albany CDC director 

It is hard to deny the importance of a skilled local labor 
force for supporting other key facets of community suc- 
cess, such as lower poverty and crime, greater Invest- 
ment, and increased access to employment. Higher 
levels of job skills and educational attainment are even 
more important in today’s economy, where fewer good- 
paying production jobs are available to workers with only 
a high school education. This is evident in places such 
as Milwaukee, where breweries and manufacturers once 
dominated the economy. 

Yet many high-poverty communities today find them- 
selves trapped in a Catch-22 with respect to building a 



177 



SYNTHESIS 



SYNTHESIS 



more skilled workforce. First, nearly all are served by local 
schools that underperform metropolitan or statewide 
rural averages on standardized tests. (See Figure 4) While 
data on school performance are challenging to interpret 
due to differences in state standards, overall the graph 
shows significant disparities in reading and math achieve- 
ment between the case study communities and their 
surrounding areas. The exception is West Fresno, where 
a local magnet high school contributes to higher average 
proficiency scores on the standardized exams, although 
neighborhood students have not performed as well as 
students bused in from other areas of the district.'^ 

In addition, in many of the case studies, interviewees 
indicated that education was a major challenge in these 
high-poverty communities. Local schools struggle to 
educate overwhelmingly disadvantaged student popula- 
tions and, like those in West Greenville, face problems 
attracting and retaining highly qualified teachers. One 
stakeholder from Cleveland’s Central neighborhood 
noted, “Schools are being asked to deal with things they 
shouldn’t have to,” including controlling violence and 
disorder and acting as social services providers for stu- 
dents and their families. 

Schools in high-poverty communities with a large 
percentage of recent immigrants— such as Little Haiti, 
West Fresno, and Chamizal— face the added challenges 
of teaching children whose first language is not English 
and involving their linguistically isolated parents, as with 
the Creole-speaking community in Little Haiti. Schools in 
some of these areas also confront economic and cultural 
expectations that children should work, like those in 
Chamizal that lose significant numbers of students each 
year who leave school to work in low-skill jobs to support 
their families. 

Moreover, children in these high-poverty communities, 
growing up amid the economic distress that surrounds 
them, may undervalue education and either fail to com- 
plete high school or forgo higher education. Parental 
involvement is also often lower in these communities. In 
McDowell, the interim superintendent of the public schools 
noted that parents of families in multigenerational poverty 
may think, “It didn’t work for me, so why would it work 
for my child?” In East Albany and West Fresno, commu- 
nity leaders pointed to links between high rates of teen 
pregnancy and low rates of high school completion, which 
further limit the ability of young girls to succeed in the 
labor market. The case studies also illustrate the compli- 
cated linkages between problems in the schools and other 



issues in the community. In West Greenville, for instance, 
the county schools superintendent noted that high rates 
of student suspension contribute to more young people 
“in the streets,” providing more opportunities to become 
involved in crime or other harmful activities. 

Poor-quality schools may also impede efforts to 
attract middle-income households into the community, 
even when improvements to the housing stock are made. 
For instance, researchers have identified the importance 
of high-quality local schools to efforts aimed at attracting 
and retaining an economically diverse group of families 
to mixed-income housing developments.'"* 

The lack of school achievement is subsequently 
mirrored in the low education levels of adults in these 
high-poverty communities. In nearly all cases, at least 40 
percent lack a high school diploma (and even higher per- 
centages in immigrant-heavy neighborhoods), versus 20 
percent of the U.S. adult population. The overwhelming 
majority of case studies note that low levels of education 
and job skills in these communities hurt the employability 
of workers. For example, case study interviews revealed 
that Atlantic City residents were unable to find work at 
casinos, Holmes County residents could not get hired 
at the local Nissan plant, and McDowell County resi- 
dents were disqualified from employment opportunities 
at Wal-Mart. Even where training opportunities and job 
connections are available, as in East Albany, Springfield, 
and Cleveland, these programs may be under-enrolled, 
misaligned with what jobs are actually available, or of 
insufficient scale to tackle the barriers facing potential 
workers in these communities. In the end, all of these 
communities significantly lag their surrounding regions 
in the share of adults who are actually in the labor force. 
(See Figure 5) 

The case studies also suggest that the lack of a skilled 
workforce— coupled with the other problems affecting 
high-poverty communities— deterred business investment. 
Chamizal leaders, for example, said that only low-skill, labor- 
intensive industries located there due to the poor quality of 
schools and job-training programs. Leaders in the Missis- 
sippi Delta lamented that Venezuela was a more attractive 
investment option than their area. 

Tackling either local school or adult labor force prob- 
lems is a large task; addressing them together— arguably 
the challenge facing these high-poverty communities— is a 
monumental one. The scale and gravity of their problems 
suggests that most high-poverty communities will need 
serious interventions on multiple fronts to ensure that 



178 



PERCENT ACHIEVING PERCENT ACHIEVING 

PROFICIENCY IN MATH, 2005 PROFICIENCY IN READING, 2005 



FIGURE 4 

Schools in case study communities under-perform those in comparison areas 
on state exams 



READING 






o 

o 

(fi 



O 

X 



3 

o 

o 



Q 

O 



CL S 
O 

CD 



Rural Case Study Communities — 



MATH 




SOURCE: Standard and Poors’ School Matters; www.schoolmatters.com 



Comparison areas are metropolitan areas for urban case study communities, and statewide non-metropolitan areas for rural case 
study communities 



179 



SYNTHESIS 



SYNTHESIS 



children and adults gain decent educational and employ- 
ment opportunities. Moreover, as leading practitioners and 
policymakers have noted, forging stronger connections 
between residents of these communities and opportuni- 
ties in their wider regions may be at least as important as 
creating new educational institutions or jobs within high- 
poverty areas themselves.'® 

Housing 

‘‘You don’t know when somebody is going to 
camp in [a vacant property] and do something 
or start a fire.” 

—Rochester resident 

‘‘Many of the rental units are cash cows, mean- 
ing there is no incentive to upgrade the property 
when they are at 100 percent capacity” 

—El Paso affordable housing advocate 

Between 2000 and 2004, nearly 40 percent of 
all Low Income Housing Tax Credit units built in 
the city as set-asides for low-income households 
were built in West Fresno. 

—Fresno case study 

Housing problems were at least as widely cited among 
stakeholders in the case study communities as problems 
with local schools and labor force readiness. Housing 
constitutes not only the largest part of most families’ 
budgets, but it is also one of the most visible signals of 
neighborhood quality. Moreover, research has shown that 
housing conditions impact the well-being of the homes’ 
occupants as well as that of the surrounding neighbor- 
hood. (See overview chapter) 

The case studies articulate distinct housing problems 
affecting different types of high-poverty communities. 

First, several communities exhibit very poor housing quality 
overall. On the Blackfeet Reservation, manufactured homes 
do not stand up well to the harsh climate and many public 
housing units have become contaminated with mold and 
moisture. Much of Chamizal’s and Little Haiti’s aging inven- 
tory is overcrowded or lacks basic facilities. Substandard 
housing can be found throughout Holmes County, but 
when the local community development corporation (GDC) 



attempted to upgrade the stock with new federally subsi- 
dized homes, qualified buyers were not available. 

Second, a few of the weak-market urban communi- 
ties face issues with abandoned properties. Community 
leaders in Cleveland, Rochester, and Springfield point to 
poorly maintained and vacant housing as a magnet for 
criminal activity, a barrier to private investment, and a 
costly burden on local public budgets, including through 
reductions in the value of surrounding properties.'® 

Third, interviewees in most case study areas cited 
issues with housing affordability. In some areas, afford- 
ability problems— often expressed as the proportion of 
families paying from more than 30 percent to more than 
50 percent of their income on housing costs— stem from 
low incomes earned by residents. In others, however, 
housing costs (including property taxes) have risen in 
the face of new development, with formerly affordable 
options dwindling. Back Maryland, one of the neighbor- 
hoods in the Atlantic City case study community, could 
see its stock of privately owned HDD-subsidized afford- 
able housing shrink in the near future with the expiration 
of agreements with HUD that maintain their affordability. 
For its part. East Austin has experienced rapid house 
price appreciation in recent years, forcing many longtime 
residents of the neighborhood to move farther out to find 
more affordable housing. 

Fourth, many of the urban case study areas remain 
very poor in part because they have long been the 
receptacle for outsized shares of their region’s public and 
subsidized housing. (See Figure 6) Chamizal, home to just 
4 percent of the El Paso region’s rental units, nonethe- 
less contains 13 percent of the region’s HDD-subsidized 
units. West Fresno has just 2 percent of the Fresno area’s 
rental units but 9 percent of its HDD-subsidized units. And 
it has remained on the receiving end of new affordable 
housing developments in the past few years. As a public 
official in Springfield noted, affordable housing policies of 
the past did not take account of local market conditions, 
and served to concentrate families in neighborhoods 
with little economic opportunity. As the overview chapter 
notes, responding to affordable housing needs by dis- 
tributing subsidized housing units across a region rather 
than by continuing to build them in poor neighborhoods 
may lead to better outcomes for low-income families over 
the long term. 

Moving and managing the housing market through 
new public and private investment, however, is itself 
a long-term effort. Such strategies will inevitably be 



180 



Case study communities have smaller shares of adults in the workforce than their 
comparison areas 




SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000 



Comparison areas are metropolitan areas for urban case study communities, and statewide non-metropolitan areas for rural case 
study communities 



FIGURE 



6 



HUD-subsidized units make up a much larger share of rental housing in urban case study 
communities than in comparison areas 



O 

O 



LU 
_l N 

? 9 

Z CO 

LU cn 
(T =5 
U.^ 

o§ 

I- X 



< 

I 






SOURCE: U.S. Census Bureau, Census 2000; HUD’s Picture of Subsidized Housing; and LIHTC database 
Comparison areas are metropolitan areas for urban case study communities. 



SYNTHESIS 



balanced against more exigent needs related to current 
housing market instabilities, including managing a ris- 
ing number of foreclosures that are affecting several of 
these neighborhoods.'^' 

Lack of Mainstream Investment 

‘‘It’s a tough market to work in, especially 
since we need to overturn decades of 
disinvestment.” 

—West Greenville city planner 

‘‘You have to go outside Martin [County to shop] ... 
[we] go to Wal-Mart in Paintsville for stuff.” 

—Martin County resident 

Financiai institutions have historically not 
located bank branches in [West Fresno]. 
Indeed, until 2006, the neighborhood was 
without even an automated teller machine. 

—Fresno case study 

‘‘In working with a population with little formal 
education and a lot of mistrust, mastering 
financial skills is often quite daunting.” 

—El Paso banker 

High-poverty neighborhoods are not an obvious invest- 
ment target for most mainstream businesses, since local 
populations are perceived to have limited buying power 
and ability to support these businesses. What is more, 
businesses may perceive— correctly, in some cases— that 
there are higher costs for serving these communities.'® 
Crime and safety problems that accompany low 
levels of employment, high levels of illicit economic 
activity, large youth populations, and abundant vacant 
housing also dampen investment in high-poverty com- 
munities.'® Neighborhoods including Cleveland’s Central, 
West Greenville, West Fresno, Little Haiti, Atlantic City’s 
Bungalow Park/Marina District, and Rochester’s North- 
ern Crescent all cited crime— including problems with 
drugs and gang violence— as an issue in the community. 
The return of thousands of ex-offenders to northwest 



Milwaukee not only raises the specter of crime in that 
neighborhood, but also contributes to its ongoing labor 
market challenges. And while residents regard McDow- 
ell County largely as a safe place, the high incidence of 
fraud-related crimes was noted as creating barriers to 
local investment. 

In addition to limiting the availability of jobs and ser- 
vices, the lack of private-sector investment may make the 
area less attractive to middle-income workers and fami- 
lies, thereby contributing to a cycle of decline that leaves 
the community poorer over time. It may also make life 
more difficult— and more expensive— for the low-income 
residents who remain. A nearby supermarket, for instance, 
seems among the most basic amenities that make for an 
appealing community. And yet the West Greenville neigh- 
borhood has no grocery store, the whole of Atlantic City 
lacks a supermarket, and some residents of the Blackfeet 
Reservation endure a half-day’s drive to reach one. 

Financial institutions represent another key local 
amenity for most residents, providing them with access 
to cash, savings, and capital for small business and 
housing needs. Here, too, a few case study commu- 
nities— Crownpoint, East Albany, Chamizal, and West 
Greenville among them— lack traditional banking options 
within or near their borders. Instead, these and other 
communities are populated with so-called “nontradi- 
tional” financial services providers, which offer check 
cashing, payday loans, remittances, and other non-bank 
financial products. Conducting financial transactions 
through these nontraditional providers typically costs 
more than mainstream options. In addition, these 
providers offer customers fewer vehicles for savings and 
longer-term financial management.®® 

Several other case study communities, however, 
including those in Cleveland, McDowell County, Spring- 
field, and Rochester, noted the nearby location of one 
or more banks. Still, for some of these areas’ residents 
and community leaders, banks rank lower on the list 
of needs. “Why does one need a bank account if one 
doesn’t have a job?” remarked one Little Haiti resident. In 
El Paso, a banker observed that the immigrant commu- 
nity there faces steep learning and trust curves in order 
to navigate even the most basic elements of the U.S. 
financial system. And despite their physical proximity to 
banks and credit unions, many residents of Rochester’s 
Northern Crescent neighborhoods opt to use alternative 
providers because of convenience, cost, or past negative 
experiences with mainstream financial institutions. 



182 



High levels of negative or absent credit records 
present a further barrier to economic progress among 
residents of the case study communities. Interviewees 
in Holmes County and Crownpoint, in particular, noted 
the struggles their residents face in managing consumer 
debt. Indeed, across all of the urban case study com- 
munities, a much higher share of consumers have thin 
credit files, meaning they have little or no credit history 
on record, than in the surrounding metro areas.^' Even 
among those consumers who have more substantial 
credit records, much lower proportions have very good 
scores that qualify them for the lowest-cost credit. As 
a reflection of this, mortgage borrowers from the case 
study communities in 2005 were, in most cases, consid- 
erably more likely than their counterparts in surrounding 
areas to receive high-cost loans.^^ (See Figure 7) Such 
high-priced credit could further erode the ability of 
consumers in these communities to manage debt and 
ultimately improve their financial profiles. This suggests 
a need for more deliberate steps to bridge not just the 
geographic gap between financial institutions and low- 
income communities, but also the gaps between the 



financial needs and financial knowledge of lower-income 
families and the products currently offered to them. ^ 

m 

w 

w 

■ III. THE CAPACITY TO ADDRESS ISSUES 
ASSOCIATED WITH CONCENTRATED POVERTY 



“[Trust land management is] an old dinosaur 
system that’s supposed to be the guardian of 
Indian people.’’ 

—Blackfeet Reservation community development ieader 

“There’s a sense that is instilled in longtime 
residents that the city is not there to serve you.’’ 

—East Austin neighborhood development leader 



“If Bill Gates wonted to give $1 billion to the 
neighborhood, could we use it?’’ 

—West Fresno community advocate 



FIGURE 



7 



Borrowers from most case study communities were more likely in 2005 to receive 
high-cost mortgage loans than their counterparts in comparison areas 



C/D 




O 0 



I 




I- < 




CL 




>^ 

C 

TO 

< 



>^ 

C 

TO 

< 



_g 

TO 

D)-- 
c Q 



(0 



>^ »- 
TO 

O ^ 

c TO 
TO D_ 



c 


TO 


TO 


O 






to 


to 

< 


C 

O 

o 


N 

E 

TO 


(0 

LL 




'to 

X 


<D 


to 

TO 


■d 


o 


to 

0) 


O Ci 


'3 


o 

z 


LU 

C 


c 

TO 

O 


6 

<0 

TO 


5 

o 




E 


di 

o 


to 

Z3 

< 


> 

o 

o 


D. 

LU 


C 

(0 

E 

LL 


§ 


TO 


D 

TO 

J 



Urban Case Study Communities 



£ o 

U) o 
^ <D 
O 

CC c 



= ~o 
X i5 

CO 

■P 

CL o 
CO o 

X 

CO 





>^ 


"c 


c 




3 


o 


o 


o 


o 


to 


c 


<D 




E 


TO 


o 




I 







^ c 




c 

O 


§ 

o 

o 


c 'o 

=3 Q. 
O C 

O 5 


'o 

TO 

O 


TO 

> 

o3 


o 


>'2 


TO 


(0 

O 


5 




CC 


o 


c 


■D 




Q 


':2 


C 


o 


O 


o 


O 

CL 


o 

u 








TO 








CD 



Rural Case Study Communities — 



SOURCE: Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA) data 



Comparison areas are metropolitan areas for urban case study communities, and statewide non-metropolitan areas for rural case 
study communities. 



183 



SYNTHESIS 



“I’ve been in this community, actuaiiy living on 
this property, for 29 years now... I haven’t seen 
a program that’s still in existence or been con- 
sistent in this community because they start a 
lot of programs.’’ 

—Cleveland's Central neighborhood resident 

A final theme that emerged from the 16 case studies con- 
cerned their communities’ limited capacity to address 
the problems associated with concentrated poverty. 

While many factors that influence levels of poverty reside 
outside of the domain of local or even regional actors, 
the delivery of social services and responsibility for 
neighborhood revitalization efforts often fall to commu- 
nity groups and local government agencies. Although 
several of the communities, most notably Cleveland, have 
a well-developed community development infrastructure, 
most of the case studies revealed that stakeholders did 
not regard nonprofit actors as fully capable of managing 
the multifaceted efforts needed to overcome the myriad 
barriers facing these communities. New and evolving 
problems, changing populations, and difficulty retaining 
talented younger people in the area were all cited as fac- 
tors that impaired community capacity. 

In addition, capacity problems in these communities 
are not confined to the nonprofit sector. In the recent 
past, elected leaders in Springfield and Atlantic City have 
abused citizen trust, eroding the chances for meaningful 
partnerships to address local problems. On the Blackfeet 
Reservation, the governance structure imposed by the 
Indian Reorganization Act of 1934 has posed difficulties 
for the tribe, providing too little separation of powers 
—for example, between the council and the courts— and 
contributing to the uncertain business environment on 
the reservation. Private-sector leadership is also in short 
supply in many of these communities, a by-product of 
the decline of large employers (e.g., Kodak in Rochester’s 
Northern Crescent) and/or local banks’ limited experience 
in financing community development activities (cited as 
concerns by stakeholders in East Albany, West Fresno, 
and McDowell County). 

Across the case studies, capacity issues were appar- 
ent in three related areas: expertise, governance, and trust. 

Expertise 

Regardless of the duration of their communities’ 



suffering from high levels of poverty, leaders expressed 
unilateral frustration at the lack of local organizational 
capacity and experience to address the scale and scope 
of problems their communities face. In Holmes County, 
interviewees pointed to problems both in promoting col- 
laboration among the county’s municipalities as well as 
in doing the actual work necessary to stimulate effec- 
tive change. Said one, “With limited staff and all you 
have to do, it’s hard.” In West Fresno, community lead- 
ers doubted their own ability to handle a major infusion 
of capital, given existing gaps in technical skills, frag- 
mented leadership, and a lack of political will and vision. 
Similar concerns about strategic balkanization across 
the public, private, and nonprofit sectors arose in Atlantic 
City. And in East Albany, city officials felt that the commu- 
nity lacked effective nonprofit organizations with which 
to partner in order to implement revitalization plans. 

In some instances, case study community stakehold- 
ers lamented the lack or misdirection of funding needed 
to enhance local community development capacity. In 
West Fresno, nonprofit representatives noted that the 
city used federal Community Development Block Grant 
dollars primarily to augment police and infrastructure, 
rather than to boost funding for local organizations. 

While stakeholders acknowledged that addressing crime 
in the community was a legitimate need, the lack of 
a source of funding for nonprofits made it difficult for 
new organizations to become more effective or reach 
more residents. Competition for philanthropic attention 
is fierce there, too, evidenced by some stakeholders 
opining that Fresno’s needs were overshadowed by big- 
ger players in the San Francisco Bay Area and Southern 
California. Holmes County interviewees sounded a similar 
theme, maintaining that the state has showered greater 
attention and financial support upon Mississippi’s faster- 
developing (and hurricane-ravaged) coastal area. 

Although not mentioned as often in case study inter- 
views, resident mobility and turnover could also serve to 
limit the capacity of these communities to stimulate and 
manage change. In the high-poverty urban communities 
especially, significant proportions of households (gener- 
ally 45 percent or more) lived in a different house in 2000 
than in 1995. These households may have relocated from 
the same neighborhood, an adjacent neighborhood, or 
another region entirely. Many have likely moved on since 
then.^^ Such continuous turnover could further complicate 
efforts to build the capacity of these areas to address the 
multiple challenges they and their residents face. At the 



184 



same time, significant mobility in these neighborhoods 
could benefit individuals by reducing their long-run expo- 
sure to areas of concentrated poverty. 

Other case study communities, particularly in older 
northern cities, seem to enjoy a robust community devel- 
opment structure borne out of earlier strife, activism, and 
philanthropy. Leaders in Cleveland’s Central neighbor- 
hood, for instance, point to a number of longstanding 
nonprofit institutions that are dedicated to serving the 
area’s residents and to connecting the area to public 
and private investment. Even so, as the quote that leads 
off this section suggests, ensuring the sustainability and 
effectiveness of programs can be a challenge. Nonprofits 
in Rochester’s Northern Crescent have succeeded in for- 
malizing relationships with city and county governments 
to improve citizen engagement in community develop- 
ment activities. Cf course, these communities still suffer 
from high levels of poverty and associated problems, 
suggesting that community development leadership 
alone is not sufficient to overcome negative regional 
economic trends or severe gaps in residents’ education 
and skills. However, the stronger leadership in these 
places may situate them better to help residents take 
advantage of emerging opportunities within, and outside, 
their borders. 

Governance 

Complicated governance arrangements pose a 
second challenge to local capacity in a few of the case 
study communities, relating both to land use and civic 
oversight. Such arrangements serve to obscure responsi- 
bility and reduce community efficacy. 

These problems are perhaps thorniest for Native 
American lands. Cn the Blackfeet Reservation and in 
Crownpoint alike, residents describe how fragmented 
land ownership and federally imposed governance rela- 
tionships have inhibited market development. Much of 
the Blackfeet Reservation is still held in trust for the tribe 
by the U.S. Department of the Interior; procedures for 
securing the land as collateral for economic and housing 
development are often lengthy and complicated. Land 
in Crownpoint is owned by a mix of federal, state, tribal, 
and private-sector actors, yielding a “checkerboard” of 
interested parties that complicates planning and deters 
private investment. 

The problem is not confined to Native American 
lands, either. In McDowell County, similar issues derive 



from absentee corporations owning so much of its land. 
To the extent that residents of these areas hope to con- 
nect to new market opportunities, such fragmentation 
acts as a substantial barrier to building their capacity for 
change and growth. 

In some of these high-poverty communities, govern- 
ance problems go beyond land ownership. McDowell 
County interviewees noted that county government frag- 
ments its approaches to highly interrelated policy areas 
such as transportation, land use, housing, and environ- 
mental quality. The result is that no single organization 
or coalition is equipped to influence decisions across all 
of these areas. In East Austin, impoverished neighbor- 
hoods do not necessarily have specifically designated 
elected representatives who can serve as a voice for and 
address the needs of their community. In high-poverty 
areas in both strong and weak markets, a lack of effec- 
tive governance mechanisms that could foster joint 
public/private/nonprofit decisionmaking may well hinder 
efforts to promote sustainable, positive change. 

Trust 

A lack of trust among residents of case study 
communities and their wider areas also serves to under- 
cut collaborative decisionmaking. Trust barriers arise 
from a number of sources, according to residents and 
stakeholders alike: from the stigma attached to these 
communities (e.g., the “river rats” moniker applied to 
residents of East Albany and the perception of rampant 
crime affecting Springfield’s Old Hill, Six Corners, and 
South End neighborhoods); from the still-raw wounds 
of forced relocation and urban renewal (e.g., Blackfeet 
Reservation, West Greenville, West Fresno); and from 
residents’ views that public officials do not understand 
or care much about their predicament (a concern voiced 
in East Austin, Holmes County, and Little Haiti). In both 
Springfield and Atlantic City, as noted earlier, recent 
instances of municipal corruption have negatively 
affected community morale and led local stakeholders to 
cast a skeptical eye on public-sector initiatives to facili- 
tate community improvement. 

Such suspicions on both sides may limit outward 
connections to economic opportunity for residents of 
these areas, as well as inward investment and migra- 
tion that could improve community economic standing. 
For example, in Little Haiti, cultural norms may militate 
against community cohesiveness, while geographic and 



185 



SYNTHESIS 



SYNTHESIS 



linguistic isolation may limit the extent to which Haitian 
nonprofits are willing to partner with outside organiza- 
tions to boost local resources. 

Perhaps most important, trust levels in each of 
these communities are affected by the conditions that 
surround their residents daily. Interviews with commu- 
nity leaders suggest that the persistence of problems 
with, for example, poor-quality housing or high levels of 
crime, contributes to a lack of confidence among com- 
munity members that their elected officials and other 
civic leaders can be effective partners in improving the 
socioeconomic well-being of residents. This trust divide 
may represent one of the most critical issues in address- 
ing the challenges of concentrated poverty, since it 
arguably sets the context for all other types of interven- 
tions— particularly as community development policies 
and strategies increasingly require broad public-private 
partnerships and resident participation. 

Even if these capacity problems were resolved, 
however, many of these communities would still face 
daunting challenges. Clearly, strong community leader- 
ship is needed to begin addressing central problems in 
high-poverty areas, such as limited education and skills, 
inadequate housing, and lack of mainstream invest- 
ment. But on its own, community leadership cannot turn 
a deindustrializing regional economy into a high-tech 
boomtown; it cannot convert a harsh, windswept plain 
into abundant farmland. And it cannot readily speed the 
social and economic incorporation of thousands of recent 
immigrants with limited English-language proficiency and 
scarce resources. 

Circumstances beyond the control of community 
leaders will continue to shape the opportunities and 
challenges facing residents of high-poverty areas. As 
one leader from Rochester’s Northern Crescent com- 
mented, the neighborhood is, despite its best efforts, 
“running to stand still.” Although enhanced expertise, 
streamlined and transparent governance, and higher 
levels of trust among local organizations will not suffice 
to tackle the multifaceted problems these places and 
their residents face, they are nevertheless valuable quali- 
ties that can help organizations improve a community’s 
prospects over time. Nimble organizations able to forge 
partnerships with public, private, and philanthropic 
sectors and embrace opportunities for residents that 
exist beyond their community’s borders may help com- 
munities such as the ones profiled in this report to move 
beyond poverty.^” 



■ IV. ADDRESSING CONCENTRATED POVERTY 

The 16 case studies in this report document a num- 
ber of difficult and interrelated challenges faced by 
high-poverty areas— none of which is easy to address. 
Perhaps the most vexing question to answer is, what 
strategies are most effective in tackling the problems of 
concentrated poverty? Just as concentrated poverty has 
long characterized portions of the American social and 
economic landscape, so too have policymakers wrestled 
with multiple, sometimes competing, visions of how to 
address it. 

Federal and state programs that offer direct financial 
support or in-kind transfers can help to address some 
of the challenges associated with living in poverty. For 
example, means-tested programs such as Temporary 
Assistance for Needy Families (TANF), Head Start, and 
food stamps can support low-income families by helping 
them to meet their basic needs. The Earned Income Tax 
Credit is another federal policy that supports low-income 
working families by providing a refundable tax credit that 
can help to boost their incomes. These policies— as well 
as social insurance programs such as Social Security, 
Medicare, unemployment insurance, workers’ compensa- 
tion, and disability insurance— all have a place in discus- 
sions of what policies are needed to address poverty 
more broadly.^^ 

In the context of this report, however, the question 
is also about how to address the problems associated 
with poor places. Scholars who have studied past efforts 
at tackling neighborhood poverty have begun to create 
a typology of the different strategies that can address 
the challenges facing distressed communities and the 
families who live there.^® 

The first strategy, improving the neighborhood, 
involves an explicitly place-based focus on the provision 
of community-based affordable housing and business 
enterprise as instruments for neighborhood revitalization. 
Policy tools in this arena— for example. Enterprise Zones or 
the Community Reinvestment Act— have expanded access 
to capital in lower-income communities and supported 
the growth of a national network of nonprofit community 
development corporations. At the same time, however, 
this strategy has been criticized for considering neighbor- 
hoods in isolation from the economic forces affecting their 
wider regions. If pursued alone, a placed-based strategy 
may actually exacerbate concentrated poverty— say, by 
clustering affordable housing in poor neighborhoods. 



186 



The second strategy, expanding opportunity, assumes 
a people-based focus on giving residents of distressed 
neighborhoods access to quality jobs and schools in their 
wider regions. By providing residents with housing vouch- 
ers or access to school choice programs, this strategy 
explicitly seeks to move them to areas of lower poverty, or 
provide them with greater opportunities in those locations. 
As reviewed in the overview chapter, several approaches— 
among them housing vouchers, transportation programs 
like Job Access and Reverse Commute, and other related 
efforts— have shown some success in helping low-income 
families access homes and jobs in lower-poverty areas 
and Improve their own safety and quality of life. At the 
same time, these programs remain imperfect tools, not 
reaching all types of low-income families and all types 
of low-poverty neighborhoods, and not addressing the 
multiple barriers often facing adults and children from 
very low-income areas.^’’ In addition, they may have limited 
applicability to highly isolated areas of concentrated 
poverty, such as those found on the Blackfeet Reservation 
or in Martin County, which do not have access to nearby 
low-poverty, hIgh-opportunity areas. 

The third strategy, transforming the neighborhood, 
incorporates both place-based and people-based ele- 
ments in focusing on fundamentally altering the socio- 
economic mix of distressed areas to create communities 
that are attractive to a broader range of households. 

These efforts often entail significant housing redevelop- 
ment, such as the HOPE VI program, as well as efforts 
to improve local schools and employ local residents. As 
explained below, these approaches have yielded signifi- 
cant revitalization in formerly very high-poverty urban 
communities, and by some measures have succeeded in 
reconnecting them— physically and economically— to their 
surrounding areas. In practice, however, this strategy has 
sometimes been employed without adequate attention to 
the needs of original residents, especially “hard to house” 
families who may end up outside the support system 
entirely. And similar to the expanding opportunity strategy, 
its applicability to remote Native American reservations 
and poor rural areas may be limited. 

Increasing attention is being given to the best way 
to integrate place-based and people-based policies to 
improve the trajectories of high-poverty communities and 
their residents while tailoring those strategies to local 
needs and assets. As the case studies in this report make 
clear, the diverse economic context for concentrated 
poverty demands responses that are equally diverse in 



emphasis. Areas close to emerging economic opportunity 
might choose to focus first on improving workforce skills, 
while more Isolated locations might first seek to improve 
local infrastructure. In the case study communities, public- 
and private-sector leaders are starting to innovate along 
these lines to address the challenges associated with 
concentrated poverty. Many of their initiatives are new and 
have not yet undergone evaluation, but they do reflect the 
range of ways In which communities are attempting to 
address concentrated poverty. 

Employment and Schools 

With low labor force skills a pressing issue across 
nearly all of the case studies, many stakeholders are 
actively promoting workforce development strategies 
that both address barriers to work and connect adults 
to employment opportunities. While researchers are still 
working to disentangle the relative merits of different 
approaches to workforce development, recent analyses 
suggest that well-designed employment programs that 
combine training to enhance participants’ human capi- 
tal with job placement assistance can produce positive 
and lasting impacts.^® This approach is being tried in 
Cleveland, for example, where an innovative program 
at Cuyahoga Community College is helping individuals 
with limited formal education enter the healthcare field 
through a nursing assistant training program, and then 
gain credentials to advance up the occupational ladder. 
Project ARRIBA, a labor market Intermediary in El Paso, 
provides clients with training opportunities from El Paso 
Community College (as well as the local university) for 
jobs in high demand in the local economy, such as health- 
care, education, and information technology positions. 

While not inherently place-based, workforce devel- 
opment programs in two of the case study communities 
are aiming to develop a more localized strategy to boost 
local employment. The Blackfeet Manpower program, 
for one. Is working with employers at adjacent Glacier 
National Park to increase the number of seasonal hires 
who come from the reservation. Similarly, through a com- 
munity benefit agreement in Atlantic City, the Borgata 
Casino is committed to training and finding jobs for 
2,000 unemployed or underemployed local residents. 

In many of these areas, low labor force participation 
may be related to a low financial return from work— the 
lack of a “living wage,” as one Springfield stakeholder 
put It. In that respect, broader policies such as the 
federal Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) are critical labor 



187 



SYNTHESIS 



market supports. Today, approximately 22 million workers 
H and families receive the EITC via their federal income tax 

o3 refund; some earn credits of $4,000 or more per year. 

Research has shown the EITC to be effective in reducing 
poverty, encouraging work, and helping low-income 
families to make ends meet.^® In most of the case study 
communities, between one-quarter and one-half of all 
tax filers claim the EITC, and that share has been grow- 
ing. (See Figure 8) Still, interviewees voiced needs to 
expand awareness of the EITC, especially among immi- 
grant groups; to increase the supply of volunteer tax 
services that provide free tax preparation (both to ensure 
that eligible families claim the credit and to reduce the 
uptake of refund anticipation loans); and to couple those 
services with information about other resources avail- 
able to low-income families (e.g., child care, food stamps, 
health insurance). 

As some case study communities work to upgrade 
the size and quality of the local workforce, others are 
focusing on the educational pipeline, striving to improve 
the quality of local schools. In McDowell County, new 
leadership in the public schools has retooled the curricu- 
lum, enhanced teacher training, and reached out to par- 
ents in new ways, with promising initial results. In Little 



Haiti, efforts are under way to stimulate greater parental 
involvement in schools. The Springfield school system, 
too, is bolstering outreach efforts to parents, and has 
forged a partnership with Springfield College to mentor 
and tutor students at an elementary school in the Old Hill 
neighborhood. 

Additional investments in education are needed at 
multiple grade levels in many of these communities,” 
and local stakeholders may benefit from the experiences 
of other cities developing new models for improving 
local schools. For example, community development 
finance is increasingly being leveraged for educa- 
tional facilities in low-income communities— including 
pre-school and charter school facilities— that support 
broader neighborhood revitalization efforts.^' Community- 
based organizations in cities such as Baltimore, Chicago, 
and Los Angeles have launched charter schools as part 
of a comprehensive neighborhood revitalization strategy, 
and have seen improvements both in student perform- 
ance and at the neighborhood level. Research has shown 
that concurrent investments in local schools reinforce 
investments in housing in poorer areas, as better schools 
become a driver of market demand for housing, attract- 
ing new families to the neighborhood.” 



FIGURE 8 



EITC uptake changes in case study communities 



</> 

DC 

LLl 







O 2 




DC 

LLl 

Q. 




C 

TO 

< 

to 

TO 

LU 

c 

TO 

< 



_o ~ 

C Q 



>^■‘- 
±L TO 

O ^ 

.y ^ 

C TO 
TO D_ 



c 


TO 


TO 


O 


03 ^ 




to 


to 

13 

< 

to 

TO 


C 

<D 

O 

i 5 


N 

E 

TO 

o 


(fi 

23 

LL 

to 

03 


i s 

o ^ 


'to 

X 


03 

5 

o 

z 


LU 

C 


c 

TO 

03 


6 

(fi 

TO 


§ 

o 


ai 

0) 


E 


03 

03 


to 

< 


> 

03 

O 


D. 

LU 


C 

(fi 

23 

LL 


§ 


TO 


D 

TO 



Urban Case Study Communities 



£ o 
(0 o 

Q) (fi 

^ O 

O O 
cc c 

o 



= ~o 
X i5 

-Q CO 

1 2 
Q. o 
CO O 
>< 
CO 



>^ 


>> 


C 


c 


Zi 


z 


o 


o 


o 


o 


to 


c 


03 




E 


TO 


o 




I 







^ c 


l : c 
03 o 


§ 

o 

o 


c o 

Q. 

O c 
O 5 


SI 

O 03 


“03 


>> o 
-^6 


'e ^ 


5 


03 CC 


o 


c 




Q 




C 03 


o 


o 


O 03 






D_ S 

O 






TO 






CD 



Rural Case Study Communities — 



SOURCE: 2000 and 2004 Earned income Tax Credit (EITC) data available at http://webapps/brookings.edu 



188 



Housing 

The housing policy perhaps most intentionally tar- 
geted to address the twin problems of concentrated 
public housing and attendant poverty is the HOPE VI pro- 
gram. Originally known as the Urban Revitalization Dem- 
onstration, HOPE VI was launched in 1993 with the aim of 
eradicating severely distressed public housing and build- 
ing mixed-income communities in their stead. Over its first 
decade, the program funded the demolition and recon- 
struction of more than 80,000 of the most distressed pub- 
lic housing units across the country. By most measures, 
HOPE VI redevelopment has led to marked neighborhood 
improvements across a range of indicators, including 
health, education, employment, and safety. Research also 
suggests that HOPE VI has catalyzed a range of neighbor- 
hood investments and has helped to integrate formerly 
isolated populations into mixed-income communities.^^ 

In Cleveland, a HOPE VI redevelopment project has 
spurred private residential development in the Central 
neighborhood, transforming the formerly troubled high- 
rise brick buildings into rows of well-designed town- 
homes. The new housing is also fostering some optimism 
among Central’s residents and stakeholders. Noted local 
funder India Pierce Lee, “You drive through there and 
it’s like a new city being reborn quietly.’’^'* In addition to 
bringing a more diverse mix of income levels into the 
community, the new housing is also helping retain some 
of Central’s residents who would otherwise leave the 
community. “When they started building the houses, that 
helped,” stated local stakeholder Gerri Burns. “A number 
of people who lived in public housing actually bought 
houses in the community and stayed.” 

Nevertheless, HOPE VI has its limitations as well. 

In some cities, the program has been criticized for not 
adequately supporting residents during relocation, for 
transforming the neighborhood at the expense of long- 
time residents, and for leading to a net loss of afford- 
able units for low-income households.^^ Researchers 
who have been following residents affected by HOPE VI 
are developing a more nuanced picture of the effects 
of relocation and redevelopment. This research will be 
extremely helpful in helping to identify what strategies 
are needed to ensure positive housing and employment 
outcomes for residents undergoing place-based revital- 
ization as part of a HOPE VI model.^® 

Moreover, while the HOPE VI model does appear to 
be having some positive outcomes in Cleveland, other 



strategies are also needed to address the much broader 
range of housing challenges prevalent in these com- 
munities. The Blackfeet Housing Authority, with support 
from financial partners, has developed a line of credit to 
enable efforts to upgrade the quality of the local housing 
stock. To combat problems with vacant and abandoned 
housing in its Northern Crescent neighborhoods, the 
Rochester Housing Development Fund Corporation buys 
and renovates vacant homes, and then resells them to 
low- and moderate-income households. And the city of 
Austin is using voluntary inclusionary zoning— coupled 
with an incentive of reduced building fees— to speed the 
development of affordable units in East Austin, in part to 
relieve housing-price pressures on lower-income families. 

Investment 

Improving the investment climate is a high priority 
for many of the case study communities, as stakeholders 
believe that such investments can attract new residents 
and jobs while improving the quality of life for the exist- 
ing population. Promising strategies on this front involve 
active partnership between the public and private sec- 
tors. To attract greater mainstream investment into West 
Fresno, for example, the city successfully lobbied for a 
new shopping center, which today houses a supermarket 
that outperforms other regional stores in the chain. The 
community is now working with Social Compact— an orga- 
nization that conducts local market analyses of under- 
served areas and challenges the negative stereotypes 
that have historically limited private development in poor 
neighborhoods— to promote further investment oppor- 
tunities. In Cleveland’s Central neighborhood, KeyBank 
worked with community leaders to create a bank account 
product for residents who frequently rely on check cash- 
ers, or who have had trouble with the banking system 
in the past. Several other communities, including East 
Albany, West Greenville, Holmes County, Martin County, 
and Chamizal, have assembled or are now assembling 
comprehensive plans for community revitalization. Such 
plans can set a useful framework for attracting greater 
private investment, though their ultimate impacts in these 
case study communities have yet to be seen. 

Capacity 

Finally, efforts to enhance the capacity of local actors 
to confront and overcome the challenges of concentrated 
poverty in the case study areas are more nascent. Some 



189 



SYNTHESIS 



SYNTHESIS 



The Role of the Federal Reserve 

So where does the Federal Reserve fit into a discussion of concentrated 
poverty? This study was motivated by the work of the Federal Reserve 
System’s Community Affairs function, which assists financial institutions 
in meeting their Community Reinvestment Act (CRA) obligations. The CRA 
encourages financial institutions to meet the credit needs of the commu- 
nities in which they are chartered, including low- and moderate-income 
neighborhoods. Beyond the direct community development lending attribut- 
able to the CRA ($56 billion in 2006), research indicates that the CRA has 
lowered the overall risk of community development investment, increased 
the availability of economic data pertaining to low-income communities, 
streamlined small business lending and development there, and led banks 
to increase the amount of capital flowing to these neighborhoods.^^ 

As part of their mandate to support financial institutions in meeting CRA 
obligations, the Community Affairs offices of the Federal Reserve System 
have always taken an active part in facilitating dialogues on topics of inter- 
est to regional public- and private-sector leaders, and in disseminating 
best practices in the areas of neighborhood revitalization and community 
and economic development. In addition. Reserve Banks have helped facili- 
tate partnerships between the public and private sectors that can help to 
address community development challenges. For example, several of the 
Federal Reserve Banks have been working with the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
and the Department of Flousing and Urban Development to streamline mort- 
gage lending on trust land, with the goal of expanding access to homeown- 
ership on reservations. Other Reserve Banks have worked with community 
partners to expand awareness of the EITC and to develop strategies for help- 
ing “unbanked” populations access checking and savings accounts. 

Many issues that were raised in this report— from the provision of afford- 
able housing, to access to financial services and mortgage credit, to the invest- 
ment capital needed to finance charter schools and small businesses— fall 
under the rubric of the CRA. Financial institutions, through their CRA-motivated 
community development lending and investments, are in a position to make a 
significant difference in high-poverty communities. Several Reserve Banks have 
initiated conversations on concentrated poverty in their districts and what can 
be done to address it.^® Such conversations will not be sufficient on their own, 
of course, to overcome many years of distrust between high-poverty communi- 
ties and public and private actors in their wider areas. But they may be a neces- 
sary component of longer-term strategies and partnerships that can help to 
more fully integrate these communities into the wider economy. 



190 




communities are working to confront deep-rooted issues 
of distrust that may have forestalled productive partner- 
ships in the past. For instance, neighborhood planning 
processes in Rochester and East Austin aim to inject 
greater citizen participation into the process of neighbor- 
hood revitalization. In other cases, sorely needed external 
reforms are progressing. The Springfield Financial Control 
Board hopes to overcome the corruption that marred 
past city governments, and to act as a more responsible 
partner for redevelopment in the city’s poorest neigh- 
borhoods. Leaders on the Blackfeet Reservation have 
moved to insulate economic development activities from 
the complicated governance problems that may have 
thwarted progress in the past. Building the capacity of 
local actors will be critical in helping to effectively direct 
resources to these communities. Over the past three 
decades, the community development field has become 
increasingly characterized by local planning and adminis- 
tration. Yet as the case studies in this report show, many 
areas of concentrated poverty are characterized by the 
lack of a local capacity for community development. With 
a couple of exceptions, these communities have few non- 
profits, residents who feel excluded from decisionmaking 
processes, and little or no political leadership to tackle the 
complicated and intertwined challenges of poverty. 

■ CONCLUSION 

This synthesis chapter, by looking across all 16 case 
studies, has shed light on a set of challenges that 
confront urban, small-city, rural, and Native American 
high-poverty communities alike. Though they may differ 
in character and degree, issues around human capital 
and labor force readiness, housing, and lack of invest- 
ment and financial stability echoed across these oth- 
erwise disparate places, as did the variable capacity of 
these communities and their wider areas to bring about 
and manage needed change.^^ 

Each of the “headline” issues examined in this 
chapter— schools and skills, housing, lack of mainstream 
investment, and limited community capacity— plays a 
role in perpetuating the disadvantage confronting these 
high-poverty urban and rural areas today. Together, these 
issues entangle many high-poverty communities in a 
Gordian knot, where, for example, deficits in residents’ 
skills frustrate efforts to attract new investment, and the 
lack of new investment makes it more difficult to move 
more people into work and to improve their skills. 



The problem of concentrated poverty, as recent 
trends have confirmed, is not altogether intractable. 
Indeed, concentrated poverty declined amid strong 
regional economic growth in the 1990s. Today, where 
economic growth persists in and around case study 
areas like East Austin and Atlantic City, in-migration and 
investment may lead to a decline in the poverty rate. 
Whether the original residents of those communities will 
achieve better outcomes as a result remains to be seen. 
In areas with weaker markets, the lack of a rising regional 
tide may necessitate more multifaceted interventions 
to improve the lives of people living in areas of concen- 
trated poverty, and to restore healthy market activity to 
the places themselves. 

As more recent data become available on these and 
other high-poverty communities through the Census 
Bureau’s American Community Survey, researchers might 
investigate what factors have been associated with rises 
or declines in concentrated poverty in the 2000s.'‘° In 
addition, more detailed longitudinal studies might exam- 
ine, in areas where poverty fell, whether original area 
residents with low incomes benefited from the uplift, or 
whether the poverty decline was associated with their 
out-migration from the area, and the reasons for those 
outcomes.'*' Research along these lines might help identify 
the mix of conditions that contributes to a reduction in 
concentrated poverty, and particularly those conditions 
that result in better outcomes for low-income residents. 

Empirical research may nevertheless fail to capture 
the true character of the people and the places that make 
up high-poverty areas; hopefully, these case studies have 
helped to elicit such information. Indeed, behind the veil 
of the daunting challenges presented in this report, case 
study authors uncovered a rich array of assets on which 
these communities and their residents might draw to over- 
come the isolation of concentrated poverty. 

Several communities highlight specific cultural 
assets associated with their dominant racial or ethnic 
makeup. In East Austin, a black resident took special 
pride in owning a home that her parents struggled to 
buy in an era of rampant racial discrimination. In McDow- 
ell County, extended family networks support residents 
who are struggling to get by, as well as help account for 
the low levels of crime in the community. In Little Haiti, 
the closely held status of businesses and their cultural 
affinity with the community allow them to adapt quickly 
to changing demands and new market opportunities. 
Similar deep spiritual, cultural, and historical traditions 



191 



SYNTHESIS 



SYNTHESIS 



characterize the Blackfeet population on the reservation 
and Navajos in the Crownpoint area. 

While largely untapped at the community level, 
economic and locational assets still characterize many of 
these areas as well. Cleveland’s Central neighborhood, 
while suffering from high rates of unemployment, is begin- 
ning to take advantage of its physical proximity to major 
universities, hospitals, corporations, and foundations, all of 
which are natural partners for its robust community devel- 
opment sector. Meanwhile, communities like East Austin 
and West Greenville may benefit from new growth occur- 
ring in their immediate areas, provided leaders act to 
ensure that community residents acquire the skills and the 
supports (including housing) to connect to these emerg- 
ing market opportunities. Even the Appalachian counties 
of Martin and McDowell have begun to consider tourism 
strategies that would take advantage of their unique histo- 
ries and access to stunning natural landscapes. 

Finally, longtime residents of these neighborhoods 
exhibit a deep commitment to their communities, despite 
the longstanding forces that have isolated them. Any 
meaningful effort to improve the lives of people in 
concentrated poverty, and to make their communities 
more viable places for future residents and businesses, 
should harness the collective knowledge and spirit of 
these individuals. Their commitment and resiliency is 
perhaps best captured by the Chamizal resident who, 
despite the sobering problems present in her commu- 
nity, said, “If I won the lottery, I still wouldn’t move out of 
Chamizal. This is what I know; these are my people.” 

This synthesis chapter was written by Aian Berube, 
research director of the Brookings Metropolitan Poiicy 
Program, and David Erickson, manager of the Center for 
Community Development Investments, and Carolina Reid, 
community development research manager, both of the 
Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco. 



Endnotes 

1 Many of the issues revealed in the case study communities are not 
new— to be sure, the sorts of very poor, predominantly African- 
American inner-city communities portrayed in seminal works like 
Wilson’s The Truly Disadvantaged and Auletta’s The Underclass still 
exist in places like Chicago, New York, and other older, northern 
cities today. The Cleveland, Rochester, and Milwaukee communi- 
ties examined within this report exhibit that profile. Similarly, areas 
like McDowell County, WV, and Holmes County, MS, share a com- 
mon ancestry with the communities profiled in Duncan's Worlds 
Apart and the Depression-era South of Agee’s and Evans’s Let Us 
Now Praise Famous Men. 



2 See Table 1: Comparison Statistics in individual case studies. 

3 Paul Jargowsky, “Stunning Progress, Hidden Problems: The Dra- 
matic Decline of Concentrated Poverty in the 1990s” (Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution, 2003). 

4 Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, “Health, United States, 
2007”; Table 10: Nonmarital childbearing by detailed race and His- 
panic origin of mother, and maternal age: United States, selected 
years, 1970-2004. 

5 See Table 1: Comparison Statistics in individual case studies. 

6 One factor to which many researchers point as contributing to 
increased rates of single parenthood in these communities is a 
decline in the number of “marriageable” men, due to shrinking 
labor market opportunities associated with economic restructur- 
ing. See William Julius Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged: The Inner 
City, the Underclass, and Public Policy (Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press, 1987). 

7 See, e.g., Oscar Lewis, La Vida— A Puerto Rican Family in the Culture 
of Poverty— San Juan and New York (New York: Random House, 1966); 
Ulf Hannerz, Soulside (New York: Columbia University Press, 1969); 

Ken Auletta, The Underclass (New York: Random House, 1982); Wilson, 
The Truly Disadvantaged; Claudia Coulton, Shanta Pandey, and Julian 
Chow, “Concentration of Poverty and the Changing Ecology of Low- 
Income Urban Neighborhoods: An Analysis of the Cleveland Area,” 
Social Work Research and Abstracts 26(4) (1990): 5-16; and Douglas 
Massey and Nancy Denton, American Apartheid: Segregation and the 
Making of the Underclass (Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press, 
1993). Paul Jargowsky’s research finds an empirical link between 
deindustrialization in the northern United States and increasing 
concentrated poverty in the 1970s and 1980s. Paul Jargowsky, Poverty 
and Place: Ghettos, Barrios, and the American City (New York: Russell 
Sage Foundation, 1997). 

8 See, e.g., Wilson, The Truly Disadvantaged, and John Kasarda, 
“Urban Industrial Transformation and the Underclass,” Annals of the 
American Academy of Political and Social Science 501(1989): 26-47. 

9 Brookings Institution analysis of data extracted from the Regional 
Economic Information System, Bureau of Economic Analysis, U.S. 
Department of Commerce. Available at http://www.bea.gov/regional/. 

10 For more information, see http://www.fingerlakeswired.com. 

11 See, e.g., Joel Kotkin and William Frey, “The Third California: 

The Golden State’s New Frontier” (Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution, 2007). 

12 The exact factors that created the conditions for economic growth 
and opportunity in Austin and Atlantic City are unclear. Certainly 
the legalization of gambling in Atlantic City has fueled the area’s 
recent growth, but that growth in turn has depended on the strong 
economic performance of the nearby greater New York area— and 
the rise in disposable income of its residents. Austin has benefited 
greatly from the longtime presence of innovative firms like Dell, 
IBM, and Whole Foods, but also from the state’s investments in 
the flagship University of Texas campus, which have contributed 
greatly to the growth of those and other firms, as well as to the 
unique local culture. How much of the current condition of these 
places can be attributed to public policy choices, and how much 
to circumstance, is a matter for further debate and research. 

13 Luisa Medina, Development Director, Central California Legal 
Services and former School Board President. Personal interview in 
Fresno, February 23, 2007. 



192 



14 Jill Khadduri, et al., “Case Studies Exploring the Potential Relation- 
ship Between Schools and Neighborhood Revitalization” (Cam- 
bridge, MA: Abt Associates, Inc., 2003). “Public Housing: For Richer, 
for Poorer,” The Economist, April 5, 2008, 38. 

15 John P. Blair and Michael C. Carroll, “Inner-City Neighborhoods and 
Metropolitan Development,” Economic Development Quarterly 21(3) 
(2007): 263-77. Jeremy Nowak, “Neighborhood Initiative and the 
Regional Economy,” Economic Development Quarterly 11(1) (1997): 3-10. 

16 William Apgar and Mark Duda, “Collateral Damage: The Municipal 
Impact of Today’s Mortgage Foreclosure Boom” (Washington, DC: 
Homeownership Preservation Foundation, 2005). Dan Immergluck 
and Geoff Smith, “The External Costs of Foreclosure: The Impact of 
Single-Family Mortgage Foreclosures on Property Values,” Housing 
Policy Debate 17(1): 57-79. 

17 Jim Rokakis, “The Shadow of Debt: Slavic Village Is Becoming a 
Ghost Town. It’s Not Alone,” Washington Post, September 30, 2007, B1. 

18 Matt Fellowes, “From Poverty, Opportunity: Putting the Market 
to Work for Low-Income Families” (Washington, DC: Brookings 
Institution, 2006). 

19 Roughly 35 percent of case study area residents were under age 
18 in 2000, versus 25 percent of residents in the surrounding 
metro area or statewide non-metropolitan areas. 

20 Matt Fellowes, “From Poverty, Opportunity: Putting the Market to 
Work for Low-Income Families.” 

21 See Table 1: Comparison Statistics in individual case studies. 

22 It is important to note that there is significant variation among 
the case study communities in the share of high-cost lending. For 
example, the Blackfeet Reservation and the Central neighborhood 
of Cleveland have lower shares of high-cost lending, perhaps due 
to the very low levels of mortgage originations in these communi- 
ties. Many factors influence the proportion of high-cost lending 

in a community, including credit scores, race and/or ethnicity, 
share of owner-occupied versus rental units, local house values, 
the types of lenders in the community, as well as unobservable 
characteristics. Our research did not attempt to tease out the dif- 
ferences in lending patterns across these communities. 

23 The 45-percent share was essentially the same as the national 
average; such turnover, however, may put high-poverty areas at a 
more significant disadvantage for achieving long-run improvement 
than similar turnover in middle- and higher-income communities. 
Mobility into and out of high-poverty neighborhoods is a highly 
fluid process, moreover, with minority households often experi- 
encing “lateral” moves rather than moves “up” the neighborhood 
economic ladder. Scott J. South and Kyle Crowder, “Escaping Dis- 
tressed Neighborhoods: Individual, Community, and Metropolitan 
Influences.” American Journal of Sociology 102(4) (1997): 1040-84. 

24 George Galster et al., “The Impact of Community Development 
Corporations on Urban Neighborhoods” (Washington, DC: Urban 
Institute, 2005). 

25 See The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s Annual Report 2006 
for a discussion of these programs and their relationship to the 
national poverty rate. 

26 See, e.g., Bruce Katz, “Neighborhoods of Choice and Connection: 
The Evolution of American Neighborhood Policy and What It 
Means for the United Kingdom” (Washington, DC: Brookings Insti- 
tution, 2004). 



27 It is also unclear what the results would be if these mobility pro- 
grams were expanded on a larger scale. 

28 See, e.g., Andrew Dyke et al., “The Effects of Welfare-to-Work 
Program Activities on Labor Market Outcomes,” Journal of Labor 
Economics 24(3) (2006): 567-607. 

29 Steve Holt, “The EITC at Age 30: What We Know” (Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution, 2006). 

30 As Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco President Janet Yellen 
noted in a 2006 speech on income inequality, programs that sup- 
port investment in education, broadly conceived, are worthwhile, 
although questions remain about how to best direct public funding. 
Janet L. Yellen, “Economic Inequality in the United States,” speech 
to the Center for the Study of Democracy 2006-2007 Economics 
of Governance Lecture University of California, Irvine, November 

6, 2006. Researchers led by James Heckman from the University 
of Chicago have argued that funds should be targeted at early 
childhood education, since preschool programs for disadvantaged 
children appear to have substantial returns on investment over the 
long term. Others, such as Alan Krueger of Princeton University, 
note that well-designed job-training programs for adults can also 
have high returns. See Inequality in America: What Role for Human 
Capital Policies? Benjamin M. Friedman, ed. (Cambridge, MA: MIT 
Press, 2003). Moreover, in the context of HOPE VI redevelopment, 
research has shown that concurrent investments in the local school 
reinforce the investments in housing in these neighborhoods, 
and vice versa. See Jill Khadduri, Heather Schwartz, and Jennifer 
Turnham, “Reconnecting Schools and Neighborhoods: An Introduc- 
tion to School-Centered Community Revitalization” (Columbia, MD: 
Enterprise Community Partners, 2007). 

31 For example, the nonprofit Illinois Facilities Fund has financed the 
construction of several charter schools in Chicago. For more informa- 
tion, see http://iff.org/content.cfm/cscp. 

32 Khadduri, Schwartz, and Turnham, “Reconnecting Schools and 
Neighborhoods.” 

33 For a more complete review of studies examining the impact 
of HOPE VI, see Susan J. Popkin et al., “A Decade of HOPE VI: 
Research Findings and Policy Challenges” (Washington, DC: Urban 
Institute, 2004). See also David Wood, “Public Housing: Information 
on the Financing, Oversight, and Effects of the HOPE VI Program” 
(Washington, DC: Government Accountability Office, 2007). 

34 India Pierce Lee, Program Officer, The Cleveland Foundation. Per- 
sonal interview in Cleveland, March 9, 2007. 

35 Popkin et al., “A Decade of HOPE VI: Research Findings and Policy 
Challenges.” 

36 See, for example, the research developed by the Urban 
Institute on A Roof Qver Their Heads, which uses panel data 
from residents affected by HOPE VI. The collective studies 
are available at http://www.urban.org/toolkit/policybriefs/ 
subjectbriefs.cfm?documenttypeid=122. 

37 Michael Barr, “Credit Where It Counts: Maintaining a Strong Com- 
munity Reinvestment Act,” New York University Law Review 80, 
(2005): 513. Robert E. Litan et al., “The Community Reinvestment 
Act After Financial Modernization: A Final Report” (Washington, DC: 
U.S. Department of the Treasury, 2001). 

38 The June 2006 Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s Community 
Development Policy Summit was titled “The Challenge of Concen- 
trated Poverty”; proceedings available at http://www.clevelandfed. 



193 



SYNTHESIS 



org/CommAffairs/Conf2006/June/povertyproceedings.cfm. In 
July 2006, the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas held a forum with 
leading researchers and practitioners entitled “Concentrated 
Poverty: What, Where, and Why.” Available at http://dallasfed.org/ 
news/ca/2006/06poverty.cfm. The Dallas Federal Reserve Bank 
also devoted a 2006 issue of Banking & Community Perspectives to 
concentrated poverty in its district; available at http://dallasfed.org/ 
ca/bcp/2006/bcp0602.pdf. 

39 To be sure, the chapter has by no means detailed the full range of 
challenges present in these 16 high-poverty communities. Crime, 
multigenerational poverty, health, and youth-related issues were 
also cited by a number of case-study community stakeholders as 
contributing to, or serving to perpetuate, high levels of concen- 
trated poverty. 

40 Jargowsky performed this type of analysis of trends from 1970 
through 1990. See Paul Jargowsky, Poverty and Place (New York: 
Russell Sage Foundation, 1997). 

41 Such analyses might use geocoded files from the Panel Study of 
Income Dynamics (PSID) to examine the moves into and out of 
very poor neighborhoods by different demographic and economic 
groups. See, e.g., Lincoln Quillian, “Flow Long Are Exposures to 
Poor Neighborhoods? The Long-Term Dynamics of Entry and Exit 
from Poor Neighborhoods,” Population Research and Policy Review 
22(3) (2003): 221-49. 



194 



Appendix A 

References for 
Connparison Statistics Tables 

a. Geolytics (2000). Neighborhood Change Database (NCDB) Tract 
Data from 1970-2000. Data for poverty calculations taken from 
the following tables: 1970, Table P83(l):l, Table P89(l):3,4, and Table 
PI7(l):l-54. 1980, Table 91:2 and Table 91:1,2; 1990, Table PII7:l3-24 
and Table PII7:l-24; 2000 Table P87-.2 and Table P87:l. Notes: 1970: 
Persons in families and unrelated individuals. 

b. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 P87— Poverty Status by Age. Percent 
of population with income in 1999 below poverty level: population 
for whom poverty status is determined. 

c. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 P52— Household Income in 1999. For 
non-census geographies, median values were estimated using the 
distribution table from the Census and code developed by Mis- 
souri’s Census Data Center. 

d. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 PI— Total Population. 

e. U.S. Census (1970) Table PI27—I00% Population Count; U.S. Census 
(1980) Table STFIA— Population; U.S. Census (1990) STFI PI— 
Persons; U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 PI— Total Population. 

f. U.S. Census (2000) Table SFI P4: Hispanic or Latino, and Not His- 
panic or Latino by Race. 

g. U.S. Census (2000) Table SFI PI2: Sex by Age. 

h. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 PIS: Family Type by Presence of Own 
Children under 18 Years by Age of Own Children. 

i. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 P2I: Place of Birth by Citizenship Status. 

j. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 PCT2I: Residence in 1995 for the Popu- 
lation 5 Years and Overstate, County, and Place Level 

k. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 P37: Sex by Educational Attainment for 
the Population 25 Years and Over. 

l. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 P37: Sex by Educational Attainment for 
the Population 25 Years and Over. 

m. School Matters (2004-2005), available online at http://www.school- 
matters.com/. Data were compiled for schools physically located in 
the case study community and in the comparison geography. Test 
scores are from the 2004-2005 school year. The test-score data 
are reported at the school level and are weighted by the number 
of students in each school. Note: For Atlantic City, Milwaukee, and 
Greenville (and their comparison communities), enrollment num- 
bers come from 2005, while the test scores come from 2006. 

n. School Matters (2004-2005), see note m. 

o. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 P43: Sex by Employment Status for the 
Population 16 Years and Over 

p. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 P43: Sex by Employment Status for the 
Population 16 Years and Over. 

q. U.S. Census (2000) Table SFI H4: Tenure (Occupied Housing Units). 



r. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 H73: Household Income in 1999 by 
Gross Rent as a Percentage of Household Income in 1999. Housing 
cost burden is defined as renters whose gross rent is more than 
30 percent of their household income. 

rr. U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (2000) A 
Picture of Subsidized Households, 2000. Available online at http:// 
www.huduser.org/picture2000/index.html. Percentage is calculated 
by dividing the number of HUD-subsidized units by the number of 
rental housing units in the geography. (Not applicable for the rural 
and reservation case studies) 

s. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 H74: Value for Specified Owner- 
Occupied Housing Units. For non-census geographies, median val- 
ues were estimated using the distribution table from the Census 
and code developed by Missouri’s Census Data Center. 

t. U.S. Census (2000) Table SF3 H34: Year Structure Built. For non- 
census geographies, median values were estimated using the dis- 
tribution table from the Census and code developed by Missouri’s 
Census Data Center. 

u. Credit score data were obtained from the Federal Reserve Board 
of Governors and are drawn from a 10 percent sample of all credit 
records from a major credit bureau in December 2004. The cut-off 
for a high credit rating corresponds to the cut-off in the market for 
prime loans. 

V. Credit score data were obtained from the Federal Reserve Board 
of Governors, see note u. 

w. FFIEC (2005) Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Loan Application Reg- 
ister. Percent high-priced loans includes all originations (regardless 
of loan type) with a rate spread greater than or equal to 3 percent. 

X. FFIEC (2005) Home Mortgage Disclosure Act Loan Application 
Register. Denial rates represent all loan applications (regardless of 
loan type) that were denied by the institution. 



195 



APPENDIX A 



196 



Appendix B 

Literature Review: Federal Reserve System 
Poverty- Related Research 



The Federal Reserve System conducts a range of research related to community development, afford- 
able housing, income inequality, and other consumer issues. The study of poverty and related issues 
is at the core of much of this work. Such research includes hundreds of working papers, articles, and 
other work published during the past few years. Listed below are examples of research conducted by 
staff from the Reserve Banks and the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System with an explicit 
focus on poverty. The selections, representing research completed since 1995, are organized by date, 
with the newest research listed first. 

Poverty in New York City, 1969-99: the influence of demographic change, income 
growth, and income inequality 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK 

Economic Policy Review, v.14, no.l. Jul, 2008 - p. 13-30. 

Authors: Levitan, Mark K. / Wieler, Susan S. 

Abstract: This article evaluates the Impact of several purported causes of poverty in New York City. 
The study finds that the rise in income inequality plays a larger role in the 1979-1999 persistence of 
poverty than do demographic changes. The authors also explore the influence of changes In earn- 
ings inequality on income inequality and poverty. The rise in earnings inequality can be traced to the 
stagnation of wages at the low end of the earnings distribution. 

http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/epr/08vl4nl/0807levi.pdf 

Inequality and growth: challenges to the old orthodoxy 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF DALLAS 

Economic Letter, v. 3, no. 1. Jan, 2008 
Authors: Quintin, Erwan / Saving, Jason L. 

Abstract: Discussions of how best to alleviate poverty often center on the relative merits of policies 
that boost growth and those that promote redistribution. If greater inequality allows economies to 
expand faster, or if it’s an inevitable consequence of pro-growth measures, the two principles seem 
incompatible. Linder such a scenario, societies seeking rapid growth rates have to forgo redistribu- 
tion from rich to poor. Conversely, choosing a high degree of redistribution implies the decision to 
accept lower growth rates. 

http://www.dallasfed.org/research/eclett/2008/el0801.html 



197 



APPENDIX B 



APPENDIX B 



Housing externalities: evidence from spatially concentrated urban 
revitalization programs 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF RICHMOND 
Working Paper. 08-03. 2008 

Authors: Rossi-Hansberg, Esteban / Sarte, Pierre-Daniel G. / Owens, Raymond E. 

Abstract: Using data complied from concentrated residential urban revitalization programs imple- 
mented in Richmond, VA, between 1999 and 2004, we study residential externalities. Specifically, we 
provide evidence that in neighborhoods targeted by the programs, sites that did not directly benefit 
from capital improvements nevertheless experienced considerable increases in land value relative to 
similar sites in a control neighborhood. Within the targeted neighborhoods, increases in land value 
are consistent with externalities that fall exponentially with distance. 

http://www.nber.org/papers/w14369.pdf 

Credit card redlining 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF BOSTON 

Quantitative Analysis Unit Working Paper. QAU08-1. 2008 
Author: Cohen-Cole, Ethan 

Abstract: This paper evaluates the presence of racial disparities in the issuance of consumer credit. 
The results suggest that the observed differences in credit lines by racial composition of neighbor- 
hoods are largely driven by issuer decisions rather than by demand. 

http://www.bos.frb.org/bankinfo/qau/wp/2008/qau0801.pdf 

Big lessons from small rural communities: working to reduce poverty long term 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO 

Community Investments, v. 19, no. 1. Spr, 2007 - p. 24-28, 30. 

Author: Stauber, Karl N. 

Abstract: The rural Upper Midwest and Pacific Northwest are quietly, and sometimes not so quietly, 
demonstrating atypical attitudes and actions when it comes to addressing persistent poverty. Hun- 
dreds of rural communities are harnessing economic and community development resources differ- 
ently to achieve long-term change, including increased opportunities for prosperity for everyone, and 
particularly for those in the lowest economic quintile. 

http://www.frbsf.org/publications/community/investments/0705/big_lessons.pdf 

A closer look at Cleveland’s latest poverty ranking 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF CLEVELAND 

Economic Commentary. Feb 15, 2007 
Authors: Schweitzer, Mark E. / Rudick, Brian 

Abstract: News that Cleveland’s poverty rate is the worst in the nation— and rising— has elevated 
the community’s concern about conditions in the city. But a closer look at the way poverty rates are 



198 



calculated suggests that all the possible causes of Cleveland’s ranking have not been fully understood. 



http://www.clevelandfed.org/research/commenta ry/2007/021507.cfm 

Human capital and the challenge of persistent poverty in Appalachia 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF CLEVELAND 

Economic Commentary. Feb 1, 2007 
Author; Ziliak, James P. 

Abstract: Recent research suggests that investments in education may provide the key to reducing 
persistent poverty in regions such as Appalachia. A look at some trends in poverty and educational 
attainment in Appalachia over the past two decades confirms that the two are strongly related. 

http://www.clevelandfed.org/Research/Commentary/2007/020107.cfm 

What happened to the gains from strong productivity growth?* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY 

Economic Review, v. 92, no.1. Q I, 2007 - p. 5-23. 

Authors: Willis, Jonathan L. / Wroblewski, Julie 

Abstract: There has been a growing sentiment among the public that the average household is not 
sharing in the recent economic prosperity. The authors find that the shares of income allocated to 
labor and capital have been constant on average over the past 35 years. However, during the last 
decade of high productivity growth, low-income households have seen no increase in real income, 
and at most only the top 10 percent of the household income distribution experienced real income 
growth equal to or greater than average labor productivity growth. 

http://www.kansascityfed.org/Publicat/econrev/PDF/1q07will.pdf 

A comparison of poverty trends and policy impacts for working families using 
different poverty indexes* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF PHILADELPHIA 

Working Paper. 07-13. 2007 
Author: DeFina, Robert H. 

Abstract: This study provides empirical evidence on recent trends in poverty among working families 
incorporating the depth of poverty and income inequality among the poor. Estimates reveal that the 
indexes produce significantly different trends. 

http://www.phil.frb.org/files/wps/2007/wp07-13.pdf 

Foreclosures: relationship lending in the consumer market and its aftermath* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF CLEVELAND 
Working Paper. 0617. Dec 2006 



'denotes academic research paper 



199 



APPENDIX B 



APPENDIX B 



Author: Ergungor, O. Emre 

Abstract: Relationship lending theory suggests that lenders in close proximity to their borrowers might 
be the most efficient providers of screening and monitoring services, because the cost of collecting 
information declines with distance. The author presents evidence that ties bank branch presence to 
borrower performance in the low-income housing market, which provides support for this theory. 

http://www.clevelandfed.org/Research/Workpaper/2006/wp0617.pdf 

The connection between poverty and the economy 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF MINNEAPOLIS 

fedgazette. v. 18, no. 6. Nov, 2006 - p. 9. 

Author: Grunewald, Rob 

Abstract: As the economy grows, so do opportunities for employment and income growth. Stronger 
labor markets and higher income levels tend to help those families living in poverty move above the 
poverty threshold. 

http://www.minneapolisfed.org/pubs/fedgaz/06-11/economy.cfm 

The myriad, changing faces of poverty. Is poverty getting better or worse? Yes 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF MINNEAPOLIS 

fedgazette. v. 18, no. 6. Nov, 2006 - p. 1-5. 

Author: Wirtz, Ronald A. 

Abstract: Poverty doesn’t happen for one reason, but for many reasons, some of them temporary, 
like a job loss, some of them long-lasting, like the decision to drop out of high school. In the end, the 
ability to make inroads against poverty means getting a critical number of these factors— personal, 
political, social, economic, demographic and geographic— flowing in the right direction. 

http://www.minneapolisfed.org/pubs/fedgaz/06-11/cover.cfm 

Community development spending, 1981-2004' 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF CHICAGO 

Chicago Fed Letter. 232. Nov, 2006 

Authors: Cashin, David B. / Gerenrot, Julie / Paulson, Anna L. 

Abstract: Millions of low-income individuals in the U.S. are aided through community development 
programs, which are funded by federal, state, and local governments. The authors consider whether 
federal transfers and expenditures from moneys generated by states and localities respond to state- 
level trends in unemployment and poverty. 

http://www.chicagofed.org/publications/fedletter/cflnovember2006_232.pdf 



200 



Incubating microfinance: the Texas border experience 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF DALLAS 

Southwest Economy. 5. Sep, 2006 - p. 3-7. 

Authors: Assanie, Laila / Virmani, Raghav 

Abstract: Success in the developing world has inspired a growing emphasis on microfinance as an 
economic development strategy in many parts of the United States, including communities along 
the Texas-Mexico border. The microfinance approach relies not on social safety nets and welfare 
payments but on market-oriented programs that provide assistance to small businesses. 

http://dallasfed.org/research/swe/2006/swe0605b.html 

Connecticut through Katrina-colored glasses 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF BOSTON 

Communities and Banking. Sum, 2006 - p. 18-20. 

Author: Hall, Douglas 

Abstract: Compared with the poverty rate in hurricane-ravaged Mississippi (21.6 percent, the highest 
in the nation), Connecticut’s rate of 7.6 percent might not seem a cause for alarm. But Connecticut 
families struggling to make ends meet often encounter the same challenges facing the poor along 
the Gulf Coast. 

http://www.bos.frb.org/commdev/c&b/2006/summer/ctkatrina.pdf 

Understanding the persistence of poverty 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF CLEVELAND 

Annual Report. 2006 - p. 7-21. 

Authors: Schweitzer, Mark E. / Rupert, Peter 

Abstract: Millions of U.S. citizens continue to live in poverty within one of the wealthiest and most 
productive nations in the world. The Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland’s 2006 Annual Report essay 
reviews some of the reasons for the persistence of poverty in America and suggests that better edu- 
cation and job training may be the best defense against poverty. 

http://www.clevelandfed.org/annual06/index.cfm 

The wealth (and poverty) of Indian nations 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF MINNEAPOLIS 

fedgazette. v. 18, no. 2. Mar, 2006 - p. 1. 

Author: Clement, Douglas 

Abstract: In recent years, thousands of Indian-owned businesses have sprung up across the nation 
and throughout the Ninth District. In this article the author focuses on efforts by the district’s Indian 
population to rebuild its economies and cultures through the development of small business and 

'denotes academic research paper 



201 



APPENDIX B 



APPENDIX B 



higher education— the latest chapter in a long struggle to regain self-sufficiency and cultural identity. 
http://www.minneapolisfed.org/pubs/fedgaz/06-03/cover.cfnn 

Tribal trends 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF MINNEAPOLIS 

fedgazette. v. 18, no. 2. Mar, 2006 - p. 2-3, 5. 

Author: Clement, Douglas 

Abstract: While economic conditions have improved for American Indians living on reservations, pov- 
erty remains prevalent, and tribes face deep challenges in their efforts to develop. 

http://www.minneapolisfed.org/pubs/fedgaz/06-03/trends.cfm 

Tackling neighborhood poverty: developing strategic approaches to community 
development 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO 

Community Investments, v. 17, no. 4. Win, 2006 - p. 3-11. 

Author: Reid, Carolina 

Abstract: In this article, we share an emerging consensus on the key principles that should guide 
community development activities as well as provide tangible examples of how these ideas are 
being implemented in practice. But first, we take a brief look at the changing dynamics of neighbor- 
hood poverty as a way to benchmark our progress and assess what there is still left to do. 

http://www.frbsf.org/publications/community/investments/0602/winter06.pdf 

Helping the poor accumulate assets 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF BOSTON 

Communities and Banking. Win, 2006 - p. 20-23. 

Author: Levere, Andrea 

Abstract: Having assets (a bank account, a car, an insured home, a good credit rating) does more 
than help families weather a crisis. It can move them out of poverty permanently, with benefits to 
individuals, government, corporations, and society as a whole. 

http://bosfed.org/commdev/c&b/2006/winter/assets.pdf 

Family portrait: life is hard in one of Baltimore’s toughest neighborhoods, but for 
Janice Walker, it’s home 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF RICHMOND 

Region Focus, v. 10, no. 1. Win, 2006 - p. 16-23. 

Author: Gerena, Charles 

Abstract: The following article on urban poverty does not explicitly discuss the public-policy issues 
at stake or proposals for reform. Instead, it tells the story of one family in Baltimore’s Sandtown- 



202 



Winchester neighborhood. This approach, we hope, will provide a broader understanding of the 
problems facing the urban poor. 

http://www.richmondfed.org/publications/economic_research/region_focus/winter_2006/pdf/cover_ 

story.pdf 

Poverty and disasters 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF DALLAS 

Banking & Community Perspectives. 1. 2006 - p. 7-11. 

Author: Sobel, Elizabeth 

Abstract: Hurricanes Katrina and Rita exposed the debilitating realities of poverty in America, com- 
munities’ lack of crisis preparedness, and how these factors can exacerbate each other. 

http://www.dallasfed.org/ca/bcp/2006/bcp0601b.html 

Concentrated poverty in the eleventh district 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF DALLAS 

Banking & Community Perspectives. 2. 2006 - p. 3-8. 

Authors: Sobel, Elizabeth / Lopez, Roy 

Abstract: This issue analyzes the dynamics of concentrated poverty in rural and urban settings. It 
also offers insights from Paul A. Jargowsky, whose research centers on the geographic concentration 
of poverty and residential segregation by race and class. 

http://www.dallasfed.org/ca/bcp/2006/bcp0602.pdf 

The ins and outs of poverty in advanced economies: poverty dynamics in Can- 
ada, Germany, Great Britain, and the United States* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO 

Working Papers Series. 2004-18. Nov. 2004 
Author: Valletta, Robert G. 

Abstract: This manuscript compares poverty dynamics in four advanced industrial countries (Canada, 
unified Germany, Great Britain, and the United States) for overlapping six-year periods in the 1990s. 
Most poverty transitions, and the prevalence of chronic poverty, are associated with employment 
instability and family dissolution in all four countries. The results also suggest that differences in 
social policy are crucial for the observed differences in poverty incidence and persistence between 
Europe and North America. 

http://papers.ssrn.com/sol3/papers.cfm?abstract_id=904920 



'denotes academic research paper 



203 



APPENDIX B 



APPENDIX B 



How should suburbs help their central cities?* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK 

Staff Reports. 186. May, 2004 

Authors: Haughwout, Andrew F. / Inman, Robert R 

Abstract: In this paper the authors study the question of whether suburbs should help finance 
the core public services of their central cities. The paper reviews three arguments that have been 
offered in favor of suburbs’ fiscal assistance to their central cities. First, the central city provides 
public services that benefit suburban residents. Second, the central city may provide redistributive 
services to low-income central city residents that benefit suburbanites with redistributive prefer- 
ences for such transfers. Third, the central city’s private economy may be an efficient production 
center because of agglomeration economies— that is, increasing returns— in the production of goods 
and services consumed by suburban residents. 

http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/staff_reports/srl86.html 

Anti-poverty design: the cash-out option 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF MINNEAPOLIS 

The Region, v 17, no. 2. Jun, 2003 - p. 18-21, 54-57. 

Author: Wirtz, Ronald A. 

Abstract: The poverty debate largely ignores the success of the Earned Income Tax Credit and, by 
extension, the insights it might hold for future policy design. 

http://www.minneapolisfed.org/pubs/region/03-06/wirtz.cfm 

The impacts of new neighborhoods on poor families: evaluating the policy impli- 
cations of the moving to opportunity demonstration 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK 

Economic Policy Review, v.9 no.2. Jun, 2003 - p. 113-140. 

Author: Goering, John 

Abstract: This paper was presented at the conference “Policies to Promote Affordable Housing,” 
co-sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York and New York University’s Furman Center for 
Real Estate and Urban Policy, February 7, 2002. 

http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/epr/2003n2.html 

Left behind: SSI in the era of welfare reform* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO 

Working Papers Series. 2003-12. May, 2003 
Authors: Burkhauser, Richard V. / Daly, Mary C. 

Abstract: In this article the authors review the role that Supplemental Security income, or SSI, has 
played to this point and consider the directions SSI might take in a work-dominated welfare 



204 



environment where people with disabilities increasingly wish to be included in the labor market. 
http://www.frbsf.org/publications/economics/papers/2003/wp03-12bk.pdf 

Improving low-income policies in tight fiscal times 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF BOSTON 

Communities and Banking. Sum, 2002 - p. 14-17. 

Authors: Lav, Iris / Springer, John 

Abstract: Iris Lav and John Springer of the Center on Budget and Policy Priorities provide information 
to help groups concerned with low-income families understand how they might best participate in 
state policy debates. 

http://www.bos.frb.org/commdev/c&b/2002/summer/CBPP.pdf 

Does lower unemployment reduce poverty?* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF PHILADELPHIA 

Business Review. Q3, 2002 - p. 34-41. 

Author: DeFina, Robert H. 

Abstract: This paper considers the link between unemployment and poverty. The strength of the 
link depends critically on how we measure poverty. The author presents empirical evidence that 
improved measures of poverty are less strongly related to changes in unemployment than the head- 
count rate, the government’s official measure. 

http://www.phil.frb.org/files/br/brq302rd.pdf 

The promise of asset-development policies 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF BOSTON 

Communities and Banking. Win, 2002 - p. 3-6. 

Author: Beeferman, Larry W. 

Abstract: What are asset-development policies? What programs are under way to explore such poli- 
cies? Larry Beeferman of the Asset Development Institute describes the movement and his views on 
why asset-development policies are vital to economic equality. 

http://www.bos.frb.org/commdev/c&b/2002/winter/winter02.pdf 

The impact of unemployment on alternative poverty measures* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF PHILADELPHIA 

Working Paper. 02-8. 2002 
Author: DeFina, Robert FI. 

Abstract: The analysis uses data from the March Current Population Survey to estimate state-level 

'denotes academic research paper 



205 



APPENDIX B 



APPENDIX B 



cross-section/time-series models of the effects of unemployment on alternative poverty indexes. The 
findings provide important lessons for researchers exploring the links between economic conditions 
and poverty and for policymakers developing strategies to reduce poverty. 

http://www.phil.frb.org/files/wps/2002/wp02-8.pdf 

The center restored: Chicago’s residential price gradient reemerges’ 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF CHICAGO 

Economic Perspectives, v. 26, no. 2. Q II, 2002 - p. 2-11. 

Author: McMillen, Daniel P. 

Abstract: After a long period during which house prices were not affected by distance from Chi- 
cago’s central business district, values now decline by more than 8 percent per mile. Annual appre- 
ciation rates in house prices are higher in neighborhoods close to the city center that have large 
minority populations, high concentrations of poverty, and many vacant homes. 

http://www.chicagofed.org/publications/economicperspectives/2002/2qepart1.pdf 

Observations on public policy: the case of homelessness 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF MINNEAPOLIS 

The Region, v 15, no. 3. Sep, 2001 - p. 66-67. 

Author: Miller, Preston J. 

Abstract: This article finds that being homeless in the United States does not mean being without 
shelter, that a relatively modest number of people are homeless at any point in time, and that, while 
many of the homeless are in serious need of help, homelessness is not their root problem. 

http://minneapolisfed.org/pubs/region/01-09/opinion.cfm 

Welfare reform and New York City’s low-income population* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK 

Economic Policy Review, v.7 no.2. Sep, 2001 
Authors: Chernick, Howard / Reimers, Cordelia 

Abstract: The goal of this paper is to evaluate the effects of welfare reform on the economic well- 
being of low-income families in New York City. To investigate the extent to which the safety net is still 
in place in New York City, we use the New York City sample of the Current Population Survey (CPS) 
to compare program receipt before and after the passage of the Personal Responsibility and Work 
Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 (PRWORA). We use the income and earnings data from the 
CPS to compare economic status. 

http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/epr/01v07n2/0109cher.pdf 



206 



Building communities: making a difference 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF BOSTON 

Annual Report. 2001 - p. 5-17. 

Authors: Kanders, Kristin / Minehan, Cathy E. 

Abstract: One of the most vexing economic problems facing the United States has been the persistence 
of pockets of poverty in the midst of prosperity. The reasons for this are many and complex. Lacking 
jobs, capital, and examples of success, many of these communities have remained mired in poverty. 

http://www.bos.frb.org/about/ar/ar2001/01essay.pdf 

The earned income tax credit at work 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF ST. LOUIS 

National Economic Trends. Apr, 2001 
Author: Hernandez-Murillo, Ruben 

Abstract: The Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC) has played an important role in raising employment 
among low-income individuals and alleviating poverty through wage subsidies to low-income indi- 
viduals and families. 

http://research.stlouisfed.org/publications/net/20010401/cover.pdf 

Inequality and poverty in the United States: the effects of changing family 
behavior and rising wage dispersion* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF SAN FRANCISCO 

Working Papers Series. 2000-06. Jun, 2000 
Authors: Daly, Mary C. / Valletta, Robert G. 

Abstract: Among key possible explanations for increasing income inequality are rising dispersion in 
individual earnings, changes in female labor supply decisions, and changes in family composition 
and living arrangements. Our results indicate that rising dispersion of male earnings and the decline 
of traditional forms of family structure respectively explain up to about three-fourths and about one- 
half of rising inequality in family income during this period. The impact of changing family structure 
was most pronounced in the lower half of the distribution. 

http://www.frbsf.Org/econrsrch/workingp/2000/wp00-06.pdf 

Profile: Northampton County, Va.: A rural community weighs prosperity 
against preservation 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF RICHMOND 

Region Focus, v. 4, no. 3. Sum, 2000 - p. 2-4. 

Author: Gerena, Charles 

Abstract: One-quarter of Northampton County, Va. residents lived in poverty in 1995. To redraw this 



'denotes academic research paper 



207 



APPENDIX B 



APPENDIX B 



picture, community groups and government officials created programs aimed at balancing economic 
growth with environmental protection. In doing so, they’ve set the tone for slow, sustainable development. 

http://www.richmondfed.org/publications/economic_research/region_focus/summer_2000/profilel.cfm 

Poverty, children’s health, and health care utilization* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK 

Economic Policy Review, v.5, no.3. Sep, 1999 - p. 9-21. 

Author: Wolfe, Barbara L. 

Abstract: This paper discusses health as a direct measure of economic well-being, and draws atten- 
tion to those suffering the worst outcomes and to the link between poverty and health. Accord- 
ing to the author, in 1994 only 10 percent of children under age five in families making $35,000 or 
more were in less than very good or excellent health. By comparison, one-third of young children in 
families with income below $10,000 were in less than very good health. Moreover, in recent years the 
number of poor children whose health is fair or poor has increased relative to the number of non- 
poor children in these same health categories. 

http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/epr/99v05n3/9909wolf.pdf 

Will increasing the minimum wage help the poor?* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF CLEVELAND 
Economic Commentary. Feb 1, 1999 

Authors: Neumark, David / Schweitzer, Mark E. / Wascher, William L. 

Abstract: Minimum wages help some families to escape poverty, but employment losses associated 
with raising the minimum wage also appear to cause some families to fall into poverty. The authors’ 
estimates suggest that on balance, the second of these effects outweighs the first; therefore, the net 
result of raising the minimum wage is an increase in the proportion of poor families. 

http://www.clevelandfed.org/Research/commentary/1999/0201.pdf 

Monetary policy and the well-being of the poor* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF KANSAS CITY 

Economic Review. 84 (1) Q 1, 1999 - p. 21-49. 

Authors: Romer, Christina D. / Romer, David 

Abstract: The authors examined the influence of monetary policy on poverty and inequality both over 
the business cycle in the United States and over the longer run in a large sample of countries. They 
argued that although expansionary policy induces a decline in the poverty rate, the decline is even- 
tually reversed. Second, monetary policy that aims to restrain inflation and minimize output fluctua- 
tions is likely to be associated with improved conditions for the poor over time. 

http://www.kc.frb.org/publicat/econrev/PDF/lq99romr.pdf 



208 



How effective is lifeline banking in assisting the ‘unbanked’?* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF NEW YORK 

Current Issues in Economics and Finance, v.4, no.6. Jun, 1998 
Authors: Doyle, Joseph J. / Lopez, Jose A. / Saidenberg, Marc R. 

Abstract: Many consumers who lack checking accounts are paying relatively high costs to access the 
nation’s payments system. Legislation aimed at opening the system to these unbanked individuals 
has centered on requiring commercial banks to offer low-cost “lifeline” accounts. But will cost savings 
alone motivate these consumers to access the payments system through banks? 

http://www.newyorkfed.org/research/current_issues/ci4-6.html 

Regional differences in family poverty* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF BOSTON 

New England Economic Review. Jan, 1997 - p. 3-17. 

Author: Triest, Robert K. 

Abstract: The main goal of this article is to shed some light on why poverty rates vary as much as 
they do in different areas. The analysis shows that much of the regional variation in poverty rates can 
be accounted for by differences across regions in the distribution of potential family earnings. Other 
factors, such as unemployment and whether the family recently immigrated to the United States, 
also are important in determining the poverty status of individual families, but play a somewhat 
smaller role than earnings capacity in explaining regional differences in poverty rates. 

http://www.bos.frb.org/economic/neer/neer1997/neer197a.htm 

“Tough Love”: implications for redistributive policy* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF DALLAS 

Economic Review. Q III, 1997 - p. 25-29. 

Author: Saving, Jason L. 

Abstract: The author explores the economic and political implications of “tough love” for redistribu- 
tive policy. The American welfare system unquestionably helps support the least fortunate among us, 
but, in making poverty less onerous, it may discourage employment among some individuals. A “new 
altruistic” approach that incorporates tough love would reduce the number of poor people but could 
only do so by worsening the living standards of those who remain in poverty. 

http://www.dallasfed.org/research/er/1997/er9703c.pdf 

Inflation, unemployment, and poverty revisited* 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF CLEVELAND 

Economic Review. Q III, 1995 - p. 2-13. 

Author: Powers, Elizabeth T. 



'denotes academic research paper 



209 



APPENDIX B 



APPENDIX B 



Abstract; An examination of the impact of inflation and unemployment on poverty, using a poverty rate based 
on goods and services consumed, rather than on income. The findings suggest that inflation may harm the poor 
more than was previously thought. 

http://clevelandfed.org/Research/Review/1995/95-q3-powers.pdf 

Growth and poverty revisited’ 

FEDERAL RESERVE BANK OF CLEVELAND 

Economic Commentary. Apr 15, 1995 
Author: Powers, Elizabeth T. 

Abstract: An explanation of an alternative analysis of poverty based on consumption rather than 
on annual income, which disputes the documented breakdown in progress against poverty in the 1980s and con- 
cludes that the poor appear to benefit from a growing economy now as much as in previous decades. 

http://www.clevelandfed.org/Research/commentary/1995/0415.pdf 



210 



Appendix C 

References for Overview in 
Alphabetical Order (by First Author) 

Aaronson, Daniel, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2008. “Inter- 
generational Economic Mobility in the United States, 1940 
to 2000.” Journal of Human Resources 43(1): 139. 

Ainsworth, James. 2002. “Why Does It Take a Village? 

The Mediation of Neighborhood Effects on Educational 
Achievement.” Social Forces 81(1): 117-52. 

Akerlof, George, and Janet Yellen. 1996. An Analysis of 
Out-of -Wed lock Births in the United States. Washington, 

DC: Brookings Institution. 

Alex-Assensoh, Y. 1998. Neighborhoods, Family, and Politi- 
cal Behavior in Urban America. New York: Routledge. 

Angrist, Joshua D., and Kevin Lang. 2004. “Does School 
Integration Generate Peer Effects? Evidence from Boston’s 
Metco Program.” American Economic Review, 94(5): 1613-34. 

Auletta, Ken. 1982. The Underclass. New York: 

Random House. 

Austin, Sharon D. Wright. 2006. The Transformation of 
Plantation Politics: Black Politics, Concentrated Poverty, 
and Social Capital in the Mississippi Delta. Buffalo: State 
University of New York Press. 

Banfield, Edward. 1970. The Unheavenly City: The Nature and 
Future of Our Urban Crisis. Long Grove, IL: Waveland Press. 

Bernstein, Jared. 2004. Testimony of Jared Bernstein 
before the Committee on Education and the Workforce, 
U.S. House of Representatives, March 11. 

Berube, Alan. 2006. “Confronting Concentrated Poverty,” 
Presentation to the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond 
Community Development Advisory Council, April 21. 

Berube, Alan, and Bruce Katz. 2005. “Katrina’s Window: 
Confronting Concentrated Poverty in America.” Washing- 
ton, DC: Brookings Institution. 



Berube, Alan, and Stephen Raphael. 2005. “Access to Cars 
in New Orleans.” Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Bhattacharya, Debopam, and Bhashkar Mazumder. 2007. 
“Nonparametric Analysis of Intergenerational Income 
Mobility with Application to the United States.” Federal 
Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper. 

Bickford, Adam, and Douglas Massey. 1991. “Segrega- 
tion in the Second Ghetto: Racial and Ethnic Segrega- 
tion in American Public Housing, 1977.” Social Forces 69: 
1011-36. 

Blumenberg, Evelyn, and Kimiko Shiki. 2004. “Spatial Mis- 
match Outside of Large Urban Areas: An Analysis of Wel- 
fare Recipients in Fresno Oounty, California.” Environment 
and Planning C: Government and Policy 22(3): 401-21. 

Booza, Jason, Jackie Cutsinger, and George Galster. 
2006. “Where Did They Go? The Decline of Middle- 
Income Neighborhoods in Metropolitan America, 
1970-2000.” Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Borjas, George. 1994. “Immigration, Ethnic Identity, 
and Assimilation: The Intergenerational Transmission 
of Immigrant Skills.” In Economic Aspects of Interna- 
tional Migration. Edited by H. Giersch, 139-54. New York: 
Springer Verlag. 

. 1995. “Ethnicity, Neighborhoods, and Human-Capital 

Externalities.” American Economic Review 85(2): 365-90. 

Borjas, George, Richard Freeman, and Lawrence Katz. 
1997. “How Much Do Immigration and Trade Affect Labor 
Market Outcomes?” Brookings Papers on Economic 
Activity, 1-90. 

Boyd, Donald, Hamilton Lankford, Susanna Loeb, and 
James Wyckoff. 2005. “The Draw of Home: How Teachers’ 
Preferences for Proximity Disadvantage Urban Schools.” 
Journal of Policy Analysis and Management 24(1): 113-32. 

Brookings Institution. 2005. “New Orleans After the 
Storm: Lessons from the Past, A Plan for the Future.” 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 



211 



APPENDIX C 



APPENDIX C 



Canner, Glenn. 1982. “Redlining: Research, and Federal 
Legislative Response,” Staff Studies 121, Board of Gover- 
nors of the Federal Reserve System. 

Caplovitz, David. 1967. The Poor Pay More: Consumer Prac- 
tices of Low Income Families. New York: The Free Press. 

Card, David. 2005. “Is the New Immigration Really So 
Bad?” National Bureau of Economic Research Working 
Paper 11547. 

Card, David, Alexandre Mas, and Jesse Rothstein. 2008. 
“Tipping and the Dynamics of Segregation.” Quarterly 
Journal of Economics 123(1):177. 

Case, Anne, and Lawrence Katz. 1991. “The Company 
You Keep: The Effects of Family and Neighborhood on 
Disadvantaged Youths.” Harvard Institute of Economic 
Research Working Paper 1555. 

Century Foundation Task Force on the Common School. 
2002. Divided We Fall: Coming Together Through Public 
School Choice. New York: Century Foundation Press. 

Cohen, Deborah, et al. 2003. “Neighborhood Physical 
Conditions and Health.” Journal of American Public Health 
93(3):467-71. 

Community Development Financial Institutions Fund. 
2001. “The Report of the Native American Lending Study.” 

Cornell, Stephen, and Joseph Kalt. 1992. “Reloading the 
Dice: Improving the Chances for Economic Development 
on American Indian Reservations.” In What Can Tribes 
Do? Strategies and Institutions in American Indian Eco- 
nomic Development. Edited by S. Cornell and J. Kalt, 1-51. 
Los Angeles: American Indian Studies Center at UCLA. 

Cotter, David. 2002. “Poor People in Poor Places: Local 
Opportunity Structures and Household Poverty.” Rural 
Sociology 67(4): 534-35. 

Coulton, Claudia, Shanta Pandey, and Julian Chow. 1990. 
“Concentration of Poverty and the Changing Ecology of 
Low-Income Urban Neighborhoods: An Analysis of the 
Cleveland Area.” Social Work Research and Abstracts 
26(4): 5-16. 



Crandall, Mindy, and Bruce Weber. 2004. “Local Social 
and Economic Conditions, Spatial Concentrations of 
Poverty, and Poverty Dynamics.” Columbia, MO: Rural 
Poverty Research Center. 

Crowder, Kyle, Scott J. South, and Erick Chavez. 2006. 
“Wealth, Race, and Inter-Neighborhood Migration.” Ameri- 
can Sociological Review 71(1): 72-94. 

Danziger, Sheldon, and Peter Gottschalk. 1987. “Earnings 
Inequality, the Spatial Concentration of Poverty, and the 
Underclass.” American Economic Review 77(2): 211-15. 

Dash, Leon. 1989. When Children Want Children: The Urban 
Crisis of Teenage Childbearing. New York: William Morrow 
and Co. 

Diez-Roux, Ana, et al. 2001. “Neighborhoods of Residence 
and Incidence of Coronary Heart Disease.” New England 
Journal of Medicine 345(2): 99-106. 

Duffy, D., and J. Stubben. 1998. “An Assessment of Native 
American Economic Development: Putting Culture and 
Sovereignty Back in the Models.” Studies in Comparative 
International Development 33(4): 52-78. 

Duncan, Cynthia M. 1999. Worlds Apart: Why Poverty Per- 
sists in Rural America. New Haven: Yale University Press. 

Duncan, Greg, Elizabeth Clark-Kauffman, and Emily Snell. 
2004. “Residential Mobility Interventions as Treatments 
for the Sequelae of Neighborhood Violence.” Northwest- 
ern University. 

Ellen, Ingrid Gould, and Margery Austin Turner. 1997. 

“Does Neighborhood Matter? Assessing Recent Evi- 
dence.” Housing Policy Debate 8(4): 833-66. 

Elliott, James, and Mario Sims. 2001. “Ghettos and Bar- 
rios: The Impact of Neighborhood Ethnicity and Poverty 
on Job Matching Among Blacks and Latinos.” Social 
Problems 48(3): 341-61. 

Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. 1996. Annual Report. 
Chicago: Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago. 



212 



Fellowes, Matthew. 2006. From Poverty, Opportunity: Put- 
ting the Market to Work for Lower-income Families. Wash- 
ington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Fitchen, J. M. 1981. Poverty in Rural America: A Case Study. 
Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 

Fox, J. 1996. “Flow Does Civil Society Thicken? The 
Political Construction of Social Capital in Mexico.” World 
Development 24(6):1089-1103. 

Frantz, K. 1999. Indian Reservations in North America: Terri- 
tory, Sovereignty, and Socioeconomic Change. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 

Freeman, Lance. 2004. “Siting Affordable Flousing: Loca- 
tion and Neighborhood Trends of Low Income Flousing 
Tax Credit Developments in the 1990s.” Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution. 

Galster, George, Jackie Cutsinger, and Ron Malega. 

2008. “The Costs of Concentrated Poverty: Neighbor- 
hood Property Markets and the Dynamics of Decline.” In 
Revisiting Rental Housing: Policies, Programs, and Priori- 
ties. Edited by N. Retsinas and E. Belsky. Washington, DC: 
Brookings Institution. 

Galster, George, and W. Mark Keeney. 1988. “Race, Resi- 
dence, Discrimination, and Economic Opportunity: Model- 
ing the Nexus of Urban Racial Phenomena.” Urban Affairs 
Ouarterly 24: 87-117. 

Goetz, Edward. 2003. Clearing the Way: Deconcentrat- 
ing the Poor in Urban America. Washington, DC: Urban 
Institute. 

Green, Gary Paul, and Anna Flaines. 2002. Asset Building 
and Community Development. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage 
Publications. 

Grieco, Elizabeth. 2002. “Characteristics of the Foreign- 
Born in the United States: Results from Census 2000.” 
Washington, DC: Migration Policy Institute. 

Flannerz, Ulf. 1969. Soulside. New York: Columbia Univer- 
sity Press. 



Flaskins, Ron, and Isabel Sawhill. 2003. “Work and Mar- 
riage: The Way to End Poverty and Welfare.” Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution. 

Flughes, Mark Alan. 1989. “Misspeaking Truth to Power: 

A Geographic Perspective on the ‘Underclass’ Fallacy.” 
Economic Geography 65: 187-207. 

Ihlanfeldt, Keith, and Daniel Sjoquist. 1998. “The Spatial 
Mismatch Flypothesis: A Review of Recent Studies and 
Their Implications for Welfare Reform.” Housing Policy 
Debate 9(4). 

Isaacs, Julia B., Isabel V. Sawhill, and Ron Flaskins. 2008. 
“Getting Ahead or Losing Ground: Economic Mobility in 
America.” Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Jackson, Matthew O. 2008. Social and Economic Net- 
works. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 

Jacob, Brian. 2007. “The Challenges of Staffing Urban 
Schools with Effective Teachers.” The Future of Children 
17(1): 129-53. 

. 2004. “Public Flousing, Flousing Vouchers, and Stu- 
dent Achievement: Evidence from Public Flousing Demoli- 
tions in Chicago.” American Economic Review 94(1). 

Jacob, Brian, and Lars Lefgren. 2003. “Are Idle Flands 
the Devil’s Workshop? Incapacitation, Concentration, and 
Juvenile Crime.” American Economic Review 93(5). 

Jargowsky, Paul. 1997. Poverty and Place: Ghettos, Barrios, 
and the American City. New York: Russell Sage Foundation. 

. 2003. “Stunning Progress, Flidden Problems: The 

Dramatic Decline of Concentrated Poverty in the 1990s.” 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Jargowsky, Paul, and Mary Jo Bane. 1990. “Ghetto Pov- 
erty: Basic Questions.” In Inner-City Poverty in the United 
States. Edited by L. Lynn and M. McGreary. Washington, 
DC: National Academy of Sciences Press. 

. 1991. “Ghetto Poverty in the United States.” In The 

Urban Underclass. Edited by C. Jencks and P. Peterson. 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 



213 



APPENDIX C 



APPENDIX C 



Joassart-Marcelli, Pascale, Jennifer Welch, and Juliet 
Musso. 2005. “The Fiscal Consequences of Concentrated 
Poverty in a Metropolitan Region.” Annals of the Associa- 
tion of American Geographers 95(2): 336-56. 

Johnson, Kenneth. 2003. “Unpredictable Directions of 
Rural Population Growth and Migration.” In Challenges 
for Rural America in the Twenty-First Century. Edited by 
David L. Brown and Louis E. Swanson. University Park: 
Pennsylvania State University Press. 

. 2006. “Demographic Trends in Rural and Small 

Town America.” The Carsey Institute: Reports on Rural 
America 1(1). 

Kahlenberg, Richard. 2001. “An Unambitious Legacy.” 
Education Week, February 21. 

Kain, John. 1968. “Flousing Segregation, Negro Employ- 
ment, and Metropolitan Decentralization.” Quarterly Jour- 
nal of Economics 82: 175-97. 

. 1992. “The Spatial Mismatch Flypothesis: Thirty Years 

Later.” Housing Policy Debate 3(2): 371-460. 

Kalt, Joseph. 2007. The State of the Native Nations: Condi- 
tions Under U.S. Policies of Self-Determination. Harvard 
Project on American Indian Economic Development. 
Oxford: Oxford University Press. 

Kane, Andrea, and Daniel Lichter. 2006. “Reducing 
Unwed Childbearing: The Missing Link in Efforts to Pro- 
mote Marriage.” Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Kasarda, John. 1989. “Urban Industrial Transformation 
and the Underclass.” Annals of the American Academy of 
Political and Social Science 501: 26-47. 

. 1993. “Inner City Concentrated Poverty and Neigh- 
borhood Distress: 1970 to 1990.” Housing Policy Debate 
4(3):253-302. 

Kasinitz, Philip, and Jan Rosenberg. 1996. “Missing the 
Connection: Social Isolation and Employment on the 
Brooklyn Waterfront.” Social Problems 43(2): 180-96. 



Katz, Bruce. 2004. “Neighborhoods of Choice and Con- 
nection: The Evolution of American Neighborhood Policy 
and What It Means for the United Kingdom.” Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution. 

Keels, Micere, et al. 2000. “How Permanent Are Suc- 
cesses in Residential Relocation Programs?” Joint Center 
for Poverty Research Policy Briefs 5(2). 

Kingsley, G. Thomas, and Kathryn L. S. Pettit. 2003. “Con- 
centrated Poverty: A Change in Course.” Neighborhood 
Change in America, no. 2. 

Kingsley, G. Thomas, et al. 1996. Assessment of Ameri- 
can Indian Housing Needs and Programs: Final Report. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Housing and Urban 
Development. 

Kling, Jeffrey. 2002. “Moving to Opportunity: Back- 
ground,” available at http://www.nber.org/-kling/mto/ 
initial.html (accessed February 2008). 

Kling, Jeffrey, Jeffrey Liebman, and Lawrence Katz. 2007. 
“Experimental Analysis of Neighborhood Effects.” Econo- 
metrica 75: 83-119. 

Kling, Jeffrey, Jens Ludwig, and Lawrence Katz. 2005. 
“Neighborhood Effects on Crime for Female and Male 
Youth: Evidence from a Randomized Housing Mobility 
Experiment.” Quarterly Journal of Economics 120: 87-130. 

Kodras, J. 1997. “The Changing Map of American Pov- 
erty in an Era of Economic Restructuring and Political 
Realignment.” Economic Geography 73(1): 67-93. 

Kraus, Neil. 2000. Race, Neighborhoods, and Community 
Power: Buffalo Politics, 1934-1997. Albany: State University 
of New York Press. 

Leichenko, Robin. 2003. “Does Place Still Matter? 
Accounting for Income Variation Across American Indian 
Tribal Areas.” Economic Geography 79(4): 365-86. 

Lemann, Nicholas. 1986. “The Origins of the Underclass.” 
Atlantic Monthly, vol. 258, 31- 55. 



214 



Leventhal, Tama, and Jeanne Brooks-Gunn. 2003. “Mov- 
ing to Opportunity: An Experimental Study of Neighbor- 
hood Effects on Health.” American Journal of Public 
Health 93: 1576-82. 

Lewis, Oscar. 1966. La Vida: A Puerto Rican Family in the 
Culture of Poverty— San Juan and New York. New York: 
Random House. 

Lichter, Daniel, and Kenneth M. Johnson. 2007. “The 
Changing Spatial Concentration of America’s Rural Poor 
Population.” Rural Sociology 72(3): 331-58. 

Liebow, Elliot. 1967. Tally’s Corner: A Study of Negro Street- 
corner Men. New York: Back Bay Books. 

Listokin, David, Robin Leichenko, and Juliet King. 2004. 
Housing and Economic Development in Indian Country: 
Challenge and Opportunity. Washington, DC: Fannie Mae 
Foundation. 

Lochner, Lance, and Enrico Moretti. 2001. “The Effect 
of Education on Crime: Evidence from Prison Inmates, 
Arrests, and Self-Reports.” National Bureau of Economic 
Research Working Paper 8605, November. 

Lupton, Ruth. 2004. “Schools in Disadvantaged Areas: 
Recognizing Context and Raising Quality.” London: LSE 
Centre for the Analysis of Social Exclusion. 

Manski, Charles F. 2000. “Economic Analysis of Social 
Interactions.” Journal of Economic Perspectives 14(3). 

Massey, Douglas, and Mitchell Eggers. 1990. “The Ecology 
of Inequality: Minorities and the Concentration of Poverty, 
1970-1980.” American Journal of Sociology 95: 1153-89. 

Massey, Douglas, and Nancy Denton. 1993. American 
Apartheid: Segregation and the Making of the Underclass. 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Massey, Douglas, and Shawn Kanaiaupuni. 1993. “Public 
Housing and the Concentration of Poverty.” Social Sci- 
ence Quarterly 74: 109-23. 

Massey, Douglas, Andrew Gross, and Kumiko Shibuya. 
1994. “Migration, Segregation, and the Spatial Concentra- 
tion of Poverty.” American Sociological Review 59: 425-45. 



McConville, Shannon, and Paul Cng. 2003. “The Tra- 
jectory of Poor Neighborhoods in Southern California, 
1970-2000.” Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Miller, Kathleen, and Bruce Weber. 2003. “Persistent Pov- 
erty Across the Urban-Rural Continuum.” Working Paper 
03-01, Rural Poverty Research Center. 

Mincy, Ronald. 2006. Black Males Left Behind. Washing- 
ton, DC: Urban Institute. 

Mincy, Ronald, and Susan Weiner. 1993. The Under Class 
in the 1980s: Changing Concepts, Constant Reality. Wash- 
ington, DC: Urban Institute. 

Murray, Charles. 1984. Losing Ground: American Social 
Policy, 1950-1980. New York: Basic Books. 

Myers, Dowell, Isaac Megbolugbe, and S. W. Lee. 1998. 
“Cohort Estimation of Homeownership Attainment Among 
Native-Born and Immigrant Populations.” Journal of Hous- 
ing Research 9(2): 237-69. 

National Research Council. 1993. Losing Generations: 
Adolescents in High-Risk Settings. Commission on Behav- 
ioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press. 

Neckerman, Kathryn, and Joleen Kirschenman. 1991. “Hir- 
ing Strategies, Racial Bias, and Inner-City Workers.” Social 
Problems 38(4): 433-77. 

Nelson, Kathryn. 1991. “Racial Segregation, Mobility, and 
Poverty Concentrations.” Paper presented at the Annual 
Meeting of the Population Association of America, 1991. 

Nord, Mark. 1998. “Poor People on the Move: County-to- 
County Migration and the Spatial Concentration of Poverty.” 
Journal of Regional Science 38(2): 329-51. 

Nowak, Jeremy. 1997. “Neighborhood Initiative and the 
Regional Economy.” Economic Development Quarterly 11(1): 
3-10. 

Pack, Janet. 1998. “Poverty and Urban Public Expendi- 
tures.” Urban Studies 35(11): 1995-2019. 



215 



APPENDIX C 



APPENDIX C 



Pendall, Rolf, Robert Puentes, and Jonathan Martin. 2006. 
“From Traditional to Reformed: A Review of Land-Use Reg- 
ulations in the Nation’s 50 Largest Metropolitan Areas.” 
Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Pianalto, Sandra. 2006. “The Challenge of Concentrated 
Poverty.” Remarks made at the Community Development 
Policy Summit, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleve- 
land, June 22, 2006. 

Pickering, K. 2000. Lakota Culture, World Economy. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. 

Quercia, Robert, and Lisa Bates. 2002. “The Neglect 
of America’s Housing: Consequences and Policy 
Responses.” Working Paper 2002-02, University of North 
Carolina at Chapel Hill. 

Quigley, John, and Steven Raphael. 2007. “Neighbor- 
hoods, Economic Self-Sufficiency, and the MTQ.” Paper 
prepared for the Brookings-Wharton Conference on 
Urban Affairs, Qctober 2007. 

Rae, Douglas. 2003. City: Urbanism and Its End. New 
Haven: Yale University Press. 

Ricketts, Erol, and Isabel Sawhill. 1988. “Defining and 
Measuring the Underclass.” Journal of Policy Analysis and 
Management T. 316-25. 

Rivkin, Steven G., Eric A. Hanushek, and John F. Kain. 
2005. “Teachers, Schools, and Academic Achievement.” 
Econometrica 73(2) (March): 417-58. 

Rosenbaum, James, and L. Rubinowitz. 2000. “Geog- 
raphy of Qpportunity for Public Housing Residents?” 
Institute for Policy Research News 21(1). 

Rosser, E. 2005. “This Land Is My Land, This Land Is Your 
Land: Markets and Institutions for Economic Development 
on Native American Land.” Arizona Law Review 47: 245-312. 

Rubinowitz, Leonard. 1992. “Metropolitan Public Hous- 
ing Desegregation Remedies: Chicago’s Privatization 
Program.” Northern Illinois University Law Review 12(3): 
590-669. 



Rusk, David. 2001. “The ‘Segregation Tax’: The Cost of 
Racial Segregation to Black Homeowners.” Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution. 

Sampson, Robert J., Jeffrey D. Morenoff, and Thomas 
Gannon-Rowley. 2002. “Assessing ‘Neighborhood Effects’: 
Social Processes and New Directions in Research,” 
Annual Review of Sociology 28: 443-478. 

Sampson, Robert, and William J. Wilson. 1995. “Toward a 
Theory of Race, Crime, and Urban Inequality.” In Crime 
and Inequality. Edited by J. Hagan and R. Peterson. Palo 
Alto: Stanford University Press. 

Sanbonmatsu, Lisa, et al. 2006. “Neighborhoods and 
Academic Achievement: Results from the Moving to 
Qpportunity Experiment.” National Bureau of Economic 
Research Working Paper 11909. 

Sandefur, Gary. 1989. “American Indian Reservations: The 
First Underclass Areas?” Focus 12(1): 37-41. 

Schill, Michael, and Susan Wachter. 1995. “The Spatial 
Bias of Federal Housing Law and Policy: Concentrated 
Poverty in Urban America.” University of Pennsylvania Law 
Review 143: 1285-1341. 

Shlay, Anne B., 1988. “Not in That Neighborhood: The 
Effects of Housing and Population on the Distribution 
of Mortgage Finance Within the Chicago SMSA from 
1980-1983.” Social Science Research 17: 137-63. 

Singer, Audrey. 2004. “The Rise of New Immigrant Gate- 
ways.” Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Solon, Gary, Marianne E. Page, and Greg J. Duncan. 2000. 
“Correlations Between Neighboring Children in Their 
Subsequent Educational Attainment,” Review of Econom- 
ics and Statistics 82(3): 383-92. 

South, Scott J., and Kyle D. Crowder. 1997. “Escaping 
Distressed Neighborhoods: Individual, Community, and 
Metropolitan Influences.” American Journal of Scoiology 
102:1040-84. 

. 1998. “Leaving the ‘Hood: Residential Mobility 

Between Black, White, and Integrated Neighborhoods.” 
American Sociological Review 63: 17-26. 



216 



. 1999. “Neighborhood Effects on Family Formation: 

Concentrated Poverty and Beyond.” American Sociologi- 
cal Review 64: 113-32. 

South, Scott, Kyle Crowder, and Erick Chavez. 2005. “Exit- 
ing and Entering Poor Neighborhoods: Latinos, Blacks, 
and Anglos Compared.” Social Forces 84(2): 873-900. 

Taylor, J. B., and J. P. Kalt. 2005. American Indians on Res- 
ervations: A Databook of Socioeconomic Change Between 
the 1990 and 2000 Censuses. Cambridge, MA: The Har- 
vard Project on American Indian Economic Development. 

Thomas, Evan, and Arian Campo-Flores. 2005. “The Battle 
to Rebuild.” Newsweek, October 3. 

Tickamyer, Ann, and Cynthia Duncan. 1990. “Poverty and 
Opportunity Structure in Rural America.” Annual Review of 
Sociology 16: 67-86. 

Trosper, R. 1996. “American Indian Poverty on Reserva- 
tions, 1969-1989.” In Changing Numbers, Changing Needs: 
American Indian Demography and Public Health. Edited by 
G. Sandefur, R. Rindfuss, and B. Cohen, 172-95. Washing- 
ton, DC: National Academy Press. 

Turner, Margery Austin, Susan J. Popkin, and G. Thomas 
Kingsley. 2005. “Distressed Public Housing: What It Costs 
to Do Nothing.” Washington, DC: Urban Institute. 

USDA Economic Research Service. 2006. “Rural Employ- 
ment at a Glance.” Economic Information Bulletin 21. 

Vale, Lawrence. 2000. From the Puritans to the Projects: 
Public Housing and Public Neighbors. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 

Weinberg, Daniel. 1987. “Rural Pockets of Poverty.” Rural 
Sociology 52 (3): 398-408. 

Wial, Howard, and Alec Friedhoff. 2006. Bearing the 
Brunt: Manufacturing Job Loss in the Great Lakes Region, 
1995-2005. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution. 

Wilson, William Julius. 1987. The Truly Disadvantaged: The 
Inner City, the Underclass, and Public Policy. Chicago: 
University of Chicago Press. 



. 1996. When Work Disappears: The New World of the 

Urban Poor. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 

Yinger, John. 1995. Closed Doors, Opportunities Lost: 
The Continuing Costs of Housing Discrimination. New 
York: Russell Sage Foundation. 



217 



APPENDIX C 



218 



Appendix D 

Photo Credits 

Fresno, California: 

the West Fresno neighborhood 

PAGE 25; California’s San Joaquin Valley, south of 
Sacramento. Photo taken in 1983 by Helen Roach (Photo 
View Plus). 

PAGE 29: Keamey Palms Shopping Center in West 
Fresno, CA. Photo courtesy of Fresno West Coalition for 
Economic Development. 

PAGE 30; Boys & Girls Club of West Fresno. Photo cour- 
tesy of the Boys & Girls Club of West Fresno. 

Cleveland, Ohio: the Central neighborhood 

PAGE 35: The former Westinghouse Electric & Manufac- 
turing Company Cleveland branch facility. Photo taken in 
2007 by case study author Lisa Nelson. 

PAGE 40; HOPE Vl-sponsored public-housing renovation 
in the Central neighborhood. Photo courtesy of Burten, 
Bell, Carr Development, Inc. 

Miami, Florida: the Little Haiti neighborhood 

PAGE 47: Ethnic restaurant along a commercial strip in 
Miami’s Little Haiti neighborhood. Photo taken in 2007 by 
case study author Ana Cruz-Taura. 

Martin County, Kentucky 

PAGE 57: President Lyndon B. Johnson on the porch of Tom 
Fletcher and family in Inez, Ky., on April 24, 1964 (Corbis). 

PAGE 62: Highway 40 heading west from Warfield to Inez, 
Ky. Photo taken in 2007 by case study author Jeff Gatica. 

Blackfeet Reservation, Montana 

PAGE 67; This sculpture, crafted from rusted automobile 
scrap metal, barbed wire, and stones salvaged from a mis- 
sion school, portrays Native American warriors. The sculp- 
ture stands at the southeast entrance to the Blackfeet 
Reservation. Photo taken by Conall o hArtghaile (Flickr). 



PAGE 69: Sign at one entrance to the reservation. Photo 
taken by Conall o hArtghaile (Flickr). 

PAGE 71; Manufactured home on the reservation. Photo 
taken in 2007 by case study author Sue Woodrow. 

Greenville, North Carolina: 

the West Greenville neighborhood 

PAGE 75: Abandoned tobacco warehouse in West Green- 
ville. Photo taken in 2007 by case study author Carl Neely. 

Atlantic City, New Jersey: 

Bungalow Park/Marina District 

PAGE 83: Aerial view of Atlantic City, facing east. Photo 
taken by Ritu Manoj Jethani (Shutterstock). 

PAGE 86: The Borgata Casino stands in stark contrast to 
the surrounding community. Photo taken in 2006 by Mike 
Mergen for the The New York Times (Redux Pictures). 

Austin, Texas: 

the East Austin neighborhood 

PAGE 91: Robertson Hill, a new residential development 
in East Austin. Photo taken in 2007 by case study author 
Elizabeth Sobel. 

PAGE 94: At left, a dilapidated home in East Austin. Photo 
courtesy of Austin Revitalization Authority. At right. Plaza 
Saltillo combines mixed-use development (pictured) with 
a new metro stop. Photo taken in 2007 by case study 
author Elizabeth Sobel. 

McKinley County, New Mexico: Crownpoint 

PAGE 101: A residential area of remote Crownpoint, 

New Mexico. Photo taken in 2007 by case study author 
Roger Zalneraitis. 

McDowell County, West Virginia 

PAGE 109: An abandoned coal tipple in McDowell Coun- 
ty’s Caretta, W. Va. Photo taken in 2004 by Jon C. Han- 
cock (AP Photo). 

PAGE 111 ; McDowell County miners, 1940. Photo reprinted 
with permission from William Archer. 



219 



APPENDIX D 



APPENDIX D 



Albany, Georgia: 

the East Albany neighborhood 

PAGE 117; Following a severe storm, the Flint River— 
which divides East Albany from the rest of the city- 
floods a nearby Dougherty County cemetery. Photo taken 
in 1998 by Todd Stone (AP Photo). 

El Paso, Texas: the Chamizal neighborhood 

PAGE 125: Looking north toward El Paso, this photo 
shows the canal and railroad tracks that mark the west- 
ernmost edge of the Chamizal neighborhood. The heavily 
polluted canal snakes to the right and runs underneath 
the train tracks into Chamizal. Photo taken in 2007 by 
case study author Roy Lopez. 

PAGE 129; This underpass mural depicts El Paso native 
Ruben Salazar, a Mexican-American journalist who cov- 
ered race issues in Los Angeles in the 1960s and 70s. 
Salazar was killed in the race riots in East LA in 1970; a 
public housing complex in Chamizal was posthumously 
named in his honor. Photo taken in 2007 by case study 
author Roy Lopez. 

Springfield, Massachusetts: Old Hill, Six Cor- 
ners, and the South End neighborhoods 

PAGE 135: Former mill buildings are visible across the 
ravine leading down to the Mill River in the Six Corners 
neighborhood. Photo taken in 2007 by Fleather Brandon 
(urbancompass.net). 

PAGE 139: Springfield residents enjoy the Connecticut 
River Walk and Bikeway. Photo taken September 6, 2008, 
by Michael S. Gordon. © 2008 The Republican Company. 
All rights reserved. Reprinted with permission. 

PAGE 140; This building is located in the South End 
neighborhood, within the Flollywood Gemini section of 
downtown. The City of Springfield has targeted the area 
for priority redevelopment. Photo taken in 2008 by Kai- 
Yan Lee of the Federal Reserve Bank of Boston. 



Rochester, New York: 

the Northern Crescent neighborhoods 

PAGE 143: A Kodak digital production printer at the com- 
pany’s graphic communications plant in Rochester. Photo 
taken in 2006 by David Duprey (AP Photo). 

PAGE 146: Distressed and abandoned properties, such 
as these along Mark Street, dot Rochester’s Northern 
Crescent neighborhoods. Photo taken in 2004 by Don 
Fleupel (AP Photo). 

Holmes County, Mississippi 

PAGE 151: Close-up of ripe cotton bolls on branch. Photo 
taken by Noam Armonn (AP Photo). 

PAGE 155: A Holmes County entrepreneur’s sign. Photo 
taken in 2007 by case study author Ellen Eubank. 

Milwaukee, Wisconsin: 
the Northwest neighborhood 

PAGE 159: A locomotive sits in the yard of the Milwaukee 
Road Railroad, or “Beer Line,” which served the area’s 
breweries. Photo taken by Gary Porter. © 2007 Journal 
Sentinel Inc., reproduced with permission. 

PAGE 163: The old Milwaukee Road railroad tracks. Photo 
taken by Gary Porter. © 2007 Journal Sentinel Inc., repro- 
duced with permission. 

PAGE 164: The Northwest neighborhood features new 
market-rate homes in the Lindsay Fleights/Josey Fleights 
development. Photo courtesy of Milwaukee Department 
of City Development, reproduced with permission. 



220 



