DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 463 917 



RC 023 449 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 

SPONS AGENCY 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

CONTRACT 
AVAILABLE FROM 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Demmert, William G. , Jr.. 

Improving Academic Performance among Native American 
Students: A Review of the Research Literature. 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools , 
Charleston, WV. 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED) , 
Washington, DC. 

2001 - 12-00 

95p. ; Online publication. 

ED- 99 -CO- 002 7 

For full text: http://www.ael.org/eric/demmert.htm. 
Information Analyses (070) -- ERIC Publications (071) -- 
Reference Materials - Directories/Catalogs (132) 

MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

♦Academic Achievement; * American Indian Education; Annotated 
Bibliographies; Bilingual Education; Cultural Maintenance; 
Culturally Relevant Education; Early Childhood Education; 
Educational Practices; *Educational Research; Elementary 
Secondary Education; Family Influence; Higher Education; 
Socioeconomic Influences; Student Characteristics 



ABSTRACT 



This literature review examines research-based information 
on educational approaches and programs associated with improving the academic 
performance of Native American students. A search reviewed ERIC'S over 8,000 
documents on American Indian education, as well as master's and doctoral 
dissertations and other sources of research on the education of Native 
Americans. Selected research reports and articles were organized into the 
following categories: early childhood environment and experiences; Native 
language and cultural programs; teachers, instruction, and curriculum; 
community and parental influences on academic performance; student 
characteristics; economic and social factors; and factors leading to success 
in college or college completion. The status of research and major research 
findings are reviewed for each of these categories; brief summaries of 
research findings with citations are included following the review of each 
category. Also included are an annotated bibliography of more than 100 
research reports, journal articles, and dissertations, most published after 
1985; and a bibliography of 23 additional references to other literature 
reviews and non-Native studies. (SV) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 





eaJW?' 




U.8 DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

S/This document has been reproduced os 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes hove been made to improve 
reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this docu- 
ment do not necessarily represent official 
OERI position or policy. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 







Improving Academic Performance among 
Native American Students 

A Review of the Research Literature 

by 

William G. Demmert, Jr. 



ERIC 

Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools 

Charleston, WV 




ERIC 

Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools 

AEL, Inc. 

PO Box 1348 

Charleston, WV 25325-1348 



December 2001 



OBTAINING THE FULL TEXT OF MATERIALS CITED IN ERIC 

ERIC DOCUMENTS (Citations identified by an ED number) are 
available in microfiche form at libraries or other institutions housing 
ERIC Resource Collections worldwide; to identify your local ERIC 
Resource Collection, connect to: 
http://www.ed.gov/BAS ISDB/EROD/eric/SF. 

Many libraries now offer E*Subscribe, which grants their patrons free 
electronic access to some ERIC documents. Ask your local librarian if 
they offer this valuable service. If they do not, documents are also 
available selectively in a variety of formats (including microfiche, paper 
copy, or electronic) from the ERIC Document Reproduction Service for a 
fee: telephone 800-443 -ERIC, e-mail service@edrs.com, or use the online 
order form available at http://edrs.com/Webstore/Express.cfm. 

ERIC JOURNALS (Citations identified by an EJ number) are available in 
your local library or via interlibrary loan services, from the originating 
journal publisher, or for a fee from Ingenta: http://www.ingenta.com/, e- 
mail ushelp@ingenta.com, or telephone 617-395-4046 or toll-free 800- 
296-2221. 



The ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools is operated by AEL, 
Inc. and funded by the U.S. Department of Education. AEL is a catalyst for schools 
and communities to build lifelong learning systems that harness resources, research, 
and practical wisdom. Information about AEL projects, programs, and services is 
available on our Web site or by writing or calling us. AEL is an affirmative 
action/equal opportunity employer. 

This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research 
and Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. ED-99-CO- 
0027. The opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the positions or 
policies of OERI, the Department, or AEL. 



ii 



4 




Table of Contents 



Preface and Acknowledgements iv 

Foreword v 

Introduction 1 

Native Education Reform 2 

A Review of the Findings 5 

Theme 1 . Early Childhood Environment and Experiences 5 

Theme 2. Native Language and Cultural Programs in Schools 8 

Theme 3. Teachers, Instruction, and Curriculum 17 

Theme 4. Community and Parental Influences 26 

Theme 5. Student Characteristics 29 

Theme 6. Factors Leading to Success in College 38 

A Summary of What the Research Tells Us 42 

Annotated Bibliography 45 

Bibliography of Footnoted Material 85 



iii 



5 




Preface and Acknowledgements 



This literature review and annotated bibliography is an expansion of a Center for 
Research on Education, Diversity, and Excellence (CREDE) project funded by the 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI). The original review 
focused on Native language and cultural programs that supported improved academic 
performance among Native students. It served as the starting point for this 
publication, which represents a significant expansion of the original and covers many 
more topics. 

This document also is part of a larger project designed to assess whether Native 
American students have improved their reading and mathematics scores over the past 
decade. The quality of the research has not been formally assessed for this report. 
ERIC and dissertation abstracts were screened and judgments were made about which 
research reports to include and which to exclude. Some of the work was familiar 
territory; in other cases, the abstracts were too sketchy to make judgments. In the 
latter cases, articles and documents were examined to make determinations about 
including them in the review. A more formal analysis of the quality of these studies 
will be made and reported on as part of the larger RAND Corporation study focusing 
on whether Native American students have improved their reading and mathematics 
scores. The forthcoming RAND study will evaluate National Assessment of 
Educational Progress (NAEP) data collected by state departments of education and 
the U.S. Department of Education. 

I wish to thank Peter Smith of the Western Washington University Library and 
Patricia Cahape Hammer of the ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small 
Schools (ERIC/CRESS) for their help in locating dissertations and screening the 
thousands of ERIC documents reporting studies that show improved academic 
performance of Native American students. I also wish to recognize the excellent work 
of Chinca Jung, a student at Western Washington University, for the many hours she 
spent sorting through hundreds of documents and helping to identify those included 
in this report and for her exemplary work with the bibliography. ERIC/CRESS staff 
who helped prepare this review for publication include Susan Voelkel (who wrote 
many of the abstracts), Robert Hagerman, Velma Mitchell, and Marilyn Slack. 

I also wish to thank David Beaulieu, former director of the Office of Indian 
Education, U.S. Department of Education, Washington DC, for his vision and interest 
in this project. Thanks also to two anonymous reviewers whose comments greatly 
improved the quality of this review. 



iv 



6 




Foreword 



There are few people as qualified as William G. Demmert, Jr. to develop this 
review of literature on “what works,” or doesn’t work, in effectively educating 
American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Native Hawaiians. Dr. Demmert is a 
professor at the Woodring College of Education at Western Washington University in 
Bellingham, Washington. He previously served as an Irvine Scholar and visiting 
professor at Stanford University, commissioner of education for the State of Alaska, 
professor of education and dean of the School of Education and Liberal Arts at the 
University of Alaska- Juneau, director of Indian Education Programs for the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, and deputy U.S. Commissioner at the U.S. Office ofEducation’s 
Office of Indian Education, Department of Health, Education, and Welfare; 

Dr. Demmert has also served on a number of influential committees, task forces, 
and commissions for the federal government. He was assigned to Senator Ted 
Kennedy’s office, where he worked as an expert in Indian education to help produce 
the original language for the Senate bill that later became the Indian Education Act of 
1972. His more recent involvements have included work on the National Indian Task 
Force, which worked on Presidential Executive Order 13096 on American Indian and 
Alaska Native Education; the Indian Nations At Risk Task Force; and the Circle of 
Advisors for the Smithsonian Institution’s National Museum of the American Indian. 
He recently worked as an advisor to the U.S. Department ofEducation’s National 
Center for Education Statistics and Office of Indian Education. 

Dr. Demmert’s involvement in Indigenous education extends beyond North 
America to include work in the Circumpolar North in Greenland, Norway, and 
Russia. His interest in Native languages and culture is grounded in bo>hood 
memories of Tlingit elders who spoke the language with each other but not with the 
youth of his generation. Over the course of three generations (his being the third), he 
witnessed the Tlingit people — like so many other Native Americans — as they nearly 
lost their Native language. Since that time, he has helped lead the movement to 
transform U.S. education policy and practice, so it can help arrest and reverse a trend 
it did much to create — the loss of a rich and diverse North American cultural and 
linguistic heritage and the widespread alienation of Native people from the 
educational establishment. 

A Note about the Format of This Review 

The literature review includes both footnotes and American Psychological 
Association (APA)-style author-date citations in the text. The citations in text refer to 

V 



7 




studies included in the annotated bibliography and represent articles, reports, and 
books describing original research studies involving American Indians, Alaska 
Natives, Native Hawaiians, and other Indigenous groups (e.g., Maori and Canadian 
First Nations). The citations in footnotes include reports of non-Indian, or 
mainstream, research and a number of secondary sources such as literature reviews. A 
separate bibliography for these resources is included at the end of this document, 
following the more detailed annotated bibliography. 

— Patricia Cahape Hammer, Director, ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education 
and Small Schools 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Introduction 



Improving the quality of education for Native American (American Indian, 

Alaska Native, and Native Hawaiian) students — especially with the intent of 
improving academic performance — presents a complex challenge for schools serving 
Native communities. Especially important players in meeting this challenge are 
Native American educators, researchers, parents, and tribal and political leaders. 

Traditional systems of Native American education — used to transfer skills and 
knowledge from one generation to the next — developed over thousands of years. In 
these systems, students were not allowed to fail. The family, clan, tribe, and 
responsible mentors worked with the youth until the information or task was clearly 
learned. The lessons were an integrated part of daily life and ceremonies, not a 
separate or isolated activity. 

Many of these traditional systems for educating the youth of a tribe are no longer 
practiced. Dramatic changes in education systems occurred because of a mix of 
cultural, social, and political interventions that have taken place among all Native 
peoples. In response, tribal groups recognized that knowledge and technology new to 
the tribe required mentors from outside the community. Missionaries and church 
groups first introduced formal educational opportunities outside the tribe by offering 
religious curricula and exposure to new technology. Beginning with the Treaty of 
August 14, 1722, some early treaties between eastern colonies and Indian tribes 
established educational opportunities. 

However, not all change was voluntary. In many places, more powerful 
governments took or assumed responsibility for the education of Native children. 
With the Act of March 3, 1819, the federal government formally assumed 
responsibility for the education of Indian children, to prevent the decline and 
extinction of Indian tribes and to introduce the customs and knowledge of 
contemporary society. In the Act of March 1, 1873, responsibility for 
Indians — including their education — was transferred from the War Department to the 
Secretary of the Interior and a new Bureau of Indian Affairs. 1 

Today, the vast majority of Native students attends state-run public schools, with 



'Deloria, V., Jr. (1975). Legislative analysis of the federal role in Indian education . 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Indian Education. 



9 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

a few tribes operating tribal schools funded through the Bureau of Indian Aflairs. 
Except for the tribal schools, responsibility for the education of Native children and 
youth has been transferred from the tribes to state agencies, mostly to administrators 
and other individuals outside the communities or tribes. With this transfer of 
responsibility, Native students began experiencing high levels of educational failure 
and a growing ambivalence toward learning traditional tribal knowledge and skills. 
They often exhibited indifference to formal Western academic learning, as well. 



Native Education Reform 

After World War II, tribal communities, as well as African Americans and other 
minorities, began to organize to ^in greater self-determination and civil rights. 2 
Tribal communities, concerned about the inability of state and federal education 
agencies to provide an adequate education to Native students, applied pressure to 
government agencies and Congress to regain some control and responsibility for the 
education of Native youth. Their efforts resulted in a number of important federal 
efforts to investigate the status of American Indian and Alaska Native education and 
to pass legislation to address its inadequacies. 

First was the U.S. Senate Report of 1969, Indian Education: A National 
Tragedy— A National Challenge , which provided impetus and guidance for passage 
of The Indian Education Act of 1972 (PL 92-318 as amended), and, in 1975, for the 
Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act. Since passage of this 
legislation, Native efforts to improve the quality of education have focused both on 
improving their children’s traditional knowledge (heritage languages and cultures) 
and academic performance. 3 

A better understanding of the condition of Native education — and what will be 
needed to improve it — has been gained since the 1970s. This interest expanded and 
intensified in the last decade of the twentieth century, culminating in a series of 



2 Reyhner, J. (1989). Changes in American Indian education: A historical retrospective 
for educators in the United States. ERIC Digest. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural 
Education and Small Schools. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED324228) 

3 U.S. Senate Special Subcommittee on Indian Education. (1969). Indian education: A 
national tragedy— A national challenge. Senate Report No. 91-501. 1969 report of the 
Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, United States Senate. Washington, DC: U.S. 
Government Printing Office. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED034625) 

2 



10 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



investigations, reports, and initiatives: 

• the U.S. Department of Education report, Indian Nations At Risk: An 
Educational Strategy for Action. Final Report , October 199 1 4 

• the White House Conference on Indian Education and follow-up report of 
May 1992 5 

• Executive Order 1 3096 on American Indian and Alaska Native Education 
signed by President Clinton on August 6, 1998 

Among the activities initiated as a result of the Executive Order was a nationwide 
effort involving tribal leaders and Native education researchers and professors to 
develop a “research agenda.” The agenda was approved by U.S. Secretary of 
Education Rod Paige in late 2001. 6 This document is significant because it outlines an 
agenda guided by Native commitments to self-determination, the perpetuation of 
Native languages and cultures, and to finding effective ways of educating Native 
children and youth. In other words, Native peoples once again will design educational 
systems in which all students will be expected to succeed. 

Fortunately, some good groundwork has already been laid. This literature review 
and annotated bibliography will help readers locate research projects that provide 
information on factors and programs associated with improved academic 
performance of Native students. This review began with a search of the Educational 
Resource Information Center's (ERIC) more than 8,000 document and article 
abstracts related to American Indian, Alaska Native, Native Hawaiian, and other 
Indigenous education; master’s degree and doctoral dissertations; and other sources 
of research information on the education of Native America. From these sources, 
there emerged a limited number of research studies — just over 100 — that provide 
evidence of what works or does not work to improve the academic performance of 



4 Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. (1991). Indian nations at risk: An educational 
strategy for action Final report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED339587) 

5 White House Conference on Indian Education. (1992). The final report of the White 
House Conference on Indian Education (Executive Summary). Washington, DC: Author. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED353 124). 

6 Executive Order Working Group, Strang, W., & von Glatz, A. (2001). American Indian 
and Alaska Native Research Agenda. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. Retrieved 
January 8, 2002, from http://www.indianeduresearch.net/index.htm. 

3 



11 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

Native students. This group of studies is the primary focus of this review. 

This review includes a discussion of the identified research studies organized 
along six themes (listed below) and brief synopses of the study findings. In addition, 
ERIC staff have prepared abstracts for an annotated bibliography of the items 
selected. Many of the documents described here can be obtained in full text from the 
ERIC system. For information about obtaining documents, see page ii. 



4 



12 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



A Review of the Findings 



The studies were organized into the following themes: (1) early childhood 
environment and experiences; (2) Native language and cultural programs in schools; 
(3) teachers, instruction, and curriculum; (4) community and parental influences on 
academic performance; (5) student characteristics; and (6) factors leading to success 
in college. 



Theme 1. Early Childhood Environment and Experiences 

The earliest recognition of the importance of early childhood education programs 
for American Indians appeared in the federally funded Meriam report of 1928 
(Prucha, 2000). Lewis Meriam, an early visionary, realized that creating a healthy 
environment during a child’s early life was important to future well-being. 7 

By the 1970s, the influence of environment on a yaung child’s intellectual 
development was better understood. Providing good prenatal care, giving children 
opportunities to explore and satisfy their curiosity, promoting language development, 
nurturing kinesthetic skill development, and building proper physical and social 
mother-child relationships were all considered important in promoting a child’s 
general well-being. 8 Major findings of a report on the Kamehameha Early Education 
Program (KEEP), involving Native Hawaiians, showed that the best predictors of 
first-grade reading achievement were verbal ability and high reading-readiness 
scores, and that family background was strongly related to school achievement 
(Kamehameha Early Education Program, 1974). 

In 1976, the most comprehensive report ever produced on early childhood issues 
among Native children was submitted to the Bureau of Indian Affairs by Herbert 
Zimiles, project director, and staff of the Bank Street College (U.S. Bureau of Indian 



7 Meriam, L., Brown, R. A., Cloud, H. R., Dale, E. E., Duke, E., Edwards, H. R., 
McKenzie, F. A., Mark, M. L., Ryan, W. C., Jr., & Spillman, W. J. (1928). The problem of 
Indian administration. Report of a survey made at the request of Honorable Hubert Work, 
Secretary of the Interior, and submitted to him February 21st. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins 
Press. 

8 Demmert, W. G., Jr. (1974). Critical issues in Indian education : 1972-1973. Ann Arbor, 
MI: University Microfilms. 



5 



13 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Affairs, 1976). This document includes information on economic conditions; health, 
nutrition, social, and emotional problems and issues; mental health issues; early 
development; and education. Primarily focusing on early childhood education and 
parenting, these researchers explored the interrelated problems Indian reservations 
and communities faced and their impact on learning. The case studies and other 
research included in this report point to the critical need for parent-focused early 
childhood education programs as an avenue for developing the whole child, including 
improved cognition and academic performance. 

This line of study was continued into the 1980s. Macias (1987) reported findings 
of an ethnographic study of Papago children in a tribal Head Start program, focusing 
particularly on how Papago teachers helped children bridge the cultural discontinuity 
between their homes and the schools, resulting in academic benefits in their later 
schooling. Swisher and Deyhle (1989) reported that the physical, social, and cultural 
environments in which young children mature significantly influence their behavior, 
learning preferences, and other characteristics later in life. A policy study published 
during this same period was produced by the Alaska Governor’s Interim Commission 
on Children and Youth. This influential report laid out a comprehensive strategy for 
providing early childhood education for all of Alaska’s children and identified the 
critical need for more Native teachers and a culturally based curriculum for Alaska 
Native children. 9 

More recent studies examining the effects of early environment and educational 
programs on the intellectual development of Native children are scarce. In contrast, 
the body of research on these topics for non-Native groups is growing in significance 
and volume. For example, a review of 36 studies provided evidence that early 
childhood programs can effect short-term benefits in intelligence quotients and long- 
term benefits in school achievement, grade retention, placement in special education, 
and social adjustment among low-income families. 10 Related results come from a 
national evaluation of tribal Even Start Family Literacy programs, which found that 
comparatively greater numbers of participating children performed at their expected 
developmental level, even into the primary grades (Levin, Moss, Swartz, Khan, & 



9 Alaska Governor’s Interim Commission on Children and Youth. (1988). Our greatest 
natural resource: Investing in the future of Alaska’s children. Juneau, AK: Governor’s Interim 
Commission on Children and Youth, Office of the Governor. 

10 Barnett, W. S. (1995). Long-term effects of early childhood programs on cognitive and 
school outcomes. The Future of Children , 5(3), 25-50. 



6 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

Tarr, 1997). In a 2-year project with the children and families of the Oklahoma 
Seminole Nation Head Start, researchers studied the impacts of a program meant to 
encourage emerging mathematics literacy by working with families. Participants in 
the program scored higher on kindergarten screening tests than students in prior years 
(Medearis, 1996). 

Brain researchers have looked for the biological bases of these findings in current 
studies on the development of the brain and the effects of environment on cognition. 
The information on cognitive development tells us that early experiences have a 
significant impact on the intelligence of a young child. 11 The research suggests that 
early experiences build synaptic connections in the brain, and the more connections 
created the smarter the child. Other research suggests that physical activity of young 
children creates a glucose that feeds the brain and is a necessary requirement for 
cognitive development. 12 

Although research on the influences of early childhood education and 
development on Native children is limited, the studies that exist support mainstream 
studies. Consequently, it is possible to infer that efforts to improve educational 
outcomes must begin by paying attention to this critical period of a child’s life. 
Ensuring a challenging and stimulating early environment for )*nmg children is 
associated with cognitive development and, later, achievement in the formal school 
setting. If improving academic performance for all Native children is a priority, we 
must take these findings seriously and pay attention to this period in a Native child’s 
life. 

Listing of findings. Abstracts of these reports are in the annotated bibliography at 
the end of this literature review. 

• The physical, social, and cultural environments in which a person grows and 
matures significantly influence behaviors, learning preferences, perceptions, 
and other human characteristics (Swisher & Deyhle, 1989). 



1 ‘Bowman, B. T., Donovan, M. S., & Bums, M. S. (eds.). (2001). Eager to learn: 
Educating our preschoolers. National Research Council, Committee on Early Childhood 
Pedagogy, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and Education. Washington, DC: 
National Academy Press. 

12 Begley, S. (1996, February 19). Your Child’s Brain. Newsweek , 55-62; see also Sousa, 
D. A. (1998, December 16). Is the Fuss About Brain Research Justified? Education Week, 
75(16), pp. 35, 52. 



7 



15 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



• At the Papago Early Childhood Head Start program Papago teachers 
developed their own “hidden curriculum” geared to reduce the negative 
impact of discontinuity. These teachers incoiporated Papago experiences, 
values, and ways of relating into discontinuous activities and experiences 
and thereby increased student engagement, compliance, and later success in 
school (Macias, 1987). 

• Parents were found to be more comfortable receiving services in their own 
homes than in public settings, and students who received services performed 
at higher levels of development, even into the primary grades (Levin, Moss, 
Swartz, Khan, & Tarr, 1997). 

• In a 2-year research project with the children and families of the Oklahoma 
Seminole Nation Head Start, standards-based packets of simple ideas and 
easy at-home activities meant to encourage emerging math literacy were 
distributed to families on a monthly basis, with family training provided at a 
preschool center and through home visits. Participants in the program scored 
higher on kindergarten screening tests than students in prior years 
(Medearis, 1996). 

• Major findings of a report on the Kamehameha Early Education Program 
show that the best predictors of first-grade reading achievement are verbal 
ability and reading-readiness scores, and that family background is strongly 
related to school achievement (Kamehameha Early Education Program, 
1974). 

• A study on economic conditions; health, nutrition, social, and emotional 
problems and issues; mental health issues; early development; and education 
explored the interrelated problems Indian reservations and communities 
faced and their impact on learning (U.S. Bureau of Indian Affairs, 1976). 



Theme 2. Native Language and Cultural Programs in Schools 

The available research on the influences of Native language and cultural 
programs on academic performance is growing in both volume and importance. The 
studies include both qualitative and quantitative research, which shed light on two 
interrelated interests: (1) the struggles of a growing number of Native American 
communities to maintain or strengthen their traditional languages and cultural 
heritages and (2) the relationship between strengthening traditional Native identities 

8 



16 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

and improving educational outcomes for Native children (for more on this topic, see 
theme 5 below). These interests are shared by other Indigenous peoples in the Pacific 
and Circumpolar regions and elsewhere, as evidenced by research reported in this 
section. 

A school curriculum that promotes the language and culture of the community or 
tribe served — adopted in partnership with that community — holds significant promise 
for improving academic performance of Native children. This finding has been 
reported in both policy studies and research and evaluation studies for many years. 

In policy studies and investigations, inclusion of Native languages and culture in 
schools serving American Indian and Alaska Native students was first recommended 
in the Meriam report of 1928 (Prucha, 2000) and was later a theme of the U.S. Senate 
Report Indian Education: A National Tragedy — A National Challenge , 13 This theme 
was strongly highlighted in the Indian Nations At Risk Task Force report (1991 ), 14 
and the White House Conference on Indian Education (1992). 13 

Developing linguistic and cultural congruence. Mainstream research tells us 
that congruency between the school environment and the language and culture of the 
community is critical to the success of formal learning. 16 Similar findings have 
emerged from studies of Native communities in Alaska and the Circumpolar North 
(Bamhardt, 1990). 17 A series of studies conducted in the past 30 years collectively 
provides strong evidence that Native language and cultural programs — and student 
identification with such programs — are associated with improved academic 
performance, decreased dropout rates, improved school attendance rates, decreased 
clinical symptoms, and improved personal behavior (Lipka & McCarty, 1994; Smith, 
Leake, & Kamekona, 1998; Stiles, 1997; Yagi, 1985). 

These programs have also had positive impacts on their communities. Native 



l3 U.S. Senate Special Subcommittee on Indian Education. (1969). Indian education: A 
national tragedy— A national challenge. Senate Report No. 91-501. 

,4 Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. (1991). Indian nations at risk: An educational 
strategy for action. Final report. 

15 White House Conference on Indian Education. (1992). 
l6 Bowman, B. T., Donovan, M. S., & Bums, M. S. (eds.). (2001). Eager to learn: 
Educating our preschoolers. 

l7 See also Darnell, F., & Hoem, A. (1996). Taken to extremes: Education in the far 
North. Cambridge, MA: Scandinavian University Press North America. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED453998) 



9 



17 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

language literacy is reportedly a source of empowerment for the Mesa Valley Navajo 
community; where schools are seen as less alien and local people are more inclined to 
become involved in the educational process (McLaughlin, 1992). Kleinfeld (1979) 
found that bicultural approaches to education in a Catholic boarding school in Alaska 
helped students function well in the majority culture. Equally important, she found 
that effective skills and knowledge development in a formal education setting did not 
separate students culturally from the home village; many students went on to college 
and were later noted for quiet village leadership. 

In contradiction to other studies on Native languages and traditionalism, a study 
in Alaska showed relatively high levels of tribal language use in childhood to be 
associated with higher potential to drop out (James, Chavez, Beauvais, Edwards, & 
Oetting, 1995). This finding may have several explanations. The language of the 
school was English, and students may not have been allowed to continue developing 
their Native language while learning the second language. Another possible 
explanation is that schoolteachers and administrators did not support the use of the 
Native language in the school setting. Willeto (1999), in a study of Navajo youth 
from 1 1 high schools in the Navajo nation, found only a small positive relationship 
between students’ academic achievement and their cultural attachments and practices 
and no effect, overall, of traditionalism. A study of rural Native students in Alaska 
showed that geographic and cultural isolation were factors in creating a lack of 
language proficiency (in English) and educational achievement (Travis, 1979). This 
study, conducted before more recent discoveries about the benefits of learning the 
language of ihe home as a base for learning English, may have overstated the impacts 
of isolation on learning and may not have taken other social or economic factors into 
account, as newer studies commonly do. Clearly there is more to be learned, in order 
to sort out the interactive effects of social, language, and cultural variables. 

Many studies have investigated how and when language and cultural programs 
produce positive outcomes. Research has focused on bilingual and immersion 
programs , where the commitment to maintaining the use of the Native language is 
very strong Native language and culture revitalization programs in other 
communities; and the use of local knowledge and culture as integral parts of the 
curriculum. 

Bilingual and immersion programs. In most programs, there was a tacit, if not a 
stated, assumption that Native languages and culture could not be dealt with 
separately, as they were two sides of the same coin. A host of studies have been 

10 



18 





Improving Academic Performance amongNative American Students 



conducted with particular communities in a variety of settings (Rosier & Farella, 

1976; Rosier & Holm, 1980; Hartley & Johnson, 1995; Holm & Holm, 1995; Franks, 
1988; Markowitz & Haley, 1973; McBeath, McDiarmid, & Shepro, 1982; Stiles, 

1997; Yamauchi & Ceppi, 1998; Yamauchi, Ceppi, & Lau-Smith, 2000; Watson- 
Gegeo, 1989; Rubie, 1999; Harrison, 1998; Wright & Taylor, 1995; Wright, Taylor, 
Ruggeiro, MacArthur, & Elijassiapik, 1996; Feurer, 1990; Stairs, 1987; Watahomigie 
& McCarty, 1994; Watahomigie, 1995). In most, the students spoke English as a 
second language and were at least somewhat conversant in their Native languages. 
Collectively, the studies suggest important benefits to educating students in their 
Native language and within a congruent cultural context (for brief synopses of these 
studies, see the listing at the end of this section). 

Native language and culture revitalization programs. The accomplishments of 
the Hawaiian and Maori language immersion programs can be difficult to replicate, 
as seen in the Wind River Reservation (Wyoming) program to revitalize Arapaho 
among children who spoke only English. Although students in the immersion 
program made astonishing progress, their mastery of Arapaho did not achieve 
fluency. Greymoming (1997) concluded that to achieve fluency, children must be 
systematically exposed to a full array of speech forms by a well-trained teacher with 
a clear understanding of language acquisition. Thus, effective teacher training 
remains a critical issue in language immersion programs. 

Ayoungman (1991) reported a similar outcome among the Siksika (Blackfoot) of 
southern Alberta. Language revitalization efforts did not significantly raise language 
proficiency, but the status of the language improved in other ways. 

Even when efforts to restore languages met with only modest success, they had 
other benefits. As Rudin found in an Omaha restoration program, benefits included 
improved tribal solidarity and pride among both elders and children and better 
attitudes and academic performance for at least some students (Rudin, 1989). Ovando 
(1994) found similar outcomes in Nulato, a remote Athapaska village. 

Use of local knowledge and culture in the curriculum. A substantial number of 
studies have shown that when local knowledge plays a dominant role in instruction 
(usually in combination with use of the Native language), improvements are seen in 
various performance and attainment measures (Bamhardt, 1999; deMarrais, 1992; 
Alaska Native Knowledge Network, 1998; Stiles, 1997; Yagi, 1985; Smith, Leake, & 
Kamekona, 1998; Slaughter & Lai, 1994; Rubie, 1999; Rudin, 1989; Watahomigie & 
McCarty, 1994; Temp, 1974). 



11 



19 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

For example, in Alaska, data specifically show aihanced student achievement in 
science and mathematics and improvement in the achievement of all students, 
including those historically underserved. During the first three jears of 
implementation, students in Alaska Ruml Systemic Initiative (AKRS1) schools 
showed a net gain (relative to non-AKRSI schools) in mathematics achievement 
scores and a reduction in dropout rates (Alaska Native Knowledge Network, 1998). 

However, Deyhle and Swisher reported that students with strong traditional 
language and cultural knowledge require less reinforcement of their Native heritage 
in the school setting than students whose Native knowledge and language base is 
weak. 18 

Conclusion. In spite of the reports, research findings, and federal legislation 
promoting the development of Native language- and culture-based programs in 
schools serving Native American children, significant resistance to the 
implementation of such programs continues to exist among state and federal 
policymakers. The preponderance of research evidence in this review shows a 
positive association between academic performance and the presence of Native 
language and cultural programs, outweighing research that shows little or no 
influence. Consequently, schools should seriously consider amending their curricula 
to support this Native American priority, while researchers should continue to study 
factors that increase or decrease the effectiveness of these programs. 

Listing of findings. Abstracts of these reports are in the annotated bibliography at 
the end of this literature review. 

• A combination of peer tutoring, counseling, attendance monitoring, cultural 
education, and hardship assistance decreased student attrition, increased 
attendance, and improved academic achievement (Yagi, 1985). 

• Relatively high levels of tribal language use in childhood were associated 
with the potential to drop out (James, Chavez, et al., 1995). 

• A study of rural Native students in Alaska showed that geographic and 
cultural isolation were factors in creating a lade of language proficiency (in 



18 Deyhle, D., & Swisher, K. G. (1997). Research in American Indian and Alaska Native 
education: From assimilation to self-determination. In M. W. Apple (Ed.), Review of research in 
education (Vol. 22, pp. 1 13-194). Washington, DC: American Education Research Association. 

12 



20 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



English) and educational achievement (Travis, 1979). 

• The level of congruence between the culture of the school and the culture of 
the community appears to have some influence on student success in the 
formal school setting (Bamhardt, 1990). 

• A school’s philosophy and goals emphasizing language and cultural 
programs were associated with success (Bamhardt, 1994). 

• A study of 45 1 Navajo youths attending 1 1 high schools in the Navajo 
Nation found no negative effect of cultural attachments and practices 
(including Native language usage) on academic achievement (Willeto, 

1999). 

• Native language literacy is a source of empowerment for the Mesa Valley 
Navajo community. Schools are seen as less alien, and local people are more 
inclined to become involved (McLaughlin, 1992). 

• Working with Native Navajo and Yup’ik teachers and elders to change the 
culture of their schools resulted in improved academic performance and 
changes in attitudes about schools and schooling among the teachers, 
students, and members of the communities in which these schools were 
located (Lipka & McCarty, 1994). 

Bilingual and immersion programs 

• A study of the English-Navajo bilingual education program at Rock Point, 
Arizona, showed that learning to read in one's mother tongue will result in 
better reading skills and improve second language reading skills (Rosier & 
Farella, 1976). 

• Researchers found that monolingual Navajo-speaking students who were 
initially taught reading and mathematics literacy in Navajo, switching to 
English instruction at the end of second grade, scored higher on standardized 
achievement tests than students who had received English-only instruction 
(Rosier & Holm, 1980). 

• In Manokotak, Alaska, a school shifted from English to a Yup’ik immersion 
program and taught English as a second language. Results for the first two 
years showed a marked improvement in average achievement in reading and 
mathematics. In addition, students reported feeling good about going to 
school, and they were interested in what they were doing. Students were able 

13 



O 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



to keep the languages separate and communicated more fluently in both 
languages. Students and parents communicated more about school activities 
because they had a common language (Hartley & Johnson, 1995). 

• Navajo students in a two-language program (in place of bilingual) and an 
immersion program had higher academic test scores and increased pride and 
confidence (Holm & Holm, 1995). 

• In a Mississippi Choctaw bilingual/English as a second language (ESL) 
program, students had greater gains [than did nan-ESL students] in three 
batteries of the California Achievement Test (CAT): reading, language, and 
overall scores (Franks, 1988). 

• A bilingual Navajo curriculum project was developed to provide learning 
materials in the Navajo language; so that Navajo-speaking children could 
begin learning when they first entered school. Evaluations showed that the 
Navajo children in the program improved in their reading and attitudes 
toward school (Markowitz & Haley, 1973). 

• Case studies in three separate Alaskan communities with schools offering 
bilingual or bicultural classes showed exceptional school staffs, satisfied 
parents, excellent student attitudes, and excellent test scores (McBeath, 
McDiarmid, & Shepro, 1982). 

• In a study of four Indigenous language programs (Cree Way in Quebec, 
Canada; Hualapai in Arizona; Te Kohanga Reo [Maori] in New Zealand; 
and Punana Leo in Hawaii), all of the programs showed decreased dropout 
rates, an increased sense of heritage and identity, and improved test scores 
(Stiles, 1997). Common elements leading to their success included home and 
community initiatives and involvement; not separating the culture from the 
language; beginning the program at an early age, preferably preschool; 
operating out of a firm theoretical foundation; and using written teaching 
materials. 

• A case study of Papahana Kaiapuni, a Hawaiian language immersion 
program established in 1987, showed that it provided opportunities for 
students to learn both the minority and majority languages well (Y amauchi 
& Ceppi, 1998). Further, teachers viewed the program as a model of school 
reform for Native Hawaiians, and the program transformed many teachers' 
views of themselves as teachers and as members of the Hawaiian 



9 2 



14 



Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



community (Y amauchi, Ceppi, & Lau-Smith, 2000). 

• An ethnographic study of a Hawaiian Native language immersion program 
showed a strong academic program, close ties between students and 
teachers, strong parental support, and improved self-esteem and sense of 
identity (Watson-Gegeo, 1989). 

• Maori children (New Zealand) participating in an intense Maori cultural 
program showed significant gains in self-esteem and locus of control 
(according to testing and interviews), improved academic performance, 
more positive attitudes toward school, improved organizational skills, and 
increased time spent on homework (Rubie, 1999). 

• Another study showed that Maori students improved academic performance 
on standardized tests as part of a language immersion and culturally based 
education program (Harrison, 1998). 

• In Canada, Inuit children instructed in their heritage language showed an 
increase in self-esteem after one year. Children educated in their second 
language showed no increase (Wright & Taylor, 1995). 

• Students taught in Inuktitut (the language of the home) showed more 
progress than students taught in French or English (the language of the 
school) (Wright, Taylor, Ruggeiro, MacArthur, & Elijassiapik, 1996). 

• The Cree Way project in Quebec demonstrated that Cree students educated 
in their own language did well in learning a second language. The 
Waskaganis school where the program began has a rapidly growing Native 
teaching staff (Feurer, 1990). 

• In Arctic Quebec, a study of language learning found a strong correlation 
between early Inuktitut proficiency and later English proficiency, both 
individually and within settlements (Stairs, 1987). 

Native language and culture revitalization programs 

• In a Wind River Reservation (Wyoming) immersion program to revitalize 
Arapaho among children who spoke only English, students made astonishing 
progress, but their mastery of Arapaho did not achieve fluency. 

Greymoming (1997) concluded that to achieve fluency, children must be 
systematically exposed to a full array of speech forms by a well-trained 
teacher with a clear understanding of language acquisition. 

15 



23 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



• Ayoungman (1991) reported a similar outcome among the Siksika 
(Blackfoot) of southern Alberta. Language revitalization efforts did not 
significantly raise language proficiency, but the status of the language 
improved in other ways. 

• In an Omaha restoration program, benefits included improved tribal 
solidarity and pride among both elders and children and better attitudes and 
academic performance for at least some students (Rudin, 1989). 

• Ovando (1994) found similar outcomes in Nulato, a remote Athapaska 
village. 

• The Hualapai (Arizona) Bilingual/Bicultural Program is nationally 
recognized for its achievements in Native language literacy and 
bilingual/bicultural curriculum development in a community with a 
previously unwritten language. (Watahomigie & McCarty, 1994). Further, 
between 1975 and 1995, only two students failed to graduate and 50 percent 
of graduates went on to college (Watahomigie, 1995). 

Use of local knowledge and culture in the curriculum 

• A case study examined recent efforts by the people of Quinhagak to 
integrate Yup'ik language, values, and beliefs into school practices and 
policies. Achievement testing showed a steady rise in test scores and higher 
graduation rates. Further, students who attended Yup’ik First Language 
School had higher average achievement scores than students who did not 
(Bamhardt, 1999). 

• In a bilingual/bicultural program implemented in eight rural communities in 
Alaska in 1973-74, students showed a marked increase in knowledge of 
historical culture and gains in their ability to read Native language materials. 
Additionally students and community were enthusiastic about the program 
(Temp, 1974). 

• The Yup’ik tradition of storytelling (story knifing) provided a forum for 
Yup’ik girls to develop both cultural and cognitive knowledge (deMarrais, 
1992). 

• During the first three years of implementation, students in Alaska Rural 
Systemic Initiative (AKRSI) schools showed a net gain (relative to non- 
AKRSI schools) in mathematics achievement scores and a reduction in 

16 



24 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



dropout rates (Alaska Native Knowledge Network, 1998). 

• Native language and cultural programs have been shown to decrease dropout 
rates (Stiles, 1997; Yagi, 1985). 

• Native cultural and language programs improved school attendance rates, 
decreased clinical symptoms, and improved personal behavior (Smith, 

Leake, & Kamekona, 1998). 

• A Hawaiian program that promoted local knowled ge, with Native language 
playing a dominant role in instruction, had a positive influence on academic 
performance (Slaughter & Lai, 1994). 

• Maori children participating in an intense Maori cultural program showed 
significant gains in self-esteem and locus of control (according to testing and 
interviews), improved academic performance, more positive attitudes toward 
school, improved organizational skills, and increased time spent on 
homework (Rubie, 1999). 



Theme 3. Teachers, Instruction, and Curriculum 

Research on what works in classrooms tends to organize itself around five main 
topics: characteristics of teachers; classroom organization and strategies; reading, 
writing, and communications instruction; science and mathematics instruction; and 
individual student support/dropout prevention. 

Cleary and Peacock (1998) described patterns of successful practice that suggest 
methods and teacher behaviors that work with Indigenous students: 

... the need to build trust; to connect with the community, to 
establish cultural relevance in the curriculum; to tap intrinsic 
motivation for learning; to use humor, to establish family support; 
to provide situations that yield small successes; to make personal 
connections with students; to use highly engaging, activity-based 
learning and, in some cases, cooperative learning; to provide role 
models; to be flexible, fair, and consistent; and to provide real 
audience and purpose for student work (p. 13). 

Many of these themes are found in other studies that have been conducted over the 
past 30 years, as discussed below. 




17 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Teacher characteristics. Solid content knowledge, sound pedagogy, an 
understanding of cognitive development and the different learning stages of children, 
cultural knowledge and an understanding of the students served, and outstanding 
interpersonal skills are well-established characteristics of effective teachers. 19 

The research on effective teachers and teaching within the Native American 
community is somewhat limited. What is available is consistent with the research on 
non-Native teachers. Teacher attitudes about students, knowledge of subject matter, 
and understanding and knowledge about the culture of students are all shown to 
promote improved academic performance and student behavior (Yagi, 1985). Rohner 
(1965) found that social and economic factors influencing poor academic 
performance of students could be mitigated by teachers that become involved in 
community activities and spend time with community members. 

Kleinfeld (1979) reported that promoting cross-cultural teaching strategies among 
prospective teachers is difficult to achieve. She suggests that the quality of teachers 
and teaching may best be improved by better selection of candidates, instead of by 
employing cross-cultural strategies in teacher training institutions or by allowing self- 
selection into programs. In any case, teachers with a demanding but warm teaching 
style appear to challenge students to work at higher intellectual levels (using or 
developing higher-order thinking skills). 

Classroom organization and strategies. Successful classroom teachers are able 
to organize their classes and adjust their teaching strategies in a way that motivates, 
engages, and challenges students to learn. An often unrecognized factor that 
influences these organizational skills and teaching strategies is the cultural context in 
which learning takes place. A growing body of research reports on the positive 
aspects of including the language and cultural base of the Native community served 
as a necessary characteristic of successful schools. 

Brancov (1994) reports that informal classroom organization, culturally relevant 
activity, and group work enhanced language learning. In addition, group work 
improved students’ mathematics problem-solving skills and attitudes towards 
mathematics. Supporting these findings is an earlier study by McCarty et al. (1991) 
that notes that changing the classroom learning environment to support open-ended 
questioning, inductive/analytic reasoning, and student participation in the context of a 



19 See National Commission on Teaching and America’s Future (1996) & Cotton (1995) 
for a more comprehensive discussion on the importance of teachers. 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

Native language and cultural environment resulted in students becoming very 
articulate and responsive to teacher questioning. A study of reservation and non- 
reservation Native students in New Mexico found that learning was enhanced by 
informal classroom organization, with flexible arrangement of furniture and emphasis 
on group work; shared locus of control by teachers and pupils; cooperative learning; 
use of dialogue; and culturally relevant materials (Little Soldier, 1988). 

Swisher (1990) points out that a variety of teaching strategies and methods 
contributed to improved academic achievement in 33 studies evaluating Student 
Team Learning classes. This observation is supported by Larimore (2000) in a study 
among urban Indian students in cooperative-style classrooms with peer-directed, 
collaborative group work. These students took more risks and performed new skills 
based on existing learning repertoires. 

Instructional conversation — a dialogue between teacher and learner in which prior 
knowledge and experiences are woven together with new material to build higher 
levels of understanding — is a direct contrast to less successful, traditional Western 
schooling, which is highly structured and teacher-dominated, with a carefully planned 
routine to follow (Tharp & Yamauchi,1994). Changing the classroom learning 
environment by emphasizing open-ended questioning, inductive/analytical reasoning, 
and student discussion in large and small group settings challenges the perception 
that Indian students do not respond well to teacher questions and standard teaching 
methods. In classrooms where dialogue is shared between students and teachers and 
where students’ ideas are encouraged within the context of their Native language and 
culture. Native students are found to respond eagerly to questioning, even in English 
(their second language) (McCarty et al., 1991). 

Reading, writing, and communications instruction. The ability to read and 
write well are dosely aligned to a student’s success in school. 

Earlier studies — particularly those produced in the 1970s — tended to focus on 
techniques for improving skills that could enhance reading, including work analysis, 
study, comprehension, vocabulary, and language development skills (Kimble & 
Davison, 1972; Alley, Davison, Kelley, & Kimble, 1974; Fox, 1976). Some work 
from this period focused on simply increasing the amount of time spent on reading 
instruction. For example, researchers found improvements in students’ reading skills 
when they were provided increased opportunities to read (Jacob, 1976; Edington & 
Pettibone, 1975) or when they were offered a focus on remedial reading skills for 25- 
30 minutes a day (American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences, 

19 



27 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

1971). Citing mainstream research. Cotton confirmed these findings, reporting that 
there is a direct relationship between the amount of quality time spent on a subject 
and the learning that takes place. 20 

In the 1980s, educators became interested in the use of computers for improving 
English fluency and writing skills, citing gains in writing, academic performance, 
attitudes, and other cognitive skills in several settings (Diessner, Rouscul, & Walker, 
1985; Bennett, 1987; Camew & Clark, 1985). Interest in uses of technology has 
continued with mixed results. In a computer-assisted writing instructional program 
for students in grades 7-9, no significant difference between control and experimental 
groups was found, but teacher evaluations expressed improvement in the quality of 
expository writing among the students (Clark, 1996). 

In the 1980s and 1990s, a few studies continued to explore techniques for 
developing writing, reading, and vocabulary, particularly in the use of daily dialogue 
journals (Dooley, 1987); verbal-visual work association strategies (Hopkins & Bean, 
1999); and the use of big books with young children (Fayden, 1997). 

It should be noted that throughout this period, various groups were exploring the 
interrelated issues of bilingualism, Native language use, and literacy, as reported in 
the previous section. Among Native students, the development of a strong language 
base (English or a tribal language) depends in large measure upon whether the 
student attends a school in his or her first language and whether that first language is 
used as a base for learning one or more other languages. One study that illustrates this 
point was conducted among the Northern Ute Indians. Separate programs that 
promoted literacy in their Native language or in English both resulted in students 
improving their literacy levels — sometimes in both languages (Leap, 1991). 

Science and mathematics instruction. Like literacy skills, in order to improve 
science and mathematics skills, the research indicates that students need to spend 
more quality time learning the subject matter and connecting science and 
mathematics to local and traditional knowledge. 

The Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative, a multifaceted program which included 
standards-based curricula (including standards for culturally responsive curricula), 
assessment, high-quality science and mathematics education, professional 



20 Cotton, K. (1995). Effective schooling practices: A research synthesis, 1995 update. 
Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

20 



28 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

development and support for teachers, and parent and community support, resulted in 
improved mathematics achievement scores and a decrease in dropout rates (Alaska 
Native Knowledge Network, 1998). In a “Natural Math” project for Seminole (and 
African American) children, improved raw test scores occurred where parents and 
kindergarten children were engaged in math games and activities in the home. For the 
Native children, the inclusion of cultural concepts into the project may have had an 
influence (Sears & Medearis, 1992). 

From the research on early cognitive development and influences of environment, 
one would expect that early attention to the skills associated with math and science 
would make a difference. Research in this area has not occurred among Native 
students and is overdue. 

Individual student support/dropout prevention. In the study of successful 
Native students by Cobum and Nelson (1987), and in the study of successful Native 
leaders by Silverman and Demmert (1986), the support of community mentors, 
family, and teachers ranks high in motivating students and keeping them in school. 

Other kinds of support, like peer tutoring, counseling, attendance monitoring, 
cultural education, and hardship assistance, are associated with improved academic 
achievement (Yagi, 1985) and a reduction in dropouts (Martens, 1992). 

Individualized instruction, reward systems, conducive physical and human factors 
(e.g., low student-adult ratios, caring teachers, affective education, strong 
administrator), student and parent involvement in decision making, and vocationally 
oriented components promoted significant growth in academics and social 
rehabilitation in an alternative high school (Malmberg, 1983). Monitoring of 
students’ success and personal relevance of curriculum has also been found to be 
associated with improved academic performance (Radda, Iwamoto, & Patrick, 1998). 

Conclusions. Factors that can be altered in the school setting need to be identified 
and tested for possible application in school improvement efforts. One important 
factor, standards-based reform, has been gaining support legislatively and among 
portions of the education community for the past decade. In Native America, this 
reform movement holds great potential if tribes and communities become involved in 
setting culturally responsive standards. The State of Alaska and the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs have provided interesting models for developing such standards. Another 
related trend in rural education, including scattered rural Native communities, is the 
development of “place-based” education. Place-based education is an educational 
approach that draws on local history, culture, economics, environment, and 

21 



29 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



circumstances as a curriculum source, sometimes with the explicit goal of connecting 
students to their community and thereby promoting citizenship, entrepreneurship, 
community sustainability, or environmental stewardship. Early reports of these 
efforts show promise, and research in this particular area — as well as many 
others — must be increased if we are to understand the factors that influence improved 
academic performance for individuals and society. 

Lastly, little research was available on the use of computers as instructional tools 
with Native students. However, evidence suggests the potential for computer use for 
improving learning, particulady in combination with place-based curriculum. 
Research into technology use by Native students may be a particularly rich field for 
evaluation and development studies. 

Listing of findings. Abstracts of these reports are located in the annotated 
bibliography at the end of this literature review. 

Teacher characteristics 

• Teachers that use a demanding but warm style of teaching appear to 
challenge the intellectual abilities of students (KJeinfeld, 1975). 

• Teacher attitudes, knowledge, and understanding, as well as differences in 
culture-specific modes of discourse and formal English textbooks are seen as 
factors that create interethnic communication problems (Travis, 1979). 

• Social and economic factors influencing poor academic performance can be 
mitigated by teachers that become involved in community activities and 
spend time with community members (Rohner, 1965). 

• Teachers in schools that serve Indian children should see themselves as 
learners who are open to understanding the reasons that children and 
communities are the way they aie, who are willing to discover and consider 
the differences between school and home cultures, and who are willing to 
change their ways of teaching to give children a better chance in school and 
life (Cleary & Peacock, 1998). 

Classroom organization 

• Student team learning strategies contributed to improved academic 
achievement in 33 studies evaluating Student Team Learning classes 
(Swisher, 1990). 



22 



30 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



• Informal classroom organization, culturally related activity, and group work 
enhanced language learning. Group work also improved students’ 
mathematics problem-solving skills and attitudes towards mathematics 
(Brancov, 1994). 

• Changing the classroom learning environment to support open-ended 
questioning, inductive/analytical reasoning, and student participation in the 
context of a Native language and cultural environment resulted in students 
becoming very articulate and responsive to teacher questioning (McCarty et 
al., 1991). 

• When placed in cooperative-style classrooms with teachers that used peer- 
directed, collaborative group work strategies, a group of urban Indian 
students took more risks and performed new skills based on existing 
learning repertoires (Larimore, 2000). 

• In observations of about 50 classrooms, conducted in schools serving 
predominantly Native American pupils on and off reservations in New 
Mexico, language learning was found to be enhanced by informal classroom 
organization, with flexible arrangement of furniture and emphasis on group 
work; shared locus of control by teachers and pupils; cooperative learning; 
use of dialogue; and culturally relevant materials (Little Soldier, 1988). 

• In a quasi-experimental design, Brancov (1994) studied the effects of using 
cooperative learning to improve mathematics achievement, attitudes toward 
mathematics, and time on task among 129 middle school Indian students. 
Improvements were measured in pre- and posttests in mathematics problem- 
solving skills and attitudes toward math. There was no significant difference 
between experimental and control groups for time on task. 

• Instructional conversation (IC) is a dialogue between teacher and learner in 
which prior knowledge and experiences are woven together with new 
material to build higher understanding. IC contrasts with the highly 
routinized and teacher-dominated "recitation script" of traditional Western 
schooling. "Ideal" Native American activity settings embed ICs in the social 
context of small student-directed units. Working together, students ask 
questions and incorporate their own experiences into the curriculum context 
(Tharp & Yamauchi, 1994). 

Reading, writing, and communications instruction 

23 



31 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



• The development of individual (Jacob, 1 976) and group student reading 
skills improved with increased opportunities to read (Edington & Pettibone, 
1975). 

• Focusing on remedial reading skills for 25-30 minutes per day improved 
reading comprehension (AIRBS, 1971). 

• Concentrating on work analysis skills, study skills, comprehension, 
vocabulary, and language development resulted in significant improvement 
in reading skills (Kimble & Davison, 1972; Alley, Davison, Kelley, & 
Kimble, 1974; Fox, 1976; Leap, 1991). 

• Students using a reading program (Distar) on the Rosebud Reservation in 
South Dakota, where the student body is racially mixed, did better than 
students in more remote Indian communities (Wescott, 1974). 

• An intervention program involving 56 Cree Indian youth included 
instruction in introductory LOGO computer language, computer use, 
reading, writing, and mathematics. In a controlled experiment, researchers 
found that the intervention positively affected cognitive functioning abilities 
and improved academic achievement in reading and writing, but had no 
effect on mathematics achievement or attitudes toward academic study 
(Camew & Clark, 1985). 

• The use of computers improved written English fluency in students from 
grades 7-12 at the Yakima Tribal School; however, thematic maturity did 
not increase, and students became reluctant to do handwritten work 
(Diessner, Rouscul, & Walker, 1985). 

• Students in grades 3-8 from two elementary schools attended weekly, 
multigrade bilingual classes in Hupa/English or Yurok/English to develop 
natural history dictionaries. Using computers and local knowledge while 
working in cooperative groups, students stayed interested and engaged for a 
whole school year. Their attitudes towards school improved, as did their oral 
communication skills and ability to translate from one language to the other 
(Bennett, 1987). 

• Computer assisted writing instruction for students in grades 7-9 resulted in 
no significant difference between control and experimental groups. 

However, teacher evaluations noted improvement in the quality of students’ 
expository writing (Clark, 1996). 

24 



32 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



• Integration of early reading and writing skills, via instructional use of a daily 
dialogue journal over a five-month period, improved punctuation, grammar, 
and sentence structure skills among most of the 10 third-grade Navajo 
students studied (Dooley, 1987). 

• Underachieving urban Native students were found to be more at ease with 
written than oral discourse (Anderson, 1987). 

• The verbal-visual work association strategy increased vocabulary knowledge 
among junior high and high school students on the Northern Cheyenne 
Reservation (Hopkins & Bean, 1999). 

• The use of predictable big books helps Native American and Hispanic 
kindergarten children and children with limited early experiences with books 
develop reading skills in the classroom (Fayden, 1997). 

Science and mathematics instruction 

• A multifaceted program that included standards-based curricula, assessment, 
high-quality science and mathematics education (including professional 
development and support for teachers), continuous program improvement, 
and parent and community support resulted in improved mathematics 
achievement scores and a decrease in dropout rates in schools involved in 
the Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative (Alaska Native Knowledge Network, 
1998). 

• A “Natural Math” project was undertaken to encourage Native American 
(and African American) parents and kindergarten children to engage in math 
games and activities at home. Natural Math was also used to integrate 
Seminole culture into math materials. The participating students were tested 
for verbal, math, and social skills. Students had higher raw scores in the 
areas tested than students of previous years (Sears & Medearis, 1992). 

Individual student support/dropout prevention 

• The Behavior Analysis Model of Follow Through was shown to improve the 
reading achievement scores of students in all grade levels who participated 
in this program for one full year. Typical components of this model include: 
individualized instruction through the use of aides; programmed reading 
materials; biweekly progress assessment; on-site training; small group 
instructional procedures; and a motivational system such as contingency 



O Q 
OO 



25 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



contracting or a token economy (McLaughlin, Williams, Cady, & Bement, 
1982). 

• Use of a combination of peer tutoring, counsel ing, attendance monitoring, 
cultural education, and hardship assistance decreased student attrition, 
increased attendance, and improved academic achievement (Yagi, 1985). 

• A case study of an alternative high school that served a high American 
Indian student population and emphasized basic academic skills showed 
significant growth in academic achievement and social rehabilitation. 

Factors influencing the success of this model include individualized 
instruction, reward systems, conducive physical and human factors (e.g., low 
student-adult ratio, caring teachers, affective education, strong 
administrator), student and parent involvement in decision making, and 
vocationally oriented components (Malmberg, 1983). 

• In a small study that included 16 Native American students (of 23 total 
students), a dropout prevention program comprising tutoring, counseling, 
and parent involvement led to a reduction of absences and increased grade 
point averages (Martens, 1992). 

• Four program components targeted at 1, 100 American Indian students in 
nine school districts in Pierce County, Washington, were evaluated. Two of 
the four program components produced positive results: (1) tutoring services 
for students identified as needing remedial classes resulted in substantial 
academic improvement (by one-tenth of one grade for every 20 days); and 
(2) the collection and/or publication of tribal bibliographies, books, films, 
records, legends, tribal artifacts, etc., resulted in general success in providing 
a variety of cultural experiences to the majority of students in the target 
group (Nelson & Clark, 1977). 



Theme 4. Community and Parental Influences 

The framers of Title IV, PL 92-318, The Indian Education Act of 1972, 
recognized that partnerships between schools and parents (including tribes and 
representatives of Native communities) were requisite to any movement aspiring to 
improve academic performance among Native students. This recognition was tied to 
local control issues and to building local ownership for programs and schools. Later 
mainstream research, most notably the studies of effective schools, confirmed the 

26 



34 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



importance of parental participation. 21 The idea of requiring parental-committee or 
tribal sign-off authority for federal programs supporting Native communities 
originated with the Indian Education Act of 1972 and also became a requirement of 
the Johnson O’Malley Act 22 Later legislation also included such provisions 23 

Community or tribal control. The struggle among minority groups to regain 
some control of their children’s education has been widely heralded as a necessary 
element to improving the performance of underserved students. 24 Separating out the 
influence of parental and community involvement from other variables is a difficult 
task; consequently, studies that address this factor tend to include other interventions 
as well. However, Native education research in this country and Canada tends to 
support findings from mainstream research that show improved school performance 
when communities and parents are involved in their operation. Kleinfeld (1985), in a 
study of 162 small (under 100 students) rural high schools in Alaska, found that the 
ones that worked best exhibited a strong alliance between teachers and the 
community. In a case study of a highly successful California school serving 
American Indian students, Leveque (1994) found that the strongest link between 
educational opportunities and student achievement was parental involvement in the 
design and implementation of programs. In another study of First Nations students 
attending a school in Canada that had come under First Nations control three years 
previously, improvements were measured in academic achievement (CTBS test 
scores), attendance, student suspensions and expulsions, age-grade deceleration, 
dropout rates, and graduation rates. Thirty-four students (who had previously dropped 
out) returned to this school and graduated (Mason, 1998). 



21 Cotton, K. (1995). Effective schooling practices: A research synthesis, 1995 update. 
22 Myron Jones and Charles F. Wilkinson worked with Congressman Lloyd Meed from 
the state of Washington to enact that requirement. 

23 Butterfield, R. A, & Pepper, F. C. (1991). Improving parental participation in 
elementary and secondary education for American Indian and Alaska Native students. In Indian 
nations at risk task force commissioned papers. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED343763) 

24 Cummins, J. (1986). Empowering minority students: A framework for intervention. 
Harvard Educational Review, 56(1), 18-36. (EJ 330827) This article presents a theoretical 
framework for analyzing minority students' school failure and the relative lack of success of 
previous attempts at educational reform, such as compensatory education and bilingual 
education. The author suggests that these attempts have been unsuccessful because they have not 
altered significantly the relationships between educators and minority students and between 
schools and minority communities. 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Traditionalism and family influences. Another small group of studies examined 
mothers’, fathers’, and other family members’ influences on educational outcomes 
and the role of traditionalism. In a study of Navajo students, motivation to do well in 
school was linked very strongly to social concern and affiliation, and parents and 
extended family members were found to be the strongest influences (for good or ill) 
on student progress at school (Mclnemey, Mclnoney, Ardington, & De Rachewiltz, 
1997). Among 87 American Indian students at a Montana college, those from 
traditional Native families were more task and achievement oriented, had higher 
grade point averages, and spent more time doing homework than those from more 
modem families, who cared more about professors' opinions and skipped more 
classes (Lin, 1990). Willeto (1999) found a small positive relationship between 
involvement in Native cultural conventions and activities and commitment to school; 
she found no support for the idea that traditionalism, including use of the Navajo 
language, had a negative effect on school achievement. She also found that 
adolescents who identified with their mothers (typically girls) did better in school. A 
study of 19 northern Ojibway families showed that the support of a mother who has 
strong traditional values and practices is beneficial to a student’s academic and social 
performance in school (Coggins, Williams, & Radin, 1996). The role of fathers 
among these families was complex. Researchers found that in boys, time spent with 
their fathers was associated with improved academic performance and social 
development, yet greater nurturance was associated with poorer academic 
performance (Williams, Radin, & Coggins, 1996). 

Conclusions. Local control of schools was a major issue in the 1960s among 
Alaska Natives and tribes in the lower 48 states. More research is needed to sort out 
under what circumstances parental and community involvement works most 
powerfully; however, the research that exists supports the importance of local control 
on community attitudes and academic achievement among Native students. The 
research on how parental support influences students’ success is also revealing. In 
light of this research, Native communities that have not yet gained control and taken 
direct responsibility for the education of their children must evaluate their role in the 
educational process. 

Listing of findings. Abstracts of these reports are located in the annotated 
bibliography at the end of this literature review. 

• Parental involvement in the design and implementation of school programs 
was strongly associated with improved student achievement in a California 



n n 



v)D 



28 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



school district (Leveque, 1994). 

• Among 87 American Indian students at a Montana college, those from 
traditional Native families were more task and achievement oriented, had 
higher grade point averages, and spent more time doing homewoik. Those 
from more modem, assimilated families cared more about professors' 
opinions and skipped more classes (Lin, 1990). 

• Willeto ( 1 999) found a small positive relationship between students’ 
involvement in Native cultural conventions and activities and commitment 
to school; she found no support for the idea that traditionalism, including use 
of the Navajo language, had a negative effect on school achievement. She 
found that adolescents who identified with their motheis (typically girls) did 
better in school. 

• A study of 19 northern Ojibway families showed that the support of a 
mother who has strong traditional values and practices is beneficial to a 
student’s academic and social performance in school (Coggins, Williams, & 
Radin, 1996). 

• A study that examined Ojibwa families for the relationship between quantity 
and quality of father involvement in child rearing and children’s academic 
and social performance found that the more time spent by fathers was 
associated with better academics and social development for boys, while 
greater nurturance was associated with poorer academic performance 
(Williams, Radin, & Coggins, 1996). 

• Partnerships between teachers and communities were associated with the 
success of 162 small rural high schools serving primarily American Indian 
and Eskimo students (Kleinfeld et al., 1985). 

• Parental and extended family influences are strongly linked to students’ 
motivation and ability to do well in school (Mclnemey, Roche, Mclnemey, 
& Marsh, 1997). 

• After three years of local control, students in a First Nations school were 
more successful academically, had better attendance, and had higher 
completion rates for high school (Mason, 1998). 



Theme 5. Student Characteristics 



n n 



J ( 



29 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Important student characteristics discussed in previous sections include second 
language use and traditionalism (see theme 2 on language and cultural programs and 
theme 4 on community and parental influences on student performance). Other 
student characteristics discussed in the research include poverty status, resiliency, 
identity, sense of self and self-esteem, goal setting and student motivation, 
communication styles, and language and cognitive skills. 

Poverty status. The National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP), an 
ongoing assessment conducted by the National Center for Education Statistics that 
examines reading, writing, mathematics, science, and other academic performance of 
students from across the nation, has shown lower performance scores for students (all 
groups combined) who are eligible for free and reduced lunch (an indicator of 
poverty) compared to students whose family incomes are too high to qualify. 25 
Nationally, 25.9 percent of American Indians and Alaska Natives had incomes below 
the poverty line between 1998-2000; the rate for children is even higher. 26 
Consequently, the academic performance of a large portion of Native children is 
affected by complex social factors associated with poverty. 

A study in Arizona by Boloz & Varrati (1983) examined these interactions and 
concluded that socioeconomic status (SES) was the variable most consistently 
associated with academic achievement of Native students in all test areas for all 
grades except 12. An earlier studty of the Seminole indicated that an improvement in 
economic opportunities and “social conditions,” coupled with a concentration on 
improving academic performance, resulted in improving student performance 
(Greene & Kersey, 1975). 

Resiliency. Benard explains that longitudinal studies, some that followed 
individuals over the course of decades, have consistently documented that “between 
half and two-thirds of children growing up in families with mentally ill, alcoholic. 



25 See for example, NAEP 1998 Reading Assessment 
(http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/reading/findings.asp); NAEP 1998 Writing Report Card 
(http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/writing/fmdings.asp); The Nation's Report Card: 
Mathematics 2000 (http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/pubs/main2000/200 1 5 1 7.asp#section3); 
and The Nation ’ s Report Card: Science 2000 

(http://nces.ed.gov/nationsreportcard/science/results/lunchprogram.asp). 

26 U.S. Bureau of the Census. (2001). Poverty in the United States: 2000. Report No. P60- 
214. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce. Retrieved February 21, 2002, from 
http://www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/p60-214.pdf 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



abusive, or criminally involved parents or in poverty-stricken or war-tom 
communities do overcome the odds and turn a life trajectory of risk into one that 
manifests ‘resilience,’ the term used to describe a set of qualities that foster a process 
of successful adaptation and transformation despite risk and adversity.’* 27 Benard 
identifies three main categories of “protective factors’* that foster resilience: (1) 
caring and supportive relationships; (2) positive and high expectations; and (3) 
opportunities for meaningful participation. While not all Native children are exposed 
to high levels of the sorts of risks described above, many are; especially risks related 
to poverty. Thus, this line of research is relevant to Native education. 

Findings from studies of Native Americans who have succeeded in school and life 
parallel the resiliency research. Many studies identified the importance of caring and 
supportive families and teachers (e.g., Bamhardt, 1994; Silverman & Demmert, 1986; 
Cobum & Nelson, 1987; Mclnemey, Mclnemey, Aldington, & De Rachewiltz, 1997; 
Coggins, Williams, & Radin, 1996). Other resiliency factors (high expectations and 
opportunities to participate) seemed to be at work in their lives, as well. In two 
studies from the 1980s (Silverman & Demmert, 1986; Cobum & Nelson, 1987), 
Native graduates and leaders cited as important to their success the early 
identification with a goal or profession and participation in student activities in 
school, sometimes in leadership positions (e.g., student government, sports activities, 
debate, choir, or other extracurricular activities). 

In an ethnographic study of 120 high-school-age Native youth from various 
locales in the United States and Canada, Bergstrom, Cleary, and Peacock (in press) 
cited student resiliency as a factor in school success. They defined resiliency as “a 
quality of people who, although they lace much life stress and adversity, do not give 
up and succeed despite the failures that school and society lay out for them.” 28 The 



27 For a brief review of this literature, see Benard, B. (1995). Fostering Resilience in 
Children. ERIC Digest Urbana, IL: ERIC Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood 
Education. Seminal studies on resilience were Wemer, E. E., & Smith, R. S. (1982). Vulnerable 
but invincible : A longitudinal study of resilient children and youth. New York: McGraw-Hill; 
and Wemer, E. E., & Smith, R. S. (1992). Overcoming the odds : High-risk children from birth to 
adulthood. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED344979) 

28 Comments from an online forum, “The Seventh Generation: Understanding the Life 
Experiences of American Indian, Alaska Native, and First Nations Youth,” held November 26- 
30, 2001, by the ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. Transcript 

(continued...) 



31 



39 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



students they studied identified a number of factors as hindering resiliency: 
absenteeism and tardiness; mandatory school attendance policies (when missing a 
specified number of days leads to failing the term); anger (many youth were angry 
and understood how their anger posed an obstacle to success); teen pregnancy; 
misusing alcohol and drugs; sexism; and living out the low expectations of others. 
These findings are similar to another study, which associated poor academic progress, 
drug use, violence, and sexual abuse with dropping out of school (Beauvais, Chavez, 
Oetting, Deffenbacher, & Cornell, 1996). 

Identity. A Native student’s identity and view of the dominant culture may have 
an impact on that student’s academic performance. According to Jim Cummins, 
considerable data show that power and status relations between minority and majority 
groups exert a major influence on school performance. As with other minority groups 
that tend to experience academic difficulty, American Indian groups in the United 
States and Canada appear to be insecure and ambivalent about the value of their own 
cultural identity as a result of interactions with the dominant group. Minority students 
are disempowered educationally in much the same way that their communities are 
disempowered by interactions with other societal institutions. 29 This theory may 
partially explain findings of a study in which the success of Indian students in 
mainstream schools was found to be related to stronger Anglo cultural identity but 
not to Indian cultural identity (James, Chavez, Beauvais, Edwards, & Oetting, 1995). 
Perhaps relatedly, self-concept, school attendance, and parental attitudes toward 
school were found to be important factors in student success in a study of Ute Indians 
in Colorado as well (Gage & Robson, 1984). 

However, when students’ Native identity is strong, there is evidence to suggest 
that they may do better in school. A survey of 1 85 Navajo students in grades 7 and 1 1 
examined the relationship between their identification with traditional Navajo culture 
and their achievement level on standardized tests. Results suggest that student 
identification with Navajo language, culture, and tradition helps develop self-esteem 
and promotes academic success (Vadas, 1995). hi a study of Sioux college students, 
cultural identity and retention of Native cultural traditions was most important for 
their success (Huffman, Sill, & Brokenleg, 1986). Another study of Navajo students 



28 (... continued) 

available at http://www.ael.Org/eric/fora2001.htm#november26. 

29 Cummins, J. (1992). The empowerment of Indian students. In J. Reyhner (Ed.), 
Teaching American Indian students (pp. 3-12). Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

32 



40 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



suggested that a stable family life with traditional values may influence the 
achievement of Navajo students more than socioeconomic status (Rindone, 1988). 

Sense of self and self-esteem. Based on a literature review and a study 
employing the Inventory of School Motivation to profile Navajo student motivation 
in school settings, Mclnemey and Swisher (1995) concluded that “Key values such as 
sense of competence, sense of purpose and striving for excellence in one’s work, are 
values that appear to be universally important to all students irrespective of cultural 
status” (p. 46). Further, sense of self (reflected in sense of competence and sense of 
purpose) is critically related to motivation, academic achievement, and retention in 
school. Mclnemey and Swisher suggest that understanding these factors better would 
be a more fruitful line of research for improving practice than research on “cognitive 
styles, learning styles, hemispheric preference, and achievement motivation” (p. 46). 

Although efforts to improve self-esteem have fallen out of favor in certain 
quarters, there is ongoing interest among some practitioners and researchers in Native 
education. It is not difficult to understand the importance of students — who may have 
internalized racist views of their own efficacy and worth — learning to view 
themselves as capable and worthy of defining goals for their education and 
accomplishing those goals. Two studies have examined approaches to improving self- 
esteem among Native Hawaiian students. In one study involving 60 Native Hawaiian 
students, guided affective and cognitive imagery has been shown to enhance self- 
esteem among children of Hawaiian ancestry (Omizo, Omizo, & Kitaoka, 1998). 
Another controlled study involving 50 students showed that group counseling using 
art activities for improving self-esteem among Hawaiian elementary children resulted 
in higher social (peer-related) and academic (school-related) self-esteem scores 
(Omizo & Omizo, 1989). 

Goal setting. Another interesting area of inquiry relates to cultural impacts (or 
lack thereof) on student goal setting, school motivation, and achievement. The goals 
and values students hold, how these goals are related to school motivation and 
achievement, and how they develop and change over a period of years in the context 
of cultural background, family, society, and school was studied with Native American 
and Anglo American students from a middle and high school in Phoenix, Arizona. 
Participants in this longitudinal study were interviewed over a period of three years. 
The analyses of these interviews indicate that for Native American and Anglo 
American students alike, there were four needs that motivated them to strive for 
school success: (1) seeking excellence in their work; (2) self-esteem; (3) affiliation; 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

and (4) social concern. A number of the values and needs emphasized in the school 
setting, such as competition, group leadership, recognition, and rewards, were 
perceived to be relatively unimportant by these students (Mclnemey & Mclnemey, 
2000 ). 

In a related study, researchers observed a narrow range of goals and sense-of-self 
variables that were common in explaining school achievement across Indigenous, 
immigrant, and Anglo groups in Australia, Canada, and the United States. Goals held 
by students from diverse cultural backgrounds were shown to be more similar than 
different, and there appeared to be a relationship between goals and sense-of-self 
variables and school achievement (Mclnemey, Roche, Mclnemey, & Maish, 1997). 

Communication styles. A Canadian study indicated ways in which interethnic 
communication may promote problems of understanding between Native students 
and their non-Native teachers (Darnell, 1985). For example, Cree students used 
silence as a mechanism of self-defense and of protecting individuals’ autonomy; 
speech, on the other hand, was used to promote intimacy, trust, and consensus. Cree 
children also responded differently to elder mentors than they did to non-Native 
teachers. 

Academic skills and cognition. Last but not least, research has shown the 
importance of having basic skills (Silverman & Demmert, 1986; Cobum & Nelson, 
1987) and English proficiency (James, Chavez, Beauvais, Edwards, & Oetting, 1995) 
in order to do well in school academically. More on the skills needed to succeed in 
college is presented in the last section. We know from mainstream early childhood 
research (and some suggestive studies in Native education) that environment and life 
experiences help shape a person’s outlook on life, cognitive skill, and intellectual 
development (see theme 1). A void exists in the research on intellectual development 
(including multiple intelligences) for Native students. 30 

Conclusions. Research and theory on resiliency, student identity, cognitive 
development, multiple intelligence, motivation, and goal setting suggest many 
potentially powerful avenues of research. Clearly, much remains to be learned about 
personal characteristics of successful Native students — especially what is alterable 
and what is not in the school setting. The research community must help us 



30 See for example, Viadero, D. (1998, November 1 1). Research notes on ‘tri archie’ 
intelligence. Education Week, 18( 1 1), p.28; and Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: 
Multiple intelligences for the 21st century. New York: Basic Books. 

34 



42 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

understand all of these areas more fully. 

Listing of findings. Abstracts of these reports are located in the annotated 
bibliography at the end of this literature review. 

Poverty status 

• To test the impact of the three variables on academic achievement, the 
Ganado (Arizona) Unified School District No. 20 analyzed available 
information on six academic subtests for a representative sample of its 
reservation student population in grades 3, 6, 8, and 12. Socioeconomic 
status was the most consistent variably showing a strong relation to 
academic achievement in all test areas for all grades except 12. Attendance 
had a significant effect on language and reading scores of students in grades 
6, 8, and 12. Attendance was also a significant variable for students of low 
SES, as was stability of enrollment (Boloz & Varrati, 1983). 

• Improvement in social and economic status of Seminoles influenced 
academic performance (Greene & Kersey, 1975). 

Resiliency 

• Aside from school-related factors, the following student characteristics were 
found to contribute to the academic success of Alaska Native teacher 
education students who graduated from the University of Alaska-Fairbanks: 
strong family and community support, supportive prior school and life 
experiences, and exceptional individual efforts (Bamhardt, 1994). 

• Two studies reported characteristics of successful Native leaders and 
students in Alaska and the continental United States. Participants reported 
the influences of parents, teachers, or other persons and several personal 
characteristics contributing to their success: early identification with a goal 
or profession; actively participating in student activities in school (e.g., 
student government, sports activities, debate, choir, or other extracurricular 
activities); having the basic skills to do well in academically (with an 
interest in one or more subject areas); and serving as a student leader in 
some capacity (Cobum & Nelson, 1987; Silverman & Demmert, 1986). 

• A study of 1 9 northern Ojibway families showed that the support of a 
mother, who has strong traditional values and practices, is beneficial to a 
student’s academic and social performance in school (Coggins, Williams, & 

35 



43 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

Radin, 1996). 

• In a study of students and teachers at Window Rock High School on the 
Navajo Indian Reservation, Mclnemey, Mclnemey, Ardington, &De 
Rachewiltz (1997) found in their examination of goal theory of achievement 
motivation that, overwhelmingly, parents and extended family were the 
prime referent groups in influencing student progress at school. 

• A large survey of Mexican American, American Indian, and White 
adolescents found that dropouts were most likely to be involved with drugs, 
perpetration of violence, and victimization by violence, while students in 
good academic standing were least likely to have such involvement 
(Beauvais, Chavez, Oetting, Deffenbacher, & Cornell, 1996). 

Identity 

• Among 1,607 American Indian and Anglo dropouts and currently enrolled 
middle- and high-school students, the success of Indian students was related 
to stronger Anglo cultural identity and better English proficiency (in 
mainstream schools) but not to Indian cultural identity (James, Chavez, 
Beauvais, Edwards, & Oetting, 1995). 

• School attendance, self-concept, and parent attitudes towards the school all 
were found to affect achievement in a study that compared Ute, Anglo, and 
Hispanic student achievement and attitudes in a school district in California 
(Gage & Robson, 1984). 

• A survey of 185 Navajo students in grades 7 and 1 1 examined the 
relationship between their identification with traditional Navajo culture and 
their achievement level on standardized tests. Results suggest that student 
identification with Navajo language, culture, and tradition helps develop 
self-esteem and promotes academic success (Vadas, 1995). 

• A study explored the relationship of several social, cultural, and aspirational 
factors to achievement measured by grade point average (GPA) among 38 
Sioux and 48 White college students. Researchers found high school GPA 
and parental encouragement most important for White students, while 
cultural identity and retention of Native cultural traditions was most 
important for Sioux students (Huffman, Sill, & Brokenleg, 1986). 

• Another study of Navajo students suggested that a stable family life with 

36 



44 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



traditional values may influence in the achievement of Navajo students more 
than socioeconomic status (Rindone, 1988). 

Sense of self and self-esteem 

• Over 500 Navajo high school students completed the Inventory of School 
Motivation, based on the personal investment model of motivation. Results 
suggest that the model's most salient elements for this group were the sense- 
of-self components and one task component: striving for excellence 
(Mclnemey & Swisher, 1995). 

• In a study involving 60 Native Hawaiian students, guided affective and 
cognitive imagery has been shown to enhance self-esteem among children of 
Hawaiian ancestry (Omizo, Omizo, & Kitaoka, 1998). 

• Another controlled study involving 50 students showed that group 
counseling using art activities for improving self-esteem among Hawaiian 
elementary children resulted in higher social (peer-related) and academic 
(school-related) self-esteem scores (Omizo & Omizo, 1989). 

Goal setting 

• The goals and values students hold, how these goals are related to school 
motivation and achievement, and how they develop and change over a 
period of years in the context of cultural background, family, society, and 
school was studied with Native American and Anglo American students 
from a middle and high school in Phoenix, Arizona. Participants in this 
longitudinal study were interviewed over a period of three years. The 
analyses of these interviews indicate that for Native American and Anglo 
American students alike, there were four needs that motivated them to strive 
for school success: (1) seeking excellence in their work; (2) self-esteem; (3) 
affiliation; and (4) social concern. A number of the values and needs 
emphasized in the school setting, such as competition, group leadership, 
recognition, and rewards, were perceived to be relatively unimportant by 
these students (Mclnemey & Mclnemey, 2000). 

• In a related study, researchers observed a narrow range of goals and sense- 
of-self variables that were common in explaining school achievement across 
Indigenous, immigrant, and Anglo groups in Australia, Canada, and the 
United States. Goals held by students from diverse cultural backgrounds 
were shown to be more similar than different, and there appeared to be a 

37 



45 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



relationship between a narrow range of goals and sense-of-self variables to 
school achievement (Mclnemey, Roche, Mclnemey, & Maish, 1997). 

Communication style 

• Interethnic communication may promote problems of understanding 
between Cree and non-Native persons, with the Cree using silence as a 
mechanism of self-defense and protecting autonomy of one’ s self. In 
addition, Cree children respond differently to elder mentors than they do to 
non-Native teachers (example of joung White women is used). Speech is 
seen as promoting intimacy, trust, and consensus (Darnell, 1985). 

Academic and cognitive skills 

• See Cobum & Nelson, 1987; Silverman & Demmert, 1986; James, Chavez, 
Beauvais, Edwards, & Oetting, 1995 cited above. 



Theme 6. Factors Leading to Success in College 

Studies on factors leading to success in college or success in completing college 
are surprisingly numerous in the research . The knowledge these studies provide is 
consistent with what has been learned about how to improve academic performance 
among elementary and secondary students. 

Family support. High levels of family support and encouragement are important 
factors in student retention and academic success in college (Bamhardt, 1994; Davis, 
1992; Huffman, Sill, & Brokenleg, 1986; Rindone, 1988; Wilson, 1983). Brown 
(1993) found that parents* educations and occupations were important predictors of 
student success in college. Family attitudes about education and identification with 
the mother (and being female) were associated with young Navajo s’ college 
aspirations and success (Willeto, 1999). 

Cultural identity. Research has produced mixed results regarding the role of 
Native traditionalism in enhancing or reducing success at the postsecondary level. 
Maintaining cultural identity and traditions was found to enhance success by 
Huffman, Sill, & Brokenleg, 1986. However, Kerbo’s (1981) data on cultural factors 
and academic success of Native American college students suggest that the best 
independent predictors for Native Americans are the degree of identification and 
social integration with Whites . Most recently, Willeto (1999), in studying Navajo 
high school students, found no support for the idea that traditionalism, including use 

38 



46 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

of the Navajo language, had a negative effect on school achievement. She found a 
slightly positive association between participation in Native cultural activities and 
college aspirations and suggests that the role of traditionalism in the education of 
Native students be explored more thoughtfully. 

Personal determination and goal setting. Multiple studies have reported the 
role of personal determination in college success (Bamhardt, 1994; Davis, 1992; 
Rindone, 1988; Wilson, 1983). Academic performance of Native college students has 
been found to be positively con-elated to career maturity (the ability to deal with 
occupational choices) (West, 1988). 

Financial support. Students identified financial support as important to staying 
in college (Wilson, 1983). 

Academic skills. Good prior academic performance has been shown to be 
positively associated with postsecondary academic performance (Brown, 1993). 

Mentors and supportive faculty. Among other factors, Indigenous students at 
the University of Alaska-Fairbanks rated professor accessibility, app reachability, 
availability, genuineness, and caring, as necessary for learning success (Wilson, 

1997). Supportive teachers, support services, and an ability to adopt new traits while 
maintaining a traditional Native perspective are all related to success in college 
(Dodd, Garcia, Meccage, & Nelson, 1995). 

Bicultural curriculum. A bicultural postsecondary training curriculum in early 
childhood care and development, incorporating both Euro-Western and Aboriginal 
knowledge, showed significant Native student retention and program completion, 
exertion of leadership, and closer ties with community and intergenerational 
relationships (Ball & Pence, 2001). Bamhardt (1994) identified student support 
services respectful of the interests and needs of culturally diverse students as one of 
five factors contributing to the success of Alaska Native teacher education students at 
University of Alaska-Fairbanks. 

Listing of findings. Abstracts of these reports are located in the annotated 
bibliography at the end of this literature review. 

Family support 

• Five factors were identified as contributing to Alaska Native teacher 

education students' academic success at the University of Alaska-Fairbanks: 
(1) a teaching and learning environment responsive to the interests and 

39 



47 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

needs of culturally diverse students; (2) student support services respectful 
of the interests and needs of culturally diverse students; (3) strong family 
and community support; (4) supportive prior school and life experiences; 
and (5) exceptional individual efforts (Bamhardt, 1994). 

• A study of the family and educational histories of 1 0 American Indian 
college graduates (most from low socioeconomic and limited educational 
backgrounds) attributed their success to family encouragement and personal 
desire for betterment (Davis, 1992). 

• A study that examined the backgrounds of 107 Navajo college graduates 
(most from traditional, low SES family backgrounds), to identify factors 
contributing to their academic success, found that students’ own motivation 
and encouragement from family were the most important factors 
contributing to their high educational attainment; about half said that a 
teacher had encouraged them (Rindone, 1988). 

• In a survey of American Indian college graduates and students in Wisconsin, 
financial aid ranked first as a factor contributing to college completion, 
followed by family support, having a personal goal, determination, and 
intelligence (Wilson, 1983). 

• A study examined the characteristics of successful and unsuccessful Native 
American and non-Native secondary students who participated in the 
Northern Arizona University (NAU) Upward Bound program. No significant 
differences were found between the success rates of Native and non-Native 
students. Participants’ success was associated with total years of program 
participation, parents’ educational and occupational levels, prior academic 
performance, and consistency in program personnel (Brown, 1993). 

• A study undertaken to learn about experiences of academically successful 
American Indian students at a postsecondary school found that most students 
considered family to be their primary support; the few reported obstacles 
were academic, indicating the importance of student support services (Dodd, 
Garcia, Meccage, & Nelson, 1995). 

Cultural identity 

• A study exploring the relationship of several social, cultural, and aspirational 
factors to achievement, measured by grade point average among 38 Sioux 
and 48 White college students, found high school GPA and parental 

40 



48 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

encouragement most important for White students and cultural identity and 
retention of Native cultural traditions most important for Sioux students 
(Huffman, Sill, & Brokenleg, 1986). 

• Willeto (1999) found that a small positive relationship between involvement 
in Native cultural conventions and activities and commitment to school; she 
found no support fa* the idea that traditionalism, including use of the Navajo 
language, had a negative effect on school achievement. She found that 
adolescents who identified with their mothers (typically girls) did better in 
school. 

• Data on cultural factors and academic success of Native American college 
students suggested that the best independent predictors for Native 
Americans are degree of identification and social integration with Whites 
(Kerbo, 1981). 

Personal determination, confidence, and goal setting 

• See Bamhardt, 1994; Davis, 1992; Rindone, 1988; Wilson, 1983 above. 

• A study comparing career maturity and academic achievement between 30 
American Indian and 39 non-Indian college students found strong positive 
correlations between grade point average and career maturity for freshman 
and sophomore Indians and freshman non-Indians, but not for the total 
sample or either ethnic group overall (West, 1988). 

Financial support 

• See Wilson, 1983 above. 

Academic skills 

• See Brown, 1993 above. 

Mentors and supportive faculty 

• See Dodd, Garcia, Meccage, & Nelson, 1995 above. 

• High failure rates among Native students sparked a study of 
professor/student relationships at the University of Alaska-Fairbanks. On 
the Personal Learning Styles Inventory, minority (Native and Hispanic) 
students scored highest on active experimentation and concrete experience. 
Indigenous students also rated professor accessibility, approac liability, 
availability, genuineness, and caring as necessary for learning success 

49 



41 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

(Wilson, 1997). 

Bicultural curriculum 

• See Bamhardt, 1994 above. 

• Aboriginal communities partnered with a university to construct an early 
childhood care and development curriculum, delivered entirely in the 
communities. Results included high rates of Aboriginal student retention, 
program completion, leadership, and application of training within their 
communities; revitalization of intergenerational relationships through tribal 
elders' involvement in curriculum construction, teaching, and learning; 
enhanced community cohesion; and reinforcement of valued cultural 
concepts and practices (Ball & Pence, 2001). 



A Summary of What the Research Tells Us 

A review of the literature on improving academic performance of Native 
American students provides some very definite insights on what has worked in 
certain circumstances, and suggests alternatives for educators, parents, and 
policymakers to consider as each searches for ways to improve academic 
performance of all Native children. 

Though limited, the literature focusing on young Native children reminds us that 
providing opportunities for early development of language and other skills can have 
significant influence on how well these children will do academically in their later 
life as students. In addition, the review of recent information on the development of 
the brain tells us that the environment in which young children learn influences the 
development of their many intelligences. The message is very clear — if parents and 
educators have an interest in promoting the development of smart, healthy, well- 
adjusted children, we must provide a safe, challenging, and enriched environment 
early in the life of a child. 

The importance of Native language and cultural programs in schools in 
motivating students, promoting a positive sense of identity and self, stimulating 
positive attitudes about school and others outside a child’s immediate environment, 
and supporting improved academic performance among Native students is worthy of 
recognition outside Native communities. The concept is accepted among Native 
peoples in the United States and in the Circumpolar North. 

42 



50 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

The research on effective teachers and classroom practice is less cohesive and 
more scattered than some of the other themes explored in this review. Hopefully 
future research can become more focused, long-term, and cumulative, which may 
give us more reliable information. The recently released American Indian and Alaska 
Native Research Agenda 31 published by the U.S. Department of Education may 
provide the focus needed to produce research that will be useful to practitioners. 

We have learned that levels of congruency between the culture of the school and 
the culture of the community served can be an important factor in community support 
and community attitudes towards the school. Community attitudes and participation 
of parents in the educational process appear to be critical elements for teachers to be 
more successful with Native students. Responsibility for and ownership of schools by 
parents and other community members are also significantly tied to success of the 
schools. 

Knowledge about characteristics of successful Native students is somewhat 
limited, but the information that is there tells us that attendance, language 
competence, motivation, positive life experiences, sense of purpose, early goal 
setting, the ability to balance conflicts between home and community, and knowledge 
of basic skills all contribute to a student’s ability to successfully navigate the process 
of schooling. There is much we still need to learn about this area and what is alterable 
and what is not. 

We know that social and economic circumstances of families and communities 
have some level of influence on student performance. We also know that Native 
traditional values and practices of students and families, when clearly understood in 
the modem context, may be significant assets to learning. There is some evidence that 
community and tribal political or traditional roles may mitigate outside social and 
economic factors. This is worth a closer examination. 

The international studies of improving academic performance among Native 
(Indigenous) peoples clearly support the information on Native American students. 
Issues of language, culture, early learning environments and language development, 
and local control in international studies are all closely aligned with the scene one 
finds in the United States among American Indians, Alaska Natives, and Native 
Hawaiians. To better understand the similarities and differences between American 



3 , To obtain a copy of this document, go to the following Web site: 
http://www.indianeduresearch.net/agenda.pdf 



43 



51 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 

Indians, Native Alaskans, and other Indigenous peoples regarding improved student 
achievement, I suggest some international studies making comparisons among Native 
peoples. 

The success of Native college students depends on many of the same factors that 
influence the achievements of Native elementary and secondary students. Family 
support, knowledge of the basics, motivation, sense of identity and self, language 
development, early goal settings, and mentors all affect whether a student stays in 
college and succeeds academically, socially, and spiritually. 

In conclusion, there are significant levels of transferability between the research 
on Native Americans, other racial and ethnic groups in the United States, and Native 
peoples in the Circumpolar North. The research base specific to the Native 
community is growing as the number of Native researchers increases and as 
knowledge gained by research becomes more important to Native communities in 
their efforts to address problems that have persisted for many decades. 



44 



52 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Annotated Bibliography 



Alaska Native Knowledge Network. (1998). Alaska rural systemic initiative: Year 
three annual progress report, December 1, 1997 -November 30, 1998. Fairbanks: 
University of Alaska. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED443603) 

The Alaska Rural Systemic Initiative (AKRS1) was established in 1 994 to develop 
pedagogical practices that incorporate the Indigenous knowledge systems of Alaska 
Native peoples into formal educational programs. The statewide project is 
organized around five initiatives, each of which is implemented in one Native 
cultural region at a time on a rotational schedule over 5 years. A sixth initiative 
focuses on developing a statewide educational telecommunications infrastructure. 

This report addresses questions associated with the following six "drivers": (1) 
implementation of comprehensive, standards-based curricula, including 
assessment, in every classroom and learning experience provided through AKRSI; 

(2) provision of high quality mathematics and science education and preparation 
and support of teachers; (3) convergence of all resources that support science and 
mathematics education into a focused, continuously improving program; (4) 
generation of parent and community support for the program based on 
presentations, evidence, and critical discussions; (5) accumulation of evidence that 
the program is enhancing student achievement in science and mathematics; and (6) 
improvement in the achievement of all students, including those historically 
underserved. During the first 3 years of implementation, AKRSI schools showed a 
net gain relative to non-AKRSI schools in mathematics achievement scores and 
dropout rates. 

Alley, R. D., Davison, R. G., Kelley, W. T., & Kimble, R. L. (1974). A reading 

improvement strategy. Journal of American Indian Education, 73(2), 14-20. (EJ093434) 
A report of the Title I, Elementary and Secondary Education Act, reading 
improvement project at the Chilocco Indian School (Oklahoma) is presented. 

American Institutes for Research in the Behavioral Sciences (AIRBS). (1971). 

Model programs: Reading. Remedial reading program, Pojoaque, New Mexico. 

Palo Alto, CA: (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED053 890) 

The elementary school in Pojoaque, New Mexico, has recently developed a 
remedial reading program for children in grades 2 to 4. Eighty-three children 
participated in 1969-70. As the population of the area is 76 percent Spanish- 
American, 12 percent Indian, 12 percent white, and less than 1 percent black, work 
in the program focuses on language and communication problems. 

Children work in remedial reading groups 25 to 30 minutes daily. Activities 
are divided between individual and small group work. Textbooks and workbooks 
are used for skill development, and high interest library books, filmstrips, and a 
tape recorder are used for motivating pupil interest. Pretest and post-test scores on 
the Gilmore Oral Reading Placement Test, administered primarily for individual 
diagnosis, indicated that the months of progress in accuracy and comprehension 

45 



53 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



generally exceeded the number of months the children spent in the program. 

References and a list of materials used are included. 

Anderson, S. H. (1987). Discourse performance of Native Indian students: A case 
study with implications for academic instruction (Doctoral dissertationJJniversity 
of British Columbia, Canada, 1987). Dissertation Abstracts International, 49(05), 1078. 
The oral and written discourse performance of eight underachieving Native 
American high school students was assessed through individual, interactive talk- 
write sessions. Four male and four female urban high school students, who came 
from different Native cultural backgrounds but had similar histories of family 
instability, took part in interactive talk-write sessions on two narrative and two 
academic topics. Contrary to findings with non-Natives, and despite difficulties 
with writing processes, these subjects were more comfortable with written 
performance than oral performance. Most of their writing difficulties were related 
to the demands of academic discourse, and it appeared that the talk-write process 
helped the students to think through and present their arguments with a better 
understanding of academic discourse. 

Ayoungman, V. (1991). Siksika language renewal efforts: Description and assessment 
(Indians, Canada) (Doctoral dissertation, Arizona State University, 1991). 

Dissertations Abstract International, 52, 1188. 

The Siksika (Blackfoot) of southern Alberta, Canada, responded to the 
endangerment of their aboriginal language with various school and community 
language revitalization efforts. Multiple assessments of the impact of these efforts 
were carried out. Language proficiency scores of elementary students showed some 
improvement related to the language revitalization efforts but were not high enough 
for the students to be considered speakers. Other data revealed positive impacts on 
students, homes, schools, and the community. A survey of language use in 
households and the community and of the importance placed on Siksika and 
English showed that the status of the aboriginal language had also improved. 

Ball, J. & Pence, A. (2001). Constructing knowledge and training curricula about 
early childhood care and development in Canadian Aboriginal communities. Paper 
presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational Research 
Association, Seattle, WA, April 12, 2001. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED451995) 

The Meadow Lake Tribal Council (MLTC) (Saskatchewan) and the University of 
Victoria (British Columbia) developed a bicultural postsecondary training 
curriculum in early childhood care and development that incorporated both 
Euro-Western and Aboriginal knowledge. Since the MLTC sought curricula using 
representative Cree and Dene cultures rather than generic pan- Aboriginal culture, 
seven groups of Aboriginal communities partnered with the university to 
co-construct a two-year curriculum delivered entirely in their communities. Tribal 
elders played key roles in developing the curriculum. A steering committee in each 
community had responsibility to raise funds; recruit instructors, students, elders, 

46 



54 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



and practicum supervisors; and provide facilities and supports for teaching and 
learning. Four of the community groups were able to recruit Native American 
instructors. A two-year evaluation using interviews, questionnaires, focus groups, 
participant observations, community forums, and record reviews was completed in 
2000. Positive program impacts included unprecedented high rates of Aboriginal 
student retention, program completion, leadership, and application of training to 
relevant vocations within their communities; revitalization of intergenerational 
relationships through tribal elders' involvement in curriculum construction, 
teaching, and learning; enhanced community cohesion; and reinforcement of 
valued cultural concepts and practices. 

Baratz-Snowden, J. f et at. (1988). The educational progress of language minority 
children: Findings from the NAEP J 985-86 special study. Princeton, NJ: National 
Assessment of Educational Progress (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED299839) 
From 1985-86, the National Assessment of Educational Progress (NAEP) 
conducted a special survey of reading and mathematics performance of language 
minority Asian American, Hispanic American, and Native American children to 
determine the progress of these children at grades 3, 7, and 1 1. The study also 
sought to identify whether the differences in achievement within and among the 
groups could be at least partially explained by differences in demographic 
background, language use and competence, attitudes and school-related behaviors, 
and school experiences. Three achievement measures were examined, including: 

(1) academic performance as measured by seventh and eleventh-grade students' 
self-report of grades in school; (2) NAEP reading scores for seventh-graders; and 
(3) NAEP math scores for third-, seventh-, and eleventh-grade students. Factors 
relating to the students' self-reports of high grades and to students' tested reading 
and math scores indicated that (1) frequency of second language use in the home 
had a significant positive relationship to grades in the total sample, as did English 
competence and (2) locus of control, English competency, and positive attitudes 
toward reading tended to be important explanatory variables of reading 
performance, but that frequency of second language use in home had little or no 
relationship to reading performance. Sample NAEP reading and math test items are 
appended. 

Barnhardt, C. (1994). Life on the other side: Alaska Native teacher education 

students and the University of Alaska-Fairbanks. (Doctoral dissertation. University 
of British Columbia, 1994). (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED382415) 

The thesis identifies factors that have contributed to the academic success of 
Alaska Native teacher education students who graduated from the University of 
Alaska-Fairbanks (UAF) between 1989 and 1993. It contains a brief history of 
schooling for Alaska Native peoples; a description of the programs, student 
services, and academic coursework at UAF designed to respond to the interests and 
needs of Alaska Native students; and a review and analysis of the experiences of 50 
Alaska Native teacher education graduates based on data obtained through 

47 



55 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



interviews, review of student records, and participant observation. Five factors 
were identified as contributing to students' academic success: (1) a teaching and 
learning environment responsive to the interests and needs of culturally diverse 
students; (2) student support services respectful of the interests and needs of 
culturally diverse students; (3) strong family and community support; (4) 
supportive prior school and life experiences; and (5) exceptional individual efforts. 
The data indicate that accommodation and adaptations by both the students and the 
institution were essential to student success. Appendices describe 27 programs and 
services that address Alaska Native peoples and issues at UAF, and list Alaska 
Native and rural undergraduate courses at UAF, student database variables, and 
interview themes. (Contains 259 references.) 

Barnhardt, C. (1999). Kuinerrarmiut Elitnaurviat: The school of the people of 
Quinhagak. Case study . Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Lab; 
Fairbanks: University of Alaska. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED437252) 

As part of a larger study of systemic educational reform in rural Alaska, this case 
study examines recent efforts by the people of Quinhagak to integrate Yup'ik 
language, values, and beliefs into school practices and policies. Quinhagak is a 
Yup'ik Eskimo community of 550 people on the southwest coast of Alaska. Nearly 
all residents can communicate in both Yup'ik and English. The K.-12 school enrolls 
about 140 students. A brief history of the community and its schools is drawn from 
the experiences of an elder and her descendants. As a participant in Alaska Onward 
to Excellence (AOTE), a district-driven reform process implemented around the 
state, the Quinhagak community leadership team developed an AOTE action plan 
that encompassed 10 statements of values and beliefs, a mission statement, and one 
student learning goal of communicating more effectively in Yup'ik. With that, the 
team decided upon two areas of study: (1) community involvement in schooling 
decisions and (2) the contribution of Yup'ik proficiency to overall student 
achievement. The case study gathered infomiation on school organization; 
elementary and secondary facilities, personnel, and curriculum; special education 
and discipline programs; parent and community involvement; and assessment. 
Evidence of changes and trends is listed. Final comments summarize factors 
contributing to community choices for its school, factors enabling the school to 
implement new and self-determined educational priorities and challenges to 
narrowing the school-community gap and approving achievement. Appendices 
include school district statistics, school documents, and related publications. 
(Contains 14 references.) 

Barnhardt, R, (1990). Two cultures, one school: St. Mary's, Alaska. Canadian 
Journal of Native Education, 77(2), 54-65. (EJ420524) 

Describes the successful school serving preschool through twelfth grade in St. 
Mary's Alaska — a small Yup'ik community. Examines the bilingual curriculum, 
strong community support, and the school's philosophy and goals emphasizing 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



integration of Yup’ik ways and values and the educational responsibility of the 
community. 

Beauvais, F., Chavez, £. L., Oetting, E. R., Deffenbacher, J. L., & Cornell, G. R. 
(1996). Drug use, violence, and victimization among White American, Mexican 
American, and American Indian Dropouts, students with academic problems, and 
students with good academic standing. Journal of Counseling Psychology, 43(3), 
292-99. 

A survey of 1,052 Mexican American, 504 American Indian, and 459 White 
adolescents found that dropouts were most likely to be involved with chugs, 
perpetration of violence, and victimization by violence, while students in good 
academic standing were least likely to have such involvement. Students in poor 
standing were intermediate in involvement. Differences between dropouts and 
student groups were similar across ethnic groups. (Contains 27 references.) 

Bennett, R. (1987). Cooperative learning with a computer in a Native language doss. 
Areata, CA: Humboldt State University Education Department. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED320709) 

In a cooperative task, American Indian elementary students produced bilingual 
natural history dictionaries using a Macintosh computer. Students in grades 3 
through 8 attended weekly, multigraded bilingual classes in Hupa/English or 
Yurok/English, held at two public school field sites for training elementary 
teaching-credential candidates. Teams of three students worked together at the 
computer to complete a dictionary page, a task involving selection of a natural 
item, formulation of its definition, transcription in the Unifon alphabet, translation 
to English, and page layout. The project focused on written sentence construction 
and oral communication skills. The goal of producing a dictionary dealing with 
plants and animals known to local tribes allowed students to use knowledge 
obtained from family and other tribal members. The computer provided concrete 
realization of abstract concepts and a self-directed interactive learning 
environment. Classroom observation showed that (1) students worked on the 
project willingly for the entire school year; (2) students' oral communication skills, 
used in the cooperative learning groups, developed over the year; (3) students 
tended to build on the work of other students; (4) older and younger students 
differed in their ways of viewing the natural world; and (5) older students advanced 
from producing literal English translations to making "good" free translations. The 
success of this project points to the importance of implementing a teaching 
methodology compatible with the learning style of the home culture. This report 
contains 26 references. 

Bergstrom, A, Cleary, L. M., & Peacock, T. (in press). The seventh generation: 
Native students speak about finding the good path. Charleston, WV: ERIC 
Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. 

Boloz, S. A., & Varrati, R. (1983). Apologize or analyze: Measuring academic 

49 



57 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



achievement in the reservation school (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED232817) 

Three variables — student attendance, stability of enrollment, and socioeconomic 
status — can affect reservation students' performance on standardized tests as 
significantly as the quality of instruction. To test the impact of the three variables 
on academic achievement, the Ganado (Arizona) Unified School District No. 20 
analyzed available information on six academic subtests for a representative 
sample of its reservation student population in grades 3, 6, 8, and 12. 
Socioeconomic status was the most consistent variable, showing a strong relation 
to academic achievement in all test areas for all grades except 12. Attendance had a 
significant effect on language and reading scores of students in grades 6, 8, and 12. 
Attendance was also a significant variable for students of low SES, as was stability 
of enrollment. In general, students with stable enrollment in grades 6, 8, and 12 
outperformed transient students in language areas. Overall, students with the best 
scores were those with the best attendance records who had been enrolled 
consistently in the district. Evaluators felt that these results proved the quality of 
the district's program. Variables such as one-parent homes, negative parental 
attitudes, and school expectations can also affect attendance and performance, and 
should be investigated. 

Brancov, T. (1994). Cooperative learning in mathematics with middle school Indian 
students: A focus on achievement and on-task behavior (Native Americans). 
Dissertation Abstracts International, 55(1 1), 3396A. (UMI No. 9506443). 

A study examined the effects of cooperative learning in mathematics on American 
Indian middle school students’ achievement, time on task, and classroom 
environment. A quasi-experimental design was established using 129 Indian 
middle school students and two teachers on a South Dakota Indian reservation. 
Pretests/posttests revealed that compared to controls, the cooperative learning 
group showed improvements in mathematics achievement, specifically problem 
solving; attitudes toward mathematics; and classroom climate. No differences were 
found in time on task. 

Brown, J. R. (1993). Upward Bound at Northern State University: A characteristic 
analysis of successful participants, 1977-1985 (Arizona). Dissertation Abstracts 
International, 54(1 1), 4012A. (UMI No. 941 1451). 

A study examined the characteristics of successful and unsuccessful Native 
American and non-Native secondary students who participated in the Northern 
Arizona University (NAU) Upward Bound program during 1 977-1985. The study 
also looked at the academic performance of participants who later enrolled as 
college students at NAU. No significant differences were found between the 
success rates of Native and non-Native students. Participants’ success was 
influenced by total years of program participation, parents’ educational and 
occupational levels, prior academic performance, and consistency in program 
personnel. Postsecondary performance was related to academic preparation, as 

50 



58 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



opposed to ethnicity. 

Carnew, F. I., & Clark, W. B. (1985). Cognitive education and Native adolescents: A 
pilot study. Alberta: Calgary University Instruction for Computer Assisted 
Learning. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED268989) 

This study investigated the potential usefulness of a cognitive education 
intervention approach to improving learning abilities of underachieving Native 
adolescents. The specific variables considered were: (1) the manner in which this 
approach may affect cognitive development; (2) academic learning; (3) attitudes 
towards and interest in academic subjects; and (4) teacher attitudes towards such 
students. Subjects included 56 Native Cree Indian adolescents who were assigned 
to experimental (N=38) and control (N-18) groups based on their need for 
remedial or regular instruction respectively. Pretests were administered to identify 
underdeveloped cognitive functions and computer literacy was assessed via a 
computer awareness questionnaire. The experimental group received the 
intervention program, which comprised an introductory LOGO computer language 
component; an extended computer component; and reading, writing, and 
mathematics components. Posttests were then administered to both groups and an 
analysis of variance was conducted to determine the significance of any differences 
between the experimental and control groups. Results indicated that involvement in 
the intervention program did positively affect the experimental subjects' cognitive 
functioning abilities and improve their achievement in reading and writing; 
however, teaching for transfer of cognitive functions neither affected the students' 
attitudes toward academic subjects nor improved their achievement in 
mathematics. An extensive bibliography is provided, and copies of the computer 
awareness questionnaire, parent permission slips, and tables of contents for the 
program components are appended. 

Clark, W. J. (1996). Effect of a computer assisted instruction program on Aboriginal 
student achievement. Unpublished master’s thesis, Brandon University, Manitoba, 
Canada. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED400777) 

Many parents on a southwestern Manitoba (Canada) Indian reservation are troubled 
by the small number of high school students who graduate. Much of the failure can 
be attributed to the generally poor writing skills of aboriginal students. To increase 
the students' writing ability, a computer-assisted instruction program emphasizing 
writing and thinking was implemented for students in grades 7-9. The purpose of 
this study was to investigate whether students receiving computer-assisted writing 
instruction would outperform students receiving traditional writing instruction 
(using pencil and paper) on the language arts component of a standardized 
diagnostic test. Following a quasi-experimental design, the researcher applied both 
a pretest and a posttest to the experimental and control groups. Prior to the 
introduction of the "Knowledge Builder" writing program and again at the end of 
the school year, the students in grades 7-9 of two southern Manitoba Indian 
reserves were administered the Canadian Test of Basic Skills, and the mean scores 

51 



59 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



for each grade of the two schools were compared. While the findings of this study 
showed no significant difference between the groups, the experimental school's 
teachers felt there was an overall improvement in the quality of expository 
writings. Thirteen tables present results of the study and descriptions and 
comparisons of the control and experimental groups. 

Cleary, L. M., & Peacock, T. D. (1998). Collected wisdom: American Indian 
education. Needham Heights, MA: Allyn & Bacon. 

Based on interviews and classroom observation, this book presents the "collected 
wisdom" of 60 teachers of American Indian students in all parts of the United 
States, as well as teachers of Indigenous students in Australia and Costa Rica. 

Chapter 1, "Introduction: The Teacher as Learner" presents the authors' 
backgrounds, the study's emerging themes, general procedures of the study, and 
rationale for the final presentation of data. The study was based on the premise that 
teachers in schools that serve Indian children should see themselves as learners 
who are open to understanding the reasons that children and communities are the 
way they are, who are willing to discover and consider the differences between 
school and home cultures, and who are willing to change their ways of teaching to 
give children abetter chance in school and life. Each subsequent chapter has a 
theme and standard format: a story that introduces the chapter's content, questions 
to tap the reader’s prior knowledge, a profile of a teacher-interviewee, a 
problematic case study, a summary of research on the theme and its implications 
for practice, and references. Chapter titles include the following: "Cultural 
Difference: Recognizing the Gap into Which Students and Teachers Fall"; "What 
Has Gone Wrong: The Remnants of Oppression"; "Creating a Two-Way Bridge: 

Being Indian in a Non- Indian World"; 'Issues of Native Language"; "Ways of 
Learning"; "Literacy, Thought, and Empowerment"; and "What Works: Student 
Motivation as a Guide to Practice." The last chapter is an epilogue which discusses 
the universality of issues in Indigenous education, the strength and tenacity of 
culture, and the need for an integrated approach to educational problems. 

Appendixes detail the research methodology and provide questions to guide a 
teacher's change to authentic assessment. (Contains an index.) 

Coburn, J. & Nelson S. (1987). Characteristics of successful Indian students: 

Research and development program for Indian education. Portland, OR: Northwest 
Regional Educational Laboratory. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED297909) 
A survey was taken to identify characteristics of Indian students completing high 
school. Using the regional Indian education network, 571 surveys were mailed to 
1987 high school graduates; 123 surveys were returned for a 23-plus percent 
response rate. Responses came from public and tribal schools, urban and rural, in 
Oregon, Washington, Idaho, and Montana. Responses showed a variety of student 
types. Half of the students surveyed were involved in sports, 35% in church 
activities, 25% in tribal activities, and 15% in civic organizations. Their average 
cumulative grade point average was 2.86. Eighty-two percent of students identified 

52 



60 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



teachers as most influential in their success. Forty-seven percent also identified 
counselors and 39% identified coaches as influential. Attributes of most influential 
teachers included caring and positive attitudes, honesty, concern, respect, and 
patience. These teachers made school interesting, and inspired and challenged the 
students, while maintaining high expectations. The most helpful teachers were 
those who gave help willingly, were open-minded, encouraged goal setting, were 
supportive when students failed, but complimented them when they did well. Half 
of the Indian students surveyed ascribed their motivation to finish high school to 
the reward of current successful experiences, including individual attention of 
teachers and participation in sports and other extracurricular activities. High 
expectations of family and friends, aspirations for a college education, self- 
confidence, and the negative consequences of dropping out were also cited as 
strong motivations. Students suggested telling other students that finishing high 
school is the way to future success on and off the reservation. 

Coggins, K., Williams, E., & Radin, N. (1996). The traditional tribal values of 
Ojibwa parents and the school performance of their children: An exploratory 
study. Ann Arbor: University of Michigan. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED400116) 

This study of 19 northern Michigan Ojibwa families examined antecedents to 
holding traditional values, and the relationship between mothers' and fathers' level 
of holding traditional values and their elementary school children's academic and 
social functioning. Participating families had a child between ages 3 and 1 1 years; 
the focal child of the study was the oldest attending elementary school. Interviews 
were held individually with the 15 mothers and 14 fathers comprising the sample. 
Based on interview information, the interviewers completed a scale measuring the 
extent to which traditional values were held. Academic functioning was assessed 
through teacher assigned report card grades and two Adaptive Functioning items 
from Achenbach's Teachefs Report Form of the Child Behavior Check List 
(CBCL). Social functioning was assessed by two Adaptive Functioning items from 
the CBCL; the Problem Behavior CBCL items; an American Indian Child Behavior 
Check List to assess personality traits important to American Indians; and an Index 
of Future Community Leadership, important in an American Indian population. 
Results indicated that identification with more traditional American Indian values 
in mothers had a beneficial impact on children's academic and social performance 
in school. Fathers' level of holding traditional values was not associated with his 
children’s academic and social outcomes. Mothers' greater adherence to traditional 
values was associated with higher levels of parental education and higher status 
parental occupation. (Contains 37 references.) 

Darnell, R. (1985). The language of power in Cree interethnic communication. In N. 
Wolfson & J. Manes (Eds.), Language of inequality (pp. 61-72). Berlin: Walter de 
Gruyter & Company. 

This chapter examines difficulties and misunderstandings that arise in 



53 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



communication between Native Americans and Whites, difficulties often 
compounded by asymmetrical access to power. Examples are drawn from the Cree 
of northern Alberta (although many of these patterns are widespread in Native 
North America) and focus on public meetings, political decision making, and 
interactions in the classroom. One area of miscommunication is related to cultural 
differences in decision making and attitudes toward leadership. In the context of 
public meetings and decision making, Whites tend to expect speedy group 
decisions in which the majority rules. Native people seek consensus, which takes 
time; avoid confrontation by depersonalizing differences of opinion; and use 
mediators to effect compromises. Cultural differences in communication styles 
include differences in interactional timing and the ways that speakers and learners 
use silence or murmur acknowledgements. In traditional Cree teaching, an elder 
conveys his experience, often in a monologue, or a teacher demonstrates a skill. 

The learner has little or no input. The interaction is open-ended, as the learner is 
responsible for putting the teaching to effective use. Other Cree interactional 
practices or premises often cause conflict in the classroom. Cree do not correct a 
mistake directly, do not force anyane to accept teaching, do not verbalize their 
feelings or talk about talk, avoid direct eye contact, and regard children as 
autonomous persons. Some thoughts on establishing true interethnic 
communication are offered. 

Davis, J. (1992). Factors contributing to post-secondary achievement of American 
Indians. Tribal College, 4(2), 24-30. (EJ465863) 

Describes a study of the family and educational histories of 10 American Indian 
college graduates to determine factors in their success. The graduates, most of who 
came from low socioeconomic and limited educational backgrounds, attributed 
their success to family encouragement and their personal desire for betterment. 

deMarrais, K. B. (1992). Meaning in mud: Yup'ik Eskimo girls at play. Anthropology 
& Education Quarterly, 23(2 ), 1 20-44. (EJ448044) 

Describes storyknifmg, a traditional way of storytelling illustrated through pictures 
traced in mud, by young girls in a Yup’ik Eskimo village on the Kuskokwim River 
(Alaska). Storyknifmg provides a forum in which young girls learn cultural and 
cognitive knowledge. Storyknifmg maintains a link with traditional society in this 
village. 

Diessner, R., Rouscul, E. E., & Walker, J. L. (1985). English fluency via computers 

at Yakima tribal school. Journal of American Indian Education, 25(1), 17-24. (EJ334947) 
A project using Apple lie processing stations and Apple Writer II software 
increased written English fluency for Native American students in grades 7-12 at 
the Yakima Tribal School. Thematic maturity did not increase, and students 
became reluctant to do handwritten work. 

Dodd, J. M., Garda, F. M, Meccage, C., & Nelson, J. R. (1995). American Indian 
student retention. NASPA Journal, 55(1), 72-78. (EJ5 14460) 

54 



62 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Presents results of study undertaken to learn what academically successful 
American Indian students at one postsecondary school encounter and what persons 
and/or support services help with their academic success. Most students indicated 
family of primary support. Few reported obstacles were academic, indicating the 
importance of student support services. 

Dooley, M. S. (1987). Dialogue journals: Facilitating the reading-writing connection 
with Native American students. Marquette: Northern Michigan University. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED2921 18) 

Focusing on the integration of early reading and writing skills, a study examined 
the instructional use of daily dialogue journals over a five-month period in a class 
of 10 third-grade Native American students living on an Indian reservation in 
northern Michigan. Students were required to make an entry of at least three lines 
every day, all writing was confidential, and the journals were not graded. 
Punctuation skills, grammar, and sentence structure improved in most cases, the 
length of sentences and paragraphs improved in all cases. Ninety percent of the 
students indicated a positive feeling about writing, and a majority reported that they 
enjoyed sharing reading and writing with their classmates. Difficulties in using this 
teaching technique included the amount of teacher time spent in answering the 
journals on a daily basis, and the problem of motivating students to write. Overall, 
results indicated that the dialogue journals were successful in combining the need 
for a culture-based learning style, which emphasized group cooperation, and 
pragmatic learning based on experiences. (Examples of pre-writing, a student 
attitude chart, a student progress chart, and 22 references are appended.) 

Edington, E. D., & Pettibone, T. J. (1975). Project HEED. Final evaluation report, 
1974-1975. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 10879 1 ) 

Project HEED's (Heed Ethnic Education Deplorization) main emphasis in 1974-75 
was to develop reading and cultural awareness skills for kindergarten through 4th 
grades in the seven proj ect schools on American Indian reservations in Arizona. In 
its fourth year of operation, the project (funded under Elementary and Secondary 
Education Title III) involved 725 Indian students in grades K-3 at St. Charles 
Mission, Hotevilla, Sells, Rice, and Many Farms and in K-4 at Sacaton and Peach 
Springs. For the project's fourth evaluation, all the students were administered the 
pre and posttest SRA Reading Achievement tests and the DISTAR Mastery tests. A 
minimum of two visits was made to all sites, except Hotevilla, during the year. 
Some of the project's successes were; (1) significant gains were attained at all 
schools; (2) changes in average grade level equivalence ranged from 4 to 7 months; 
and (3) in terms of national posttest norms, only 1 school achieved as high as the 
national median score of the 50th percentile. This report covers 3 basic areas of the 
evaluation: (1) reading performance by SRA (WRAT) and DISTAR Reading 
Mastery test; (2) development of reading objectives; and (3) cultural awareness 
activities. The reading scores are reported both as grade level changes and as 
percentile changes. 



55 



63 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Fay den, T. (1997). What Is the effect of shared reading on rural Native American and 
Hispanic kindergarten children? Reading Improvement, 34( 1), 22-30. (EJ544226) 
Finds that the use of predictable Big Books in the classroom with primarily Native 
American and Hispanic kindergarten children and with children whose early 
experiences with books are limited is an effective way to develop reading skills. 

Feurer, H. (1990). Multilingual education : An experimental project by the Cree 
Indians ofWaskaganish in Quebec, Canada. Paper presented at the International 
Conference on Thai Studies, Yunnan, China. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED337045) 

The struggle of one Cree community, the Waskaganish (formerly called Rupert 
House) in Quebec, to maintain its own language and culture within the larger 
multicultural Canadian context has led to the creation and development of a 
linguistic experiment, the Cree Way Project. After a discussion of the Canadian 
historical context, this report describes Quebec and Amerindian education and the 
Cree Way Project. The project was a first attempt to help the Cree people remain a 
nation, introducing Cree syllabic readers for primary grade children. Since 1978, 
the project has been incorporated into the Cree School Board's curriculum in one 
community and has begun to be implemented in seven others. There are now more 
than 500 textbooks printed in Cree syllables, and a Cree immersion program is in 
its second year. The school calendar honors Cree traditions such as hunting and 
ceremonial activities. The school, with its rapidly growing Native teaching staff, 
seeks to meet the needs and maximize the abilities of the Waskaganish community. 
The Cree experience supports the hypothesis that the education of Indigenous 
peoples in their own language will further the process of second language 
acquisition. Contains 18 references. 

Fox, S. J. (1976). An evaluation of the eighth grade reading programs implemented for 
Indian students in North and South Dakota (Doctoral dissertation, University of 
Maryland College Park, 1976). Dissertation Abstracts International, 37, 7095. 

Poor reading achievement is a major problem of American Indian students. This 
dissertation describes eight Title I reading programs implemented during 1973-74 
in Bureau of Indian Affairs schools of North and South Dakota and evaluates them 
with regard to U.S. Department of Education criteria for exemplary Title I 
programs. The students in these programs were primarily of the Chippewa and 
Sioux tribes. Students in all programs improved significantly in reading ability 
after 1 year of program participation. The three schools that showed the best gains 
in reading ability also ranked the highest when rated against the criteria for 
exemplary programs. Specifically, these three schools were rated higher than other 
schools on having close coordination between Title I and the regular reading 
program and on having a structured program approach. Recommendations are 
offered for improving Title I programs that serve Indian children. 

Franks, M. E. (1988). Using the gap reduction model to evaluate a successjul 
bilingual/ESL program . Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the Mid-South 

56 



64 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Educational Research Association, Louisville, Kentucky. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED303505) 

Procedures and results of an evaluation of the Choctaw Bilingual/English as a 
Second Language (ESL) Program, conducted in east central Mississippi, are 
discussed. The program, which is in its filth year, is implemented using Title VII 
funds in three of the six Bureau of Indian Affairs elementary schools on the 
Mississippi Choctaw Reservation. The Bilingual/ESL program focuses on 
increasing students' proficiency in English in a manner that does not devalue 
Choctaw language or culture. It involves formal classroom instruction and parent 
training. A major component involves the training of instructional personnel in 
ESL instructional methods. The means used to evaluate the project was the gap- 
reduction design advocated by G. K. Tallmadge et al. During the evaluation, the 
program served 139 students enrolled in kindergarten through grade 3. All students 
were dominant Choctaw speakers with limited English proficiency. A comparison 
group of 194 non-ESL students in kindergarten through grade 4 was used. Students 
in both groups were administered the California Achievement Test (CAT) in April 
of 1987 and 1 988. The unit of analysis was the standard score for the reading, 
language, and total battery. Results indicate that the students in the program made 
greater gains in all three batteries of the CAT than did non-ESL students. It is 
concluded that the program has been sufficiently effective to recommend its 
adoption by the entire school system. In addition, the gap-reduction method of 
program evaluation has proven to be an efficient and effective method of 
evaluating supplemental educational programs. Nine data tables and five graphs are 
presented. 

Gage, J., & Robson, D. (Oct 1984). Patterns of achievement and self-concept among 
students in a tri-ethnic community. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Northern Rocky Mountain Educational Research Association, Jackson Hole, WY. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED252343) 

Commissioned by the Southern Ute Tribal Council and coordinated by the 
Education Division of the tribe, this study was undertaken to collect and analyze 
data relating to achievement patterns of Native American, Hispanic, and Anglo 
children in the public school system in Ignacio, Colorado. The major objective of 
the study was to determine if differences existed in achievement levels of the three 
ethnic groups in elementary, junior high, and senior high schools and if differences 
were found, which demographic, attitudinal, and cultural variables were associated 
with the differences. A self-inventory was completed by 364 students (primary, 

109; intermediate, 66; secondary, 189). A random sample of 10 Ute, 10 Hispanic, 
and 10 Anglo parents of high school students were interviewed. The basic findings 
of the study revealed that achievement differences did exist between the three 
ethnic groups. These differences were associated with three factors — school 
attendance, self-concept, and parent attitudes towards the school. Eight 
recommendations were presented to the Ute Tribal Council for consideration in 
reference to this study. 



57 



G5 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Greene, R. H., & Kersey, H. A. (1975). Upgrading Indian education: A case study of 
the Seminoles. School Review, 83, 345-61. (EJ1 13653) 

Authors' research indicated that the "equal and alike" approach to education doesn't 
work for the American Indian either. 

Greymorning, S. (1997). Going beyond words: The Arapaho immersion program. In 
J. Reyhner (Ed.), Teaching Indigenous languages (pp. 22-30). Flagstaff, A Z: 
Northern Arizona University. (Also listed as ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED4 15061) 

This paper examines the growth and development of the Arapaho immersion 
program and discusses language revitalization strategies and methods used on the 
Wind River Reservation (Wyoming). Following a community request for an 
Arapaho language and culture program in reservation public schools, a test class of 
kindergarten students received an hour of Arapaho instruction daily for 18 weeks. 
After 12 weeks, 80 percent of students had mastered 162 words and phrases. These 
favorable results plus information from Hawaiian immersion programs led to 
implementation of a half-day immersion kindergarten class in September 1993. A 
belief in the need to increase students' language contact hours led to a preschool 
immersion class; a summer program; and finally, a 6-hour-a-day school immersion 
program. Although children in the expanded school program greatly increased their 
mastery of Arapaho, they did not come close to fluency because they lacked the 
ability to independently use and manipulate new speech forms. In 1996, a trainer 
from the Hawaiian language immersion system was hired to guide and train staff in 
proven immersion techniques, and a second immersion class was begun on another 
part of the reservation. Both classes made astonishing progress, but fluency was 
again elusive. To achieve fluency, children must be systematically exposed to a full 
array of speech forms by a well-trained teacher with a clear understanding of 
language acquisition. Thus, effective teacher training remains a critical issue for 
language immersion programs. Implications of the enormous success of Maori 
immersion efforts are discussed. 

Harrison, B. (1998). Te Wharekura o Rakaumangamanga: The development of an 
Indigenous language immersion school. Bilingual Research Journal, 22(2-4), 297- 
316. (EJ607046) 

Describes development since 1985 of a Maori immersion school for children aged 
5-17. Provides background on Maori and New Zealand history, the Waikato tribe 
and the community, Indigenous language revitalization efforts, and national school 
restructuring that facilitated Maori immersion programs. Discusses the school's 
educational practices, school-community relations, student performance and 
academic persistence, and teacher training. (Contains 30 references.) 

Hartley, E. A., & Johnson, P. (1995). Toward a community-based transition to a 
Yup'ik first language (immersion) program with ESL component. Bilingual 
Research Journal, 1 9(3-4), 571-85. (EJ528256) 

In the small Alaskan village of Manokotak, the community participated in the 

58 



G6 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



school's shift from an "English submersion" program to Yup'ik immersion plus 
ESL. Discusses community involvement and participative planning, first-y^ar 
goals, scheduling of instructional time in each language, staff development, 
materials development, cultural relevance versus competency based education, 
student evaluation, and problems during the change process. 

Holm, A., & Holm, W. (1995). Navajo language education: Retrospect and prospects. 
The Bilingual Research Journal, 19(1), 141-67. (EJ499403) 

Describes the growth and development of bilingual education on the Navajo 
Reservation and resultant outcomes for Navajo students, educators, and 
communities, and demonstrates how learning is mediated by language and culture 
in the Navajo context, as well as the critical conditions needed to sustain genuine 
two-language education. (16 references) 

Hopkins, G., & Bean, T. W. (1999). Vocabulary learning in the verbal-visual word 
association strategy in a Native American community. Journal of Adolescent & 

A dull Literacy, 42(4) 274-8 1 . (EJ575037) 

Describes classroom action research with the verbal-visual word association 
strategy. Explores the strategy with a group of junior high and high school students 
on the Northern Cheyenne Reservation in southeastern Montana. Shares 
interpretative impressions and results of a vocabulary quiz given to the high school 
group. 

Huffman, T., Sill, M. L., & Brokenleg, M. (1986). College achievement among 
Sioux and white South Dakota Students. Journal of American Indian Education, 
25(2), 32-38. (EJ336454) 

Relates several social, cultural, and aspirational factors to achievement measured 
by grade point average among 38 Sioux and 48 White college students. Finds high 
school GPA and parental encouragement most important for White students, 
cultural identity and retention of Native cultural traditions most important for 
Sioux students. 

James, K., Chavez, E., Beauvais, F., Edwards, R., & Oetting, G. (1995). School 
achievement and dropout among Anglo and Indian females and males: A 
comparative examination. American Indian Culture and Research Journal, 79(3), 
181-206. (EJ5 15294) 

Among 1,607 American Indian and Anglo dropouts and currently enrolled middle- 
and high-school students, language difficulties and problems with teachers were 
predictive of academic troubles and dropping out. Success of Indian students was 
related to stronger Anglo cultural identity and better English proficiency (in 
mainstream schools) but was not related to Indian cultural identity. 

Jacob, J. (1976). The effects of individualizing instruction by the use of multi-sensory 
multi-media learning centers in reading and arithmetic achievement of inner-city 
children (Doctoral dissertation, Michigan State University, 1977). Dissertation 
Abstracts International, 37, 5586. 



59 

67 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



NOTE: Also abstracted in ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 155678: 
Reading Instruction: Remedial and compensatory: Abstracts of doctoral 
dissertations published in “Dissertation Abstracts International” March through 
June 1977 (Vol. 37 nos. 9 through 12). 

A study examined the effects of an individualized, diagnostic, prescriptive 
instructional approach on the reading and mathematics achievement of inner-city 
children. Subjects were 211 fifth- and sixth-graders in Benton Harbor, Michigan. 
Experimental groups of students received individualized instruction through 
multisensory, multimedia learning centers and were allowed to progress at their 
own pace. Control groups received conventional instruction. After 6 months, 
students in experimental groups had significantly higher reading scores on the 
California Achievement Test, compared to controls. In addition, individualized 
instruction increased the self-direction and independence of students in the 
experimental group. There were no significant differences in mathematics 
achievement. Teacher training in the individualized instructional approach is 
described. (Contains 34 references.) 

Kamehameha Early Education Program. (1974). Major KEEP findings, 1971-1975. 
Honolulu, Hawaii: Kamehameha Schools. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED 158869) 

This report lists the 34 major research findings from the Kamehameha Early 
Education Program (KEEP) for the years 1971-1975. Each finding is accompanied 
by a listing of KEEP technical reports and working papers, which contain 
information relevant to that finding. Included among areas covered in the findings 
are: (1) student motivation, (2) teacher training, (3) student achievement, (4) 
curriculum, (5) teaching methods, (6) ethnic dialects, (7) family background, and 
(8) information dissemination. 

Kerbo, H. R. (1981). College achievement among Native Americans: A research note. 
Social Forces, 59(4), 1275-80. (EJ245079) 

Data on cultural fectors and academic success ofNative American college students 
suggest that the predictors of grade point average among these students are 
different from predictors for Whites. The best independent predictors for Native 
Americans are degree of identification and sodal integration with Whites. 

Kimble, R. L., & Davison, R. G. (1972), Reading improvement for disadvantaged 
American Indian youth. Journal of Reading, 15(5), 342-46. (EJ052423) 

(Abstract not available in ERIC) 

Kleinfeld, J. (1975). Effective teachers of Eskimo and Indian students. School Review 
83(2), 301-44. (EJ1 13652) 

Author described the problems of Alaskan Natives who confront the "equal and 
alike" classroom teacher and who fail to learn. As well, she considered four 
different types of teachers in the classrooms of Alaska and how only one 
successfully taught her Native students. 

60 



68 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Kleinfeld, J. S. (1979). Eskimo school on the Andreafsky: A study of effective 

bicultural education. Praeger studies in ethnographic perspectives on American 
education. New York: Praeger Publishers. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED201437) 

Written as part of a series of ethnographic studies, this book is a case study of a 
Catholic boarding high school for Alaskan Eskimos from remote villages 
undergoing rapid change. Six chapters appraise the bicultural educational 
principles employed at St. Mary's: (1) a profile of the students as effective 
bicultural people; (2) the relationship between students and staff; (3) educational 
aims and methods used at St. Mary's; (4) values and ideals of the students; (5) 
student selection policies; and (6) the model used at the school for bilingual and 
bicultural education. The study concludes that: St. Mary's is highly effective in 
cross-cultural education and produces graduates with skills and communication 
style needed for access to the opportunities of majority culture; its graduates 
succeed in college much more frequently than comparable Eskimo students, but 
learning skills which enable them to function well in the majority culture does not 
cut them off from the culture of their home villages, where they are noteworthy for 
quiet village leadership. An epilogue discusses problems encountered by the school 
and possible alternatives for its continued existence. Four appendices present 
statistics on characteristics of students, staff, and graduates, and the research 
methods used. 

Kleinfeld, J. S., et al. (1985). Alaska's small rural high schools: Are they working? 
Abridged edition. Fairbanks: University of Alaska, Center for Cross-Cultural 
Studies. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED264989) 

The report describes the educational programs that Alaska's 162 small rural high 
schools offer, identifies educational problems, and examines strategies that districts 
and schools have devised to strengthen these schools. The schools mostly serve 
Eskimos and American Indians, have fewer than 100 students, and are located in 
communities of fewer than 1,000 residents. Information was obtained through 
telephone interviews, mailed surveys, site surveys of 32 randomly selected schools, 
achievement test scores, and in-depth studies by educators. Findings indicate: (1) 
most communities want village high schools as well as boarding school options; (2) 
replacement of boarding schools with village higji schools has resulted in 
dramatically increased graduation rates; (3) high school size does not determine the 
quality of students' educational experiences or achievement on standardized tests; 
and (4) schools that are working well exhibit a strong teacher/community 
partnership, teacher/community agreement on a theme for the educational program, 
an enterprising teaching staff, and a central office that encourages adapting 
schooling to local needs. Successful strategies are described for problems in the 
areas of increasing course and teacher variety, providing vocational education, 
preparing students for college, raising achievement test scores, teaching students 
about the outside world, and helping rural students through the transition to 
adulthood. 



61 



69 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Larimore, C. K. (2000). When worlds collide: Native American students navigating 
dominant culture classrooms. Dissertation Abstracts International, 57(07), 2932A. 
(UMI No. 9979694) 

A group of Native American children in an urban, public elementary school were 
followed across different types of classroom environments, from third to fifth 
grade. Similar to Native students in reservation schools, these children disengaged 
when teachers emphasized verbal, versus visual, instruction; avoided competition 
and public performance, and were uneasy about demonstrating new skills without 
adequate practice. However, these children tended to adapt more readily, take more 
risks, and perform new skills more willingly in classrooms where teachers used 
cooperative learning practices. Surprisingly, the influence of a competitive or 
cooperative classroom could be mitigated by student actions. Native students with 
willing collaborators could find ways to learn cooperatively even in competitive 
classrooms. On the other hand, a preponderance of highly competitive non-Native 
students could interfere with practices in a cooperative classroom and thus impede 
Native students’ progress. Native parents influenced their children’s adaptation to 
school through the relative value they placed on education versus becoming a good 
person. 

Leap, W. L. (1991). Pathways and barriers to Indian language literacy-building on the 
Northern Ute reservation. Anthropology and Education, 22(1), 21-41. (EJ426523) 
Describes recent efforts by members of the Ute tribe (northeastern Utah) to 
introduce a written form of the Ute language. Discusses several reasons for the 
resistance to Ute literacy among many members of the tribe and the steps that have 
been taken in response to these concerns. 

Leveque, D. M. (1994). Cultural and parental influences on achievement among 
Native American students in Barstow unified school district. Paper presented at the 
National Meeting of the Comparative and International Educational Society, San 
Diego, CA. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED382416) 

The academic achievement of Native American students in the United States has 
consistently been the lowest in the nation. This study examined the school 
performance, involvement of Native parents in the school life of their children, and 
assimilation patterns of a specific group of Native Americans who have lived in 
Barstow, California, for at least three generations. The case study approach used 
participant observation, ethnographic interview, and documentary analysis. 
Analysis of norm-referenced test data indicated that Native American students (K- 
12) in Barstow Unified School District (BUSD) scored as well as, or better than, 
the BUSD mean percentile scores for the total student population and the 
Caucasian subpopulation in all areas except second-grade reading in 1992 and 
third-grade reading in 1993. Between 1991 and 1993, the dropout rate for Native 
American students was only 10 percent, and the honor roll rate was 30 percent. At 
least 36 percent of Native students who attended BUSD between 1988 and 1993 
continued their education past high school. The strongest link between educational 

62 



70 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



opportunities and Native student achievement was found in the involvement of 
parents in the design and implementation of programs. The Native American 
families in Barstow are the descendants of Navajo and Pueblo railroad workers 
who chose to come to Barstow (thus assuming "immigrant” characteristics). Full 
assimilation into the majority culture occurred over three generations. Thus, the 
strongest elements contributing to Native student achievement were parental 
involvement and family acculturation patterns. The findings suggest that Ogbu's 
categories of immigrant and nonimmigrant minorities are not static, and that 
nonimmigrant minorities may not be bound to their caste like status. 

Levin, M., Moss, M, Swartz, J., Khan, S, & Tarr, H. (1997). National evaluation 
of the Even Start Family Literacy Program. Report on Even Start Projects for 
Indian tribes and tribal organizations. Bethesda, MD: Abt Associates, 

Incorporated; Fu Associates, Ltd. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 

ED415084) 

The tribal Even Start program is one of the set-aside components of the U.S. 

Department of Education's Even Start Family Literacy Program. Even Start 
combines adult literacy, early childhood education, and parenting education 
services for parents eligible for adult education and their children from birth to age 
7. In 1994-95, nine Indian tribes and tribal organizations received direct federal 
grants to administer Even Start Projects. This report examines three of the projects: 
those administered by the Makah Tribe (Washington), the Cherokee Nation 
(Oklahoma), and the Pascua Yaqui Tribe (Arizona). The following is covered for 
each project: community characteristics, recruitment of families, program staff, 
content and delivery of Even Start services, coordination of service components, 
and evaluation and the Even Start Information System (ESIS). The three projects 
each serve 20-27 families in primarily rural areas. Many core services are delivered 
during home visits. This may be the preferred mode of delivery for tribal projects, 
due to expansive catchment areas and lack of public transportation, and because 
participants and staff are often previously acquainted. Major issues and challenges 
confronting tribal projects are related to preserving tribal culture, encouraging 
parent involvement, poverty, unemployment, lack of facilities, and lack of 
culturally relevant materials. Appendix includes topic and observation guides for 
site visits. 

Lin, R. (1990). Perception of family background and personal characteristics among 

Indian college students. Journal of American Indian Education, 29(3), 19-28. (EJ413874) 
Among 87 American Indian students at a Montana college, those from traditional 
families were more task and achievement oriented, had higher grade point 
averages, and spent more time doing homework. Those from modem families cared 
more about professors' opinions and skipped more classes. Contains the survey 
questionnaire. 

Lipka, J., & McCarty, T. L. (1994). Changing the culture of schooling: Navajo and 
Yup’ik cases. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 25(3), 266-84. 

63 



71 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



This article presents two cases in which Indigenous teacher groups are 
transforming the culture of schooling. Data are drawn from over a decade of 
ethnographic and action-oriented research at Rough Rock Demonstration School, 
on the Navajo Nation in northeastern Arizona, and in 10 Yup'ik community schools 
in southwestern Alaska. By coming together in Indigenous teacher study groups, 
Navajo and Yup'ik teachers and elders are finding creative ways to use their 
culture, knowledge, and language in the construction of curriculum and pedagogy. 
These teacher groups have created zones of safety in which resistance to 
conventional practices can be expressed and innovative approaches to schooling 
investigated and practiced. The work of these teacher groups has theoretical 
implications for community-based teacher preparation. Factors influencing 
development of these groups and their ability to effect change are discussed, along 
with the challenges of transferring their cultural creations to the wider institutions 
of schooling. (Contains 32 references.) 

Little Soldier, L. (1988). Sociocultural context and language learning of Native 
American pupils. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National 
Association for Bilingual Education, Houston, TX. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED295503) 

A study examined the quantity and quality of language produced by kindergarten 
and early primary Native American pupils in relation to selected factors in the 
classroom context in which the language was produced. Observations of about 50 
classrooms were conducted in schools serving predominantly Native American 
pupils on and off reservations in New Mexico. A rating sheet was used to evaluate 
the sociocultural environment of the classrooms. Results showed that informal 
classroom organization with flexible arrangement of furniture and emphasis on 
group work enhanced language learning. Other factors relating positively to 
language learning were situations in which the locus of control was shared by 
teachers and pupils, where there was an emphasis on cooperative learning and 
dialogue patterns involving pupils to a great degree, and in which culturally 
relevant materials or activities were used. 

Macias, J. (1987). The hidden curriculum of Papago teachers: American Indian 

strategies for mitigating cultural discontinuity in early schooling. In G. Spindler & 
L. Spindler (Eds.), An interpretive ethnography of education: At home and abroad 
(pp. 363-80). Hillsdale; NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

This chapter summarizes the major findings of an ethnographic case study of 
Papago children in a tribal Head Start program on the Papago Reservation 
(Arizona). For many children of ethnic minority origin, the transition from home to 
school is a critical period of cultural discontinuity. The two-year study, which 
included 9 months of intensive field work at the Papago Early Childhood Head 
Start Program (PECHS), examined some cultural discontinuities experienced by 
Papago preschool children and the responses of their Papago teachers in helping 
them cope with the contradictions of their first schooling experience. PECHS was 

64 



72 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



intentionally preparing preschool children to enter a mainstream school system. 
Three main areas of cultural discontinuity were identified: the school's 
encouragement of children’s verbal behaviors; increased interference with 
children's autonomy through imposition of new behavioral rules and norms; and 
introduction to mainstream ways of life through various new experiences. At 
PECHS, Papago teachers developed their own Papago "hidden curriculum" geared 
to reduce the negative impact of discontinuity. These teachers incorporated Papago 
experiences, values, and ways of relating into discontinuous activities and 
experiences and thereby increased student engagement, compliance, and later 
success in school. 

Malmherg, S. R. (1983). A new beginning: A case study of the establishment of a 
rural community-based alternative high school, emphasizing basic academic skills, 
with a high Native American minority student population, I. An occasional paper 
series. Sault Sainte Marie Public Schools, Michigan. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED231600) 

The case study of the establishment of the rural community-based Sault Ste. Marie 
Area Public Schools' Alternative High School, emphasizing basic academic skills, 
and with a high Native American minority student population (16 years or older), 
shows that alienated youths, when given the opportunity and support, tend to show 
significant growth in academics and in social rehabilitation. Chapter I discusses 
demographics of the service area, local efforts to produce change, formation of the 
Neighborhood Education Center, selection of a program site, and selection and 
referral. Chapter II contains the evaluation of the Alternative High School Program 
(1974-75): description of program objectives and evaluation criteria; and selection 
of evaluation models for program evaluation, needs assessment, program planning, 
and formative and summative evaluation. Chapter III examines various program 
results, i.e., services provided, recognition and exposure, student enrollment and 
disposition data, performance objective data, and conclusions and 
recommendations. The last chapter looks at the Alternative High School as a 
vehicle for educational and social change: factors influencing replication 
(individualized instruction, reward systems); conducive physical and human factors 
(low student-adult ratio, caring teachers, affective education, strong administrator); 
student and parent involvement in decision making; vocationally oriented 
components, etc. Appendices list agencies and individuals who contributed to the 
program and a list of topics covered by "survival" classes; and data on students, 
staff, program costs, and test results. 

Markowitz, A., & Haley, F. (1973). A bilingual Navajo curriculum project Profiles 
of promise 16. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED095073) 

Ninety-six percent of the students who enter first grade in the San Juan School 
District, Blanding, Utah, cannot speak or understand English. They are Navajo and 
attend school on the Navajo reservation. A unique bilingual Navajo curriculum 
project has been developed to provide learning materials in the Navajo language to 

65 



73 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



enable the child to learn when he first enters school, regardless of the language he 
speaks. Using filmstrips, cassette recordings, slides, 16 mm films, book 
illustrations, and file printed word, Ihe project translates the learning materials 
found in the classroom into the Navajo language. Major objectives of the San Juan 
Educational Program are to provide instruction in the language the child 
understands best so that he does not become retarded in the academic areas while 
learning the common instructional language; build a positive self image of all 
children; and develop closer communication and understanding between parents 
and teachers. Evaluation shows that the Navajo children in the program have 
improved in their reading and in their attitudes toward school. 

Martens, B. A. (1992). The implementation of a dropout prevention program for at- 
risk secondary students (at risk). Dissertations Abstracts International, 55(08), 
2759A. (UMI No. 9237374). 

The impact of a 14-week dropout prevention program was assessed for 16 Native 
American and 7 Anglo American students in grades 9-11. All 23 students were 
experiencing academic difficulties, and most had excessive absences, had 
behavioral problems, and came from single-parent homes. The students received 
tutoring in current coursework and participated in a weekly group counseling 
session. Counseling topics included social relationships, study skills, careers, 
motivation, importance of education, self-esteem, peer pressure, decision making, 
and extracurricular activities. Parent involvement was addressed through increased 
communication between school and home. After 14 weeks, the group showed a 
significant decrease in absences and a significant increase in grade point average. 
Academic self-concept improved significantly, but four other affective areas were 
unchanged. 

Mason, N. (1998). Project research on the achievement of Aboriginal students in 
reserve schools: A success or disappointment. Unpublished Master's Thesis, 
Brandon University, Manitoba, Canada. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED427901) 

With the move to self-governance and the dismantling of Indian and Northern 
Affairs Canada (INAC), there is a need to know if Aboriginal education systems 
are providing superior, adequate, marginal, or unsatisfactory standards of education 
for their students. A study of 165 First Nations students attending aK-10 First 
Nations school sought to determine if Aboriginal students were more successful in 
a locally controlled reserve school, as opposed to a federal school. A student survey 
examined attitudes toward school, values, and sources of enjoyment. Measures of 
success at the school, which had come under First Nations control 3 years 
previously, included academic testing (CTBS), attendance, student suspensions and 
expulsions, age-grade deceleration, dropout rates, and graduation. Attendance 
improved significantly under Native control, compared to under INAC contrd. 
Student enrollment increased steadily from 1990 to 1997, an average of 25 students 
per year. Age-grade deceleration was reduced by 20.8 percent, primarily in the K-8 

66 



74 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



grade levels. Students were staying in school, and 34 older students who had been 
out of school for some time, returned to finish. The paper includes 25 
recommendations for increased school success, and suggestions for further 
research. (Contains 38 references and 34 data tables.) 

McBeath, G. A., McDiarmid, B., & Shepro, C. E. (1982). Achievement and school 
effectiveness: Three case studies. A report to the Alaska department of education. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED233840) 

Case studies of high student achievement levels and school effectiveness from 
three rural Alaska Native schools, all offering some bilingual orbicultural classes, 
examine curriculum and school instructional practices, school social systems, 
student outcomes, aspects of school governance, and school-community relations. 
Chaputnguak High School, in the Yupik Eskimo village of Chefomak, enrolls 29 
students in individualized, self-paced mastery programs and has the region's 
highest graduation requirements; school-community relations are excellent, 
students have positive attitudes and a sense of "ownership," and one-third to one- 
half of seniors enter college. Metlakatla elementary/secondary school, in a 
Tsimshian Indian village, has a history of local control and emphasizes teaching 
basics; student academic achievement, measured on standardized tests, is very 
good compared to other rural small schools in Alaska, but some questions exist 
about school effectiveness in meeting community needs. The 22 students (K-8) 
who attend Tanacross school are largely Athabaskan Indians; the school exists 
because parents felt their children were not well served by being bused to school in 
another community, and took legal action to have their own school, which opened 
in 1980; school staff is exceptional, parents are satisfied, and student attitudes and 
test scores are excellent. 

McCarty, T. L., Wallace, S., Lynch, R. H., & Benally, A. (1991). Classroom inquiry 
and Navajo learning styles: A call for reassessment. Anthropology & Education 
Quarterly, 22(1), 42-59. (EJ426524) 

Describes experimental K-9 bilingual-bicultural curriculum in Navajo studies 
emphasizing open-ended questioning, inductive/analytical reasoning, and student 
verbalization in both small and large groups, and discusses reasons why it has been 
well received by teachers and students. Findings challenge conventional view that 
these students are nonanalytical, nonverbal learners. Suggests educational 
application of such "learning styles" can peipetuate patterns of learned dependence. 

Mclnerney, D. M., & Mclnerney, V. (2000). A longitudinal qualitative study of 
school motivation and achievement. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
American Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED441815) 

The goals and values students hold, how these are related to school motivation and 
achievement, and how these goals develop and change over a period of years in the 
context of cultural background, family, society, and school was studied with Native 
American and Anglo American students from a middle and high school in Phoenix, 



n ~ 

t O 



67 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Arizona. Participants were selected for this longitudinal study when they were in 
grades 7 and 8, and it was intended that they would be interviewed annually until 
they finished high school. Over 3 years, 48 first interviews, 26-second interviews, 
and 1 1 third interviews were conducted. The analyses of these interviews indicate 
that for Native American and Anglo American students alike, there are four needs 
that motivate them to strive for school success: (1) seeking excellence in one’s 
work; (2) self-esteem; (3) affiliation; and (4) social concern. A number of the 
values and needs emphasized in the school setting, such as competition, group 
leadership, recognition, and rewards, are perceived to be relatively unimportant by 
these students. Many students did not have a clearly articulated sense of purpose 
for their schooling, and this lack should be addressed. (Contains 2 tables and 42 
references.) 

Mclnerney, D. M., Roche, L. A. Mclnereney, V., & Marsh, H. W. (1997). Cultural 
perspectives on school motivation: The relevance and application of goal theory. 
American Educational Research Journal, 34{ 1), 207-36. (EJ545456) 

Whether goals held by students from diverse cultural backgrounds differ and the 
relationship of these goals to school motivation and achievement were studied with 
2,156 Australian (Anglo, immigrant, and Aboriginal), 529 Navajo, and 198 
Canadian Montagnais Betsiamite Indian secondary school students. Cross cultural 
and educational implications are discussed. 

Mclnerney, D. M., Mclnerney, V., Ardington, A., & De Rachewiltz, C. (March 
1997). School success in cultural context: Conversations at Window Rock. 
Preliminary Report. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American 
Educational Research Association, Chicago, IL. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED407202) 

The goal theory of achievement motivation maintains that the goals stressed by 
schools influence children's self-efficacy and willingness to try hard. This paper 
examines the applicability of goal theory to a Navajo school and community and 
widens the focus to encompass a range of potential culturally relevant goals. 
Interviews were conducted at Window Rock High School on the Navajo 
Reservation (Arizona) with 20 students in grades 8- 12, 10 Navajo community 
members, and 9 Navajo teachers. In general, interviewees believed that school- 
based education is important in that it assists students to develop self-sufficiency 
and competitive skills that will ultimately benefit the community. However, 
competitiveness is not regarded as merely a desire to win at all costs; it is tempered 
by a strong sense of affiliation to the Navajo group in that individual achievement 
is not sought at the expense of the community. Student motivation to do well at 
school was strongly linked with social concern and affiliation. Overwhelmingly, 
parents and extended family were the prime referent groups in influencing student 
progress at school. A generally supportive home environment was seen as essential 
for educational success. The most frequently cited inhibitors of school motivation 
were family substance abuse, gang behavior, student substance abuse, and 

68 



76 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



pregnancy. Respondents scrutinized the Inventory of School Motivation, agreed 
that all items and scales were relevant to the Navajo educational context, but 
offered differing Navajo perspectives on the items measuring competitiveness and 
group leadership. The results suggest that Navajo and Western cultures share many 
similar values related to education. Contains 25 references and interview excerpts. 

Mclnerney, D. M., & Swisher, K. G. (1995). Exploring Navajo motivation in school 
settings. Journal of American Indian Education, 34(3), 28-51. (EJ5 18695) 

Over 500 Navajo high school students completed the Inventory of School 
Motivation, based on the personal investment model of motivation. Results suggest 
that the model's most salient elements for this group were sense-of-self components 
and one task component, striving for excellence. Combinations of variables were 
useful in predicting student performance and attitudes. Contains 66 references. 

McLaughlin, D. (1992). When literacy empowers: Navajo language in print. 
Albuquerque: University of New Mexico Press. 

This book presents an ethnographic study of literacy practices and beliefs about 
Navajo and English usage in one Navajo community. Throughout the book, 
Spolsky's structuralist notion of "special diglossia" on the Navajo 
Reservation — Navajo for most oral communication and English for nearly all 
written purposes — is contrasted with Street's "ideological model" of literacy, which 
relates literacy functions and beliefs to the requirements of local institutions and 
ideologies as they reflect particular requirements of the more powerful mainstream 
society. Chapter 1 reviews traditions of sociolinguistic analysis and previous 
research on Navajo and English usage. Chapter 2 provides a historical background 
and description of the community from the different perspectives of major actors in 
local institutional settings: trading post, chapterhouse (center of local tribal 
government), mission church, and community school. This chapter also details the 
history and development of the school's bilingual education program. Chapter 3 
describes ways that the trading post and chapteriiouse “script” uses for English 
print, while Chapter 4 describes uses for written English and Navajo scripted by the 
community school and church. The concluding chapter presents survey data on the 
community's literacy-related practices and beliefs and discusses study implications 
in terms of pedagogical practice in Navajo schools and theoretical notions about 
the relationship between literacy and society. Appendices describe a demonstration 
project in applied literacy and include survey questionnaires in English and Navajo. 
(Includes chapter notes, an extensive bibliography, and an index.) 

McLaughlin, T. F., W illiams, R. L., Cady, M., & Bement, G. (1982). Reading 
achievement in the northern Cheyenne behavior analysis model of follow through. 
Reading Improvement, 19(2), 111-13. (EJ266955) 

Reports on a study that evaluated the effectiveness of Project Follow Through 
programs on the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation. Reveals continued 
improvement in reading achievement scores at all grade levels studied. 



69 



77 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Medearis, L. C. (1996). Young Seminoles and Natural Math. The Journal of 
Educational Issues of Language Minority Students, 16. Special Issue: Parent 
Involvement. 

A two-year research project with the children and families of the Oklahoma 
Seminole Nation Head Start aimed to encourage emerging math literacy in 
preschool children. Standards-based packets of simple ideas and easy at-home 
activities were distributed to families on a monthly basis, with family training 
provided at the preschool and through home visits. Preschool students exposed to 
the program scored higher on kindergarten screening tests than students in prior 
years, and their older siblings (who had also participated) showed improvements in 
their mathematical skills. The researcher describes experiences and mistakes made 
in attempting to develop culturally relevant materials. 

Nelson, S., & Clark, R. (1977). Pierce County Indian education program, educational 
service district #121, Tacoma, Washington. 1976-77 Final Evaluation Report. 
Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory, Office of Research and 
Evaluation Services. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 145997) 
Comparing program objectives with program outcomes, 4 program components 
targeted at 1,100 American Indian students in 9 school districts in Pierce County, 
Washington were evaluated. Program objectives operationalized by an 1 1-member 
staff including 9 specialists and 1 coordinator were to develop: (1) basic skills via 
tutoring services for students identified by testing as needing remedial classes; (2) 
cultural knowledge via the collection and/or publication of tribal bibliographies, 
books, films, records, legends, tribal artifacts, etc.; (3) career counseling by 
surveying Indian students' interests and then distributing the results to guidance 
counselors in the high schools; (4) court liaison activities to provide linkage 
between the Pierce County Juvenile Court and the Indian home. Program 
evaluation indicated: substantial (academic improvement by 1/10 of 1 grade for 
every 20 days) improvement in the basic skills component, though it was suggested 
that standardization of the assessment instruments across districts would further 
analysis; general success in providing a variety of cultural experiences to the 
majority of students in the target group, though two districts received very few 
services; little tangible evidence of success in the career counseling component, but 
there appeared to be a high level of activity in this component which may eventuate 
in more successful post-high school experiences; the Coordinator and the 
specialists were actively involved in court liaison activities but that these services 
would be terminated due to time and leg^l issues. 

Omizo, M. M., & Omizo, S. A. (1989). Art activities to improve self-esteem among 
Native Hawaiian children. Journal of Humanistic Education and Development, 
27(4), 167-76. (EJ398687) 

Investigated effects of group counseling using art activities in improving self- 
esteem among Hawaiian elementary children (N=50). Found subjects who 
participated in counseling had higher Social Peer-Related and Academics/School- 

70 



78 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Related Self-Esteem scores than children who did not participate. 

Omizo, M. M., Omizo, S. A., & Kitaoka, S. K. (1998). Guided affective and 
cognitive imagery to enhance self-esteem among Hawaiian children. Journal of 
Multicultural Counseling and Development, 26(1), 52-62. (EJ567219) 

Investigates the efficacy of guided affective and cognitive imagery in enhancing 
self-esteem among children of Hawaiian ancestry. Children (N=60) who 
participated in 10 weekly group sessions had significantly higher post-test scores 
on two self-esteem measures when compared to the control group. 

Ovando, C. J. (1994). Changes in school and community attitudes in an Athabaskan 
village. Peabody Journal of Education, 69(2), 43-59. (EJ490166) 

Reports a study that examined the attitudes of students, parents, and teachers 
toward school and community issues in Nulato, a remote Athapaskan village, 
noting changes in attitude between 1983 and 1992. Results suggested the 
community valued the maintenance of cultural heritage, and cultural and language 
restoration were becoming high priorities in 1993. (EJ490166) 

Prucha, F. P. (Ed.) (2000). Documents of United States Indian Policy. Third Edition. 
Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press. 

The 238 documents printed in this volume illustrate the history of the United States 
government and the American Indians from the founding of the nation to the end of 
the 20th century. They are a collection of official and quasi-official records that 
marked significant formulations of public policy. The documents, presented in full 
text or extracts, include federal legislation, court decisions, treaties, and 
administrative actions. Documents related to education include the Civilization 
Fund Act, 1819; Indian Commissioner statements on civilizing the Indians and on 
cooperating with Religious Societies, 1881-82; Use of English in Indian Schools, 
1887; Supplemental Report on Indian Education, 1889; Inculcation of Patriotism in 
Indian Schools, 1889; Indian School Superintendents as Indian Agents, 1893; 

Indian Commissioner Leupp on Reservation Schools, 1907; Meriam report, 1928; 
Report on Indian Education, 1969; Indian Education Act, 1972; Comprehensive 
Employment and Training Act, 1973; Student Rights and Due Process Procedures, 
1974; Indian Self-Determination and Education Assistance Act, 1975; Tribally 
Controlled Community College Assistance Act, 1978; Education Amendments Act 
of 1978, Title XI: Indian Education; Indian Child Welfare Act, 1978; Report on 
BIA Education, 1988; Tribally Controlled Schools Act of 1988; National Museum 
of the American Indian Act, 1989; American Indian and Alaska Native Education, 
Executive Order 13096, 1998; and various treaties. (Contains an index, a selected 
bibliography, and a list of federally recognized Indian tribes as of March 2000.) 

Rindone, P. (1988). Factors affecting achievement motivation and academic 

achievement of Native American students. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting 
of the American Educational Research Association, New Orleans, LA. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED302370) 

71 



79 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



This study examined the backgrounds of Navajo college graduates in order to 
identify factors contributing to Native Americans' academic motivation. A 
questionnaire mailed to 200 randomly selected Navajo college graduates 
investigated family characteristics, educational experience, socioeconomic status, 
language use, and demographic data. Among the respondents were 80 women and 
27 men with a mean age of 33; 87% had been bom on the reservation. Most 
respondents came from families that spoke Navajo at home and practiced the 
Navajo Way. More than half the parents completed less than 6 years of schooling, 
and most annual family incomes were less than $ 10,000. About half of respondents 
spoke no English at school entry, and most attended schools that taught primarily 
in English. Respondents indicated that their own motivation and encouragement 
from family were the most important factors contributing to their high educational 
attainment. About half said that a teacher had encouraged them to succeed in 
school. The paper contends that Native Americans and other minority groups have 
aspired to high academic achievement but have not until recently had the 
opportunity to act on those aspirations. Whereas other studies have correlated 
achievement and socioeconomic status, the present study suggests that a stable 
family life with traditional values may be a more important influence in the 
achievement of Navajo students. This study contains 19 references. 

Rohner, R P. (1965). Factors influencing the academic performance of Kwakiutl 
children in Canada. Comparative Education Review, 9(3), 331-40. 

Social and cultural factors affecting the academic performance of Kwakiutl 
children were studied in the isolated Kwakiutl village on Gilford Island, British 
Columbia. Poor educational achievement of Kwakiutl children was indicated by 
higher median age per grade than is characteristic of other provincial schools and 
poor performance on two intelligence tests. Two sets of factors contribute to this 
situation: students' cultural background, which is inconsistent with school 
assumptions and demands, and teachers' attitudes toward and relationships with the 
community. Sociocultural conflicts include the permissive, informally structured, 
bilingual environment of the home versus the authoritarian, formally structured, 
English-only environment of the school; experiential learning in the community 
based on observation and manipulation versus language-based learning in school; 
and values associated with time, independence, compliance, and aggression. 
Repeated failures or bad experiences in school cause students to approach school 
with anxiety or distaste and drop out at the minimum age. In addition, school is not 
seen as contributing anything important to students' present or future lives. 
Teachers themselves have a profound influence on the progress of Indian children. 
Teachers of Kwakiutl children have been inconsistent in their demands and 
expectations, have a high rate of turnover, and rarely have close personal contacts 
with the community. Finally, large classes containing many grades managed by a 
single teacher create problems for both pupils and teachers. 

Rosier, P., & Farella, M. 1976). Bilingual education at Rock Point — Some early 

72 



80 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



results. TESOL Quarterly, 10( 4), 379-88. (EJ151531) 

This article describes the English-Navajo bilingual education program at Rock 
Point, Arizona, and reports on the results of various reading achievement tests 
illustrating that learning to read in one’s mother tongue will result in better reading 
skills, and will improve second language reading skills. 

Rosier, P., & Holm, W. (1980). The Rock Point experience: A longitudinal study of a 
Navajo school program (SaadNaaki Bee Na'nitin). Bilingual education series 8, 
papers in applied linguistics. Washington DC: Center for Applied Linguistics. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 195363) 

Conducted from 1975 to 1977, this reading achievement study examined the effects 
of initial literacy in Navajo on later reading in English and the effects of initial 
arithmetic instruction in Navajo on later arithmetic instruction in English by 
comparing two groups of Navajo students, both of whom began school essentially 
monolingual in Navajo. The bilingual group consisted of students from Rock Point 
Community School who had first been taught to read in Navajo and then, at the 
second grade level, had also been taught to read in English. The second group 
consisted of students from a selected sample of BIA schools who had been taught 
to read in English only in English as a Foreign Language (EFL) direct method 
programs. The study utilized existing programs in carefully selected schools. 
Students who had received bilingual instruction scored higher on standardized 
achievement tests than did students at comparable schools who had received 
English-language-only instruction and better than earlier Rock Point students who 
had received English-language-only instruction. Also, the bilingual students who 
were taught arithmetic in Navajo and English until the end of the second grade had 
significantly higher mean scores on the Total Arithmetic subtests than did the EFL 
direct method group at grades above the fourth. The major portion of the 
monograph consists of Appendix A, which describes other related studies and 
Appendix B, which details the Rock Point Study's methodology, findings of the 
study, and a statistical analysis. 

Rubie, C. (1999). Kia Kaha: Improving classroom performance through developing 
cultural awareness. Paper presented at the Joint Conference of the Australian 
Association for Research in Education and the New Zealand Association for 
Research in Education, Melbourne, Australia. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED441651) 

A study of 24 Maori children in grades 3-6 who were invited to perform at a 
children's festival in Turkey and two control groups (control 1, n=24; control 2, 
n-23) of Maori children who did not participate in the festival examined the effect 
of an intense cultural program on children's self-esteem, locus of control, and 
academic performance. Literature related to adventure programs and developing 
ethnic identity was drawn upon extensively in structuring the Maori cultural 
training program. The study group and two control groups were pre-tested on a 
self-esteem scale, a locus of control scale, and a range of academic measures. Post- 



73 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



testing was completed one year later. A subgroup of the Maori children, their 
caregivers, and teachers was also interviewed regarding their experience of the 
program. The standardized testing showed that children in the Maori Culture Group 
made significant positive changes in self-esteem and locus of control, changes not 
matched in the control groups. Both parents and teachers noted developments in the 
social skills, confidence, and social maturity of the Maori children. Although the 
group activities were not theoretically related to the academic activities assessed by 
the standardized tests, a facilitative effect on academic achievement was suggested. 
Moreover, both the results of testing and the interviews with the Maori children, 
their caregivers, and teachers suggested positive developments in these children's 
academic performance, a more positive attitude toward school, improved 
organizational skills, and more time spent on their homework. (Contains 37 
references and 6 tables.) 

Rudin, C. (1989). Omaha language preservation in the Macy, Nebraska Public 
School Washington, DC: National Science Foundation. Paper presented at the 
Meeting of the Mid -America Linguistics Conference, Cedar Falls, IA. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED347785) 

A Native language renewal program at the Macy, Nebraska Public School is 
described that is designed to preserve Omaha, a Native American Indian language 
that is only a generation away from extinction. At the time of this research, only 
about 100 fluent Omaha speakers lived on the Omaha Reservation in Nebraska. 

The language and culture program, instituted in 1970, has employed various 
instruction techniques and methodologies, including immersion, memorization of 
words and phrases, and publication of student-authored stories in English and 
Omaha. The program has suffered from a lack of consistency; frequent changes in 
funding, personnel, and curriculum; and a lack of attention to syntax, morphology, 
and conversational competence. Although the program has not been successful in 
preserving Omaha as a living spoken language, it has helped to improve tribal 
solidarity and pride. Nearly every child knows at least some Omaha words and 
phrases, and the classes have provided satisfaction and a sense of pride for children 
and elders. In addition, many teachers at the school believe that the program has 
led to better attitudes and academic performance for at least some students. The 
program may enhance Omaha cultural survival and enrich the educational 
experience of the children. 

Sears, N. C., & Medearis, L. (1992). Natural Math: A progress report on 

implementation of a family involvement project for early childhood mathematics 
among children of the Oklahoma Seminole head start and Boley head start . Paper 
presented at the Meeting of the Rocky Mountain Research Association, Stillwater, 
Oklahoma. Oklahoma State Regents for Higher Education. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED352172) 

The Natural Math project was undertaken to encourage parents of Native American 
and Black preschool and kindergarten children to engage in math activities and 

74 



82 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



games at home. Natural Math also attempted to integrate Seminole culture into 
math materials. The project originally included only Seminole preschool and 
kindergarten children. Later, Bo ley school, located in a rural Black community, 
petitioned for inclusion. Natural Math activities included: (1) the provision of start- 
up supplies and other materials to the children and their families; (2) an initial 
meeting to explain the project and the proper use of the materials; (3) a portable 
computer lab; (4) a math fair; and (5) the distribution of materials for the summer. 
After their participation in the project, former Head Start children were tested for 
verbal, math, and social skills, and parents were surveyed. Participating students 
had higher raw scores than the students of the previous year. At Boley School, 
Natural Math materials were introduced to the children before they were given to 
parents, with several advantages resulting. An extensive literature review covers 
adult literacy and communication among Native Americans; a Native American 
perspective of giftedness; the role of culture in education; demographic and 
academic achievement data for six tribes; and Native American early childhood 
education and Head Start programs. A 36-item bibliography is included. 

Silverman, R. J., & Deni me rt, W. G., Jr. (1986). Characteristics of successful Native 
leaders. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED269208) 

Characteristics were profiled for 40 southeast Alaskan Haida, Tlingit, and 
Tsimshian tribal members in positions of responsibility in business, government, or 
a profession. Respondents had found school easy, did well, liked school, and 
participated in school-related activities. Positive influence and encouragement of 
family members, especially mothers, were important success factors. Families 
viewed school as important and expected children to do well. Over half the 
respondents indicated teachers as a key influence outside the immediate family, 
with advice, push to action, and role model the most frequent forms of 
encouragement. Positive learning experiences outside of school were important, 
especially experiences involving social skills. Family socioeconomic level had a 
positive effect on future success. Family members of 80% of respondents were 
clan, church, or community leaders or were recognized for some skill. 
Establishment of goals was important to success, with deciding to go to college the 
most common goal. 'Making a contribution to society" and "being at peace with 
oneself' were the most used definitions of success. Respondents felt they had had 
many opportunities to succeed, but had encountered barriers of racism and lack of 
money. Applications to educational situations are suggested. Questionnaire, 
tabulated responses, and respondents' comments form the appendix. 

Slaughter, H. B., & Lai, M. (1994). Indigenous language immersion as an alternative 
form of schooling for children of Hawaiian ancestry: Lessons from a six-year 
study. Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the American Educational 
Research Association, New Orleans, LA. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED375637) 

The Hawaiian Language Immersion program (HLI) is described and evaluated. 

75 



83 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



HU began in 1987 with two small classes on two islands and within 6 years had 
grown, in response to parent interest, to serve 621 students in grades K-7 in 6 
schools on 5 islands. Participating students are taught entirely in Hawaiian until 
grade 5; in grades 5 and 6 one hour a day of instruction is in English, and 
immersion may continue into grade 7. The report contains an assessment of the 
program based on the status of the first sixth-grade cohort of participating students. 
Data used include: qualitative reading assessment in Hawaiian and English; 
reading, writing, and mathematics achievement data, tested in English; 
mathematics achievement, tested in Hawaiian; longitudinal data; comparison of 
participant and non-participant attitudes; and student, parent, and teacher interview 
data. An introductory section outlines positive and negative implementation factors 
influencing the first cohort, then results from the analyses listed above are 
summarized. Recommendations include: assurance of adequate curriculum 
materials in the case of program expansion; reconsideration of the policy of 
teaching English language arts in Hawaiian; further consideration of participant 
interaction with non-participating students; continued support for the successful 
programs; better planning for students with special needs. 

Smith, D. C., Leake, D. W., & Kamekona, N. (1998). Effects of a culturally 
competent school-based intervention for at-risk Hawaiian students. Pacific 
Educational Research Journal, 9(1), 3-22. (EJ592505) 

Studied the effects of an intervention designed to foster emotional, academic, and 
interpersonal skills on 22 elementary school students at risk of emotional and 
behavioral disorders. The intervention, which was designed to be culturally 
competent, was associated with decreased clinical symptoms and improved 
academic and behavioral performance. 

Stairs, A. (1987). Evaluating the role of first language in Native education: 

developmental results in a Canadian Inuit setting. Paper presented at the Annual 
Meeting of the American Educational Research Association, Washington, DC. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED283394) 

A study of language learning in Arctic Quebec examines relationships between 
early Inuktitut competence and later learning of English as a second language, 
general and local characteristics of Native language competence, and early 
Inuktitut instruction and later competence. It also looks at the reliability of Native 
educators’ assessment of language competence and the identification of features of 
Inuktitut competence for use in improving Native language instruction. Participants 
in both phases of the study numbered approximately 90 Inuit children. As students 
in grades 3 and 4 they provided Inuktitut writing samples that were compared with 
English samples written a year later. Each group of samples was organized by 
knowledgeable raters into "strong," "average," and "weak" categories. In general, it 
was found that: (1) the Native language situation in the region is not homogeneous, 
with settlement groups varying in both proficiency and style of Inuktitut; (2) a 
nonlinear relationship exists between fluency and complexity in judgments of 

76 



84 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Inuktitut competence, and apparently in Inuktitut development; and (3) a strong 
correlation exists between early Inuktitut proficiency and later English proficiency, 
both individually and within settlements. However, facts and policy resulting from 
such research should be tempered with consideration for the community's linguistic 
and social values. 

Stiles, D. B. (1997). Four successful Indigenous language programs. In J. Reyhner 
(Ed.), Teaching Indigenous languages. Flagstaff, AZ: Northern Arizona University 
Press. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED415079) 

This paper examines four Indigenous language programs to compare common 
components, problems, and outcomes. The programs are Cree Way in Quebec, 
Canada, Hualapai in Arizona, Te Kohanga Reo (Maori) in New Zealand, and 
Punana Leo (Hawaiian) in Hawaii. These programs were chosen for four 
characteristics: (1) the languages are no longer transmitted to the younger 
generation (in the home or community); (2) the programs all have curriculum 
development, community support, parent involvement, and government support; 

(3) the programs exist in different countries; and (4) they are recommended as 
model programs for endangered Indigenous languages. Each program's description 
covers historical background; program development; funding; parent, community, 
and academic involvement; and current status. Each program has a curriculum that 
combines Indigenous language and cultural heritage, literacy, community 
involvement, and parent participation. Common problems are related to teacher 
availability, teacher training, lack of written materials, and funding Outcomes of 
all programs have included decreased dropout rates, increased sense of heritage and 
identity, and improved test scores. It is concluded that the success of these types of 
programs depends on home and community initiative and involvement; culture 
cannot be separated from the language. It is also important to begin the program at 
an early age, preferably preschool; to have a firm theoretical foundation; and to 
have written teaching materials. (Contains 29 references.) 

Swisher, K. (1990). Cooperative learning and the education of American 

Indian/Alaskan Native students: A review of the literature and suggestions for 
implementation. Journal of American Indian Education, 29(2), 36-43. (EJ4 13871) 
Reviews the literature, as it relates to American Indian students, on cooperative 
learning, competition, learning styles, teacher-student interactional styles, peer 
influence, and the effects of cooperative versus competitive learning on academic 
achievement. Discusses Student Team Learning techniques. (Contains 3 1 
references.) 

Swisher, K., & Deyhle, D. (1989). The styles of learning are different, but the 
teaching is just the same: Suggestions for teachers of American Indian youth. 
[Special Issue]. Journal of American Indian Education, 1-14. (EJ402975) 

Examines learning style and interactional style differences of American Indian and 
Alaskan Native students. Provides specific classroom examples and research 
findings concerning culturally influenced learning styles, the visual approach to 

77 



85 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



learning, field dependence, public versus private demonstration of learning, and 
cooperation versus competition in the classroom. (Contains 46 references.) 

Temp, G. E. (1974). Final evaluation report for Alaska Native Education Board, Inc., 
1973-74. First year of the bilingual/bicultural program. Anchorage: Alaska Native 
Education Board. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED094580) 

The ANEB bilingual/bicultural programs were in operation in eight rural 
communities in Alaska in 1973-74. This evaluation is based on the results of 
interviews with members of the community, staff, and student body. The 
information collected was in four areas: (1) fall 1973 student pretest information; 
(2) spring 1974 student posttest information; (3) winter-spring 1974 community 
reactions; (4) spring 1974 staff reactions. The questions presented to the students 
tested their knowledge of present and past Native cultures. The results 
demonstrated a marked increase in knowledge of historical culture due to the 
instruction of the bilingual/bicultural programs; their knowledge of the present 
Native culture was already high, hi regard to reading and speaking skills in Native 
languages, 68 percent of the children were able to read some of the Native 
language materials by spring 1974, but there is still room for movement toward 
equal Native/English-speaking ability. Virtually all of the students involved were 
enthusiastic about the programs. In addition, wide community support of the 
programs was shown from a random sampling of members of the community. 
Finally, 14 of 16 staff members questioned wanted the program to continue. 

Tharp, R. G., & Yamauchi, L. A. (1994). Effective instructional conversation in 
Native American classrooms. Educational practice report: 10. Santa Cruz, CA: 
National Center for Research on Cultural Diversity and Second Language 
Learning. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED372896) 

Instructional conversation (IC) is a dialogue between teacher and learner in which 
prior knowledge and experiences are woven together with new material to build 
higher understanding. IC contrasts with the highly routinized and teacher- 
dominated "recitation script" of traditional Western schooling. IC varies in form in 
different cultures, as do other discourse forms. Analysis of research on the formal 
and informal learning of Native Americans (including Native Hawaiians) indicates 
that successful Native American ICs are influenced by at least four basic psycho 
cultural factors: (1) sociolinguistics (teacher and student expectations about 
conversational "wait time," participation structure, tempo, loudness, and nonverbal 
behavior); (2) cognition (Native American emphasis on the visual/holistic 
approach); (3) student motivation (enhanced by the use of culturally relevant 
curriculum materials and by teacher respect for student autonomy); and (4) social 
organization (Native American emphasis on small peer-oriented work groups). The 
evidence suggests that the nature of classroom activity settings influences the 
participation and engagement of American Indian and Alaska Native students in 
these activities. "Ideal" Native American activity settings embed ICs in the social 
context of small student-directed units engaged in joint productive activity that 

78 



86 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



contextualizes formal knowledge in the immediate experience and concerns of the 
learners. This report contains 74 references. 

Travis, M. (1979). Significant impact of environment regarding eligibility of Native 
American and Alaskan Native students for ESEA Title VII regulations. Juneau, AK: 
Alaska State Department of Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service 
No. ED195362) 

Early Russian religious and educational influences on the 20 various Alaskan 
Native languages are described, followed by those of American origin in schools 
and religious groups after the American purchase in 1867, all of which show the 
development of diglossia and language shifts. The present dual educational system, 
which includes state schools and Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) schools, has 
contributed to shifts in language use from Alaskan Native languages to varieties of 
English or combinations of both. Alaskan Native and non-Native students learn 
Native language-specific dialects of English which have their own phonological 
and syntactical characteristics. Teacher attitudes, knowledge, and understanding, as 
well as differences in culture-specific modes of discourse, and the use of 
formalized textbook English are seen as factors which create interethnic 
communication problems. The geographic and cultural isolation has also been 
influential in creating a lack of language proficiency and educational achievement. 
Recommendations for student eligibility for the bilingual program in ESEA Title 
VII include: identification of limited English proficient students by teacher 
recommendations and testing; documentation of community language and cultural 
influences by languages other than English; and description of historical 
community cultural contribution to the limited English proficiency of target 
students. 

U.S. Bureau of Indian Affaire (1976). Young Native Americans and their families: 
Educational needs assessment and recommendations. Washington, DC: Author. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 127021) 

This report presents findings and recommendations based on a detailed assessment 
of the educational needs of young Native American children and their families. The 
project had three major objectives: (1) to conduct an assessment of the educational 
needs of Native American children (prenatal to age 8) and their families; (2) to 
describe and report on the types of programs cunently available to these children 
and their families; and (3) on the basis of the assessment of needs, and in the 
context of programs available, to draw conclusions and make specific 
recommendations for programs which will have the maximum potential for 
meeting the identified developmental and educational needs. Discussed are: 
economic conditions; health and nutrition; social problems and issues; emotional 
problems and mental health issues; early development and education; school 
learning and intellectual development; education for Indian and Eskimo children, 
bilingual programs; and program recommendations. Appendices include an 
evaluation of two parent-child development programs, detailed cost estimates, and 

79 



87 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



interview guides and data sheets for classroom and school visits. 

Vadas, R. E. (1995). Assessing the relationship between academic performance and 
attachment to Navajo culture. Journal of Navajo Education, 12(2), 16-25. (EJ518690) 
A survey of 185 Navajo students in grades 7 and 1 1 examined the relationship 
between their identification with attributes of traditional Navajo culture and their 
achievement level on standardized tests. Results suggest that student identification 
with Navajo language, culture, and tradition helps develop student self-esteem and 
cultural identity in ways that promote academic success. (Contains 47 references.) 

Watahomigie, L. J. (1995). The power of American Indian parents and communities. 
Bilingual Research Journal, 19( 1), 189-94 (EJ499407) 

Discusses the role that schools, communities, and parents can play in transmitting 
American Indian culture and language to Indian children, focusing on the 
experiences of the Hualapai Indians and Peach Springs School District in Arizona. 

Watahomigie, L. J., & McCarty, T. L. (1994). Bilingual/bicultural education at 
Peach Springs: A Hualapai way of schooling. Peabody Journal of Education, 

69(2), 26-42. (EJ490 166) 

The Hualapai (Arizona) Bilingual/Bicultural Program is nationally recognized for 
its achievements in Native language literacy and bilingual/bicultural curriculum 
development. The article presents information on how the program evolved, the 
role of Indigenous educators, community involvement, and biliteracy education in 
a community with a previously unwritten language. 

Watson-Gegeo, K. A. (1989). The Hawaiian language immersion program : 

Classroom discourse and children's development of communicative competence . 
Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the National Council of Teachers of 
English, Baltimore, MD. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED321561) 

In its first year, the Hawaiian Language Immersion Program combined 
kindergarten and first-grade students in two classes. About half of the students had 
no speaking knowledge of Hawaiian; the remainder had attended Hawaiian- 
language preschools and/or spoke Hawaiian at home. Both teachers, fluent speakers 
of Hawaiian, were new to teaching. The teachers spoke only Hawaiian after the 
first 2 days of school, and students were reminded to speak in Hawaiian. By spring, 
lapses into English or pidgin became infrequent. Visiting parents were impressed 
with the warm relationships evident between children and teachers. Classroom 
organization combined adaptation to Hawaiian values and cultural practices with 
practices common to other elementary classrooms. While occasionally correcting 
students' Hawaiian, teachers more commonly modeled correct form or set up 
repeating routines to support student learning. Teachers treated students as true 
conversational partners, focusing primarily on content comprehension, with brief 
but significant instructional sequences inserted. Language learning in peer-peer 
interactions was encouraged. The students were found to take their work seriously, 
and were on task a high proportion of the time. 

80 



88 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



West, D. K. (1988). Comparisons of career maturity and its relationship with academic 
performance. Journal of American Indian Education, 27(3), 1-7. (EJ382740) 
Examines career maturity and academic achievement between 30 American Indian 
and 39 non-Indian college students. Finds strong positive correlations between 
grade point average and career maturity for freshman and sophomore Indians and 
freshman non-Indians, but not for the total sample or either ethnic group overall. 
(Contains 19 references.) 

Wescott, J. R. (1974). The effects of the Distar reading program on selected 
disadvantaged children of South Dakota. (Doctoral dissertation, University of 
South Dakota, 1974.) (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED109613) 

The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of the Distar reading program 
on the reading achievement of fifth-grade students in three schools on the Rosebud 
Reservation in South Dakota. Distar programs were developed to help overcome 
some of the problems of disadvantaged children. The program is a highly 
structured one, designed to compensate for the language and reading problems of 
these children. Several tests were used to determine the effectiveness of the Distar 
reading program, including a diagnostic reading test, a reading comprehension test, 
and a self-concept test. The results showed that pupils in a larger mixed-population 
center exhibited greater reading comprehension and a larger vocabulary than pupils 
in more remote Indian communities, whether they learned to read in the Distar 
program or not; Distar pupils in a larger community also showed a greater facility 
in syllabication than the Distar pupils in the smaller Indian communities; Distar 
pupils showed less reading comprehension, a smaller vocabulary, and poorer sound 
discrimination than non-Distar pupils; and there was a positive correlation between 
reading achievement and self-concept for all pupils in all schools. 

Willeto, A. A. A. (1999). Navajo culture and family influences on academic success: 
Traditionalism is not a significant predictor of achievement among young Navajos. 
Journal of American Indian Education, 38(2), 1-24. (EJ605532) 

A study of 451 Navajo youths attending 1 1 high schools in the Navajo Nation 
found no relationship between their academic achievement and their cultural 
attachments and practices. Families modestly influenced educational outcomes, but 
being female was a stronger predictor of academic success. An appendix describes 
study variables. (Contains 42 references.) 

Williams, E., Radin, N., & Coggins, K. (1996). Paternal involvement in childrearing 
and the school performance of Ojibwa children: An exploratory study. Merrill- 
Palmer Quarterly, 42(4), 578-95. (EJ533053) 

Examined Ojibwa families for relationship between quantity and quality of father 
involvement in child rearing and children's academic and social performance 
Found that more time spent by fathers was associated with better academics and 
social development for boys, while greater nurturance was associated with poorer 
academic performance. Found that participation of father's father was an antecedent 
of involvement. 



81 



89 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Wilson, J. G. (1983). Wisconsin Indian opinions of factors which contribute to the 
completion of college degrees. Program report 83-13. Madison: Wisconsin Center 
for Education Research, Madison. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED237274) 
Opinionnaires were mailed to 860 Wisconsin Indian college students and 
graduates, 189 of whom were also interviewed, to identify positive factors 
contributing to completion of college degrees by Wisconsin Indian people. The 
opinionnaire used for current students and those graduated from 1977 to 1982 
differed from that used with pre-1977 graduates; the latter provided more open- 
ended questions. Usable opinionnaires (214) were 27.8% of those distributed. 

Financial aid ranked first as a factor contributing to college completion, followed 
by family support, having a personal goal, determination, and intelligence. Seven 
composite profiles of Wisconsin Indians who completed college degrees, derived 
from the opinionnaires and interviews, showed a number of commonalities: a 
parent or parents who understood the value of a college education, no perception of 
discrimination before the high school level, discovery that college was more 
difficult than high school and less personal, pride in being Indian, and sense of 
purpose. Detailed recommendations from opinionnaire respondents discussed six 
sources that could encourage Indian students: parents, pre-college schools, tribes, 
colleges and universities, students themselves, and older Indian college students. A 
specific recommendation called for a state-wide conference on Indian education, 
followed by practical on-site workshops to help implement the study's 
recommendations. Appendices include opinionnaires, maps, and supporting letters. 

Wilson, P. (1997). Key factors in the performance and achievement of minority 

students at the University of Alaska-F air banks. American Indian Quarterly , 2/(3), 

535-44. (EJ578167) 

Realization of high failure rates among Native students sparked a study of 
professor/student relationships at the University of Alaska-Fairbanks. On the 
Personal Learning Styles Inventory, minority (Native and Hispanic) students 
scored highest on active experimentation and concrete experience. Indigenous 
students also rated professor accessibility, approachability, availability, 
genuineness, and caring, as necessary for learning success. (Contains 22 
references.) 

Wright, S. C., & Taylor, D. M. (1995). Identity and the language of the classroom: 
Investigating the impact of heritage versus second language instruction on personal 
and collective self-esteem. Journal of Educational Psychology, 87(2), 241-52. (EJ509335) 
The connection between heritage language instruction and self-esteem was 
investigated for 64 Inuit, 13 white, and 36 mixed-heritage children. Children 
educated in their heritage language showed an increase in self-esteem after one 
year, but Inuit and mixed-heritage children educated in a second language did not. 

Wright, S. C, Taylor, D. M., Ruggeiro, K. M., Mac Arthur, J., & Elijassiapik, M. 

(1996). The Jaanimmarik school language-testing project. Montreal, Quebec: 

Kativik School Board. 



82 



90 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



In the fall of 1989, Jaanimmarik School in northern Quebec began offering 
kindergarten classes in Inuttitut, English, and French. This document contains three 
reports of participant testing in grades K-2. “Examining the Potential for Academic 
Achievement: An Analysis of the Children’s Performance on the Raven Coloured 
Progressive Matrices Test” shows that Inuit and mixed-heritage children’s 
intellectual potential or “analytic intelligence” was superior to that of U.S. children 
in general, as well as African American, Mexican American, and Navajo children. 
“Identity and Language of Instruction: The Effects of Heritage Language versus 
Second Language Instruction on Personal Self-Esteem and Collective Self-Esteem” 
found that all kindergarten children at the school-Inuit, White, and mixed- 
heritage-had high personal self-esteem. Self-esteem increased for all students who 
went to kindergarten in their heritage language, but did not increase for Inuit 
children who went to kindergarten in English or French. “Heritage Language 
Maintenance and Second Language Learning: Early Inuttitut Instruction and 
Additive or Subtractive Bilingualism in Nunavik” reveals that by grade 2, Inuit 
children in the Inuttitut program had developed strong academic and conversational 
skills in their heritage language, those in the English and French programs had not 
developed strong academic skills in any language, and those in the English 
program were beginning to show signs of subtractive bilingualism. Among mixed- 
heritage children, those educated in English did well in English but developed little 
skill in the other languages, while those educated in Inuttitut developed Native-like 
ability in Inuttitut and maintained strong conversational ability and some academic 
ability in English. 

Yagi, K. (1985). Indian education act project in the Portland public schools. 1984-85 
evaluation report . Oregon: Portland Public Schools. Evaluation Department. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED268168) 

The Portland Indian Education Act Project (IEAP), completing its 1 1th year, serves 
American Indian students from preschool through high school. Eligibility for 
services is established according to federal guidelines. Objectives set for the project 
concentrate on increasing academic achievement and school attendance, and 
reducing early school attrition. The main activities are tutoring/counseling, 
attendance monitoring, cultural education, and hardship assistance. Data are 
collected and maintained to evaluate the project's progress annually, as well as 
longitudinally. This evaluation report is divided into four major sections: 
introduction, program description, evaluation of objectives, and comments and 
conclusions. The plan used in the evaluation of objectives consists of evaluation 
questions related to each of the three objectives. District statistical data compiled 
over five years shows a decline in attrition while also showing an increase in 
attendance and achievement among American Indian students. Efforts of the IEAP 
staff emphasize significant use of resources, sometimes community resources, in 
these areas. Data accumulated and compiled for IEAP evaluation purposes continue 
to show educational needs for American Indian students in Portland. Funding 
restrictions pose a threat to program quality and make it increasingly more difficult 



83 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



for the project to design and implement a comprehensive program. 

Yamauchi, L. A., & Ceppi, A. K. (1998). A review of Indigenous language 

immersion programs and a focus on Hawaii. Equity & Excellence in Education, 
57(1), 11-20. (EJ565885) 

Reviews American educational policy and Indigenous language loss, the 
importance of language revitalization, and various models of language-immersion 
studies. A case study reports on Papahana Kaiapuni, the Hawaiian language 
immersion program established in 1987. This program is an example of a Native 
community's efforts to revitalize its language. 

Yamauchi, L. A., & Ceppi, A. K., & Lau-Smith, J. (2000). Teaching in a Hawaiian 
context: Educator perspectives on the Hawaiian language immersion program. 
Bilingual Research Journal, 24(4), 333-51. 

Papahana Kaiapuni is the nation’s only K-12 program taught entirely in Hawaiian. 
Focus groups and interviews with 37 teachers and 4 principals examined their roles 
and experiences in the program. Teachers integrated Hawaiian culture into the 
curriculum and viewed the program as a model of school reform for Native 
Hawaiians. The program also transformed many teachers' views of themselves as 
teachers and as members of the Hawaiian community. 



84 



92 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Bibliography of Footnoted Material 



Note: The following articles, legislation, literature reviews, and other resources were 
cited in footnotes, but not included in the annotated bibliography. The annotated 
bibliography includes only reports of studies involving Native Americans and other 
Indigenous peoples. 

Alaska Governor’s Interim Commission on Children and Youth. (1988). Our greatest 
natural resource: Investing in the future of Alaska ' s children . Juneau, AK: 
Governor’s Interim Commission on Children and Youth, Office of the Governor. 

Bowman, B. T., Donovan, M. S., & Bums, M. S. (Eds.). (2001). Eager to learn: 
Educating our preschoolers . National Research Council, Committee on Early 
Childhood Pedagogy, Commission on Behavioral and Social Sciences and 
Education. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 

Begley, S. (1996, February 19). Your Child’s Brain. Newsweek , 55-62. 

Benard, B. (1995). Fostering resilience in children (ERIC Digest). Urbana, IL: ERIC 
Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood Education. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED386327) 

Butterfield, R. A, & Pepper, F. C. (1991). Improving parental participation in 
elementary and secondary education for American Indian and Alaska Native 
students. In Indian nations at risk task force commissioned papers. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Department of Education. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED343763) 

Cotton, K. (1995). Effective schooling practices: A research synthesis, 1995 update. 
Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Cummins, J. (1986). Empowering minority students: A framework for intervention. 
Harvard Educational Review, 56(1), 18-36. 

Cummins, J. (1992). The empowerment of Indian students. In J. Reyhner (Ed.), 

Teaching American Indian students (pp. 3-12). Norman: University of Oklahoma 
Press. 

Darnell, F., & Hoem, A. (1996). Taken to extremes : Education in the far North. 

Cambridge, MA: Scandinavian University Press North America. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED453998) 

Deloria, V., Jr. (1975). Legislative analysis of the federal role in Indian education. 
Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education, Office of Indian Education. 

Demmert, W. G., Jr. (1974). Critical issues in Indian education: 1972-1975. Ann 
Arbor, MI: University Microfilms. 



85 



93 




Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Demmert, W. (1995). Indian nations at risk: An educational strategy for action. In L. I. 
Rendon, R. O. Hope, & Associates (Eds.), Educating a new majority (pp. 231-62). 
San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Bass Publishers. 

Deyhle, D., & Swisher, K. G. (1997). Research in American Indian and Alaska Native 
education: From assimilation to self-determination. In M. W. Apple (Ed.), Review 
of research in education (Vol. 22, pp. 1 13-194). Washington, DC: American 
Education Research Association. 

Executive Order Working Group, Strang, W., & von Glatz, A. (2001). American 
Indian and Alaska Native research agenda . Washington, DC: U.S. Department of 
Education. Retrieved January 8, 2002, from 
http://www.indianeduresearch.net/index.htm 

Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for the 2 1st century . 
New York: Basic Books. 

Indian Nations At Risk Task Force. (1991). Indian nations at risk: An educational 
strategy for action Final report. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Education. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED339587) 

Meriam, L., Brown, R. A., Cloud, H. R., Dale, E. E., Duke, E., Edwards, H. R., 
McKenzie, F. A., Mark, M. L., Ryan, Jr., W. C., & Spillman, W. J. (1928). The 
problem of Indian administration. Report of a survey made at the request of 
Honorable Hubert Work, Secretary of the Interior, and submitted to him, February 
21st. Baltimore, MD: Johns Hopkins Press. 

National Commission on Teaching and America’s Future. (1996). What matters most: 
Teaching for America ’s future. New York: Author. (ERIC Document Reproduction 
Service No. ED395931) 

Reyhner, J. (1989). Changes in American Indian education: A historical retrospective 
for educators in the United States. ERIC Digest Charleston, WV: ERIC 
Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED324228) 

Sousa, D. A. (1998, December 16). Is the Fuss About Brain Research Justified? 
Education Week, I8(\6), pp. 35, 52. 

U.S. Bureau of the Census. (2001). Poverty in the United States: 2000. Report No. 
P60-214. Washington, DC: U.S. Department of Commerce. Retrieved February 21, 
2002, from http://www.census.gov/prod/2001pubs/p60-214.pdf 

U.S. Senate Special Subcommittee on Indian Education. (1969). Indian education: A 
national tragedy— A national challenge. Senate Report No. 91-501. 1969 report of 
the Committee on Labor and Public Welfare, United States Senate. Washington, 
DC: U.S. Government Printing Office. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. 
ED034625) 



86 



94 





Improving Academic Performance among Native American Students 



Viadero, D. (1998, November 1 1). Research notes on ‘triarchic’ intelligence. 
Education Week, 18( 11), p.28 

Werner, E. E., & Smith, R. S. (1982). Vulnerable but invincible: A longitudinal study 
of resilient children and youth. New York: McGraw-Hill. 

Werner, E. E., & Smith, R. S. (1992). Overcoming the odds: High-risk children from 
birth to adulthood. Ithaca: Cornell University Press. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED344979) 

White House Conference on Indian Education. (1992). The final report of the White 
House conference on Indian education (executive summary ). Washington, DC: 
Author. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED353124) 



87 



95 





\ 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 

REPRODUCTION BASIS 



□ This document is covered by a signed “Reproduction Release 

(Blanket)” form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a “Specific Document” Release form. 



This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release 
form (either “Specific Document” or “Blanket”). 





( 9 / 92 ) 





