DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 476 009 



RC 024 041 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Harding, Letitia 

The Carlisle Indian Boarding School and Its Literary Legacy: 
The War with the Pen. 

2001 - 02-00 

41p. ; In: 2001 Monograph Series, Proceedings of the Annual 
Meeting of the National Association of African American 
Studies, the National Association of Hispanic and Latino 
Studies, the National Association of Native American Studies, 
and the International Association of Asian Studies (Houston, 
TX, February 12-17, 2001). 

Historical Materials (060) -- Opinion Papers (120) ~~ 
Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC02 Plus Postage. 

^Acculturation; ^American Indian Education; American Indian 
History; ^American Indian Literature; American Indians; 
Authors; Boarding Schools; Cultural Maintenance; Educational 
History; Elementary Education; English (Second Language); 
Federal Indian Relationship; ^Resistance (Psychology); 

^School Newspapers; Vocational Education ■ 

^Carlisle Indian School PA; *Pratt (Richard Henry) 



ABSTRACT 

When Richard Henry Pratt founded the Carlisle Indian Boarding 
School, he felt that assimilation of American Indians was the only 
alternative to annihilation. Much of the training at Carlisle was intended to 
break all connections between students and their families. However, the 
students did have opportunities to record their stories, ideas, and opinions 
in their school newspapers, even as they were controlled by white staff 
members. For Pratt ’ s . system to flourish, he intended that some graduates from 
Carlisle and other off-reservation boarding schools would either work at the 
schools as teachers or return to their reservations to continue his mission. 
Pratt's objectives required that the students learn both English and a 
marketable .trade . However, some graduates used their newly-developed skills 
to decry assimilation policies and to denounce the methods practiced at the 
schools. The continuation of this criticism is apparent in modern Native 
American literature. In personal narratives, school newspapers, and later in 
autobiographical essays and stories, the legacy of Carlisle students was 
preserved and passed on to the' present generation of Native American authors. 
In this way, the "enemy language" was used to continue the war with the pen 
and to ensure the survival of Indian cultures and heritage. (TD) 



o 

ERiC- 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be mads 
from the original document. 



0 2 4 0 4 1 



Os 

o 

o 

VO 



Q 



w 



V 



The Carlisle Indian Boarding School and 
Its Literary Legacy: 

The War with the Pen 



Letitia Harding, M, A. 
University of the Incarnate Word 
San Antonio, Texas 



OF EDUCATION 

OmC0 of Educatronaf Research and Irnprovement 
E^CATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATIO 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

fir This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 





TO THE EDUCATIOr^L RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 



205 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 




2 



The Carlisle Indian Boarding School and Its Literary 
Legacy: The War with the Pen 



Richard Henry Pratt established the Carlisle Indian 
Boarding School on the principle that total assimilation into white 
society was the only way in which Native American Indians could 
survive amid the ever-increasing numbers of white immigrants. 
This paper first describes the founding and development of the 
Carlisle Indian School and then addresses the literary legacy that it 
initiated which has led to the preservation and recognition of 
Native American cultures in literary terms: not at all the aim of the 
boarding school system. 

The Carlisle Indian Boarding School has, since its 
conception, invoked passionate debate about the motives and aims 
of its founder, teachers, administrators, and sponsors. Richard 
Henry Pratt established the school on the predicate that total 
assimilation into white society was the only way in which Native 
American Indians could survive amid the ever-increasing numbers 
of white immigrants. Although Pratt did not feel that racial 
extinction was necessary, he did consider Indians to be inferior to 
white people, and devoted much of his life trying to ensure that 



206 




3 



Indian savagery was overcome by the forces of “civilization.” This 
was achieved by removing Indian children from their homes to a 
web of off-reservation schools and immersing them in the culture 
of white society. 

For assimilation to be successful, Indian children had to be 
separated from their cultural ties. The staff at Carlisle began this 
process as soon as the young students arrived at the school by 
stripping them of all outward signs of their heritage, and forcing 
them to look, act, and speak like their white teachers. Although 
some of the historical documentation about the Carlisle Indian 
School promotes the notion that many of the children were happy 
and grateful for their educational opportimities, there is much 
evidence of a quiet, written resistance by the students to the 
attempted extermination of their culture and heritage. The Native 
Americans’ war with the pen began with these school children, 
who wrote of their experiences in their family letters, school 
newspapers and, in some cases, autobiographies. Their stories 
remain alive in the Native American literature of today which is 
steeped in Indian myths and legends. Themes such as loss of 
language, relationships with earth and family, problems of 
separation, alienation, and identity, which were all affected by the 




207 



Carlisle Boarding School System, are addressed with strength and 
determination by these writers. 

The resolve of outsiders to “educate” the indigenous 
peoples of the Americas has been unyielding ever since the first 
settlers arrived to colonize the continent. Indeed, the main aim of 
the French and Spanish missionaries in the early 1600s was to 
neutralize native resistance by “diminishing indigenous cultural 
integrity to the point of nonexistence” (Noriega, 1992, p. 371). 
Throughout the following centuries, education was used as a 
means to disrupt native societies by creating an educated elite 
which would adopt and promote European ideals. 

In the years following the War of Independence, colonizers 
were obsessed with the idea of expanding their territorial holdings. 
The main obstacles in their way were the natives whose lives and 
livelihoods were inextricably connected to the land the Europeans 
wished to confiscate. Armed with preconceptions of Indian 
savagery and inferiority, the white settlers offered the Indians two 
choices: “civilization” or extinction. As an attempt to avoid 
violence as much as possible, government officials made funds 
available to offer educational services to the Indians in return for 
treaties and alliances. For several decades, missionary teachers 

208 




5 



tried many educational methods to transform the Indians while 
keeping tribal family xinits intact, but as J. D. C. Atkins, the U.S. 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, said in his 1886 annual report: 
“The greatest difficulty is experienced in freeing the children 
attending day schools from the language and habits of their 
untutored and often savage parents. When they return to their 
homes at night, and on Saturdays and Sundays, and are among 
their own surroundings, they relapse more or less into their former 
moral and mental stupor” (qtd. in Noriega, 1992, p. 379). 

In the light of Atkins’ findings, the US Commissioner of 
Education, John Eaton, Jr., suggested that a boarding-school 
environment, although much more expensive to operate, would 
afford better results by removing the native children from the 
cultural contamination of their families and homes completely. 
Moreover, government policymakers decided that the schools 
would adopt “the penal procedures developed to break the will of 
some of the most “recalcitrant” of the indigenous resistance 
leaders” (Noriega, 1992, p. 380). Thus, when the Carlisle Indian 
School, in Carlisle, Pennsylvania, was opened in November 1879, 
Captain Richard Henry Pratt, who had been commandant of Fort 
Marion Prison, was appointed as its superintendent. 




209 



Captain Pratt was not new to the idea of educating Indians. 
Indeed, he had piloted a scheme at Fort Marion which transformed 
Indian inmates into students. There, adopting the role of a father- 
figure, Pratt treated his charges as children, teaching them that 
obedience to his rules could result in some degree of freedom. So 
Pratt established the new School with the presumption that Native 
American Indians could only survive by total assimilation into 
‘civilized’ white society. Indeed, the Carlisle school slogan was, 
“To civilize the Indian, get him into civilization. To keep him 
civilized, let him stay”. 

The success of the off-reservation boarding schools 
depended initially, of course, upon attracting the requisite number 
of students. While some parents voluntarily sent their children 
away to be educated in the ways of the white man, feeling that 
assimilation was the only way that their children could survive in 
this “new” America, others according to annual reports of the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, had to be persuaded or forced to 
give up their offspring. Persuasion came in the form of 
withholding food and clothing, and sometimes even imprisonment 
(Adams, 1995, p. 211). The Indians had great difficulty entrusting 
the welfare of their children to the same people who had deceived 

210 




7 



them over land rights, and who had broken treaty after treaty. 
Pratt’s answer to this charge was to suggest that the problem lay in 
the Indians’ lack of understanding of the English language: if they 
had been able to read English, they would have understood the 
treaties. He thus reasoned that the Indian children would be in a 
much better position to look after their own interests if they were 
educated at the boarding schools and learned to speak English. 
According to Pratt’s memoirs, he personally had no need to use 
force to achieve his quota of children: “The Indians were so 
enthusiastic that repeatedly parents who had not tried to get their 
children into the party came forward and asked to have their 
children go, and I could have had several times as many as my 
authority allowed” (Pratt, 1964, p. 227). 

From the moment they arrived at Carlisle, Indian children 
had all outward signs of their native heritage taken from them: 
their hair was cut, their clothes were exchanged for military-style 
uniforms, Indian names became anglicized, and Indian languages, 
both spoken and written, were banned. At the same time as these 
tactics were used to distance the children from their native 
cultures, an educational program was developed to prepare them 
for a life of assimilation (Landis, pp. 3-4). 




211 



The first step in distancing the children from their tribal 
identity was to cut the boys’ hair. This physical and psychological 
attack was a terrifying experience. In My People the Sioux, Luther 
Standing Bear, a member of the first class of Carlisle, recalls how 
he felt when it was his turn to be shorn: “it hurt my feelings to such 
an extent that the tears came into my eyes” (p. 140). The 
acquisition of new clothes did not seem to cause the Indians the 
same trauma as did having their hair cut. Indeed, Standing Bear 
remembers fondly his excitement at receiving his new uniform: 
“We heard that we were soon to have white men’s clothes. We 
were all very excited and anxious when this was annoimced to us. 
[. . .] As soon as we had received our outfits, we ran to our rooms to 
dress up” (p. 142). With their new haircuts and uniform-style 
clothing, the Carlisle Indian students were beginning to look like 
their white counterparts. Hence, the first part of Pratt’s agenda was 
underway. It was now time to go beyond the visible changes and 
begin to sever the Indians’ spiritual connection to their homeland 
and heritage. 

One of the first assignments on the academic schedule was 
the allocation of English names to the new students. There was, of 
course, more than one reason behind this practice. First, many of 

212 




9 



the Indian names were very difficult for the teachers to pronounce, 
and second, land allocation and the promise of citizenship 
necessitated a clear family lineage which could be understood by 
the government agencies. There were, according to David Wallace 
Adams, several methods used to select names for the students. 
Some original names, which were easy to pronounce, remained 
unchanged, some were translated literally, while other students 
received totally new names (Adams, 1995, p. 109). 

The next academic objective of the curriculum was to 
instruct the children in the English language. This posed many 
problems both for students and teachers, and was a source of 
immense frustration. But if the proponents of the boarding-school 
system were going to succeed in their mission to prepare Indian 
children for a life of assimilation into white culture, a way had to 
be found to encourage the use and mastery of English. Thus, 
school officials announced that students were to be forbidden to 
speak any language other than English, and that the punishment for 
infringement of this rule would be severe (Adams, 1995, p. 140). 

The aim of the educational program at Carlisle was to 
prepare the Indian children for assimilation into white society, and 
this meant that they not only had to learn the English language, but 

213 



O 

ERIC 



10 



had to be taught a marketable trade. To this end, the students’ 
working day was divided between academic instruction and 
manual labor. The techmcal part of the schedule served two 
purposes: to provide students with the opportunity to learn a useful 
trade, and to produce goods for sale to offset the cost of the 
program. At Carlisle, boys were offered tuition in wagon building, 
shoemaking, tinsmithing, carpentry, painting, tailoring, and 
harness making. The syllabus for girls included sewing, ironing, 
cooking, canning, child care, cleamng, stenography, typing, and 
bookkeeping (Adams, 1995, pp. 149 — 50). 

By 1900, the Indian boarding school program was, on 
paper, a tremendous success with over 21,000 students in 
residence. But one of the most visible results of Pratt’s Carlisle 
experiment was the disastrous effects which this educational 
program had on Indian children and their families. Although each 
student spent several years learning English, command of the 
language was often not proficient enough to secure employment 
away from the schools. The young people were not ready for life in 
white conununities, but at the same time, they had lost fluency in 
their native languages. These young adults, after serving their time 
in the government boarding schools, were totally unprepared both 




214 



for the white world and for their own. Fortunately, some of the 
students did have a sufficient grasp of the English language to 
enable them to write their boarding school experiences. These 
stories, together with personal narratives from people who came 
into contact with the students, comprise the first stage of 
establishing an Indian literary legacy. 

Without any first-hand evidence it would be difficult to 
gauge accurately the apprehension, excitement, hopes and fears of 
the students; and Richard Pratt’s memoirs would stand as the only 
accovmt of the successes and failures of the program. Fortunately, 
however, Luther Standing Bear recorded his life story in three 
autobiographical books: My Indian Boyhood, written for and 
dedicated to the boys and girls of America; My People the Sioux; 
and Land of the Spotted Eagle. These works, besides tracing his 
own personal life, describe the beliefs, customs, and values of 
Indian people, especially the Lakota. Standing Bear, by describing 
how he and his playmates were traditionally schooled, by revealing 
his own personal hopes and fears as a child, and by explaining his 
Carlisle education and his views on white-Indian relations, was one 
of the first Indians to provide an accovmt of his people from an 
Indian perspective. His portrait of his home life, of his relationship 

215 




12 



with his family and friends, and of the freedom enjoyed by Indian 
children helps explain their alienation and fear when they were 
taken from their homelands and family to be educated at Carlisle. 

To understand fully the emotional trauma experienced by 
the Indian children during this process, it is necessary to examine 
the home life from which they came. In Land of the Spotted Eagle, 
Standing Bear describes his childhood and the education he 
received at the hands of his parents. Although the traditional Indian 
way of life was in decline by the time he was bom in the 1 860 s, 
Standing Bear or Ota K’te (Plenty Kill), as his parents called him, 
was trained to be a hunter, a warrior, and a respectful member of 
his tribe. For the first six years of his life. Standing Bear, like all 
the other Lakota children, was cared for solely by his mother. 

As soon as a Lakota child was old enough to walk, parents 
and grandparents spent time teaching through example and play. 
Respect for elders, obedience, truthfulness, and kindness were all 
virtues with which the children were surrounded. Grandmothers 
were greatly involved in the care of the little ones, and routinely 
acted as cooks, teachers, and advisors. Lakota fathers were 
generally very proud of their sons and Standing Bear remembers 
fondly the times he and his father worked and played together: 

216 




13 



everything which the mother taught, the father reinforced, but 
included in his training were the skills which would transform the 
boy into a Lakota warrior {Land of the Spotted Eagle, 1978, p.lO). 
Standing Bear recalls that throughout his boyhood he wanted to be 
brave like his father, “Dangers and responsibilities were bound to 
come, and I wanted to meet them like a man. I looked forward to 
the days of the warpath, not as a calling nor for the purpose of 
slaying my fellowman, but solely to prove my worth to myself and 
my people” {Land of the Spotted Eagle, 1978, p. 14). 

On first consideration, it is difficult to understand why 
Standing Bear would have chosen to leave his home, where he had 
been perfectly happy, to attend boarding school at Carlisle. He 
admits in My People the Sioux that white people were mistrusted 
and thought of as the enemy, yet he volunteered to join the first 
group to travel East. Standing Bear recalled his father’s words to 
him and saw this as the ideal opportunity to make him proud, 
‘“Son be brave! Die on the battle-field if necessary away from 
home. It is better to die young than to get old and sick and then 
die’” {My People the Sioux, 1975, p. 124). Standing Bear had 
witnessed his father’s acceptance of the inevitable domination of 




217 



the white way of life, and looked upon this new situation as the 
perfect way to prove his bravery. 

Everything about Carlisle was, however, anathema to 
Standing Bear and to the other children who had been educated by 
their parents in accordance with traditional Indian methods and 
ideology. As for their personal comforts, they initially had no 
proper beds to sleep in and not enough food to eat, and were given 
uncomfortable clothes to wear. During the daytime, they were 
confined to classrooms or workshops and had to adhere to a 
schedule, the divisions of which were marked by the ringing of a 
bell. These children were used to following the cycles of the Sun 
and the Moon; now they had to learn to divide the day into hours, 
minutes, and seconds. 

Considering the disastrous racial and cultural implications 
of his educational programs, the fondness with which his students 
remember Richard Pratt is sometimes difficult to understand. 
Nevertheless, the Indian prisoners at Fort Marion, and the children 
who attended Carlisle, seemed to look upon Pratt as a father-figure 
who had their best interests at heart (Adams, 1995, p. 46). To the 
prisoners, he was a savior amid a sea of enemies, danger, and 
hopelessness; while his ability to persuade many tribal chiefs and 

218 




15 



other parents that his program was their only hope for survival, 
physical if not cultural, ensured their support for the school and his 
agenda. 

Although he had many arguments with the bureaucrats in 
the government, especially at the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Richard 
Pratt was the perfect diplomat when it came to dealing with Indian 
parents and their children. Their co-operation in his plans for 
assimilating the Indians was crucial. He encouraged and welcomed 
visitors, and took the time to promote the school and its 
achievements to those parents who made the journey from faraway 
Indian homelands to see their children. When Chief Standing Bear 
arrived at the school, Pratt not only allowed father and son to talk 
in their own native language, but also took the Chief to many of 
the neighboring cities to show him the progress in the eastern 
section of the country. The reason behind this seemingly generous 
gesture was to prove to the Chief that the expansion of white 
civilization was unstoppable, and that assimilation was the only 
way for Indians to survive its onslaught. The ploy was successful. 
On their return to Carlisle, Chief Standing Bear told his son that he 
must learn all that he could from the white people, and that he 
would send his other children to Carlisle. 



219 



ERIC 




Luther Standing Bear became a model student, 
concentrating on his studies and his vocational trade, tinsmithing; 
eventually, he was selected by Captain Pratt and his teachers to 
work in John Wanamaker’s department store in Philadelphia. This 
was a great honor for Luther Standing Bear who was determined 
that he would make his employers proud of him {My People the 
Sioux, 1975, p. 183). In this he excelled and he was promoted 
within the company more rapidly than anyone before him. Pratt 
could not have hoped for a better ambassador for Carlisle and his 
assimilation program. 

Eventually, however, the time came for Standing Bear to 
return home to his own people. He worked as an interpreter, a 
teacher, and even at times as a lay Episcopal preacher. But it was 
not long after his return to the reservation that Standing Bear 
realized that he could be of no help to his people while living 
among them: “on the reservation I was only a helpless Indian, and 
was not considered any better than any of the uneducated 
Indians — that is, according to the views of the white agent in 
charge of the reservation. [...] So I had to do one of two thin gs — 
keep my mouth shut or fight the agent all the time {My People the 
Sioux, 1975, p. 277). Indeed, Standing Bear spent the rest of his 

220 




17 



life fighting for his rights and those of his people. In his later years 
he was persuaded to write his autobiography. This he did with the 
help of Clyde Champion, E. A. Brininstool, his niece Was-te-win, 
and her husband William Dittmar. If it had not been for his Carlisle 
education, Standing Bear’s story could never have been told in this 
way, nor perhaps could he have served his people as he did, but the 
final words of Land of the Spotted Eagle indicate that he 
considered the price he paid for the white man’s education as too 
high: “if today I had a young mind to direct, to start on the journey 
of life, [...] I would, for its welfare, unhesitatingly set that child’s 
feet in the path of my forefathers. I would raise him to be an 
Indian!” (Nabokov, 1978, p. 221). 

Richard Pratt had hoped that those Carlisle students who 
elected to return home would find the gap between the reservation 
customs and their new lifestyles too great to overcome and would 
soon make new, successful lives for themselves in the cities. 
Unfortunately for Pratt and his advocates, however, many students 
immediately abandoned their training, grew their hair long, re- 
learned their native languages, and re-adopted the traditional ways. 
Others took their boarding school education and used it to further 



er|c 



221 



the prosperity and unique identity of their tribes despite the 
continual encroachment of white society. 

The Carlisle students were kept informed about former 
pupils through articles and letters which were printed in the school 
newspapers. Although the purpose of these publications was 
primarily to allow the student printers the opportunity to practice 
appropriate skills, their content adds a further dimension to 
Carlisle’s literary legacy. Throughout its almost 40 years of 
existence, the Carlisle Indian School distributed an in-house 
publication, the contents of which encompassed letters and articles 
written by students, reports on topics of special interest to the staff 
and children of the school, and reprints of government documents 
and speeches which were relevant to the Indian population. The 
school publication went though many changes, including nine 
different names, and the format grew both in physical size and 
maturity as the students became more familiar with the printing 
process and with writing in the English language. 

During Pratt’s tenure as Superintendent of the School, the 
school newspaper became a major weapon in his armory against 
his opponents (Haller, 1997, p. 5), and he ensured that copies were 
sent to members of the government, Indian agencies, local 




222 



officials, and other newspapers, in the hope that his message of 
assimilation would reach every comer of the country. 

In the very first edition of School News in June 1880, the 
editor Samuel Townsend, a Pawnee Indian boy, wrote, “We put 
every thing in this paper that the Indian boys write for us. Not any 
white man’s writing but all the Indian boy’s writing [...] We want 
to show the people how they can do. Some have been going to 
school but a few months and some have been going to school for 
several years and they can do most everything now” (School News, 
June 1 880, p. 2). The message was that this was to be a publication 
by Indians about Indians. 

As the school’s student population became more attuned to 
the system, proficiency in the English language increased, and the 
printers’ skills developed, so the nature of the school publications 
matured. Eadle Keatah Toh, which means ‘Big Morning Star,’ was 
produced alongside School News, and carried some illustrations, 
reports on Indian affairs, and reprints of newspaper articles which 
were thought to be of interest to the staff and students. 

In 1884 Eadle Keatah Toh changed its name to 
The Morning Star, increased in size to eight pages, and began to 
include yet more advanced articles which highlighted general 

223 




20 



Indian issues and government reports relevant to the school 
community. Whereas Samuel Townsend had written in June 1880 
that his publication was totally Indian in content and production, 
the description of The Morning Star stated that it was “Published 
Monthly in the Interest of Indian Education and Civilization — 
NOT EDITED, BUT— PRINTED BY INDIAN BOYS” {The 
Morning Star, October and November 1882, p. 4). Clearly, the 
emphasis had changed considerably and, by studying the content 
and language of the included articles, it is evident that the intended 
audience for the publication was no longer just the children. 

Throughout the forty years of their existence, the 
publications of the Carlisle Indian School provided a platform for 
the dissemination of stories and information by and about Indians, 
and of subjects in which they had interest. In addition to offering 
students an opportunity to practice their language and literary 
skills, and to providing information about their school, Richard 
Pratt used the newspapers to advance his assimilation policies and 
practices, and to promote them among the American people. 
Although the production of the publications was overseen by 
members of Carlisle’s staff, and therefore probably censored to 
ensure that the outside world would only received positive 

224 




21 



information about the school, the children benefited by being able 
to feel part of their people’s ‘success story.’ The publications of 
Carlisle catered to two very separate but dependent interests: the 
educational and social needs of the students, and the distribution of 
Pratt’s assimilation message, which ensured political and 
philanthropical support. They were also used at times to counteract 
or condemn criticism of the school which dissenting former 
students sometimes expressed. 

For Richard Pratt’s assimilation policies and the work 
carried out at the Carlisle Indian School to be successful, positive 
results of the education system had to be conveyed to the 
American people. While all types of employment were welcomed 
and applauded, the graduates who really offered visible 
endorsement of Pratt’s project were those who returned to the 
boarding schools to play an active role in the assimilation effort. 
There could be no better recommendation for Pratt’s work than to 
see Indian boarding school graduates spreading the assimilation 
message amid their own people. Among those who accepted 
employment at Carlisle was Gertrude Simmons Bonnin, who 
taught English. Although Bonnin had not experienced the Sioux 
way of life before white people encroached upon their territory, the 

225 




22 



elders of the tribe, and especially her mother, “sought to instill in 
the young child, a hatred for all things Anglo” (Welch, 1985, p. 2). 
This influence was to affect every major decision and action in 
Bonnin’s adult life. 

Just as Luther Standing Bear recorded his boarding school 
experiences, Bonnin has described all the disappointment, pain, 
humiliation, and degradation of her school days in her 
autobiographical writings. From her first night away fi-om home 
when she “was as frightened and bewildered as the captured young 
of a wild creature” (Zitkala-Sa, 1985, p. 44) to the death fi-om 
disease of a classmate which disturbed her intensely, she wrote that 
the sad memories of those days “left so long a shadow that it 
darkens the path of years that have since gone by” (Zitkala-Sa, 
1985, p. 67). But Bonnin was not the type of person to be totally 
subdued by the pressures of school life, and she sought out 
opportunities to rebel. 

In 1899 Gertrude Bonnin accepted Richard Pratt’s offer of 
a teaching position at Carlisle. This decision could not have been 
easily made, and after her own unhappy years in boarding school, 
her very presence at Carlisle must have brought back unpleasant 
memories. Furthermore, any impressions that she was ‘buying 

226 




23 



into’ Pratt’s assimilation policy must have caused her considerable 
discomfort. 

With her fine command of the English language and her 
musical talents, which had become highly developed during her 
college days, Gertrude Bonnin was exactly the type of teacher Pratt 
needed for his school. Not only would she be a role model for the 
students, but her accomplishments in the white world were also 
visible confirmation that his assimilation dreams were becoming a 
reality. Unfortunately though, their relationship was, for each, both 
tumultuous and difficult. 

While Pratt was convinced that in Bonnin he had at his 
disposal a new weapon in Carlisle’s educational and political 
arsenal, Boimin felt that her position at the school would be 
beneficial to her fiitiu'e. Boimin’ s main reason for accepting 
employment at Carlisle was, most certainly, not any great desire to 
teach. Nor did she believe in Pratt’s methods of educating her 
people. Her teaching position, however, gave her enough money to 
remain in the East where she could showcase her talents to those 
who dictated national policy. According to Deborah Welch, 
Bonnin believed that “only by reaching the hearts and minds of 
these people [...] could she convince them that Indian peoples 

227 




24 



possessed abilities equal to those of Whites” (Welch, 1991, p. 17). 
While working at Carlisle, she also contacted literary societies and 
publishing companies, and her first article, “Impressions of an 
Indian Childhood” appeared in the January 1900 issue of The 
Atlantic Monthly (Welch, 1991, p. 18). For her writing career, 
Bonnin assumed the pen name, Zitkala-Sa. 

Richard Pratt was, at first, imconcemed by his employees’ 
extra-curricular activities, and even admitted that in many ways 
Bonnin’s first story reinforced his views that Indians, when 
educated and acculturated, could make a valuable contribution to 
white society. Bonnin’s description of the poverty and suffering of 
her people also conformed with Pratt’s disapproval of the 
reservation system (Welch, 1991, p. 18). Bonnin’s later articles, 
however, were to cause Pratt great concern. He had hired a quiet, 
studious, and assimilated Indian girl, and now had to deal with a 
confident woman who was becoming increasingly willing to 
declare her Indian pride. To rid himself of this subversive 
embarrassment, and to separate Bonnin from her literary 
companions, Pratt devised the perfect solution: he sent her West to 
recruit new students for the school. 



228 




25 



At the end of the spring term in 1900, Bonnin travelled 
West towards her homeland. In many ways this enforced sojourn 
among her own people only served to deepen Bonnin’ s 
determination to become an active and outspoken advocate for 
Indian rights. Her mother and brother were destitute with 
inadequate housing, little food, and no money, because the old 
woman was now unable to work, and her son’s job had been 
commandeered by a white man. 

In the Autumn of 1 900, Boimin briefly returned to Carlisle 
to work again for Richard Pratt. But her attitude to Carlisle and its 
staff had changed, and her days there were numbered. She could 
no longer endure the white teachers who belittled the students and 
used the school to further their own agendas (Welch, 1991, pp. 24- 
5). And of the philanthropists who visited the school, she said, 
“few there are who have paused to question whether real life or 
long-lasting death lies beneath this semblance of civilization” 
(Zitkala-Sa, 1985, p. 99). For Boimin to survive, both spiritually 
and in the literary world, it was necessary for her to move away 
from this place which had caused her and the Indian children so 
much pain. In late 1900, she left Carlisle to pursue her writing and 
her music. 




229 



Several stories, including “The Soft-Hearted Sioux,” were 
published by Bonnin in 1901 and addressed the problems of Indian 
children who had been educated by the whites, and had then tried 
to return to their homelands. Richard Pratt was furious and 
denounced the stories as “trash” and their author as “worse than 
pagan” (Bonnin, 1901). Bonnin was deeply hurt by Pratt’s 
criticism, but was equally determined to express her own beliefs. 

More than any other Indian woman of her time, Gertrude 
Bonnin was potentially the perfect example of an Indian child who 
had been removed from family influences at an early age and 
assimilated through education. She obviously loved living and 
working in the East, and excelled in many aspects of the literary 
field. If Richard Pratt’s dreams of a fully acculturated Indian 
population was to become a reality, then this was the type of 
student he needed to produce. It would then not have been long 
before there was no more need for white teachers, because Indian 
graduates would simply reverse roles and take up teaching 
positions. Thus the process would become self-fulfilling. 
Unfortunately for Pratt and his program, (but fortunately for the 
Indians) this dream was not to become reality. Indians like 
Gertrude Bonnin were far too strongly connected to their heritage 

230 




27 



to be able to sever ties as easily as he predicted, and their own 
experiences of boarding school life not only discouraged them 
from perpetuating or endorsing the system, but also fostered in 
them a need to attack it at every opportunity. These graduates of 
the Carlisle Boarding School system are the ancestors of today’s 
Indian writers, whose pride in their heritage and outrage at the 
treatment of their race at the hands of the white invaders resounds 
throughout their writings. 

The Carlisle Indian School, although closed for more than 
eighty years, has provided a legacy which lives on in the works of 
present day Indian writers. Out of the misery of lost families, 
homelands, cultural heritage, native skills, and language has 
emerged a literature which has been enriched by the pain of those 
experiences. Following the oral tradition of their ancestors, the 
Indian writers of today blend the past with the present in a 
continuum of inherited memory. But, unlike the oral stories of their 
ancestors which, according to N. Scott Momaday, were always one 
generation away from extinction, modem Indian literature uses the 
written word, and the white-man’s language, to ensure that its 
message will endure, and will reach audiences far beyond Indian 
linguistic and cultural boundaries (Momaday, 1998, p. 28). 

231 




28 



In The Road to Disappearance, Angie Debo recounts the 
story of a young Indian from Arkansas who decided to use his 
enforced education, and especially his command of the English 
language, to fight for his rights, and those of his people; “Although 
I am a school boy yet I feel a great interest in the welfare of my 
people, and some future day, if I live, I expect to take the pen and 
fight for my coimtry” (Debo, 1970, p. 250). This war Avith the pen 
is still being waged by Indian writers. But it must be remembered 
that the struggle for Indian survival has been continuing ever since 
white settlers first set foot on this continent. Richard Pratt took part 
in this battle, both as a soldier on the frontier, and as an educator. 
Indeed, in a letter to President Rutherford B. Hayes, in which he 
expressed concern that his request for more staff for his school had 
been declined, he stated “I am at this time, “fighting” a greater 
number of “the enemies of civilization” than the whole of my 
regiment put together, and I know fiuther that I am fighting them 
with a thousand times more hopes of success” (Pratt, 1964, p. 251). 

Jo Haijo and Gloria Bird recently edited an anthology of 
short stories and poetry by Indian women entitled Reinventing the 
Enemy Language. This title reinforces the idea that the “war with 
the pen” is still active. There are now many Indian writers who 

232 




29 



have chosen to use their literary skills to tell the story of their 
people, and to highlight the plight of those who feel that they have 
no voice in modem America. With her first-hand experience of an 
oppressive education system and an outing program, Laura Tohe 
has brought her own feelings of outrage and defiance to her work. 
And D’Arcy McNickle was one of the very first Indians to use 
fiction to record his story. 

D’Arcy McNickle, having dedicated his life to educating 
white people about Indians, is described by many as the 
grandfather of modem Native American Literature. It was against 
his mother’s wishes that McNickle was sent to the Chemawa 
Indian School in Oregon. Like Carlisle, the aim of this school was 
to promote the superiority of the white culture, and to attempt to 
force Indian children to reject their native heritage. The hardships 
endured by Indian children, while confined in institutions like 
these, is recounted many times in McNickle’ s novels and short 
stories which deal, primarily, with the historical reality of the 
indigenous people of the west and their interaction with those who 
settled there. Much of the content of his works stems from personal 
experiences from McNickle’s childhood, and from his lifetime of 
work on behalf of American Indians. 

233 




30 



The novels and short stories of D’ Arcy McNickle describe 
a progression of misunderstandings between the Indian and Anglo- 
American cultures which often resulted in tragedy. The white 
government’s attempts to enforce assimilation of Indians into 
white society had failed, and it was time for the natives to use the 
language of the newcomers: a language which had been forced 
upon them in schools like Carlisle. D’Arcy McNickle was one of 
the first of a new type of Indian who transferred the oral tradition 
into a written medium which could reach a wide, non-Indian 
audience. In this way, such writers were able to adapt to new 
circumstances which helped ensure cultural survival. Although 
McNickle, like many others, considered any integration as a 
cultural loss, John Lloyd Purdy points out in Word Ways: The 
Novels of D ’Arcy McNickle, that “Through his work, he found just 
the opposite, and this revelation guided the efforts of a lifetime” 
(p. 141). From those early beginnings, there is now a strong Indian 
voice which strives to ensure that the indigenous people do not 
have to assimilate to survive and that, despite the efforts of the 
early missionaries and government agents who tried to “bury the 
Indian to save the man”, there are a great many talented Indian 
writers who refuse to be either invisible or silent. 




234 



Laura Tohe’s No Parole Today is a collection of poems and 
stories dedicated to, among others, “all those who survived Indian 
schools everywhere” (dedication page), and its introduction 
includes a quotation from the speech by Richard Henry Pratt in 
which he states, “In Indian civilization I am a Baptist, because I 
believe in immersing the Indians in our civilization, and when we 
get them under holding them there until they are thoroughly 
soaked” (Tohe, 1 999, p. ix). Tohe continues her introduction in the 
form of a letter in reply to that speech, explaining that, by their 
focus on assimilation, Pratt and the government officials who 
formulated the colonization policies had a devastating effect on the 
Indian peoples. These policies, according to Tohe, were intended 
“to turn Indian people into civilized white American citizens, who 
would dress, worship, think, and hold the values of the dominant 
culture, (and) still affect us today” (Tohe, 1999, p. ix). 

Although Laura Tohe’s school experiences began as 
recently as the late 1950s, many of her accounts are very similar to 
those of Luther Standing Bear and his fellow students who 
attended Carlisle Indian School in the late 1870s. Military-style 
routines of roll call, work routines, and marching between 



235 




3 



O 



classrooms were, for Tohe, also the order of the day (Tohe, 1999, 
p. ix). 

No Parole Today began as a class assignment in which 
Tohe was asked to write a prison poem. Tohe’s writing leaves the 
reader with the impression that she equates the quality of life 
which her people endure to that of a prisoner who has been 
sentenced to life without parole: the very title of the work 
emphasizes this point. It can therefore be deduced that Laura Tohe 
sees Native Americans as trapped in an endless prison of 
hopelessness. 

Her poetry, however, is not without hope and comprises a 
mixture of English and Dine, with the latter usually translated into 
English. She writes most of her work in English, which she has at 
times described as “the language of the enemy”, because this 
affords her a wider audience than work in her own language would 
attract. Passages of Dine are inserted to show that the language is 
still flourishing, and to give readers an opportunity to experience 
its richness. Tohe’s school experiences left her with the impression 
that her way of life and language were drifting into oblivion. 
Today, however, the reservation schools include programs for 
teaching children their native language and culture. Indeed, Tohe 

236 




33 



comments on the irony of a government system which one hundred 
years ago was funding Pratt’s assimilation program, but now 
provides financial aid “to help preserve and revitalize the 
languages” (Tohe, 1999, p. x) that it was attempting to annihilate. 

Because Laura Tohe and her fellow writers have refused to 
be silent, their native voice is no longer in danger of drowning in 
Pratt’s baptismal waters of assimilation. Tohe comments that she 
and others like her have not “gone away quietly into the sunset, or 
assimilated into mainstream culture the way (Pratt) envisioned” 
(Tohe, 1999, p. xi). “At Mexican Springs”, which is the last piece 
in the book, ends with the words “and I will live to tell my children 
these things” (Tohe, 1999, p. 47). This is Laura Tohe’s personal 
commitment to the preservation of the language and heritage of her 
people. 

When Richard Henry Pratt founded the Carlisle Indian 
Boarding School, he felt that assimilation was the only alternative 
to annihilation. Although many people, including some Indians 
thought that he was totally committed to securing the welfare and 
future of the Indian people, he had no respect for Indian culture 
and heritage. Indeed, much of the training at Carlisle was intended 
to break all connections between students and their families. The 

237 




34 



students did, however, have an opportunity to record their stories, 
ideas, and opinions in their school newspapers, even as they were 
controlled by white members of staff. 

For Pratt’s system to flourish, he intended that some 
graduates from Carlisle and the other off-reservation boarding 
schools would either work at the schools as teachers, or would 
refrim to their reservations to continue his mission. Unfortunately 
for Pratt, however, many graduates used their newly-developed 
skills to decry the assimilation policies, and to denounce the 
methods practiced at the schools: the continuation of this criticism 
is apparent in modem Native American literature. 

Through the writings of the Carlisle students in personal 
narratives, the school newspapers, and later in autobiographical 
essays and stories, their legacy has been preserved and passed on 
to the present generation of Native American authors. By using the 
‘enemy language’ for their own purposes, these writers continue 
the war with the pen, and ensure that their children are steeped in 
the cultures and heritage of the Indian peoples. 



238 




33 



REFERENCES 



PRIMARY SOURCES 

Bonnin, G. (1901 March 5.). [Letter to Carlos Montezuma]. Ms. 
Cumberland County Historical Society. Carlisle, PA. 

Haijo, J, & Bird, G. (Eds.). (1997). Reinventing the enemy’s 
language^ New York: Norton. Morning Star. (1882, 
October & November). Editorial, 4. 

Momaday, N. S. (1997). The man made of words. New York: 
St Martin’s Griffin. 

Nabokov, P. (Ed.). (1978). Native American testimony: a chronicle 
of Indian-white relations from prophecy to the present, 
1492 — 1992. New York: Penguin. 

Pratt, R. H. (1964). Battlefield and classroom: four decades with 
the American Indian, 1867—1904. R. M. Utley (Ed.). New 
Haven: Yale University Press. 

Standing Bear, L. (1978). Land of the spotted eagle. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. (Original work published 
1933). 

Standing Bear, L. (1988). My Indian boyhood. Lincoln: University 
of Nebraska Press. (Original work published 1931). 

Standing Bear, L. (1975). My people, the Sioux. Lincoln: 
University of Nebraska Press. (Original work published 
1928). 

Tohe, L. (1999). No parole today. Albuquerque: West End Press. 

Townsend, S. (1880, June). Editorial. School News, p. 2. 

Zitkala-Sa. (1985). American Indian stories. Lincoln: University of 
Nebraska Press. (Original work published 1921). 





239 



SECONDARY SOURCES 



Adams, D. W. (1995). Education for extinction: American Indians 
and the boarding school experience, 1875 — 1928. Kansas: 
University Press of Kansas. 

Debo, A. (1970). A history of the Indians of the United States. 
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Haller, B. A. (1997). The publications of the Carlisle Indian 
School: cultural voices or pure propaganda? Paper 
presented at the History Division of the Association for 
Education in Journalism and Mass Communication annual 
meeting, Chicago. 

Landis, B. (2000). Carlisle Indian Industrial School history. 
Available: Http://home.epix.net/~landis/history.html. [2000]. 

Noriega, J. (1992). American Indian education in the United 
States. In M. A. Jaimes (Ed.). The State of Native America: 
Genocide, Colonization, and Resistance. Boston: South 
End Press. 

Purdy, J.L. (1990). Word ways: the novels of D’Arcy McNickle. 
Tucson: University of Arizona Press. 

Welch, D. S.)1991) Zitkala-Sa: An American Indian leader, 
1876 — 1938. Aim Arbor: University Microfilms 

International. (Original work published 1985). 



240 




37 



’2^0 G \ • 




Table of Contents 



Disrobing Joseph and Big Boy: Biblical Imagery in 

Richard Wright’s “Big Boy Leaves Home” 



Carmen Abston 1 

Subversiva Santa Evita 31 

Omar Basabe 



The Damaged African Soul in the 20*** Century Plays of 
August Wilson 

Regina Naasirah Blackburn 49 

Juggling Cultures/Reconciling Identity: Gender, Ethnicity, and the 
Circular Influence of “Home” in Julia Alvarez’s How the Garcia 



Girls Lost Their Accents 

Allison P. Boye... 81 

Illusive Authority and Elusive Control in Arlt’s Saver io, el cruel 
Alan Burch 107 

Chasing Shadows by Lucrecia Guerrero: Constructing the New 

World Person 

Wendy Caldwell 1 17 

The Black Helping Tradition in Frances Harper’s lola Leroy and 

Beverly Jenkins’ Indigo and Through the Storm 
Rita B. Dandridge 139 

Violence in Latino Literature: Literary Trope or Cultural Reality? 
Mark De Stephano 163 

Los Esbozos Psicologicos de Clarin en La Regenta 

Elvia Garcia- Ardalani 185 

The Carlisle Indian Boarding School and Its Literary Legacy: The 

War with the Pen 

Letitia Harding 205 ' 




- 1^ (L. 



38 



Recovered Memory and Narrative in Twentieth Century Chinese 



Women’s Literature 

Luyi Lan 241 

Nihilism of the Indifferent: Avant-garde Fiction by Yu Hua 
Yinghong Li 265 

Baudelaire Revisited: “La Langoureuse Asie et La Superbe 

Afrique” 

Joycelynne E. Loncke 297 

Some Structural Features in Gayl Jones’s Eva’s Man 

Jie Lu 317 

Everyman and Acculturation in Douglas C. Jones’s Gone the 

Dream and Dancing 

Peter G. Murphy 333 

The Electrical Voice of Invisible Man 

Cullen Capehart Nicholls 353 

Richard Wright’s Black Boy and Haiku: This Other World 
Naoko Nomura 377 



El Escritor y las Normas del Canon Literario 
Alcibiades Policarpo 

Jose Maria Arguedas en El Sexto 
Alcibiades Policarpo 



401 

415 



The Hero and the Anti-Hero in the Chicano Corrido 

Arthur Ramirez 43 1 

Un Estudio Comparado de la Caracterizacion de Ana Ozores y de 
Don Fermin De Pas en La Regenta de Leoploldo Alas 
Hector R. Romero 455 




La Historia de la Alquimia y su Influencia en la Literatura 
Hispanoamericana 

Rose Mary Salum 473 



Simply Maria or the American Dream: Myth, Identity and 
Challenge 

Virginia Shen 503 

Beyond the Narrow Gate: An Accoimt of Cultural Complexity and 
Search for Identity 

Virginia Shen 517 

Rosario Ferre and Her Narrative of Shattered Dreams: An Attempt 



to Show the Iimer Coimectedness of Stories from The Youngest 
Doll 

Angelika Soldan 53 1 

What Is Japan Coming To? Crime and Death in Two 
Contemporary Japanese Authors 

Matthew C. Strecher 553 

Genre, Theme, and Universality in Three African Texts 

Margaret Judith Sullivan 577 

The Isolated Protagonist in Bengali Short Stories: A Cultural 
Transmission 

Meghmala Tarafdar 605 

Fiction, Feminism, and Melodrama: Contemporary Hispanic 
American Women’s Literature 

Belkys Torres 627 

Weaving Yams in a Foreign Tongue Memories of Communist 
China: An American Perspective 

Li-hua Ying 645 

Buson’s Practice as a Bimjin Poet-Painter 

Toshiko Yokota 675 

Toward Cyclic Time: The Way to Salvation in Joim Edgar 
Wideman’s Hiding Place 

Yupei Zhou 701 



Papers included in this publication represent select presentations 
from the 2001 national conference of the National Association of 
African American Studies, National Association of Hispanic and 
Latino Studies, National Association of Native American Studies, 
and the International Association of Asian Studies. Information in 
this publication may not be reproduced without approval from the 
national organization. 



Copyright 2001 



NAAAS/NAHLS/NANAS/IAAS 
c/o Lemuel Berry, Jr., Ph.D. 
Morehead State University 
212 Rader Hall 
Morehead, KY 40351 
www.NAAAS.org 



U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERl) 

National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

ERrC REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

1. Document Identification: 

Title: 200 1 Monograph Series 
Author: Lemuel Berry, Jr., Ph.D. 

Corporate Source: 

Publication Date: 2001 



If. Reproduction Release: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, 
documents announced in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system. Resources in Education (RIE), are usually 
made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction release 
is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please check one of the following three 
options and sign the release form. 

Level I - Permitting reproduction and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival media (e.g. electronic) 
and paper copy. 

. Level 2A - Permitting reproduction and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media for ERIC archival 

collection subscribers only. 

Level 2B - Permitting reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only. 

Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission to reproduce is granted, 
but no option is marked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 

Sign Here: "I hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to 
reproduce and disseminate this document as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic 
media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. 
Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy information needs of 
educators in response to discrete inquiries." 

Signature: Position: ^ 

Printed Organization: NAAAS, NAHLS, NANAS, lAAS 

Address: PO Box 325 Telephone No: 207-839-8004 

Biddeford, ME 04004-0325 Date: 

III. Document Availability Information (from Non-ERIC Source): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the 
document fi"om another source, please provide the following information regarding the availability of the 
document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly available, and a dependable source can 
be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more stringent 
for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 







Publisher/Distributor: 



Address: 



Price per copy: Quantity price: 



IV. Referral of ERIC to Copyright/Reproduction Rights Holder: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please complete the 
following: 

Name: 



Address: 



V. Attach this form to the document being submitted and send both to: 

Velma Mitchell, Acquisitions Coordinator 

ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools 

P.O. Box 1348 

1 03 1 Quarrier Street 

Charleston, WV 25325-1348 

Phone and electronic mail numbers: 

800-624-9120 (Clearinghouse toll-free number) 

304-347-0467 (Clearinghouse FAX number) 
mitchelv@ael.org 



National Association of African 
American Studies 

National Association of Hispanic and 
Latino Studies 

National Association of Native 
American Studies 

International Association of Asian 

Studies 



2001 Monograph Series 



February 12 - 17, 2001 
Houston, Texas 



