RESEARCH ON MATHEMATICS PEDAGOGY 
FOR AMERICAN INDIAN STUDENTS: PHASE III 

Connecting Practices with Outcomes 



Regional Educational Laboratory 
Contract #ED-01-CO-0006 
Deliverable #2004-04 



Prepared by 

Helen S. Apthorp, Ph.D. 

Principal Researcher 



September 27, 2004 




Af97EL 

© 2004 McREL 



This document has been funded at least in part with federal funds from the U.S. 
Department of Education under contract number ED-Ol-CO-0006. The content of this 
publication does not neeessarily reflect the views or policies of the Department of Education nor 
does mention of trade names, eommereial produets, or organizations imply endorsement by the 
U.S. Government. 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



Foreword ii 

Introduction 1 

Statement of the Problem 2 

Overview of Report 2 

Research Context: Phase I and II Findings 3 

Phase I Activities 3 

Key Variables 3 

Research Partnership and Advisory Panel 5 

Phase I Outcomes 6 

Phase II Findings 7 

Mathematics Curricula and Approaches 7 

Demographic and Achievement Characteristics 10 

Data Collection Tools 12 

Phase III Research Design 13 

Overall Strategy and Rationale 13 

Research Questions 14 

Research Methods 14 

Sampling Frame 14 

Data Collection and Instrumentation 15 

Mathematics Achievement 15 

Teacher Questioning and Classroom Mathematics Talk 15 

Participatory Learning Environments 15 

Student Background 16 

School and Community Context 16 

Rival Instructional Factors 16 

Data Analysis 16 

Verification 17 

Anticipated Benefits and Outcomes 18 

Appendix A: Lists of Research Partnerships and Advisory Panel Members 23 

Appendix B: Mathematics Curriculum Materials Used in North Dakota Schools 

Serving Native American Students 24 



1 




FOREWORD 



This report presents a research design for the third and final phase of a project examining 
effective practices for American Indian students in mathematics. The project is part of one line of 
work being conducted by Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning (McREL) in the 
area of standards-based education. The research addresses priority issues in the Central Region, 
including quality of curricula and instruction and effective practices for student subgroups. The 
purpose of this research is to expand the evidence-based knowledge about effective standards- 
based practices for improving American Indian student achievement. 

In this report, we present the rationale, purpose, design, and methodology of the phase III 
study. The audience for this report includes leaders and researchers in American Indian 
education, and representatives of the project’s funding agency, the Institute of Education 
Sciences in the U.S. Department of Education. Ultimately, McREL intends to use the knowledge 
gained from the proposed research to inform product development in the form of a teacher’s 
guide and/or case examples. Such a product is intended to help teachers adopt standards-based 
mathematics instruction that enables students from culturally diverse backgrounds to meet 
standards important to their future success in school and life. 




INTRODUCTION 



American Indian students make up a substantial subgroup of the K-12 student population 
in two Central Region states. In South Dakota and North Dakota, American Indian students make 
up over seven percent of the student population, placing these states fifth and sixth highest 
among all states (U. S. Department of Education, 2002). In North Dakota, only 24 percent of the 
American Indian students performed at or above proficiency on the 2002 fourth-grade state 
assessments in mathematics (Dooley, 2003). If we are to take the goals of the No Child Left 
Behind Act (NCLB) seriously, such subgroup outcomes need to improve dramatically. 
Unfortunately, only a limited research base exists to inform practitioners and policymakers about 
how to make these improvements. 

In the 1990s, Deyhle and Swisher (1997) recounted the history of research in American 
Indian and Alaska Native education. Prior to the 1960s, research was steeped in “a legacy of 
deficit thought and guided by assimilation ideology” (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997, p. 117). Native 
language and culture were viewed as barriers rather than resources. Few studies attended to 
social environment and school structures as essential factors in understanding student success or 
failure. And, generally, the voices and perspectives of American Indians were not included and 
researchers ignored tribal policies of self-determination. Improvements in American Indian 
education research occurred in and around the 1960s: 

The 1960’s seem to define a point of demarcation in Indian education. This 
decade marked the emergence of strong Indian leadership that led to a policy of 
self-determination. Consistently over the past two decades, the voices of Indian 
people have become stronger in determining all aspects of their children’s 
education, including educational research. More schools on reservations are now 
locally controlled, and research, once the domain of university researchers, has 
been demystified to include research partnerships with local people asking their 
own questions and constructing appropriate paradigms for finding solutions. 

(Deyhle & Swisher, 1997, pp. 180-181) 

This report is one of a series of reports produced by a research partnership supported by 
Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning (McREL) involving researchers, teachers, 
local administrators, and state education and tribal officials. The partnership is engaged in a 
long-term research project that includes reviewing research and related literature on effective 
standards-based practices for American Indian and Alaska Native students, supporting 
professional development in research for American Indian educators through an intern and 
visiting scholar program, and establishing and maintaining a core group of partners to help direct 
and implement relevant and rigorous research for improving the educational outcomes of 
American Indian students. Current efforts focus on effective teaching practices for American 
Indian students in North Dakota. However, McREL plans to expand its partnership to include 
schools and educators from South Dakota and other Great Plains states. 

In this report, a summary of project findings to date is presented, followed by a proposal 
for the Phase III study. Phases I and II, establishing the partnership and conducting initial 
studies, have been completed. Phase III work, which will be conducted from October 2004 to 
November 2005, builds on the preliminary work and findings of the prior phases. 



1 




Statement oe the Problem 



Our initial review of research for this line of work (Apthorp, Debassige D’ Amato, & 
Richardson, 2003) led to conclusions similar to those reached by Deyhle and Swisher (1997). 
American Indian education research had made a difference in some contexts, resulting in 
significant achievement gains for American Indian students in some schools and some 
communities, notably, for example, in Rough Rock, Arizona (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997). 
Nonetheless, as Deyhle and Swisher argue: 

Still needed ... is the interpretation of what this research means in the way 
teachers are trained, schools are organized, curriculum is designed, and 
instruction is delivered, (p. 182) 

Researchers, practicing educators, and community members in Navajo and Hawaiian 
schools collaborated to conduct a comparative case study and two quasi-experimental studies. In 
these studies, students who received culturally based education with an emphasis on developing 
language and critical thinking performed significantly higher on tests of academic achievement 
in both language arts and mathematics than students in comparison groups (Holm & Holm, 1995; 
Rosier & Farella, 1976; Tharp, 1982). Whether or not similar approaches bring about similar 
outcomes in different communities, however, remains unexplored. In the studies cited, Hawaiian 
Native (Tharp, 1982) or Navajo students (Holm & Holm, 1995; Rosier & Farella, 1976) made up 
the majority in the participating schools. Many if not most American Indian students, however, 
attend schools where they are in the minority (U.S. Department of Education & U. S. 

Department of the Interior, 2001). 

Without a strong research base, educators have had to rely more on ideological, rather 
than theoretically sound, empirical guidance when looking for ways to improve the achievement 
of American Indian students. The present research seeks to extend the relevance of the 
knowledge to groups of American Indian students not well represented in the extant research 
literature. This inquiry focuses on the effectiveness of promising practices in mathematics 
pedagogy for American Indian students in North Dakota. In the long run, data collection tools 
and analytic procedures developed and refined in this study can be used in research focused on 
other groups and local and state contexts beyond North Dakota. McREL is assessing the efficacy 
of some of the potential solutions available to educators — solutions that are theoretically sound, 
have promise for improving American Indian student achievement, but are short on research- 
based evidence regarding their effectiveness. The intended audience for this research design 
includes education researchers and representatives of this project’s funding agency, the Institute 
of Education Sciences of the U.S. Department of Education. 

Overview oe Report 

This report begins with a brief summary of Phase I activities as well as findings related to 
the Phase II research questions. This summary provides the context for the focus on mathematics 
pedagogy and achievement for American Indian students in North Dakota schools. Next, the 
research design for the Phase III study is presented, including the overall design strategy, 
rationale, and methodology. The methods section provides details on sampling and data 



2 




collection and analysis. The design section concludes with a timeline of events and report 
deadlines. 



RESEARCH CONTEXT: PHASE I AND II EINDINGS 

As shown in Table 1, Phases I and II involved establishing collaborative relationships, 
developing preliminary instruments, and conducting descriptive field studies. This section of the 
report briefly summarizes Phase I and II findings and highlights conclusions and implications for 
the design of Phase III work. 



Table 1. Overall Timeline for Three Phases of Research 



Phase I: 

Establishing Relationships 

Year 1: Dec 2002-Nov 2003 


Phase II: 
Conducting 

Descriptive and Pilot Studies 

Year 2: Dec 2003-Aug 2004 


Phase III: 
Conducting an 
Effectiveness Study 

Year 3: Oct 2004-Nov 2005 


• Establish collaborative 
relationships 

• Form advisory panel 

• Conduct informal survey 


• Summarize descriptive findings 

• Develop/adopt instrumentation 

• Collect & analyze pilot data 


• Design effectiveness study 

• Conduct effectiveness study 

• Produce report 

• Disseminate report 



Phase I Activities 

Phase I activities resulted in (1) a literature review (Apthorp, 2003) that identified key 
variables in American Indian student achievement and a research design for Phase II, and (2) a 
research collaborative comprised of two groups. This section begins by identifying and 
discussing key variables. This is followed by a presentation of the purpose, membership, roles, 
and responsibilities of two groups that were formed for this project, the Research Partnership and 
the Research Advisory Panel. 

Key Variables 

A major premise of this research is that learning is “best built on the experience, values 
and knowledge of students and their families, both personal and community-based” (Demmert & 
Towner, 2003, p. 8). Making connections between prior knowledge and experience and new 
learning, however, is not a simple matter of association. As described by Beals (1998, as cited in 
Tharp, Estrada, Dalton, & Yamauchi, 2000), “it is an active process of sorting, analysis, and 
interpretation” (p. 29). This research focuses on the use of instructional conversations or 
mathematics talk as a way for teachers to help students extend prior knowledge to develop 
understanding of the new. 

The ability to facilitate mathematical discourse is a core mathematics teaching standard 
(National Council of Teachers of Mathematics [NCTM], 1991). Conversations are used to 
emphasize, model, and practice mathematical reasoning (Florian, 2001; Kilpatrick, Swafford & 
Findell, 2001; Stein, Grover & Henningsen, 1996). Tharp and Yamauchi (1994) define 
instructional conversation as “a dialog between teacher and learner in which prior knowledge 
and experiences are woven together with new material to build higher understanding” (p. 1). 
According to these authors, the dialogue is interesting, extended, and rational. It has a 



3 





substantive focus, involving in-depth exploration of complex and abstract ideas and reasoning, 
and results in a new level of understanding on the part of both the student and teacher. In 
addition to its academic and intellectual value, dialogue can reduce the distance between teachers 
and their students. Through the exchange of ideas, teachers and students construct lessons “from 
common understandings of each others’ experiences and ideas” and the teaching-learning 
process becomes “a warm, interpersonal and collaborative activity” (Dalton, 1989, as cited in 
Tharp et ah, 2000, p. 33). 

For instructional conversations to be interesting, extended, and rational, the questions 
posed and addressed need to be high-cognitive-demand questions. Low-cognitive-demand 
questions elicit factual recall, whereas high-cognitive-demand questions are probing and open- 
ended, seek meanings and interpretation, and elicit reasoning and explanations. Using a 
quantitative comparative study, Ben-Ari (1997) examined relationships between teacher 
behaviors, student verbal interactions in the classroom, and academic outcomes. The study was 
part of a larger research and development effort that extended the theory and research of 
Elizabeth Cohen (1994) on group work in heterogeneous classrooms. Using classroom 
observation data and results from a test of thinking that required defining, categorizing, and 
formulating conclusions, Ben-Ari (1997) found that the extent to which teachers posed 
intellectual challenges to students and encouraged them to engage in higher order thinking (e.g., 
asking, “What other ways could you approach the problem?”) was significantly and positively 
related to the extent of students’ verbal interactions, which mediated their performance on the 
test of thinking. Conversely, more teacher time spent disciplining or directing students, or 
hovering over groups, was associated with less verbal interaction among students and lower 
performance on the test of thinking. 

A participatory learning environment is necessary for every student to feel inclined to 
engage in and benefit from instructional conversations. Qualities of a participatory learning 
environment are identified and discussed by Tharp et al. (2000) in their proposal for 
transforming teaching to achieve excellence, fairness, inclusion, and harmony. A participatory 
classroom has an explicit system of shared values and beliefs regarding inclusion, helpfulness to 
others, and mutual respect, all of which may be necessary conditions for effective instructional 
conversations, especially in culturally and linguistically diverse classrooms (Tharp et ah, 2000). 

To encourage participation of American Indian students, teachers might need to adopt 
different social conventions and norms. Swisher and Deyhle (1992) suggest that Indian children 
tend to avoid situations that challenge harmonious relations and individual humility: “For Indian 
children from certain groups, public display of knowledge that is not in keeping with community 
or group norms may be an unreasonable expectation” (p. 90). To create greater cultural 
congruence, diads and triads can be used for cooperative work and conversation rather than 
singling out students in front of the whole class. According to Tharp and Yamauchi (1994), other 
considerations important for creating cultural congruence for American Indian students include 
increased wait time, an emphasis on peer- and activity -based versus teacher-oriented discussions, 
slowed tempo of events and conversations, indirect eye gaze, and engagement when ready 
instead of by teacher command. 

In academically successful and culturally and linguistically diverse schools and 
classrooms, teachers and school leaders adapt practices and structures to students’ interests and 



4 




cultures and students feel a sense of belonging (Allexsaht-Snider & Hart, 2001; Jamieson & 
Wikeley, 2000). Other research and perspectives, however, are equally clear that an over- 
emphasis on personalizing instruction is not effective (Chall, 2000). Effective mathematics 
instruction is academically dense and structured to include clear statements of goals and explicit 
definitions, explanations, and modeling, followed by guided and independent practice with 
corrective feedback in multiple contexts (Baker, Gersten, & Lee, 2002; Cardelle-Elawar, 1990; 
Chapin, O’Connor, & Anderson, 2003; Ysseldyke, Spieuzza, Kosciolek, & Boys, 2003). 
Therefore, not only are shared values of helpfulness and inclusion and students’ sense of 
belonging key variables in this research, alternative explanations for success, such as use of 
structured, explicit teaching, also are addressed. 

To summarize, research literature on the academic achievement of students in culturally 
and linguistically diverse classrooms and schools identified four key variables that are 
considered in our research: 

■ Quality and duration of mathematics talk 

■ Cognitive demand of teacher questioning 

■ Nature of participation structures and learning environment 

■ Extent to which teaching is structured 

Research Partnership and Advisory Panel 

In September 2003, McREL formed two groups to conduct research relevant to the needs 
of education practitioners and policymakers serving American Indian students in Central Region 
states. One group is a hands-on working group, the Research Partnership; the other is an 
Advisory Panel of researchers and American Indian education leaders. The membership lists of 
both the Research Partnership and Advisory Panel are provided in Appendix A. 

The purpose of the Researeh Partnership is to conduct meaningful, methodologieally 
sound research to improve the quality and outcomes of education for American Indian students 
in North Dakota elementary schools.^ The Research Partnership is a hands-on work group 
comprised of teachers and administrators from local, tribal, and state education agencies in North 
Dakota and researchers from Me REE. At least one member of the Research Partnership also 
serves on the Research Advisory Panel. Each member of the Research Partnership serves on a 
subcommittee and is responsible for assisting with the conduct of one or more aspects of the 
study (e.g., assuring protection of rights of human subjects and complying with tribal research 
policies, developing/selecting student assessments and other instruments, interpreting and using 
findings). 



* Although the intended scope of this work originally included schooling and outcomes for American 
Indian students in South Dakota, momentum and active membership currently represents North Dakota almost 
exclusively. Discussion of how to recruit and expand into South Dakota or other states and regions is an activity 
planned for the conclusion of Phase III. 



5 




The Advisory Board is a group of scholars and state and national leaders in American 
Indian education and research. The purpose of the Advisory Board is to guide the work of the 
Research Partnership through research plan and report reviews. Members of the Advisory Board 
have knowledge of and use high standards of quality in research. In addition to their research 
expertise, they bring to the project knowledge and experience in American Indian education and 
mathematics education. 

Phase I Outcomes 

Phase I activities and outcomes influenced Phase II work in several ways. Based on a 
survey of participants in a 2003 professional development workshop sponsored by the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, McREL identified mathematics textbooks and approaches commonly used with 
American Indian students in North Dakota schools (see Appendix B). Three of these textbooks 
(Saxon, Everyday Mathematics, and Scott Eoresman- Addison Wesley) and one approach 
(Cognitively Guided Instruction) became the focus of studies conducted in Phase II. 

Networking and meetings between Research Partnership members and others confirmed 
and extended the identification of key variables and attributes of classroom interactions 
supportive of American Indian students’ learning and achievement. Participants at a planning 
meeting in Bismarck in Eebruary 2004 discussed the adequacy of the conceptual model 
presented in Eigure 1 as a preliminary way of relating key teaching variables to success in 
mathematics. 




Figure 1. Conceptual model. 

Participants added explanatory details to the conceptual model, such as language 
experience at home and residential stability as background factors contributing to prior 
knowledge. Distinctions were made between variables teachers had control over and those they 



6 



did not. Thus, the connection between students’ prior knowledge and teachers’ pedagogical 
reasoning was added to show that teachers use their assessment of students’ prior knowledge to 
inform their pedagogical decisions. In particular, during the Research Partnership Meeting in 
February 2004, participants elaborated on the attributes of teacher- student mathematics talk that 
are effective for American Indian students, as follows: 

• Is often based on experiences teachers have in common with students outside of 
school 

• Makes connections for students by using students’ experience and knowledge 
outside of school (e.g., conversations and problem-solving content include 
Indian tacos vs. egg rolls vs. brownies) 

• Encourages and extends students’ thinking (e.g., by asking students to explain 
their thinking and offering a variety of response modes, such as “show me,” 

“draw it,” “tell me,” “write it,” or “teach your partner how you did it”) 

• Is non-judgmental in comments or observations (does not put students down) 

• Expresses high expectations (e.g., two-word responses from students are not 
acceptable) 



Phase II Findings 

The purpose of the Phase II work was to describe contextual factors important to 
mathematics pedagogy and achievement for American Indian students in North Dakota schools. 
The following Phase II research questions were specified: 

1. To what extent are selected mathematics curricula and approaches used with 
American Indian students in North Dakota elementary schools aligned with 
content standards in mathematics? 

2. What are the demographic and achievement characteristics of elementary 
schools serving American Indian students in North Dakota? 

3. What data collection tools are reliable and valid for studying teaching 
practices and student achievement in mathematics in schools serving 
American Indian students? 

Mathematics Curricula and Approaches 

Standards documents specify and sequence learning targets in terms of the knowledge and .skills 
expected of students and for which schools hold themselves accountable. The North Dakota state 
mathematics standards (North Dakota Department of Public Instruction, 2004) specify the 
mathematics knowledge and skills intended to represent what a person needs to know and be 
able to do to succeed in later schooling, at work, and in his or her community. Our first Phase II 
analysis was designed to evaluate the extent to which students had opportunities to learn these 
standards in the area of mathematics at grade four. We analyzed the alignment of content 



7 




between mathematics textbooks used in schools serving American Indian students and North 
Dakota’s mathematics standards (North Dakota DPI, 2004). 



Study Sample. McREL selected three mathematics textbooks from a list of curricular 
resources used by teachers in North Dakota schools serving American Indian students (see 
Appendix B for complete list); these were Saxon, Scott Foresman-Addison Wesley, and 
Everyday Mathematics. Grade 4 mathematics content as specified in 44 benchmarks was 
selected for analysis because of the significance of performance at the end of grade 4 in state and 
federal accountability systems. 

Review and Analysis Methods. Eesson by lesson (or chapter by chapter), the analyst first 
identified all knowledge and skills covered in the teacher’s manual for each mathematics 
textbook even if not explicitly included in the student pages. Then, the knowledge and skills 
were compared to the North Dakota grade four mathematics benchmarks. If no matches were 
found at grade 4, the alignment was conducted with benchmarks specified for grade levels above 
and below grade 4. 

Findings. The analysis revealed equally comprehensive coverage of grade four 
mathematics benchmarks for the three textbooks. Each textbook covered 39 of the 44 
benchmarks (89%) specified for the five North Dakota grade four mathematics standards. Figure 
2 shows that (1) there is generally good alignment of the textbooks and the North Dakota 
standards and (2) no one textbook aligns perfectly with content standards. 




Everyday Math Scott Foresman Saxon 4/5 



■ Numbers and Operations (20 benchmarks) 

H Geometry (5 benchmarks) 

□ Data (9 benchmarks) 

□ Measurement (6 benchmarks) 

□ Algebra (4 benchmarks) 

Figure 2. Selected textbook coverage of Grade 4 North Dakota content standards and 
benchmarks in Mathematics. 



8 






Although comprehensive, each textbook omitted some benchmarks. Across the 
textbooks, the missing benchmarks varied. As can be seen in Figure 2, Everyday Mathematics 
had the lowest coverage of Measurement benchmarks, but the highest coverage (100%) of the 
Algebra benchmarks. Although both Scott Foresman and Saxon covered three of the four 
Algebra benchmarks, each textbook omitted a different benchmark. Scott Foresman content did 
not include “use parentheses in solving simple equations,” and Saxon content did not include 
“determine the missing elements of complex repeating patterns.” (Uncovered benchmarks are 
identified for each textbook in the complete report [McREF, 2004].) 

In standards-based systems, textbooks should not be viewed as drivers of the curriculum; 
rather, they should be viewed as resources from which to purposively select units and activities 
to help children learn important knowledge and skills. Curriculum maps and pacing charts help 
teachers organize instruction over the course of the academic year so that children have 
opportunities to learn critical knowledge and skills (Reichardt, 2002). An area for future inquiry 
is to determine the extent to which schools and teachers use pacing charts or other alignment and 
curriculum design tools to help ensure that American Indian students in North Dakota have 
opportunities to learn critical knowledge and skills. 

Cognitively Guided Instruction. Cognitively Guided Instruction (CGI) is an approach to 
teaching developed by researchers who systematically studied and described children’s 
mathematical development and their intuitive problem solving (Peterson, Fennema, & Carpenter, 
1991). CGI builds on children’s accomplishments and complements rather than contradicts what 
children already know and can do. Teachers trained in CGI develop a clear understanding of how 
students learn. 

Along many dimensions, CGI is compatible with American Indian culture (Hankes & 
Fast, 2002). In CGI, for example, paired or group problem solving and solution sharing is 
emphasized and instruction is time generous rather than time driven. Also, the fact that CGI 
builds on children’s accomplishments and complements rather than contradicts what children 
already know is congruent with Native American pedagogy. In contrast to the metaphor of 
teaching where students are viewed as “blank slates onto which information is etched,” from the 
CGI and Native American perspective each student “is a born thinker,” constructing and revising 
emerging theories about the world (Hankes & Fast, 2002, p. 44). Furthermore, CGI is recognized 
as an approach particularly effective for culturally and linguistically diverse students (Tharp et 
al., 2000; Hankes, 1998). 

North Dakota educators, including both local leaders and state officials, are interested in 
the potential of CGI, especially for developing American Indian students’ confidence, skills, and 
knowledge in mathematics (FaFromboise & Rasmussen, personal communications, 2004). 
Evidence from a study conducted in spring 2004 supports these appraisals of CGI. Teachers 
using CGI in North Dakota classrooms serving American Indian students report increased 
student confidence as problem solvers, increased excitement about learning mathematics through 
a “makes sense” approach, improved verbal skills for presenting in front of groups, and better 
understanding of numbers (Apthorp & Woempner, 2004). The problem is that no assessments of 
students’ knowledge and skills were made to verify the teachers’ reports. State and national 
regard for the possibilities of CGI (e.g., Tharp et al., 2000) warrant further study of its 
implementation and effectiveness. 



9 




Additionally, Apthorp and Woempner (2004) asked teachers how they perceived CGI’s 
role in helping students meet standards. If a standards-based system is to impact achievement as 
intended — by clearly establishing what student must learn and holding students, teachers, 
administrators accountable — then curriculum and instruction must reflect or align with what is 
required in the standards (Clune, 2001; Ravitch, 1995). Teachers reported that CGI was an asset 
for helping students meet particular mathematics standards and benchmarks, namely, developing 
understanding of numbers, problem solving and communicating solutions to others (Apthorp & 
Woempner, 2004). As found for the alignment analysis above, where no one textbook aligned 
perfectly with content standards, CGI, as a pedagogical approach, did not align perfectly with 
every type of learning required by all content standards. Teachers supplemented their use of CGI 
with more explicit instructional strategies as appropriate depending on what students needed to 
learn. This purposeful alignment between instructional strategies and particular content was 
described by a teacher of combined-second and third- grade classroom as follows: 

Benchmarks such as identifying triangles or other shapes still have to be taught. 

Likewise, rounding, graphing, identifying coins, measurement, and the like need 
to be shown to the students for them to understand. The beauty of CGI is that 
once these concepts are established, story problems can be written to include 
these as well. The benchmarks involving number sense and number relationships 
are covered completely through CGI. Place value is a difficult concept, and I use 
a combination of CGI and demonstration for that. (As quoted in Apthorp & 

Woempner, 2004, p. 10) 

Demographic and Achievement Characteristics 

According to 2003 state data, there are 321 elementary schools in North Dakota, 
including public and Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) schools. Half of these schools serve student 
populations in which 1.5 percent or less are American Indian students. As shown in Figure 3, in 
about one-quarter (81) of these schools, American Indian students made up 1.6 to 5.3 percent of 
the student population, and in another quarter of the schools (80), American Indian students 
comprised 5.4 to 100 percent of the student population. 




Percent of American Indian Students 



Figure 3. North Dakota elementary schools with different percentages of American Indian 
students. 



10 





The 80 schools with the highest percentage of American Indian students have an average 
free or reduced-price lunch (FRL) rate of 50 percent (ranging from zero to 98%). This is 
considerably higher than the state average FRL rate of 35 percent. The majority (78%) of schools 
with the highest percentage of American Indian students are either in rural locales (e.g., a 4-hour 
drive from Bismarck) or in mid-size cities (e.g., Bismarck or Grand Forks). 

Mathematics achievement data aggregated at the school level were obtained from the 
North Dakota Department of Public Instruction. These data are the results of the state’s criterion- 
referenced, standards-based assessment for grade four. The performance of American Indian 
students as a subgroup was available for 17 schools. In these schools, proportionally fewer 
American Indian students, compared to all students combined, performed at or above the 
proficient level. The gap between the achievement of American Indian students as a subgroup 
and all students combined is shown graphically in Figure 4. The average percentage of American 
Indian students who scored at or above proficient was 33 percent or less compared to nearly 60 
percent for all students combined. 



c 




□ All Students (2002 n=209; 2003 
n=204) 

□ American Indian Students (2002 
n=13; 2003 n=15) 



Figure 4. School average percentage proficient in grade 4 mathematics for all students and 
for American Indian students as a subgroup. 

In five of the 17 schools with available subgroup data, the percentage of American Indian 
students who scored at or above the proficient level was relatively high. Descriptive information 
about each of these high-performing schools is presented in Table 2. These schools are potential 
study sites that will help extend the evidentiary knowledge base about effective practices in 
mathematics for American Indian students. Their demographic characteristics are comparable to 
the 80 schools represented by the right-hand bar in Figure 3 where American Indian students 
comprise over five percent of the student population. As potential study sites, they may offer 
lessons to be learned about how to effectively teach mathematics to culturally diverse groups of 
students, in particular, groups of students that include students with American Indian heritage. 



II 




Table 2. North Dakota Schools with High Percent Proficient or Above American 
Indian Students in Grade 4 Mathematics 





Grade 4 Mathematics 
Percent Proficient or Above 


2002 

School Composition 


2002 


2003 


American 

Indian 


Overall 


American 

Indian 


Overall 


Total 

Enrollment 


American 

Indian 


FRL 


Jeannette 

Myhre 

Elementary 


” 


31% 


50% 


57% 


433 


10% 


53% 


Parshall 

Elementary 


38% 


47% 


47% 


55% 


158 


68% 


73% 


St. John 

Public 

School 


43% 


47% 


46% 


46% 


144 


81% 


83% 


Minnie H. 
Elementary 


- 


64% 


45% 


63% 


111 


34% 


51% 


Lake 

Agassiz 

Elementary 

School 


36% 


47% 


44% 


70% 


412 


26% 


60% 



Data Collection Tools 

Two Phase II activities examined the viability of data collection tools for assessing 
student mathematics achievement and classroom learning environment and practices. 

Appropriate student assessment was discussed at the February 28, 2004 Research Partnership 
meeting in Bismarck, North Dakota; particular student surveys and teacher logs were jointly 
examined on June 16 and 17, 2004, by educators and McREL researchers working with 

'y 

American Indian students. 

With regard to student assessments. Research Partnership members identified criteria for 
assessments of mathematics knowledge and skills, including that (1) items represent a balance 
between reasoning, conceptual understanding, and computation; (2) assessment items are aligned 
with curriculum content; and (3) reading demands are minimized as long as cognitive demand is 
not compromised. Released items from NAEP Grade 4 Mathematics and MAEP (Michigan) 
Grade 4 Mathematics meet the first and third criteria. 

Teachers in Bismarck and Twin Buttes reviewed two surveys that asked students about 
their perceptions of their classroom learning environments. These two surveys were My Class 
Inventory (Fraser & Fisher, 1983) and the Constructivist Learning Environment Survey (Fraser, 



^ Educators included Jen Janecek, Director of United Tribes Technical College Rural Science Systemic 
Initiative; Teresa Delorme, Principal, and Denise Fulston, sixth-grade teacher, Pioneer Elementary School; Willa 
Incognito, sixth-grade teacher, Twin Buttes Elementary School. 



12 




1998). The teachers’ review concluded that important features of participatory learning 
environments were covered but that students would need several of the terms clarified. The 
reviewers suggested that researchers first ask students’ teachers to identify potentially confusing 
terms in the surveys and to jointly develop definitions. Also, reviewers suggested administering 
the surveys as a structured group interview with two or three students at a time. 

Teachers also reviewed the Mathematics Daily Log (RAND #01 1003) and agreed that 
teachers would be willing and able to complete such a log daily. Recommendations included 
clarifying certain terms with concrete examples and adding a request to list mathematics 
vocabulary used. 



PHASE III RESEARCH DESIGN 

The purpose of the Phase III study is to better understand connections between teaching 
practices and mathematics achievement for American Indian students in North Dakota. These 
students represent a substantial subgroup attending both tribal and public schools about whom 
there is concern but little research-based evidence to guide efforts at improvement. The Phase III 
study is designed to examine the implementation of, and outcomes associated with, an approach 
to teaching mathematics valued by professional educators participating in this Research 
Partnership, specifically. Cognitively Guided Instruction. A mixed methods comparative case 
study will be used for the Phase III study. 

This study will extend prior research by including assessment of student achievement at 
its core and operationalizing ideas about why and how mathematics talk and participatory 
learning environments appear to be important dimensions of effective pedagogy for American 
Indian students. In addition to measuring student achievement and documenting mathematics 
talk and participatory learning, the study design includes procedures for addressing rival 
explanations. Sampling procedures involve identifying both a CGI site and a comparison site not 
using CGI but with similar student population demographics. Data collection procedures address 
rival explanations, including student, school, and community background factors and 
instructional practices that are not typically characteristic of CGI. 

Overall Strategy and Rationale 

The overall strategy of Phase III is to develop “thorough understanding” (Stake, 1995) 
through a case study. For the purposes of this study, the central phenomenon, mathematics 
achievement, will be generally defined as progress toward or proficiency in fourth-grade 
mathematics. Similarly, an American Indian fourth-grade student generally will be defined as a 
fourth grader enrolled in a tribal or public school in North Dakota and identified as a member of 
a recognized tribe or Indian community. Our purpose is to tell the stories of teachers whose 
students are advancing toward or beyond proficiency in meaningful mathematics standards so 
that others can imagine a role for themselves in similar types of experiences. This project 
complements experimental, what works research in culturally based education (i.e.. Yapp, 2004) 
by using a mixed methods case study design to address what is and what could be. Moreover, the 
present study sample complements the study sample proposed in Yapp’s (2004) research, which 
includes schools where at least half of the student population is American Indian. In the present 



13 




study, the sample will inelude schools where less than half of the student population is American 
Indian. 



Research Questions 

The overarching research question for this study is “What are the primary ways in which 
American Indian students succeed in mathematics in North Dakota grade four classrooms and 
schools?” 

Related sub-questions include the following: 

a. To what extent are there systematic relationships between patterns of teacher 
questioning and student mathematics achievement? 

b. To what extent are there systematic relationships between indicators of a 
participatory learning environments and student mathematics achievement? 

c. To what extent and in what manner are teacher questioning strategies and 
indicators of a participatory learning environment supported by or in conflict 
with standards-based policies and practices? 

RESEARCH METHODS 

A comparative case study design including mixed methods will be used, including 
quantitative analyses of relationships between student achievement and key pedagogical 
variables and practices and student background factors. Site visits involving interviews, 
observations, and document review will be used, and qualitative data will be analyzed using 
constant comparative methods. 



Sampling Erame 

A purposive sampling strategy will be used to identify two study sites and two to four 
classrooms. Initial site selection criteria, used to ensure that sites are representative of schools 
serving American Indian students in North Dakota, are (I) grade levels from Pre-K to six, (2) at 
least 10 percent of the student population is American Indian, and (3) an FRL rate of 40 percent 
or more. One site will be using CGI for teaching mathematics; a comparison site will not be 
using CGI but will have comparable demographic characteristics and a record of relatively high 
performance for American Indian students as a subgroup. 

Teachers and students in all fourth-grade classrooms at the study sites will make up the 
sample of teachers and students. Three target students in each classroom will be identified to 
obtain student-level data on participation in instructional activities and conversations and 
achievement. These students will be American Indian students identified by the classroom 
teacher as low, medium, and high achievers. 



14 




Data Collection and Instrumentation 



Data will be collected to measure key variables and address rival explanations. Key 
variables as indicated in the research questions are mathematics achievement, level of cognitive 
demand in teacher questioning, and indicators of participatory learning environments. Rival 
explanations involve demographic and context factors and alternative theoretical perspectives. 

Mathematics Achievement 

To measure student achievement, mathematics subtest(s) of an achievement test will be 
administered to students in study classrooms. Two achievement tests, not used in the North 
Dakota State Assessment system, are being considered for this purpose: Wide Range 
Achievement Test-Expanded (WRAT-E) Group Eorm (Robertson, 2003) and Iowa Tests of Basic 
Skills® (ITBS)® (Hoover, Dunbar, & Frisbie, 2001). One of these tests will be selected for use 
based on meeting three of four criteria: (1) aligned with North Dakota fourth-grade mathematics 
standards and benchmarks, (2) scoring tum-around time fits project timeline, (3) American 
Indian students are represented in the norming sample, and (4) adequate reliability and validity. 
If available and psychometrically sound, both criterion-referenced and norm-referenced scores 
will be used as measures of achievement. 

Teacher Questioning and Classroom Mathematics Talk 

A teacher survey, a daily activity log, and classroom observations will be used to obtain 
data on teacher questioning and conversations with students. Data sources, variables, and scores 
for each of these tools are presented in Table 3. 



Table 3. Data Collection for Teacher Questioning and Interactions 



Tool 


Data Sources 


Variables 


Scores and other Data 


Teacher 
Survey of 
Practices 


Teacher self-assessment in 
response to Likert-type and 
open-ended questions 


Level of cognitive demand 
Encouraging talk 
Developing vocabulary 


Extent to which press for 
justification, explanation, 
and meaning is sustained 


Daily 

Activity 

Log 


Teacher self-report 


Corrective feedback 
Expectations (high or low) 


Erequency of instances of 
different categories of 
talk format (e.g., 
initiation, response, 
evaluation [IRE]; 
re voicing or restating; 
developing common 
understanding of each 
other’s experiences) 


Observation 

Protocol 


Researcher field notes from 
interviews and classroom 
observations 





Participatory Learning Environments 

My Class Inventory (MCI) (Fraser & Fisher, 1983) and Constructivist Learning 
Environment Survey (Fraser, 1998) will be used in a structured interview format with student 
participants in study classrooms. Both have adequate reliability and evidence of validity (Fraser 
& Fisher, 1983; Fraser, 1998). Prior elementary school research has shown significant positive 



15 





correlations between MCI ratings and the extent to which teachers create a climate of acceptance 
and active participation in their classrooms (Apthorp, 2000). 

Student Background 

Student’s prior knowledge in mathematics will be measured by performance on the most 
recent North Dakota grade-level assessment in mathematics (administered annually in the fall). 
Student demographic data (gender, years in present school, eligibility for free or reduced-lunch 
lunch, American Indian/non- American Indian) will be collected from school records. The extent 
to which students identify themselves as American Indian will be determined by asking students, 
“Do you see yourself as American Indian”? using the scale “not at all” (0), “a little” (1), “some” 
(2), and “a lot” (3) (Zimmerman et ah, 1995, p. 209). 

School and Community Context 

Data on school-level standards-based policies and practices will be collected through 
document review and interviews with school administrators and teachers and community elders. 
Documents and information to be gathered include school and district curricula, pacing charts, 
content standards and benchmarks, and definitions of proficiency levels. Information on 
community context will include frequency of activities of American Indian families in the 
community, such as attending Pow Wows, seasonal feasts, and naming ceremonies. 

Rival Instructional Factors 

Data will be collected related to the extent to which teaching is structured. For this 
purpose, a set of survey items used to measure structured teaching in the McREL Teacher Survey 
of Policies and Practices will be used (see Apthorp et ah, 2004). Additionally, the classroom 
observation protocol will include recording whether or not the three target students are engaged 
in academic talk (e.g., answering or asking academic questions), task management (e.g., looking 
for or setting up materials, asking for clarification on task or activity directions), or non- 
academic or task management behaviors (e.g., looking around, playing or talking 
inappropriately, being disruptive). 



Data Analysis 

To answer the research questions, several stages of data analysis will be used. For the 
qualitative data, categories of teacher questioning and patterns of student participation in 
learning and in mathematics talk will be identified during data collection. As new data are 
collected, they will be compared to the categories and patterns, and the two steps will be repeated 
until all data fit into categories and patterns. Second, conditional matrices, chronologies, and 
other forms of tabular presentations of data will be used to examine possible patterns or 
relationships between practices and student achievement. Finally, a cross-case analysis will be 
conducted to further develop an interpretation of the ways in which teaching practice and student 
achievement are related. 

Using the achievement data, class averages, American Indian student averages, and non- 
American Indian student averages will be computed for each classroom. We will conduct a linear 



16 




regression between prior achievement and current achievement and identify /count students 
(American Indian and non- American Indian) who perform above predicted levels. Finally, we 
will conduct comparative analyses across classrooms and student groups using teacher and 
classroom practice data to determine if evidence suggests connections between practices and 
achievement above predicted levels. 



Verification 

Four procedures will be used to establish credibility of findings and interpretations 
(Creswell, 1998). First, multiple and different sources of data, methods, and perspectives will be 
used to corroborate or refine interpretation of data from any one single source. Second, active 
searching and consideration of negative or disconfirming evidence will be conducted and initial 
hypotheses revised until all cases, including exceptions and outliers, are accounted for. Third, 
member checks will be conducted; this will include having participant teachers and others on-site 
in the study schools review the accuracy of data categories and interpretations. Fourth, members 
of the Research Partnership will be involved in peer review and/or debriefing periodically 
throughout the study and formally for review of the first draft of the report of findings. 

The project timeline involves four overlapping stages of work, as reviewed in Table 4. 
During the first two months (October and November), study sites and participants will be 
selected and prepared and instrumentation finalized. Data will be collected and analyzed during 
the following months. Draft and final reports will then be written; the final report will be 
completed by June 15, 2005. Subsequently, McREL will utilize the knowledge gained from the 
project in a product for teachers, such as a teacher’s guide and/or case examples of how to 
implement standards-based practices in mathematics instruction for culturally diverse groups of 
students. 



Table 4. Project Timeline 



Task 


Activities 


October 4 to November 30, 2004 


Site Selection 
and Preparation 


Review site selection with Research Partners. 


Gather background info on study sites. 


Invite site and classroom teacher participation. 


Assure protection of rights of human subjects and tribal sovereignty. 


Finalize 

Instrumentation 


Review mathematics content, psychometric and norming properties, and 
scoring turn-around time of achievement tests; select/purchase one (ITBS 
and WRAT-E Group). 


Adapt MCI and GEES for diad or triad interview. 


Adapt RAND daily log and McREE Teacher Survey of Policies and 
Practices. 


Einalize interview and document review protocols for gathering 
information on standards-based policies and practices. 


Einalize classroom observation protocol. 


Define variable measures. 



17 





Task 


Activities 


December 2004 to February 2005 


Data Collection 


Teachers complete daily log 


Site visits to establish Memoranda of Agreement and collect student and 
school-level data 


Site visits to interview and survey students and teachers; collect student 
work, lesson artifacts; observe classrooms; recruit and train achievement 
test examiners 


Test examiners administer student achievement tests 


February, March, and April 2005 


Data Analysis 


Descriptive summaries of (1) teacher daily log, (2) classroom observations, 
(3) school context and standards-based policies and practices, (4) student 
perceptions of learning environment, and (5) student achievement 


Verification/triangulation - (1) with (2), (1) with (4), (2) with (4) above 


Code data for patterns and emphases in practices. 


Examine data for relationships between practices and student achievement. 


March, April, and June 2005 


Report Writing 


Write appendices: (A) Daily log summary, (B) Student perceptions 
summary, C) Classroom observations summary. 


Draft report answering research questions (due to external reviewers, 
5/15/05). 


Finalize report (due June 15, 2005). 



ANTICIPATED BENEFITS AND OUTCOMES 

This research is being designed in part in response to the needs of educators and 
policymakers in the Central Region states for evidence-based knowledge about effective 
practices and achievement outcomes for American Indian students in elementary schools. The 
process of designing the study, conducting the study in North Dakota schools, and interpreting 
findings through the Research Partnership offers multiple opportunities for professional 
development. As members of this partnership, American Indian educators are involved in clearly 
communicating valued education goals, operationalizing progress toward goals through 
instrument development, identifying and creating representative research samples, and 
interpreting and using findings appropriately. In addition, it is anticipated that this project will 
result in rich, case-based knowledge about implementing standards in mathematics instruction 
for culturally diverse groups of students. 



18 





REFERENCES 



Allexsaht-Snider, M., & Hart, L. E. (2001). “Mathematics for all”: How do we get there? Theory 
into Practice, 40(2), 93-101. 

Apthorp, H. (2000). Dimensions of Learning Evaluation for Kirkland School District. Aurora, 
CO: Mid-continent Research for Education and Eeaming. 

Apthorp, H. (2003). Research on mathematics pedagogy for Native American students: Research 
Design for Phase 11. (Deliverable #2003-05). Aurora, CO: Mid-continent Research for 
Education and Eearning. 

Apthorp, H., Barley, Z., Englert, K., Eauer, P., Gamache, E., Van Buhler, B., and Martin-Glenn, 
M. (2004). High-performing, high-needs schools model development report. Aurora, CO: 
Mid-continent Research for Education and Eeaming. 

Apthorp, H., DeBassige D’Amato, E., & Richardson, A. (2003). Effective standards-based 
practices for American Indian students: A review of research literature. Aurora, CO: 
Mid-continent Research for Education and Eeaming. 

Apthorp, H., & Woempner, C. (2004). Use of Cognitively Guided Instruction in a sample of 
North Dakota classrooms. Aurora, CO: Mid-continent Research for Education and 
Eeaming. 

Baker, S., Gersten, R. & Eee, D. (2002). A synthesis of empirical research on teaching 

mathematics to low-achieving students. The Elementary School Journal, 103(\), 51-73. 

Ben-Ari, R. (1997). Complex instmction and cognitive development. In E. G. Cohen & R. A. 
Eotan (Eds.), Working for equity in heterogeneous classrooms: Sociological theory in 
practice, (pp. 193-206). New York: Teachers College Press. 

Cardelle-Elawar, M. (1990). Effects of feedback tailored to bilingual students’ mathematics 
needs on verbal problem solving. The Elementary School Journal, 91(2), 165-170. 

Chall, J. S. (2000). The academic achievement challenge: What really works in the classroom. 
New York: Guilford Press. 

Chapin, S., O’Connor, C., & Anderson, N. (2003). Classroom discussions: Using math talk to 
help students learn grades 1-6. Sausalito, CA: Math Solutions Publications. 

Clune, W. H. (2001). Toward a theory of standards-based reform: The case of nine NSE 
statewide Systemic Initiatives. In S. H. Euhrman (Ed.), Erom the capital to the 
classroom: Standards-based reform in the states (pp. 13-38). Chicago: University of 
Chicago Press. 

Cohen, E. G. (1994). Designing group work: Strategies for heterogeneous classrooms (2"‘^ ed.). 
New York: Teachers College Press. 



19 




Creswell, J. W. (1998). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five 
traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage Publications. 

Demmert, W. J., & Towner, J. C. (2003, February 10). A review of the research literature on the 
influence of culturally based education on the academic performance of Native American 
students. Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Laboratory. 

Deyhle, D., & Swisher, K. (1997). Research in American Indian and Alaska Native education: 
From assimilation to self-determination. In Michael W. Apple (Ed.), Review of Research 
in Education (Vol. 22, pp. 113-194). Washington, DC: American Educational Research 
Association. 

Dooley, S. (2003, August 17). Indian students struggling: Teachers, parents hope to keep kids 
from being left behind. Bismarck Tribune. 

Florian, J. (2001). Mathematics standards in classroom practice. In H. Apthorp, C. Dean, J. 

Florian, P. Lauer, R. Reichardt, N. Sanders, & R. Snow-Renner, Standards in classroom 
practice research synthesis (pp. 63-106). Aurora, CO: Mid-continent Research for 
Education and Learning. 

Fraser, B. J., & Fisher, D. L. (1983). Science education assessment instruments: Development 
and validation of short forms of some instruments measuring student perceptions of 
actual and preferred classroom learning environment. Science Education, <57(1), 1 15-131. 

Fraser, B. J. (1998). Appendix A: Constructivist Learning Environment Survey. In R. J. Fraser & 
K. G. Tobin (Eds.), International Handbook of Science Education (pp. 562-564). Great 
Britain: Kluwer. 

Hankes, J. (1998). American Indian pedagogy and cognitive-based mathematics instruction. 

New York: Garland Publishing. 

Hankes, J., & Fast, G. R. (2002). Changing the Eaces of Mathematics: Perspective on 

Indigenous people of North America. Reston, VA: National Council of Teachers of 
Mathematics. 

Hoover, H. D., Dunbar, S. B., & Frisbie, D. A. (2001). Iowa Test of Basic Skills® (ITBS®). 
Itasca, IF: Riverside Publishing. 

Holm, A., & Holm, W. (1995). Navajo language education: Retrospect and prospects. The 
Bilingual Research Journal, 79(1), 141-167. 

Jamieson, L, & Wikeley, F. (2000). Is consistency a necessary characteristic for effective 
schools? School Effectiveness and School Improvement, 77(4), 435-452. 

Kilpatrick, J., Swafford, J., & Findell, B. (Eds.). (2001). Adding it up: Helping children learn 
mathematics. Washington, DC: National Academy Press. 



20 




Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning. (2004, February). Fourth- grade 

mathematics textbooks aligned to the North Dakota mathematics content standards for 
grade K-12. Aurora, CO: Author. Report presented at the meeting of the McREL 
Research Partnership for Mathematics Teaching and Native American Student 
Achievement, Bismarck, ND. 

National Council of Teachers of Mathematics. (1991). Professional standards for teaching 
mathematics. Reston, VA: Author. 

North Dakota Department of Public Instruction. (2004, January). The North Dakota standards 
and benchmarks content standards - Draft. Mathematics: Grades K-12 - content only. 
Retrieved September 12, 2004, from 

http://www.dpi.state.nd.us/standard/content/math/math Jan04.pdf . 

Peterson, P. L., Fennema, E., & Carpenter, T. (1991). Using children’s mathematical knowledge. 
In B. Means, C. Chelemer, & M. S. Knapp (Eds.), Teaching advanced skills to at-risk 
students: Views from research and practice (pp. 68-101). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Ravitch, D. (1995). National standards in American education: A citizen's guide. Washington, 
DC: Brookings Institution. 

Reichardt, R. (2002). Opportunity to learn policies and practices in high-performing, high-needs 
schools and districts. Aurora, CO: Mid-continent Research for Education and Learning. 

Robertson, G. J. (2003). Wide Range Achievement Test-Expanded (WRAT-E). Austin, TX: 
Pro-ed. 

Rosier, P. & Farella, M. (1976). Bilingual education at Rock Point - Some early results. TESOL 
Quarterly, 10{A), 379-388. 

Stake, R. (1995). The art of case study research. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Stein, M., Grover, B. & Henningsen, M. (1996). Building student capacity for mathematical 
thinking and reasoning: An analysis of mathematical tasks used in reform classrooms. 
American Educational Research Journal, 33(2), 455-488. 

Swisher, K. & Deyhle, D. (1992). Adapting instruction to culture. In J. Reyhner (Ed.), Teaching 
American Indian students. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press. 

Tharp, R. G. (1982). The effective instruction of comprehension: Results and description of 

Kamehameha Early Education Program. Reading Research Quarterly, 77(4), 503-527. 

Tharp, R. G., Estrada, P., Dalton, S. S., & Yamauchi, L. A. (2000). Teaching transformed: 
Achieving excellence, fairness, inclusion and harmony. Boulder, CO: Westview. 



21 




Tharp, R. G., & Yamauchi, L. A. (1994). Effective instructional conversation in Native American 
classrooms. National Center for Research on Cultural Diversity and Second Language 
Learning (Educational Practice Report: 10). Retrieved May 22, 2002, from 
http ://www .ncela. gwu.edu/miscpubs/ncrcdsll/epr 1 0.htm 

U. S. Department of Education. (2002). National Center for Education Statistics, Common Core 
of Data (CCD) Build a table: Table by state school year 2002-2003 . Retrieved 
September 29, 2004, from 

http://nces.ed.gov/ccd/bat/viewreport.asp?id=364359170&tvpe=f&ft=l . 

U.S. Department of Education & U.S. Department of the Interior. (2001, November). American 
Indian and Alaska Native education research agenda in response to Executive Order 
13096. Washington, DC: Author. 

Yapp, K. O. (2004). Experimental research in culturally based education: An assessment of 
feasibility. Portland, OR: Northwest Regional Educational Eaboratory. 

Ysseldyke, J., Spicuzza, R., Kosciolek, S. & Boys, C. (2003). Effects of a learning information 

system on mathematics achievement and classroom structure. The Journal of Educational 
Research, 9(5(3), 163-173. 

Zimmerman, M. A., Ramirez, J., Washienko, K. M., Walter, B. & Dyer, S. (1995). Enculturation 
hypothesis: Exploring direct and protective effects among Native American youth. In H. 

I. McCubbin, E. A. Thompson, A. I. Thompson, & J. E. Eromer (Eds.), Resiliency in 
ethnic minority families: Native and Immigrant American Eamilies. Volume I. Madison: 
The University of Wisconsin System Center for Excellence in Eamily Studies. 



22 



APPENDIX A 



Lists of Research Partnership and Advisory Panel Members 
Research Partnership 

Rose-Marie Davis, School Improvement Specialist, Turtle Mountain Agency, ND 

Teresa Delorme, Principal, Pioneer Elementary School, Bismarck, ND 

Lori Gibson, Math Staff Developer, Bismarck Public Schools, ND 

Jean M. Hall, Principal, Edwin Loe Elementary School, New Town Public School 

District, ND 

Kathy Jo Henry, Instructional Coordinator, Ojibwa Indian School, Belcourt, ND 

Elaine Incognito, Principal, Twin Buttes School, Three Affiliated Tribes, ND 

Willa Incognito, Sixth-Grade Teacher, Twin Buttes School, Three Affiliated Tribes, ND 

Jen Janecek, UTRSI Director, United Technical Tribal College, Bismarck, ND 

Ellen Knudson, Math Staff Developer, Bismarck Public Schools, ND 

Gene La Eromboise, Superintendent, Standing Rock Community Schools, ND 

Advisory Panel 

Donna Dehyle, Ph.D., University of Utah 

Gerald R. East, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh 

Cheryl M. Kulas, Director, North Dakota Indian Affairs Commission 

Minority Interns 

2002 - Nicole Bowman, Owner Bowman Consulting, Wisconsin 

2003 - Teresa Delorme, Pioneer Elementary School, Bismarck, North Dakota 

2003 - Gene La Eromboise, Turtle Mountain RSI, Belcourt, North Dakota 

2004 - RunningHorse Livingston, Middleton, Wisconsin 

Visiting Scholar 

2004 - Judith Hankes, Ph.D., University of Wisconsin-Oshkosh 



23 




APPENDIX B 



Mathematics Curriculum Materials Used in North Dakota Schools 
Serving Native American Students 



Textbook and Approach 


Schools 


Houghton Mifflin 


Twin Buttes Day School, Halliday 
White Shield School, Roseglen 


Accelerated Math 


Twin Buttes Elementary, Halliday 
Standing Rock Schools, Fort Yates 


Saxon 


Dunseith Elementary, Dunseith 
Ojihwe Indian School, Belcourt 
White Shield School, Roseglen 
Fort Eincoln Elementary, Mandan 


Everyday Math 

Developing Mathematical Ideas (DMI) 


Bismarck Public Schools 


SRA 


Dunseith Indian Day School, Dunseith 


Others: 




Cognitively Guided Instruction 

Investigations 

Scott Forseman 

Changing Faces of Mathematics: Perspectives 
on Indigenous Peoples of North America 
(NCTM, 2002) 





Note: Information for this exhibit was gathered from a survey of teachers (including many Special Education 
teachers) who attended a regional Bureau of Indian Affairs professional development session held on May 2, 2003. 
This information has been supplemented by information provided by Mr. Gene LaFromboise and Dr. Teresa 
Delorme 11/11/03. 



24 





