DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 353 852 FL 800 A20 

TITLE Fort Berthold Library Literacy Program, Final 

Performance Report, October 1, 1988-September 30, 
1989, 

INSTITUTION Fort Berthold Reservation Public Library, New Tovm, 
ND. 

SPONS AGENCY Office of Educational Research and Improvement (ED), 
Washington, DC. Center for Libraries and Education 
Improvement • 
[92] 

R167A80305 
lOp. 

Reports - Evaluative/Feasibility (142) 
MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

Adult Basic Education; Advertising; ^American 
Indians; ^Tultural Awareness; Essays; '^Library 
Acquisition; Library Circulation; Library 
Instruction; ^Library Services; '^Literacy Education; 
Outreach Programs; Program Evaluation; Public 
Relations; ^Tutorial Programs; Volunteers; Volunteer 
Training 

Arikara (Tribe); *Fort Berthold Indian Reservation; 
Hidatsa (Tribe); Mandan (Tribe); Native Americans 



The report describes activities of the Fort Berthold 
Reservation Public Library (North Dakota) Literacy Program to meet 
six objectives for the 1988-89 project year. The program was designed 
specifically to promote literacy among three Native American tribes, 
the Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara. Objectives included acquisition of 
a library literacy coordinator, development of an essay collection 
with cultural relevance to the three tribes, acquisition of 
traditional literacy materials, promotion of literacy services, and 
volunteer tutor training. The essay collection developed for the 
library was compiled from materials submitted by students in a local 
community college Native American literature program, biographies 
written by a literacy tutor, and the program's coordinator. The 
collection focused on five cultural aspects of the tribes: ancestors; 
contemporary stories; historic places and events; traditions; and 
traditional foods. It is reported that creation of the essay 
collection resulted in increased use of other library services. 
Promotion of the literacy program was achieved through local radio, 
newspapers, local service programs, television programs, activities 
of a designated state literacy day, and distribution of literacy 
materials by mail. All stated program goals and objectives were met. 
(MSE) (Adjunct ERIC Clearinghouse on Literacy Education) 



PUB DATE 
CONTRACT 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



ABSTRACT 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made ' * 

* from the original document. * 



00 
CO 



LffiRARY SERVICES AND CONSTRUCTION ACT 
TITLE VI 



^ LIBRARY LITERACY PROGRAM 

€0 



Fort Berthold Library Literacy Program, 
Final Performance Report, 
October 1, 1988 - September 30, 1989. 



THREE AFFILIATED TRIBES 
FORT BERTHOLD RESERVATION 
FORT BERTHOLD COMMUNITY COLLEGE 
FORT BERTHOLD RESERVATION PUBLIC LIBRARY 
P.O. BOX 788 
NEW TOWN, NORTH DAKOTA 58763 



PR/AWARD NO. R167A80305 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 

2 



U S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

o«ice of Educatronai Rej^arch and imp^ovenienf 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
^ CENTER (ERtCi 

J^his document has tj«en reproduced as 
received from the oerson or oroamrafion 
ortginitrng it 

O Minor changes have been made lo -mprove 
reproduction quality 



Pomis of view o' opinions slated m ihisdocu 
meni do noi r^ecessariiy represent otficrai 
OcHi posit(On or policy 



The following report describes the activities conducted to 
meet the goals and objectives of the Fort Berthold Library 
Literacy Program for the 1988-89 project year. The report 
includes activity revisions which were necessary for new staff to 
accomplish the objectives proposed for the program year. 

TASK l.Q; Library Literacy Coordinator 

A personnel turnover occurred early in the grant year. The 
former Literacy Coordinator, Danile J. Henry sustained an injury 
which incapacitated her from work at the beginning of the 
program year. She resigned as the Literacy Coordinator on 
December 21, 1988. The position was filled on February 20, 1989 
by Amy Henry, an enrolled Tribal member. Amy Henry graduated 
with Associate of Art degrees in Business Administration/ 
Accounting and Environmental Science. Ms. Henry was employed for 
ten years in Tribal program administration and had extensive 
experience in contract/grant administration. She also worked 
closely with various State, Tribal and local agencies as well as 
the general public throughout the reservation. The new Literacy 
Coordinator made minor changes in activities and scheduling. 
Even with the loss of project time, the objectives of this year's 
grant were eventually met. 

TASK 1.1: ESSAY COLLECTION 

The Fort Berthold Reservation Public Library has accumulated a 
vast collection of culturally relevant materials pertaining to 



the Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara Tribes as well as other Tribes 
across the nation. The majority cf these materials are written 
at a level that is beyond the comprehension of most adult new 
readers and young children. 

One major objective for the grant year included the 
compilation of cultural essay collection relevant to the 

Mandan, Hidatsa, and Arikara people of the Fort Berthold 
Reservation. The collection focused on providing appropriate 
materials that stimulated the interest of the service population 
and motivated them to learn more about their culture through 
reading. The essay collection resulted in an increase in the 
utilization of other Library services (Literacy Tutoring, Books- 
by-Mail.) This occurred as new adult readers familiarized 
themselves with the Library, improved their reading skills and 
graduated to higher levels of reading. 

The proposed activities included the recruitment of 
volunteers who would participate in the actual writing of the 
essays after attending a writer's workshop. Although there was 
no response for volunteer writers, a number of essays and poems 
were submitted for use by the Native American Literature 
students of the Fort Berthold Community College. Some of the 
materials, which were based on local interest topics, were used 
in the essay project. The essay collection also included several 
biographies compiled by Michael Stevens, a former Literacy Aide 
and trained literacy tutor. Because of time constraints and the 
lack of volunteer writers, the majority of the collection was 

2 



4 



composed by the Literacy Coordinator. 

The essay collection is classified into five cultural 
aspects of the Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara tribes. The five 
categories include Ancestors; Contemporary Stories; Historic 
Places and Events; Traditions; and Traditional Foods. The 
Literacy Coordinator obtained information for the essays from the 
Fort Berthold Reservation Public Library, the North Dakota 
Historical Society, Knife River Indian Villages, and from Tribal 
elders. A number of Tribal elders were retained as consultants 
because of their expert knowledge in certain topics relating 
specifically to the Mandan, Hidatsa and Arikara tribes. The 
essays were then analyzed for readability through the use of 
appropriate computer software. Two individuals were hired in the 
final phase of the essay collection. The Word Processor and the 
Illustrator assisted in the layout and printing preparation of 
the culturally relevant essay collection. 

TASK 1.2; MATERIAL ACQUISITION 

The Literacy Coordinator and the Fort Berthold Reservation 
Public Librarian discussed the acquisition of the various types 
of traditional materials that were added to the present Literacy 
Collection at the Library. The Literacy Coordinator reviewed the 
extensive Literacy collection at the Minot Public Library and 
also received additional expert advice on the subject from the 
Coordinator of the Adult Learning Center in Minot as well as the 
Coordinator of the Statewide Adult Ed Resource Center in 

3 



ERIC 



5 



Bismarck. The final selection included two reading/spelling 
video programs (levels 1 & 2), two word problem computer programs 
(levels 1 & 2), five survival skills workbooks with accompanying 
audio-cassettes, six "Laying the Foundations" parent-child 
literacy training kits, two newsletter subscriptions for 
administrative use, one weekly news subscription for adult new 
readers, three promotional literacy video programs, 21 study 
guides/activity books, 22 training manuals and guides (Literacy 
Volunteers of America) , and 154 new fiction and non-fiction 
titles. 

TASK 1.4; PROMOTION 

The Literacy Coordinator utilized all local media in 
promoting the availability of literacy services on Fort Berthold. 
The local FM radio station, KMHA, aired literacy volunteer tutor 
and student recruitment as well as public service announcements 
four to six times daily from 7:00 a.m. through midnight. The 
local weekly newspapers, THE NEW TOWN NEWS and THE MANDAN, 
HIDATSA, ARIKARA TIMES, were also utilized to promote literacy 
services and publicize program accomplishments. The Literacy 
Coordinator designed a brochure which was distributed reservation 
wide. All service oriented programs on Fort Berthold were 
contacted by the Literacy Coordinator to establish a referral 
system for people needing or desiring tutoring services. The 
agencies that were contacted provide services to the Fort 
Berthold Reservation and eligible near-reservation population. 

4 



6 



The majority of the agencies have central headquarters based in 
New Town, North Dakota and provide services through satellite 
offices in the outlying districts. They include the Adult Basic 
Education Program, Fort Berthold Community College; Tribal Social 
Services Department (Tribal Work Experience Program, General 
Assistance, and the Child Welfare Program), Tribal Food Service 
Programs (Women, Infants and Children-WIC Program, Commodity 
Program, and Tribal Nutrition); Employment Assistance Readiness 
Net (EARN) Program; Tribal Job Training Partnersiiip Act (JTPA) 
Program; Job Service North Dakota; Bureau of Indian (BIA) Law 
Enforcement; North Dakota Legal Services, Indian Health Service; 
Community Health Program; and the Circle of Life Resource Center. 

The Literacy Director received television programming 
information from the Contact Literacy Center, a national 
clearinghouse for the Coalition for Literacy and Project Literacy 
U.S. (PLUS) based in Washington D.C., and followed up by 
publicizing two literacy related after-school television 
specials, "Daddy Can't Read" and "Making the Grade". 
Announcements were publicized through the grade school newsletter 
and the local FM radio station, KMHA. 

September 8, 1989 was designated as Literacy Day in North 
Dakota. Statewide activities were scheduled in observance of the 
estimated 55,000 functionally illiterate adults in the State. 
The Fort Berthold Literacy Program presented three literacy 
related video programs and scheduled other activities to increase 
public awareness and participation in the Literacy Day events. 



To further promote the use of the library and the literacy 
program, a collection of literacy materials was selected for 
distribution through a Books-by-Mail catalog. The catalog, 
which contains approximately 35 literacy titles as well as a 
description of the availability of literacy tutoring services, 
was mailed at bulk-rate to 4,000 reservation residents. The 
culturally relevant essay collection is also included in the 
catalog. The Books-by-Mail services are delivered at no charge 
to interested patrons. 

TASK 1.5: VOLUNTEER TUTOR TRAINING 

The Literacy Coordinator received tutor training from Barb 
Korpi, Coordinator of the Statewide Adult Education Resource 
Center in Bismarck. Ms. Korpi facilitates the 16-hour Basic 
Reading Tutor Training Workshops throughout North Dakota. The 
Literacy Coordinator recruited volunteer tutors through a 
reservation-wide campaign* A total of 14 volunteers were 
recruited during a three-month period. All but three completed 
the Basic Reading Tutor Training Workshop. Five of the trained 
tutors attended the North Dakota Education Association Conference 
in Bismarck on September 21-22, 1989. 

After the initial group of volunteers completed training, an 
extensive campaign was conducted to publicize the availability of 
trained tutors and to recruit students for the program. Students 
were referred for tutoring services from the Employment 
Assistance Readiness Net (EARN) Curriculum Developer, the Fort 

6 



8 



Berthold Community College Adult Basic Education Director and the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs Law Enforcement Agency. At the end of 
the grant year, the program was proyiding services to one adult 
in Twin Buttes, two adults in Mandaree, two adult students and 
one young student in New Town. Literacy materials utilized 
included the Literacy Volunteers of American (LVA) READ Test and 
TUTOR Manual, Lakeshore Lifeskills Workbook Series, Life-Coping 
Skills Worktext Series, Competency/Enrichment Adult Reading 
Collection, Family Development Workbook Series, Follet Career 
Guidance and Coping Skills Series. Rand McNally Road Atlas, North 
Dakota Driver's Class III License Manual. educational and 
promotional video and audio-cassette programs, and fiction and 
non-fiction titles. 

SUMMARY 

The Fort Berthold Library Literacy Project was able to meet 
its goals and objectives proposed for the grant year. By the end 
of the program year, the reservation population was aware of the 
scope of illiteracy on the national, state and local level. They 
were well informed of the services available to them on Fort 
Berthold and how they could access those services. Social 
Services Agencies referred individuals for tutoring and other 
prospective students sought assistance and information on their 
own initiative. 

The newly created essay collection based on the Mandan, 
Hidatsa and Arikara people of the Fort Berthold Reservation will 



motive people, young and old, to read more and will continue to 
attract patrons. The materials will be used by future literacy 
tutors as a tool for stimulating their students interest and 
desire to read. 



8 



