DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 384 795 CE 069 493 

TITLE Creating a Literate Future. A National Forum on 

Strengthening Policies and Partnerships for Adult 
Education and Training for Native Americans /Alaska 
Natives (St. Paul, Minnesota, October 12-14, 
1995) . 

INSTITUTION J 6c E Associates, Inc., Silver Spring, MD. 
SPONS AGENCY Office of Vocational and Adult Education (ED), 
Washington, DC. Div. of Adult Education and 
Li teracy. 
3 Mar 95 
76p. 

Collected Works - Conference Proceedings (021) 
MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

Adult Basic Education; Adult Education; Adult 
Vocational Education; *Alaska Natives; *American 
Indians; Basic Skills; Cherokee (Tribe); Conferences; 
Cooperative Planning; Educational Attainment; 
Educational Needs; Educational Objectives; 
Educational Planning; Educational Policy; Educational 
Practices; Employment Level; Employment Patterns; 
Enrollment; *Job Training; '"'Literacy Education; 
National Programs; Navajo (Nation); ^Partnerships in 
Education; '"'Policy Formation; Program Descriptions; 
State Programs; Tables (Data) 

Action Plans; Job Opportunities and Basic Skills 
Program; Native Americans 



This document contains information from the national 
forum Creating a Literate Future for the Year 2000, which was held to 
help state team delegations develop vision/mission statements and 
action plans citing goals, objectives, and activities for enhancing 
adult literacy and education for Native Americans and Alaska Natives. 
Presented first are introductory discussions of the forum's 
objectives and activities. The conference keynote address, "Creating 
a Literature Future for the Year 2000" (Augusta S. Kappner) , is 
included. Team vision/mission statements and action plans are 
included for each of the following states/tribes/nations: Alaska, 
Hawaii, and Northern Mariana Islands; Arizona; California; Colorado; 
Florida, Maine, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, New York, and North 
Carolina; Idaho; Illinois; Kansas; Michigan; Minnesota; Montana; 
Navajo Nation; Nevada; New Mexico; North Dakota; Oklahoma and the 
Cherokee Nation; Oregon; Texas; Utah; Washington, Wisconsin; and 
Wyoming. Exemplary adult education and literacy demonstration 
programs in California, Colorado, Arizona, and Minnesota are 
profiled. Appendixes constituting approximately 60'/i of this document 
contain the following: 1990 census data regarding the educational 
attainment and school enrollment and labor force status of American 
Indians/Alaska Natives; conference agenda; presenter/moderator and 
participants list; and tally of responses to conference evaluation 
forms. (MN) 



PUB DATE 
NOTE 
PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



ABSTRACT 



'., ■ wSf^^:; ' .^'^ i 

St.>aul»Mlnnototd 



FINAL REPORT 



Submm«d by: 




J 5; i Associates, Inc. 
1 100 Wayne Avenue, Suite 820 
Silver Spring. MD 20910 
(301) 495-0400 



March 3, 1996 



CN 

er|c 



u.«. MfMitmwtori m KKnot i 

ZnONAL MSOUnCES mrOMMTKM 
CCNTtniCMC) 
dOCIMMflt Ms kMA C«p>0*IC*d M 
r«c«N«d Inn Mw nna» - oi«*m<**w« 



O Mmer chtflfM )««• kMit MM to MVfe** 



OCM 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Crta&tgA IMeraU Future 
TibleofCooteots 



StPaulMN 
October 12 '14, 1994 



Table of Contents 



Page 

3 

IntroductioQ 

Conference Overview ^ 

Keynote Address "Creating a Literate Future for the Year 2000" by Dr. Augusta S. Kappner, Assistant 
Secretary of Vocational and Adult Education, U.S. Department of Education o 

Enhancing Adult Literacy and Education for Native Americans/Alaska Natives . • 13 

Exemplary American Indian and Alaska Native Adult Education and Literacy Demonstration Program ^ ^ 
Descriptions Programs 

Appendices 

A Educational Attainment and School Enrollment and Labor Force Status of American Indians 

and AIaska Natives by State and the Cherokee and Navajo Nations: 1990 U.S. Census i 

xiv 

B. Agenda 

C. Presenter/Moderator and Participant List 

„ , . xxxvii 

D. Evaluattwjs 



ERIC 



J Associates, Inc. 



Crt^ A UUntt Future 



Spoiuoc5 



St Paul, MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



SPONSORS 



Division of Adult Education and Literacy, U.S. Department of Education 
Office of Indian Education, U.S. Department of Education 
National Advisory Coundi on Indian Education 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of interior 
JOBS Program, U.S. Department of Healtti and Human Services 



U.S. Department of Agriculture 



U.S. Department of Labor 



Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma 



Navajo Nation 



ERIC JAEAs»citie«,Inc. 



4 



CreatiHgA LiUnU Future 

Acknowledgnents 



SlP*u1,MN 
October 12- 14, 1994 



ACKNOWLEDGMENTS 



This forum was the result of considerable work by a number of conunitted people over a period of approxinxatdy one 
year. Because of the geographic distances and the nature of the planning, it was decided to conduct planning meetings 
in both Arizona and Washington, D.C. to obtain essential input fiom tribal representatives and other agency staff in 
coofdinating the synyosium. 

Among the rtasc/ people vrfio significantly contributed to the planning discussions and activities were Robert Chicago, 
Natiraal Advisay Council on Indian Education; Gloria Duus, U.S. Department of Labor, Lorraine Edmo, Btecutive 
Director, National Indian Education Association; Cathie Martin and Mary Brayboy, Office of Indian Education, U.S. 
Department of Education; Pat Williams and Ja-Na Oliver, Administration, for Children and Families; Ruby Kozad, 
Bureau of Indian Affairs; Stanley Kedelty, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Ft Defiance, Arizona; Petty Sue Nez, Navajo 
Nation; Jim Quetooe, Director of Education, Cherokee Nation; Dr. Gary Eyre, State Administrator, Arizona; and 
Brian Kanes, Minnesota Department of Education. State Directors who provided special assistance during the 
planing include: Dian Bates, Colorado; Dr. Brent Gubler, Utah; Lloyd Kjomess, Wyoming; Muriel Lawler, New 
Mexico; Phyllis Rich, Nevada; Dr. Robert Ruthcmeyer, Montana; and Dr. Shirley Spencer, Idaho. 

In particular, I would like to commend a member of my staff. Dr. Carroll Towcy, and Jacquelyn Power, Consultant, 
Tempe, Arizona for their valuable contributions in coordinating many aspects of this forum. The Contractor, J & E 
Associates, kc., provided excellent leadership and support services in fmalizing the activities to make this forum a 
success. 



Ronald S.Pugsley 
Acting Director 

Division of Adult Education and Literacy 



O 

ERJC J&EAssociites.Inc. 

UMMmmmm 



5 



CrtatimgA UUnte Future 

latroductioo 



St Paul. MN 

October 12 '14. 1994 



INTRODUCTION 

The conduct of this fonim afSims the Department's commitment to adult education as stated in the Goals 2000: 
Educate America Act — By the yw 2000 every American wiU be Utcrate and possess the skills neccs^ 

in the ecooomy of the 21st century. This goal reinforces the outcomes of the 1993 National Adult Utwwy Swvey 
that indicated the importance of providing all Americans with the opportunity to pursue their goals - whether these 
involve job advancement, consumer decision making, citizenship, or other aspects of their lives. 

This important forum focused on broadening the base of support, from the community to national level and the 
natioMlto community level, for Native American/Alaska Native Adult Education. State teams were formed to: 

• Improve coordination and coUabor&aon widi Federal, State, regional, local, and tribal agencies. 

• Establish cooperative agreements among all agencies providing adult education, employment and 
training for Native Americans/Alaska Natives. 

• Strengthen the partnerships tiiat will allow every Native American/Alaska Native adult increased 
fd^fati^^a' opportunity and to obtain necessary academic and technical skills to achieve personal 
goals, meaningfid employment and exercise the rights and responsibilities of citizenship togetiier 
with cultural awareness. 

• Support research and demonstration projects impacting Native American/Alaska Native adult and 
continuing education. 

These guidelines were addressed throughout die planning phase, presentations during die sessions, and widiin die 
State team discussions. Outcomes from die forum can be used by die Division of Adult Education and Literacy as 
part of its efforts in promoting adult education Uirough its State-administered adult education program. Tnbal leaders 
may use die activities and outcomes described in diis report in planning fotiire programs to empower Amcncan Indian 
and Alaska Natives to achieve dieir goals. State education agencies can capitalize on diese State team efforts m 
continuing efforts to address diis need. It is our expectation diat odier related Federal programs will also utiUze diese 
findings in strengdiening future coordination efforts among related programs. 

Early in die planning process it was realized diat it was critical to identify related programs to assist in diis endeavor. 
Teams were to be identified widiin each of die participating States to ensure adequate representation of program 
personnel and Native Americans. Also, it was decided to have die Cherokee Nation and die Navajo Nation become 
participating sponsors of die foium due to dieir large geographic area, extending over several States, andlheir 
extensive tribal membership. Sponsors of die forum include: 

Division of Adult Education and Literacy, U.S. Department of Education 
Office of Indian Education, U.S. Department of Education 
National Advisory Council on Indian Education 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of Interior 
JOBS Program, U.S. Department of Healdi and Human Services 
U.S. Department of Labor 
Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma 
Navajo Nation 



ERIC 

UMmmmmm \j 



Crta^A LkenU Future 

Introductioa 



St Paul, MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



Opportunities for improved cooidinatioa among related adult education and occupational programs for American 
Indians and Alaska Natives were discussed during a number of presentations and meetings. I would like to see those 
activities that were developed during the forum be continued and shared with other interested adult education 
stakdioiders. This cooditkn is essential for the further development and implementation of these initiatives as we 
move forward to create a literate future for Native Americans and Alaska Natives. 

I h<^ you will find the foium proceedings useful and I cncoui,-age you to take the initiative in applying these team 
activities to strengthen adult education programs in your area. 



Ronald S.Pugsley 
Acting Director 

Division of Adult Education and Literacy 



ERIC J&EAsKci«tes,Inc. 



OtalmtAlMtntaFutitn 
Conference Overview 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



CONFERENCE OVERVIEW 



The 2-dsy forum oa "Creating a Literate Future for the Year 2000" was desigpned for State team delegations to 
develop visioii and mi«noo statements and action plans citing goals, objectives, and activities for enhancing adult 
literacy and education for Native Americans and Alaska Natives. It was intended that the results of these discussions 
would be utilized by Federal, State, and Tribal entities in their program efforts. Judging from the wealth of 
infonnation obtained in the sessicMis and the results of the conference evaluations, the forum was successful in 
achieving its purposes. 

This report is organized to capture both the tone and major outcomes of the Forum. First, the conference Keynote 
Address is presented in its entirety as delivered by Dr. Augusto S. Kappner, Assistant Secretary of Vocational and 
Adult Education, U.S. Department of Education. Then, the Vision Statements, Mission Statements, and Action Plans 
developed by each State team using a strategic planning process are presented. Following arc descriptions of four 
Exemplary Aduit Education and Literacy Demonstration Programs funded through Federal, State, and local sources. 

Appendices contain Census data portraying the educational attainment and school cnrolbncnt of American Indians and 
Alaska Natives for States and the Cherokee and Navajo Nations, as well as a copy of the Conference Agenda 
(annotated with highlights of session outcomes) and a list of conference presenters, moderators, and participants. The 
Appendix also provides a siunmary of the conference evaluation results. 



8 



5 



Cr*0lmgA Uttrau Future 
Keynote Address 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



"Creating a Literate Future for tiie Year 2000" 

K^noteAddmssby 
Augusta S. Kappner, Assistant Secrctaiy of Vocational and Adult Education, 
U.S. Dq)aitxnent of Education 



Thank you, Ron Pugslcy, Carroll Towcy and Brian Kanes for your woric on today's conference. I am delighted and 
honored to be here with you to open today's Symposium on Adult Education and Training for Native Americans and 
Alaska Natives. My office is a proud co-sponsor of this important collaboration along vvith the Department of 
Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs; the Office of Indian Education; the Departments of Health and Human Services, 
Labor, and Agriculture; the Cherdcee and Navajo Tribes and the National Advisory Council on Indian Education. 

We used to %3Cf, Tm firam Washington and I am here to help you. Now we say, we are from Washington-We need 
your help''-and we do! We need your help in serving you better-in making things woric better for more people. 

President Clinton and all of us in his Administration are deeply committed to improving the well-being of American 
Indians and Alaska Natives. The President set the stage for true parmcrship with American hidians and Alaska 
Natives when he held a historic White House meeting on April 29, 1994 vvith Tribal leaders. In his statement at the 
White House meeting, the President reaffirmed the Nation's commitment to self-determination for Tribal 
goveroments. The President reiterated his commitment to a stronger partnership between the Tribal nations and the 
United States Government by signing an historic directive that requires every executive department and agency of 
government to take at least two steps: 

• To remove all barriers that prevent the Federal government fiora working directly with Tribal governments; 
and, 

• To make certain that if the agencies take action affecting Tribal trust resources, they consult with Tribal 
governments prior to that decision. 

President Clinton asked: 

"What is the goal of a bettT and more equal partnership and more empowered Tribes and more efficient 
government? Ultimately it must be to improve the living conditions of those ^Aixm we serve." ... We must 
position American Indians and Alaska Natives to compete economically as we move toward the 2 1st century. 
... We must do more to create jobs, raise incomes and develop capital for new businesses ... Strengthening 
Tribal ecooamies will require new thinking and the courage to change. It will require investing in the health, 
the education and the skills of American hidians and Alaska Natives as we must do for all Americans." 

Tod^^'s meeting is part of the ongoing effort of the Administration to support the rights of American Indians and 
Alaska Natives to self-determination and self-sufficiency ... and to provide the opportunity to translate this into the 
hard woric, represented by all your teams, which lies before us. 



rn9r> J A E Associates, Inc. 

UMWM-mmmm 



9 



6 



Keynote Address 

During the Clinton Administration's nearly two year tenure, we have learned quickly that working in isolation is no 
longer cfifective. Federal agencies must work hand in hand to bring about needed and effective solutions. 
Comprebcnsive problems require comprehensive strategies. Government cannot just talk to itself. The Federal 
govenment must engage States, communities and Indian Nations to become partners in problem solvmg. And today s 
meeting is a good beginning. 

So tody's Fonm iUustrates that partnerships fian occur and can be effective; that government agencies can work 
together to improve the well-being of its citizens, including Native Americans and Alaska Natives. I commend you 
for this effort 

State teams and Tribal Iwidera arc here today to work hand in hand to address the criucal education and training needs 
of American Tn^"»« and Alaska Natives. We are here because we want to achieve the foUowing outcomes: 

• ht^iove cooidination and collaboration with Federal, State, regional, local and Tribal agencies. 

• Establish ^operative agreements among all agencies providing adult education, cmploj'mcnt and training for 
Native Americans/Alaska Natives. 

• Strengthen partnerships that will allow every Native American/Alaska Native aduit increased educational 
opportunity to obtain necessary academic and technical skills to achieve personal goals, meaningful 
employment and exercise the rights and responsibilities of citizenship along with cultural awareness. 

• Support research and demonstration projects that impact Native American/Alaska Native adult and 
continuing education. 

We are here to create and strengthen partoerships. There is no doubt that the economic health and well-being of 
Native American communities is directiy related to how well these communities arc able to access adult education, 
literacy, occupational training, social services and other resources. And, uppermost among these must be improved 
access, oppatunity and, most of all, success in education. 

There are good model programs that are successful in meeting the education needs of the Native American 
community. These partnerships and practices can be replicated to help other communities improve their local 
programs. Today's Symposium will give each of you the opportunity to learn from each other, woric together to form 
partnerships for a better fijture, overcome banriers and enhance cooperation. 

It is our hope that you will also leam about where resources exist and aliat resources exist. How well do these 
resources fit together? And how these resources can be used at the local level to improve education and training 
outcomes. And what can you-^md we at the Federal level-do to make these resources woric together for better results 
for all American bdians and Alaska Natives? 

It is no accident that so many government entities arc here today. We already know that coordinated services can. lead 
to better service outcomes. We arc increasingly aware of barriers created by separate funding cycles, formulas and 
guidelines which often hinder the deliveiy of effective services. Our task is to fmd ways to rt^nove unnecessary 
barrien-barriers sometimes created by government itself-in order to achieve the goal of preparing citizens to be 
productive and to contribute to the welfare of the entire society. 

Each of us in government has a role to play in removing obstacles. Removing obstacles is an important task in 
enabling Native Americans and Alaska Natives to achieve their goal of self-determination. We spend a good deal of 
time in government these days talking about reinventing ourselves. Wouldn't it be wonderful if out of the Forum 



rn?r> J & E Aswciates, Inc. XO 

hKjL 



KevnoteAddiess October 12 - 14. 1994 

today came a reinveotion of education, training, and employment services to American Indians and Alaska Natives? 
Periiaps you can help us reinvent the vn^ in which we do things. 

We all know that no Natioa can achieve self-determinaticm unless it invests in its human potential. The U.S. 
Department of Educaticn has been committed to mai^ aspects of yVmerican Indian Educati Eachyeartbe 
Department spends i^proximately $460 million through its 10 operational programs and anodicr five which we fund 
but are operated by the Bureau of Indian Affairs. The education problems faced by American Indians and Alaska 
Natives are severe. 

According to the 1990 Census, American Indians represent almost 2 million people-less than one percent of the U.S. 
population. Within these figures are 580 Tribes and communities in which more than 200 languages are sp<rfcen. 
Tribes recognized by the Federal Government are located in 34 States, and ahnost 40 percent of the American Indian 
population lives on reservations or on Indian land. 

• Like many minority populations in America, American Indians face serious educational and economic 
problems. 

• The educational attainment ofAmerican Indians is significantly lower than that of the overall U.S. 
population. 

• There are 44 million adults in the United States vAio do not have a high school diploma. Of those, 405,000 
are American Indians and Alaska Natives. 

• Fourteen percent ofAmerican hidians and 1 1 percent of Alaska Natives over the age of 25 have completed 
less than 9 years of school. 

• The Native American population is younger, with larger families, with a lower proportion of high school 
graduates aud more imemployed persons than in the total population. 

• The 1993 National Educational Goals report tells us that the dropout rate for Native Americans/Alaska 
I'^atives is 17 percent-and represents a higher dropout rate than that of any other ethnic group in America; 
and that's the official rate; as a native New Yorker I learned that the official dropout rate is sometimes half 
the real dropout rate. 

• Currently, 13.7 percent of Native Americans have less than a 9th grade education and 34.4 percent of this 
population have less than a high school education. 

• Moreover, to complicate an already difficult profile, American hidians have a shorter hfe expectancy than 
other Americans. 

Need we ssy that these figures pose a serious threat to the well-being of and survival of these communities and will 
require multiple strategies to address these critical concerns. 

President Clinton's Education Agenda is designed to improve education for everyone including American fcdians and 
Alaska Natives. President Clinton and U.S. Secretary of Education Richard Riley, along vrith the Congress, have 
developed and successfully passed into law a comprehensive legislative education reform agenda to improve the 
future of our nation's youngest and not so young citizens. 

These initiatives include Goals 2000: Educate America Act, the School-to-Work Opportunities Act, and the 



ERIC 



9^ jAEA««oci«iei,Inc. 



i -<' 



taprovint? Schools Act, better know as the reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act 

CJoais 2000: Educate America Act, for the first time, sets world class education standards for every school and every 
child and adult Goals 2000 formalizes into law the ei^t national education goals. These goals constitute a 
li^idiouse that can guide the efforts of communities and States to improve education. 

Secretary Riley likes to refer to the Goals 2000 as ovr North Star — something to steer by. By the Year 2000, we i se 
steering toward: 

• All children in America will start school ready to learn. 

• All students in America will be competent in core academic subjects. 

• The hi^ school graduation rate will increase to at least 90 percent 

• U.S. students will be first in the world in math and science. 

• Every adult American will be literate and possess the skills necessary to compete in the economy by the 2 1st 
century. 

• All teachers will have the opportunity to acquire the knowledge and skills needed to prepare U.S. students for 
the next century. 

• Every school in America will bo safe, disciplined and drug-free. Andfmally 

• Every school will promote parental involvement in their child's education. 

I don't have to teU you how far we have to go to achieve these goals, but we arc serious when we say all chUdren and 
all adults means M- The Goals 2000 Act provides resources to States and communities to develop and implement 
comprehensive education reforms aimed at helping students reach challenging academic and occupational skills 
standards. 

The Goals 2000 legisbiion has also rcafiOrmed the commitment to American, bidians and Alaska Natives. Goals 
2000 has a set-aside of one percent-over $4 million-for tadian and Alaska Native education. In addition, the 
legislation requires the State's plan to include representatives of Indian Tribes to ensure the school reform connection 
between the BIA and public schools. 

The Goals 2000 legislation also reflects the Adminisr ation's concern for and commitment to improving adult 
education and literacy programs. By the year 2000, "every adult American will be literate and possws the skills 
necessary to compete in a global economy and exercise the rights and responsibilities of citizenship." This 
challenging goal is also very much on our minds as we prepare for the reauthorization of both the Carl D. Perkms 
Vocational Education Aa and the Adult Education Act 

We continue to support basic skills programs under the Adult Education Act. Basic grants to Stotes are currentiy 
allocated by formula based on the number of adults over the age of compulsory attendance who have not cotnpleted 
high school. Each year 3.9 million adults receive instruction in basic skills, ESL and adult secondary education. Last 
year, of the 3.9 million, 41,000 American tadians and Alaska Natives received basic skills instruction. Moreover, 
anoUier 5,000 adultt received instruction through the Educational Services for Indian Adult Program conducted by tiie 
Education Department's Office of Indian Education. 

ERXC JAEAsiociate«,Inc. 22 



ItevaoteAddr«« ' October 12 - 14, 1994 

Another critical rompiyfw^ of the President's lifelong Icaining and workforce investnsent agenda is the School-to- 
Woik Opportunities Act The SchooI-to-Work Opportunities Act, which the President signed into law, wiU work 
hand-in-hand with Goals 2000. It involves structural reform of school systems. It sets high academic and 
oCTopiti^' skill standards. School-to-Work will spur the creaticMi of education and training systems to prepare all 
students for high wage, high-skill jobs and further education. It seeks to aUow more young people access to academic 
achievement and good jobs. In other words ... young people must be prepared for both college and careers. 

We are pleased that the School-to-Woric Opportunities Act provides special grants to establish School-to-Work 
faitiatives for Indian youth. Up to $500,000 is available in FY 1994 and $1,250,000 in FY 1995 to support these 
initiatives. These grants require partnerships. Scbool-to-Work partners can include BIA schools. Tribal 
organizations. Tribal business councils, and appropriate employers, including but not limited to Tribal businesses, 
school-based enterprises, postsecondary institutions, worker and employer representatives. 

The School-to-Work Initiative is one example of government trying to not only talk the talk, but walk the walk. The 
School-to-Work Initiative is an example of partnership across two government bureaucracies-the Departments of 
Education and Labor. Both agencies have come together to jointly administer this initiative, and, in fact, are hiring a 
Director vioo reports to both Departments! We hope that this will reduce and/or eliminate some of the red tape that 
too often prevents programs from developing successfully. 

We in the Office of Vocational and Adult Education are also woridng closely with ail the Indian Education Offices in 
our own Dq)artment and with the Bureau of Indian Affairs in planning for the Indian Education SchooI-to-Woric 
grants. We in the Office of Vocational and Adult Education are also committed to the continuing support of the 
Indian Vocational Education program, and the Tribally-controlled Community Colleges. 

The Indian Vocational Education program provides fmancial assistance to eligible Native American Tribes arid 
organizations to plan, conduct and administer vocational education projects. Funds arc provided to tadian Tribes or 
Tribal organizations and to certain Bureau of Indian Affairs schools to support vocational and technical education 
opportunities for Native Americans. Job training tied to a Tribal economic development plan is required. In Fiscal 
Year 1993, the hidian Vocational Education program served over 2,000 individuals through 13 grants. I am pleased 
tiiat we woe able to increase the number of individuals served to 3,500 through a total of 19 grants in 1994. Data 
which we have received on outcomes tell us that the program has been able to successfully place smdents in jobs. 

The Office of Vocational and Adult Education continues to support the Tribally Controlled Community 
Collegcs-Crownpoint Institute of Technology in New Mexico and the United Tribes College in North Dakota. 
Authorized under the Carl D. Perkins Act, funds are used to support the operations and improvement of these Tribally 
Controlled Postsecondary Vocational institutions to ensure continued and expanded opportunities for fadian students. 

Under the recentiy passed reauthorization of the Elementary and Secondary Education Act, fimds will be available to 
support the education needs of American Indian and Alaska Native childroi, college students, and adidts. Programs at 
the elementary-secondary level are funded by way of formula based on die number of hidian students in a particular 
LEA. The Secretary also has authority to fund a variety of programs through discretionary grants to address the 
education needs of American Indian and Alaska Natives including special programs relating to adult education for 
Indians. 



ERXC J*EAaiociitei,Inc. 

ummmmmm 



13 



10 



This program authorizes the Secretary to award competitive grants to Indian Tribes, LEAs and institutions of hi^ 
education, to: 

• supportdemonstrationprojcctstoimprovecmploymcntandeducationalopportum 

• Assist with basic Utcracy education and to provide the opportunity to "qualify" for a high school diploma or 
G£D;and, 

• Support research and encourage distribution of information and materials regarding best practices in 
education pn>g;rams for Indian adults. 

But aU of these resources need to be reviewed and coordinated if they are to have maximum impact 

Whae a great deal has been accomplished, a great deal more needs to be done. The White House Conference on 
S £i^v*ich was^ January of 1992, developed a series of recommendations ^^^^^^^'"^^ 
T^^a^ycmm>. You wiU recall Goal Eight of the White House Report, which we support, states that. By 

the^ 2000 Native adult wiU have the opportunity to be literate and to obtain the necessary academic 

and technical skills and knowledge needed to obtain meaningful employment and to exercise the rights and 
responsibilities of Tribal and national citizenship." 

Other recommendations fiom the White House conference which we fully support caU for: 

• Expansion ofdistancc delivery programs at the local level; 

• Educating parents about their rights and responsibilities so they are active partners in education; 

• Provision for one's fimdamcntal economic needs-to have the fundamental abilities to read directions, 
complete job applications, and interview successfully for jobs in the woricplace; 

• hnprovement of schools to prepare students for a rapidly changing and highly technological worid; 

• Defining models of practice that work for American fadian Adult Education and Occupational programs; and, 

• Strengthening partnerships for future growth of adult programs. 

These arc still good goals. I highlight only these. There are many other good recommendations which deserve your 
and our attention, and I'm sure will receive it over the course of the conference. 

AU of us in education and in government know that something more, someUiing different, must be done if the United 
Sta^^to ^ its goal of literacy and economic self-sufficiency for all adults-and this is doubly true for our goal of 
literacy and economic self-sufficiency for American Indians and Alaska Natives. 

This Administration is committed to education and lifelong learning for all our people-and determined to dfl 
something about it Back in April at the historic White House meeting, the President said: 

"As we look back on the American journey the test ahead is always whether we are moving in the 
right direction of more tolerance, wider justice, and greater opportunity for all. It is the direcuon that 
counts, always the direction." 



CrtatbigA UUtm Future SL Piul, 

Keynote Address , October 12 -14, 1994 

Your woik here this week-your visions-your action pians-are critical to movement in the right direction for all of us. 
And we support your woric with enthusiasm and anticipation. 

Before leaving you today, I'd like to share with you a small poem written by Roberta Lewis, who is a Program 
SpeciaUst in the Office of Vocational and Adult Education. She wrote it for this occasion for this conference: 

It has been said, we humans are but one thread in the web of Life, and that we should study and prepare to 
meet its challenges and strife. ^ 

Whatever we do to this delicate web, we do to ourselves and each other as a Nation, wax...or ebb, we arc 
indelibly bound together. 

We're all connected in this web, with knowledge ... the common thread that binds, we can spin a place within 
this web if we challenge our lives and minds. 

Your ciders did not sit and weep v^cn times were hard and rough, the legacy they left that's yours to keep is 
that knowledge is power, and their web was tough! 



We are striving to achieve this oneness for ail Americans. A oneness where everyone has equal access to the 
resources of our ? Nation. Your work here this week is critical to keeping us moving in the right direction. 

I thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. I look forward to continuing to work with each of you to 
weave together the common threads by which we inust be bound if we are to create a literate fiiture for all Americans. 



CrttAtgA UttnU Futurt 

Team Vision Stttemeota. Kfission Statements, and Actiaa Plans 



SLPaulMN 
October 12 '14, 1994 



Enhancing Adult Literacy and Education for Native Americans/Alaslca Natives 
Team Vision Statements, Mission Statements, and Action Plans 



Vision: 



Core 
Beliefs: 

AcnvrriEs: 



Barriers: 



Mission: 

GoALl: 
Activity: 
Goal 2: 

Activities: 



AIJ^SKA, HAWAII, AND NORTHERN MARIANA ISIJ^NDS 

In a literate world, people read, write and communicate at levels that enable them to fulfill 
their aspirations in a secure, prosperous and healthy society. 

Families are primary. Individuals participate in civic and community life and are informed 
consumers. W(»kers are productive in a glisbal and local economy. 

• Establish and formalize a State team. 

• Establish goals and objectives through team strategic planning activities (i.e., to 
increase community awareness of adult education programs available to the 
indigenous populations; to develop an intergenerational literacy program that will 
include and involve ail family members). 

• Lack of baseline inforaiation specific to indigenous people. 

• Need to develop culturally appropriate materials. 

• Geographic remoteness (i.e., communication, delivery of quality services). 



ARIZONA 

The Tribal community leaders in collaboration vnth Federal and State agencies commit to 
maximize adult education services and make it available to all American Indians. 

Tribal leaders will be more proactive to the educational needs of the community. 

• Hold symposium for Tribal leaders, educators. State and Federal agencies. 

Validate the linguistic, traditional and cultural identity of our people in intergenerational 
ways of learning. 

• Utilize resource guide for language cultural materials: Mountain States Multi* 
cultural Indian Technical Assistance Resource Center, networking sessions, NABE, 
Sute of Arizona GRK 

• Mobilize Tribal government, 
e Gather information. 

• List specific activities. 

• Write resolutions. 

• Conduct Education Summit. 

• Develop action plans to address pre*school through 12 and adult education. 

• Conduct needs assessment involving the community and institutions. 

• Education will be provided that strengthens the individual family and community 
and supports self>suniciency and self-determination. 



ERIC 



JAEAsaociatet.Inc. 



13 



16 



CreatiHgA LiUnU Future 

Team Visioo Stttoaents, Missioo Statements, and Action Plans 



SLPaul.MN 
October 12 -J4, 1994 



• Initiate State and Tribal dialogue. 

• Enlist all available resources. 

Sdf-detemunation: 

Oiaiter school -Education Department Parental involvement in school. Funds specifically set aside 
for Tribes. Establish curriculum including language, cultural awareness, math and science and 
literacy for the primary grade levels. 



CALIFORNIA 

Vision: California will have an Adult Literacy program created by and for the Native American Community 
which is adequately funded and culturally relevant This holistic program shall be fanuly oriented 
and community based. With emphasis on learner outcomes, the program will be responsive to 
learner needs which promote student retention and goal attainment 

AcnvrriES: • improve coordination and collaboration: Conduct a Statewide conference with 

Native American Tribal entities and organizations. Federal, State, regional, and 
local agencies to improve coordination and collaboration among the programs 

serving adult learning needs. 

• Establish cooperative agreements to provide equitable access to educational and 

employment training opportunities through the esublishment of cooperative 
agreements and partoerships at all levels. 

• Identify non-served or under-served Native American population. 

• Assess and determine educational needs of the target population. 

• Design strategies that will meet the identified needs. 

• Initiate Statewide conference activities: Prepare resource materials (i.e., a resource 
packet); provide an inspirational Keynote Speaker, use Native American leaders as 
role models; serve traditional food. 

• Increase educational opportunities. 

• Through staff development, provide training and technical assistance to strengthen 
literacy education and job training opportunities for Native American adults in 
California. 

• Plan and conduct staff development activities and modules for staff working with 
adult education programs serving Native Americans. 

• Provide technical assistance to identified staff where appropriate. 

• Identify and provide for dissemination oftraining resources and instructional 

materials. 

• Establish a program or strategy to support research and demonstration projects 
within the State that impact Native American, Alaskan Natives, and Native 
Hawaiian adults throu^ continuing literacy and career education opportunities. 

• Initiate localized curriculum development (e.g., language acquisition. Tribal 
history). 

• Document new and existing activities and make information generally available. 



ER^C JAEAsioci»te»,Inc. 



CreatiHgA Uume Future 

Tom Visioii Stttements. Missioa Statements, and Action Plans 



SLPaul,MN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



COLORADO 



Vision: 



Mission: 



Core 
Beliefs: 



Vision: 



Goail: 



Action Plan: 



Shared visions within the omimuni^ can make a difference for the generations to come throu^ 
family healing, lifelong learning, coilaborauon, and membership. 

Identify and then improve the coordination and collaboration with Federal, State and regional, local 
and Tribal agencies in order to build a holistic adult education program that addresses literacy and 
personal/spiritual growth. 

Self-actualization in chosen environment 
Success on personal, individual terms 
SufEicient skills 
Holistic 
Trusteeship 
Responsibility 
Comtpunity 



Goal 2: 



Action Plan: 



FLORIDA, MAINE, MASSACHUSETTS, RHODE ISLAND, 
NEW YORK AND NORTH CAROLINA 

By the year 2001, Federal and State program regulations and funding will have facilitated the 
achievement of culturally and economically healthy Native American communities, as defined by 
each community. 

To prepare Native people to compete in a non-Indian world, while strengthening their cultural 
identity. 

• In the next 6 months, identify stakeholders and begin meaningful dialogue in our 
individual areas (i.e.. State, business, educational institutions. Tribal programs, etc.) 

• Prepare local educational needs assessments. 

• Identify needed human resources; Tribal leaders, healUi professionals, judicial, 
public worics, education professionals, etc. 

• Promote positive attitude among our people regarding full-time jobs. 

• Develop and implement a team approach to case management, through Tribal 
identified resources. 

To prtHnote cultinral and linguistic Uteracy among Indian Students, in order to support positive self- 
esteem and self-awareness among American bidian Students/families; respecting Uieir unique 
cultures and valuing their contributions. 

• Establish language retention programs within the next 6- 1 2 months, integrated 
throughout programs. 

• Provide activities which promote self-esteem and self-awareness, parenting skills, 
life skills, career awareness, etc. 

• Identify resources (human, fmancial and written), to implement these activities 
(corporate or local business support). 



ERIC 



J &E Associates, Inc. 



18 



IS 



CreatiHgA UUraU Future 

Te«iB Vision SUtements. Mission Statements, and Action Plans 



St Paul, MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



Goal 3: 
Action Plan: 

Goal 4: 
Action Plan: 



Goal 5: 



Action Plan: 



Goal 6: 



To nurture family unity through the development of holistic/family-based programs. 

• Develop and implement a presentation for community and Tribal officials regarding 
tbis initiative. 

• Provide activities which promote spending quality family time. 

To provide Native Americans with opportunities for entrepreneurial training and access to capital in 
order to facilitate community economic development/self-sufficiency. 

• Identify necessary resources to achieve goal within the next 6- 1 2 months; including 
college courses/curricula re: entrcpreneurship. 

• Work with Tribe/native community to develop economic development plan. 

• Explore possibility of developing a language code (with incentives) for employment 

To promote employability and life-enhancing/coping skills among Native American people, enabling 
them to thrive. 

• Conduct assessment ofstudents to determine employment 
interests/capabilities/skills, and assess needs in our respective communities in the 
area of professions/employment. 
Initiate job coaching classes. 

Provide child care opportunities for parent(s) (which are not limited to 8 hours) for 
students in training-including mothers under 16 years old, providing parenting skills 
training for those individuals. 
Provide city survival skills for urban youth. 

Approach local businesses to establish mentorships for students, particularly 
parents. 



Action Plan: 



To preserve/recognize the rights of Indian people to services, whether or not they elect to live/woric 
on or off reservation. 

• Approach policymakers through Sute and Federal represenutives, as well as the 
Tribal level, to initiate goal. EDUCATE THEM. 

• Organize advocacy efforts to ensure increased and equitable funding, consistent 
regulations and guidelines, etc., for Native People-both on a local level and as 
consortia. 



IDAHO 

GoAi^: • Assure that all coordination and practitioners in basic skills education for Indian adults are 

aware of specific resources and staff development activities and that all are on appropriate 
mailing lists. 

Utilize standing committees and available resources and scheduled meetings to 
fiirthernetworicing and promoting our vision and mission. Identify roles and tasks 
of agencies where we are and how we will interact in the future to support joint 

efforts. 

Expand adult basic education programs for American Indians and Alaska Natives. 



CnaSiig A UUmte Future 

Visioo SUtements. Missi.on Statements, and Action Plms 



StPaul.N!N 
October 12 -14, 1994 



Recommendations: 

• Provide addt vocational, adult basic educatioii,JTPA training, and (»inmunitye^ 

classes on or near reservations. 

• Provide extension or universi^ satellite sites for community education on reservatioais. 

• Provide education and counseling on health related issues such as nutrition, substance abuse 
and sexually transmitted diseases. 

• Incorporate life-skills training into adult basic education prograins. 

• Establish parenting classes to help American Indian parents become active in school and 
other activities. 

• Provide American Indian adults with para-professional training to help in schools and 
classrooms. 

• Provide a child development associate (CDA) program on or near reservations. 

• Provide adult students (especially single parents) with child care services to encourage 
participation in adult education programs. 

• Develop partnerships with private industry, councils, JTPA, and business and industry to 
provide workshops, u-aining, and other educational programs on or near reservations. 

• Funding is a must. 



ILLINOIS 



Vision: 



Mission: 



Action Plan: 



Native people will equitably access and develop ail the tools, funds, and policies for detennining life 
balance through informed choice and action. 

Native communities will establish and develop relationships that will ensure opportunities to obtain 
necessaiy social, cultural, educational, technical, and political skills to achieve personal growth and 
economic stability through a holistic approach. 

• Identify existing Indian educational coalitions in Illinois. If none, organize an 
educational coalition. 

• Identify educational needs of Native people in Illinois. 

• Identify current programs addressing those needs. 

• Start developing programs to address unmet needs. 

• Use the group brought together for this conference to start to expand and better 
utilize local. State, Federal, and Tribal contacts. 



KANSAS 

Vision: There will be secure funding sources to support the process of life-long learning for Native 
Americans/Alaska Natives through inter-agency and community planning leading to the 
implementation of a program that creates a community of learners. 

Mission: Kansas Adult Education for Native Americans Network (KAENAN) will seek fiindmg sources to 
provide a stable environment for adult education for Native Americans. All agencies and 
organizations will collaborate to plan and implement strategies to increase educational opportunities 
aod enable Native Americans to obtain necessary academic and technical skills to achieve personal 



ER^C J*EAsioci«ie«,lDC. 

UMWM-mmmm 



20 



17 



CreadHgA IStetmt Future 
Te«m Visioo Stotemeots, Missioa Statements, and Action Plans 



SLPaul,MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



goals, meaningful employment and exercise the rights and responsibilities of citizenship together 
with cultural awareness. 



Goals: 



Objectives: 



Activities: 



AU agencies and organizations which are involved in educating Native American adults wiU 
gather to share information and resources. 

Agencies and organizations wiU aeatively search for and access private and pubhc Federal, 
State and local sources of funding. 

Identify agencies and organizations dealing with Native American adult education and the 
resources they possess. 

Meet and compile a list of possible members: 
Where: Wichita Indian Center 
When: November 8 

Future actions to be determined after furst meeting. 

Establish the need for a collaborative entity dealing with KAENAN. 
Do a needs assessment to determine future actions. 

Create one point of contact and a mailing list for all agencies and organizaUons deahng with 
Native American Adult Education. 



MICHIGAN 



Vision: 



Mission: 



Issues: 



AU Native people will have an opportunity to live healthy lives to ensure balance and harmony within 
themselves. 

To increase the utilization of existing and future resources to improve the socioeconomic, poUtical 
and educational condition of Native people of the First Nations. 

• Impacting State policies and programs affecting Adult Education. 

Impacting Federal policies and programs tiiat affect Adult Education. 

Coordination of intake services utilized by tiie various adult education vocational 

and employment programs. , t j- 

Need for outreach by appropriate school-to-work initiatives at alllevels-Indian 

involvement as an active partner in collaboration and cooperation. 

Need for outreach by State Adult Literacy Center towards tiie collaboration and 

cooperation of Tribal Adult Education and employment programs and Indian JTPA. 



CrtatiHgA UUraU Future 

Te«n Visioo SUtements. Mission Statements, and Action Plans 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



MINNESOTA 

Vision: In lecognition of the unique status of American Indian Nations at the State and Federal levels of 
govenunent, the Minnesota delegation is committed to a future which provides for collaborative 
efiTocts to empower American Indians, resulting in fiill and equal access to academic, life, and 
tedinical skills necessary for the fulfiUment of personal goals, cultural and societal responsibilities, 
along with recognition for their achievement 

Mission: The Minnesota delegation will facilitate the development, implementation, and improvement of adult 
education programs available to the American Indian population. The mission will include: 
Improving coUaboratioo, communicaticMi, cooperation, and coordination with government. Tribal 
entities, and all educaticm providiers; supporting research and demonstration projects relevant to the 
American Indian population; advocating for increased recognition and conunensurate fimding for 
adult educati(Hi programs serving American Indians; encouraging alternative teacher license 
programs yAach. promote a greater inclusion of American Indians as classroom teachers; and taking 
an active role in administrative and legislative processes impacting American Indian programs. 

Action PiAN: • Communicate, coordinate and collaborate with Tribal entities. Federal, State, 

regional and local agencies. 

Tribal government review and approval of Minnesota State Adult 
Education carried out prior to submission of State Plan. 
Coordinate one-day annual meeting of service providers relevant to Adult 
Basic Education (ABE) American hidian clients/learners. 

• Continue to strengthen cooperative agreements among all agencies providing adult 
education, employment and training for American Indians. 

I^tablish renewable cooperative agreements defming State and local 
responsibilities of supporting academic and life skills achievement for 
Ainerican Indians. 

Create State mandates to ensure cooperation between Indian Adult 
Education service providers and local agencies. 

• Continue to strengthen the partnerships that will allow every American hidian adult 
increased educational opportunity to obtain necessary academic and technical skills 
to achieve personal goals, meaningful employment and exercise the rights and 
responsibilities of citizenship along with cultural awareness. 

Develop curriculum materials that target Minnesota-based Tribal groups 
(i.e., Anishinabe and Dakota). 

• Support research and demonstration projects that impact American hidian adult and 
continuing education. 

Identify exemplary models for Indian Adult Education and distribute and 
disseminate information and materials so that models can be replicated. 

• Make adult education a priority by appropriating adequate and on-going funding. 

Review existing sites and plan for additional facilities that are conducive to 
successful Adult Basic Education (ABE) for American Indians. 
Contact communities being served to assess overall satisfaction in meeting 
ABE needs. 



rnir> J A E Asiocittei, Inc. 

UMMmmmm 



22 



19 



OMTHif ^ UtenU Future 

Team Visioo Stttements. Mmaa Statemen ts, and Action Plans 

Lobby VcdenH agencies to assure Title 5C is funded at least at cunent 
levels with future year increases. 

Implement recanmendations for existing and additional sites. 
Compile statistical data to provide direction and speed of service. 
Use existing influential people to assure funding levels for Title 5C. 

• The Adult Basic Education (ABE) Ucense should be modified to meet the cultural 
and staffing needs of Tribal communities and promote positive role models for 
Indian learners. 

Meet with the Minnesota Department of Education and the Adult Basic 
Education staff to determine alternatives to current licaising practices. 
Create a plan to determine requirements for an alternative license. 

• Advocate against proposed welfare reform that limits the amount of time that 
learners must complete Adult Basic Education program. 

Advocate against policies that work against learners' needs for basic 

survival. 

Work with Human Services jobs and training and other supportive service 
agencies to help provide more comprehensive services for learner needs. 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



MONTANA 



Vision: 



Mission: 



Priority: 



Core 
Beliefs: 



Goals: 



As our ancestors used the whole buffalo for survival, we envision education as the "New Buffalo ui 
that Native Americans can use education to its fullest degree to impact poverty and ultimately greatly 
improve economic conditions among Native American Tribes. That we as Indian people may 
maintain a view of the world through this way of survival, that recognizes the power of commumty 
and allows all to participate to tiieir full potential. 

Maintain a stable flow of technological, economic and social resources to permit the consistent and 
on-going program offerings necessary for native people to realize their educational goals. 

Implement cultural literacy defmitions that reflect and accent the spiritual, social and historical views 
of Native American Tribes of Montana. 

Educationisacontemporary weapon for Native American People. As die Crow Chief 
Plenty Coups said, "Education is your weapon, without it you will be the white man's victim", 
(meaning the main society will stomp on you). Native heritage and cultural values must be 
mnintninH at the same time. 

• Organize a Montana hidian Education Consortium to: 

Interact with State government as a unified body. 

Provide training and other technical advising to programs that serve Native 

American adult learners. 

Develop culturally relevant curriculum and teaching strategies for Native Amencan 
adult learners. 

• Plan and develop a Native American Adult Education Training Seminar to be held during the 
summer of 1995. 



ERIC 



J&EAiwciates,Inc. 



23 



20 



CrttitiHgA UttMU Future 

Tem Visioo SUtements, Miasioo Statements, and Action Plans 

• Develop a culturally relevant curriculum that addresses the views of Tribal people within the 
geographic boundaries known as the "State of Montana". 



NAVAJO NATION 

Vision: The Navajo Nation delegation, recognizing nation sovereignty, is conunitted to systematic changes in 
adult education and vocational education, v**ich emphasize Navajo langiiage, culture and technology 
in partnership with the Navajo Nation, Federal and State government 

Mission: The Navajo delegation will faciUtate revising the Navajo Nation Code which governs adult education 
and vocational education programs. The mission of the delegation will include reconunending the 
revision of the Navajo Nation Code on adult education and vocational education prop-ams throu^ 
the Navajo Nation Education Conunittee and to be adopted by the full Navajo Council. In 
collaboration with Federal, State, private business sector, and schools, the vision of the l^avajo 
Nation delegation will become a reality. 

Core To develop a literate Nation so that the Navajo people will be able to function in both the 

Beliefs: traditional and western societies. 

Action Plan: • To develop a literate Nation so that our people will be able to function in both the 

traditional and Western Society. 

• To establish an adult education department to be part of the Navajo Nation 
education organization. 

• To advocate for equity in accessing adult education funds. 

• To develop and implement a plan to secure direct funding from the State and 
Federal government. 

• To provide technical assistance to the Native Americans/Alaska Native adult 
education programs. 

• To utilize modem technology to provide educational outreach to the Navajo People. 

• In developing a literate population, we must maintain our cultural and traditional 
values. 

• To establish an advisory committee to facilitate amendments to the Tribal code, 
develop adult education and vocational education policies, and to advocate for a 
literate population of the Navajo Nation. 

• To plan and implement a Navajo Nation campaign to address literacy and to provide 
awareness to the general public. 

• To develop partnerships with the commimity, school, student, and business. 

• To develop occupational standards specifically to regulate literacy standards, 
criteria, curriculum, testing, course offerings, and diplomas/certification. 

• To integrate the educational and vocational program to prepare an educated skilled 
labor force. 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 -J4. 1994 



ERXC J*EAiiociate«,Inc. 



24 



21 



CreatmgA IMente Future 

Team Tisioo Statements. Mission Statements, and Actioa Plans 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



NEVADA 

Vision/ All Indian people in Nevada will have equitable access to opportunities that promote life- 
Mission: long learning, while maintaining cultural identity, resulting in self-sufliciency. 

Goals: • improve cowdination and collaboration with Federal, State, regional, local and Tribal 
agencies. 

• Increase involvement and commitment to support adult Indian education in Nevada. 

Objective: • Seek input on adult education goals and objectives from Indian Tribes and organizations on 
an ongoing basis. 

Increase adult education fimding at State and Tribal levels which meet the needs of 
Indian Tribes and organizations for 95»96. 

Establish a Native American Desk at the Department of Education and a consultant 
at Inter-Tribal Coimcil of Nevada for 95-96; designate a contact person at the State 
Department of Education and within each Lidian Tribe and Indian organization. 
■ - Research, develop and design a proposal to establish four (4) regional cducatioual 

centers by December, 1996 

Develop and maintain an accountability system for recipients of any adult education 

funding to ensure that services are provided to Indian people. 

Review and evaluate our adult education action plan on an ongoing basis. 

• Strengthen partnerships among Federal, State, regional, local and Tribal agencies. 

Increase communication between Nevada Tribes, Tribal organizations. State 
agencies by designating a spokesperson within the Department of Education by 
February, 1995. 

Identify and utilize resources to market and implement adult education within the 
Indian community beginning February 1 , 1 995 and ongoing thereafter. 
Develop a woricshop to educate the Indian community regarding laws and resources 
available in conjunaion with the ITCN Convention in December. 1994 and ongoing 
thereafter. 

Incorpwate the adult education plan into the State adult education plan which will 
go into effect by July, 1 996. 

• Empower Tribal leaders to advocate for adult education at the State legislature. Congress 

and local government forums. 

Create leadership forums to discuss adult issues, resolve problems and share 

information on a quarterly basis. 

Make regularly scheduled presentations to Tribal councils, education committees, 
and other Indian organizations. 

Prepare resolutions for Tribal council action which support adult education. 

• Establish cooperative agreements among all agencies providing adult education, employment 
and training for Native Americans/Alaska Natives. 

• Establish cooperative agreements among all agencies providing adult education services: 
Indian Tribes and organizations. State adult education office, university and community 
colleges, community based literacy organizations. State board of education. 



ERIC 



J AE Associates, Inc. 



25 



22 



1 



CreatmgA LiUraU Future 

Team Visioo Strtmvm**. Missioa Stttements. and Action Plans 



SLPtul.MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



Identify a person or organization to assist in the development of cooperative 
agreements among agencies serving Indian adults by FY 95-96. 

Establish cooperative agreements between Nevada Indians and employment and training 
agencies: JTPA, employment services. Job Corps, AmeriCoips, business, industry, and 



Conduct and facihtate infonnationd worksh<^s for employment, training and 
educational agencies by July, 1996. 

Invite a representative from business and industry, and employment and trainmg 
agencies to participate on Indian Education Steering Committee by January, 1995. 
Develop and implement plan to collaborate with business and industry by 1995-96. 

Strengthen the partnership that will allow every Native American/Alaska Native adult 
increased educational opportunity to obtain the necessary academic and technical skills to 
achieve personal goals, meaning&l (employment and exercise the rights and responsibilities 
of citizenship along with cultural awareness. 

Increase equitable access to education, training and employment opportunities. 

Include adult education component in annual hidian education conference by 
January, 1995 and ITCN Convention by December, 1994. 
Identify existing, and secure additional resources as needed to provide support 
services such as: child care, transportation, career counseling, family counseling and 
substance abuse counseling. 

Maintain and/or review cultural identity. 

- , Include elders and other culturally knowledgeable individuals throughout the 
planning and implementation process. 

Identify culturally knowledgeable individuals within the Indian conununity. 
Develop and implement cultural curriculum component within adult education 
programs. 

Establish a model adult education program which promotes interaction and 
collaboration among elders and children to enhance literacy and cultural identity. 

Support research and demonstration projects that impact Native American/Alaska Native 
adult and continuing evaluation. 

Establish technological distance learning delivery systems within Tribes and Tribal 
organizations. 

Research, develop and design a proposal to secure funding to establish technology 
and distance learning systems by December, 1995. 
Provide on-site, on-going training and technical assistance as needed. 
Monitor and evaluate delivery systems on an ongoing basis. 



umons. 



« 



ERIC 




23 



CrtatingA UUraU Futun 

Tern Viarioo SUtemeots, Missioo Statements, and Action Plans 



StPtuUMN 
October 12-14,1994 



Initiate research and demonstration projects in collaboration with the Tribes, universities and 
other appropriate entities. 

Develop and implement model intergenerationai literacy curriculum in 'pilot 

program" beginning January, 1996. 



Vision: 



Mission: 



Objectives: 



NEW MEXICO 

We, as the New Mexico Task Force, acknowledge Tribes as. sovereign nations and view education as 
the development of knowledge, skills, abiUty or character, by teaching, training, study, or experience 
as defined by each Tribal/community entity. 

The mission of the New Mexico Team is to facilitate the continuum of education and educational 
support services for our target population. Respecting cultural diversity, we will strive to provide 
opportunities for individual and community enhancement through networking and collaboration. 

• To provide for followup initiatives which focus on identifying and eliminating 
barriers. 

• To identify various ABE programs, as well as funding sources within the State. 

• To provide a forum for networking and collaboration. 

• To provide a forum for participation at the grassroots level. 

• To allow program development at the local level in order to meet community needs. 



Vision: 



Core 
Beliefs: 



Mission: 



NORTH DAKOTA 

Through partnerships, all members of North Dakota Tribal nations will be biculturally and 
functionally literate. 

AH learners will possess knowledge, respect, and appreciation of their Tribal history, culture, 
values and language; their spiritual, traditional and ethical laws, social, political, literacy, life and 
technological skills necessaty to function in the global and mainstream society. 

In order to realize our vision this committee will facilitate cooperation and collaboration between the 
State and Tribal nations adult education programs. Crucial to this effort is the recognition of the 
govcmment-to-govemment relationship in law and policy, creating meaningful proactive 
partnerships, and providing accurate data about the needs of American hidian adult learners. 



Action Plan: Goall. 



Facihtate cooperation and collaboration between the Federal, State and Tribal adult 
education programs. 



Objective 1 . Create a vehicle for building a systemic, broad-base of support of adult 
Indian education needs. 

Conduct a series of Statewide forums focused on adult literacy topics and 
include appropriate stakeholders. 

In recognition of the govemment-to-govemment relationship create a 
mechanism for equitable funding streams for addressing each government's 
Indian adult education needs and responsibilities 



Er|c J&EA»oci«es.Inc. 27 2* 



Creating A UUraU Future 

Team Vision Statements. Missiop Statements, and Action Plans 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



Objective 2. Establish a Statewide, integrated adult education networic for the purpose of 
planning and resource sharing and increasing American Indian involvement 
in State planning and State involvement in Tribal planning. 
Identify potential resource people who could "cross-plan" for States/Tribes. 
Establish a telecommunications netwoilc to share resources and knowledge. 
Encourage and help off-reservation adult education programs to incorporate 
culture into classroom instruction. 

Develop an adult education "exchange program" for on- and off-reservation 
teachers and students. 

Support the recommendatiotis of the N ational Indian Adult Education 
Association. 

Goal 2. Provide an accurate picture of the level of Adult Education, GED, and literacy 

needs. 

Objective 1. Establish a databank of statistics that could be updated biannually and will 
be available to support funding requests, program planning, and program 
evaluations. 

Establish an office or agency to conduct research or contract with outside 
agency to conduct research Statewide. 

Develop a uniform method of gathering and reporting information. 
Identify "successful" areas or regions and model/disseminate information 
on successful strategies. 

Identify "problem" areas or regions through the data collection process and 
identify underlying causes. 

Track drop-outs and refer them to area adult education programs. 

Goal 3. Expand Adult Education Programs and keep abreast of national trends and adult 

education strategies. 

Objective 1 . Increase the availability of literacy efforts for Indian adults, and increase the 
availability of life skills training for Indian adults. 
Identify funding sources to purchase computers for student use. 
Expand classes on life-skills topics such as money management, budgeting, 
parenting and/or media literacy. 

Expand services to provide job and pre-employment skills and career 
counseling programs. 

Identify funding sources to support American Indian museums, archives 
and heritage centers. 

Include Adult Education in Indian nations economic development 
planning/funding. 

hicrease coordination and access to funding agencies. 

Goal 4. Make adult education an integral part of reservation communities education 

planning. i 



Objective 1 . Increase American Indian conununity involvement in adult education planning to 
promote the importance of educauon. 

Er|c J&EAssoci^eMnc. ^8 



CrtatiHg A UUnU Future 
Team Visioo Strtcmen**, Miaaion Stetements. and AcUon Plans 



SLPaul,MN 
October 12- 14. 1994 



Develop Tribal specific/culturally relevant cumculum geared toward adult 
learners. 

Provide parenting workshop to help parents support education and learning. 
Develop Tribal adult education codes and estabUsh a GED granting agency. 
Networic with area social service agencies to address barriers to academic 
success. 

Place adult education under the auspices of Tribal colleges to encourage a 

cooperative effort for development 

Form community adult education "boards" to foster ownership: 



OKLAHOMA AND THE CHEROKEE NATION 



Vision: 



Mission: 



Goals: 



Action Plan: 



Objectives: 



CoUaboration of Tribal, Sute, and Federal parmership activities as a means of improving 
coordination of all related services to maximize the resources provided through these efforts. 

Strengthen the parmerships that will allow every Native American/Alaska Native adult increased 
educational opportunity and to obtain necessary academic and technical skills to achieve personal 
goals, meaningfiil employment, and exercise the rights and responsibilities of citizenship together 
with cultural awareness. 

• To establish an advisory group with representatives from Federal, State, regional, 
local and Tribal agencies. , . • 

• To develop and implement a plan to improve coordination and collaborauon of 
services for Native Americans/Alaska Natives. 

• The State Department of Education will be the lead agency in contacting all Native 
American/Alaska Native Tribes or agencies who currently provide adult education, 
training and employment services to appoint one representative, and one alternate to 
serve on the advisory group. 

• Upon receipt of representatives names, the State Departmem of Educauon wUl plan 
the first advisory group meeting. 

• The committee will organize with officers and rules of operation: Time frame 6-12 

months. . 

• Communicate with all entities. 

• Sharing training and staff development , 

• Provide opportunity to look at ways group can obuin resources and maximize the 
use of current resources. 

• Share program resources for purpose of learning about utilizing and referring 

clients. 

• Look into developing parmerships with business and industry. 

• Long term plans to solicit funding from the Sute Legislature for adult education, 
employment and training services. 



Cre«dHgA Uttnte Futurt 

Team Visioo StJteneots, Missioo Statements, and Action Plans 



St Paul, MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



OREGON 

Vision: The Oregon delegation to this national fonim on adult and vocational education resolves that aU 
American Indian, Alaska Native, and Hawaiian Native people in Oregon will be provided with the 
opportunity to gain the skills, attitudes, and knowledge necessary to make informed choices and 
participate fuUy in Tribal, State, and national communities. 

Mission: The Oregon delegation to this forum is committed to the mission of: 

• Providing accessible, cultura%*relevant adult education, Ufelongleaniing, and training 
programs to all American Indian, Alaska Native, and Hawaiian Native adults in Oregon. 

• Encouraging Indian/Natives adults to more fully utilize educational and support services so 
that all nu^ better develop their talents and abilities, compete in the changing global 
ecooooiy, pursue hi^er education or training, and preserve traditional cultures. 

• Promoting the value of education and literacy for Indian/Native families and communities so 
that all TCON exercise the rights, privileges and opportunities of Tribal, State, and national 
citizenship. 

PLANNED Launch AcnvuiEs: 

• To draft an amendment to the newly-published Oregon State Indian Education Plan, in order 
to include a comprehensive statement of adult education goals, objectives, and services 

• To pursue additional sources of funding for current and proposed programs of adult and 
vocatioiutl education for Indians/Natives in Oregon. 

• To hold regular planning meetings to continue the collaborative efforts and initiatives started 
at the October 1994 national forum. 

• To begin disseminating information about these plans and initiatives and to prepare a 
presentation for the April 1995 Oregon hdian Education Conference. 

• To gadier more information about the JOBS Plus (waver system) and AmeriCorps 
programs. 

• To contact and begin collaborations with the American Indian Association of Portland, the 
Organization of Forgotten Americans, as well as the Eugene, Medford, Salem, and other 
community organizations which serve (or might serve) non-reservation based Indian/Native 
adults and famiUes. 

• To update and distribute the Oregon ABE directory to all Indian and Native communities 
and to organizations serving these communities. To append the directory with a chart and/or 
other visual aids designed to clarify how, and by whom ABE, GEO, and vocational 
education resources, services, referrals, etc., are provided to Indian/Native adults and 
families. 

Planned On-Going AcnvrriEs: 

• To gather, evaluate, and distribute current Statewide Indian/Native population and adult 
education data. 

• To evaluate the current BASIS/CASAS ABE assessment system, especially in relation to 
their usefidness for Indian/Native leaders. 

• To explore Statewide staff development needs in adult education. 

• To enlist support of the State Office of Community College Services Staff Development 
office, in our adult education training efforts, and in developing volunteer tutor programs. 

• To explore and develop strategies and collaborative efforts to help Indian/Native students 
make a smooth transition &om high school, ABE, and GEO programs into employment, job 
training, or post-secondary schools. 



ERXC JAEAssociate$,Inc. 



30 



27 



SLP«ul,MN 

Crealmg A IMU Future . . . „, October 12- 14 1994 

Teim Visioo S*'>™ >« Mi^^i"" S tetements. «nd Actioa Plans uctooeri^ 74. iyy# 

• To review and evaluate current curriculum materials for ABE/GED courses and to develop 
new materials as needed. . • i _i • 

• To explore the impUcations of education reform in Oregon in adult and vocaUonal education 

for Indians/Native Americans. 

• To identify and more fully utilize organizations and resources such as the regional Literacy 
Center, The Northwest Regional Education Laboratory and otiiers. 



TEXAS 

Vision: All Texas adults will have access to basic education services. 

Mission: The mission of the adult education and Uteracy program is to provide literacy and other basic skills 
needed for high school completion, employment, personal development and family livmg through 
collaborative efforts to achieve excellence and equity in student activities. 



Goals: 



Identify current program services and needs. 

Identify existing resources. 

Join the local adult education cooperative. 

Identify existing cooperative delivery system in local community and become a part of it 
Become members of the existing State adult education information network through the 
Texas A&M University Adult Education Clearing House. 



UTAH 

Vision/ Native Americans of the State of Utah, in collaboration with the State Director of Adult 
Mission: Education, will provide equal opportunity for literacy, job skills/employment, while preserving 
cultural identity. 

Goals- • Organize and schedule a Native American Adult Education Seminar in collaboration with 
Tribes and State officials to meet the needs of the Native American adult communities. 

• Formalize existing agreements and develop new agreements for the benefit of providing 
adult education, employment, and training for Native Americans in collaboration with, but 
not limited to, the following agencies: State Office of Education, Division of Indian Affairs, 
Tribes, BIA Social Services, JTPA, homeless, job service, school districts, rehab programs, 
PIC, and Association of Governments. 

• Propose that the State of Utah adopt and implement a written policy that will aUow tuition 
waivers/scholarships to eligible Native American adults upon cnrolhnent at applied 
technology centers/post secondary institutions. 

Train existing financial and officers to assist in, and identify available financial 
resources to Native American adults. 

Conduct woricshops to help Native American adults in the fmancial aid application 
process that will lead to enhanced educational opportunities. 

• Prepare a Utah proposal for a demonstration project for adult and continuing education for 
Native American adults. 



EMS J &E Associates. Inc. ^ 



Crea^A UUnU Future 

Team Virioo Stotcments. Missioo Statements, and Action Plans 



SLPaul.MN 
October 12 '14, 1994 



AcnvrriES: 



Action Plan: 



Native American Adult Education Seminar. 

Foraiaiize existing/new agreements. 

Native American tuition/waiver scholarships. 

Financial aid resource workshops with assistance of ethic/multicultural centers. 
Utah proposal for a demonstration project for adult and continuing education. 



WASfflNGTON 

• Contact other Tribes from Washington State at the NIEA for input 

• Check with Office of the Superintendent and other Washington State Education 
Organization such as ATNI to open the lines of conununications. 

• Contact the Washington State Adult Education Director by telephone and letter 
by the end of October, 1994. 

• Esublish a network of the Tribes and State organizations that are involved with 
adult education. 

• Establish biannual meetings with the Washington State Director of Adult 
Education 



Mission: 



Core 
Beliefs: 

AcrrvrriEs: 



Vision: 
Mission: 



WISCONSIN 

Wisconsin's committee will consist of official representatives designated by the Tribes. Their 
mission will be to explore the possibilities of collaboration efforts which will strengthen tadian 
Adult Education Programs. 

Must work with Tribes (Tribes have varying needs and have their own 
vision/mission statements, organizational structures.) 

• Draft a letter to Tribal Chairpersons. 

• Information sharing with appropriate entities: 

Attend Great Lakes Inter-Tribal Council Meetings 
Language and Culture Board 

• "Unofficial" follow-up meetings to keep the lines of communication open and 
further the discussions started in St. Paul 

• Establish a Wisconsin Education Team 



WYOMING 

We believe the key to a better future for all Native Americans is education. 

Every Native American student will be functionally literate and employable by the year 2000. It 
is imperative that all appropriate public and private organizations participate in this process. 



ERIC 



J&EA»ociates,Inc. 



32 



29 



CreatmgA UUnt* Futurt 

Tcttn Vision Stitements. Misnon Statements, and Action Plans 



St Paul, MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



Goals: • WcvdU identify barriers to the cdiicational process and strive to eliminate them 
possible. 

• We will identify and maximize usage of existing resources thereby minimizing 
duplication of service. 

• We will develop and implement a process which will create and maintain an awareness 
of adult education opportunities and the development of marketable skills. 



33 



FR?r J&EAsioci«te«,Inc. 



CrttdmgA LiUraU Future 
Demooatntioo Prognm Descriptions 



SLPaul,MN 
October 12-14.1994 



Exemplary Adult Education and Literacy 
Demonstration Program Descriptions 



JOBS Manpower Consortium, California 

The California Indian Manpower Consortium, Inc. wasformaUy created in 1978 under State law as a non-profit 
corporation for the purpose of working for the social welfare, educational and economic advancement of its memlw 
Tribes, groups, organizations, and Indians and other Native Americans living in the Sutc of California. 

The membership of the Consortium includes federaUy recognized American Indian Tribes, reservations, rancherias, 
bands colonies, terminated rancherias, American kdian groups, entities, and organizations (public or private non- 
profit) satisfying the requirements set forth in the by-laws of the California fadian Manpower Consortium, toe., and as 
agreed to in the Consortium Agreement formally approved by tiw membership. 

The primary purpose of the Consortium is to offer training, employment and other activities designed to fidly meet tiie 
employment and training needs of the client population. The principal funding source is the Federal Job Trammg 
Partnership Act. 

Anotiier purpose of the Consortium is to promote community self-help programs and provide direct services to assist 
eligible American fadian populations to become economically self-sufficient and to alleviate poverty in rural, 
reservation and urban areas through Community Service Block Grant fimding. 

A third purpose of the Consortium is to provide professional economic development services to assist American 
Indian Tribes and promote and develop fimding strategies and public-private partnerships that will lead to greater 
economic vitality. 

A fourtii purpose of the Consortium is to promote and provide programs and activities designed to improve the 
educational attainment levels of Native American youth and adults. 

The program is designed for training, employment and other activities designed to assist an individual in becoming 
employed. It is a non-profit organization representing Federally recognized Tribes, reservations, rancherias, bands, 
colonies, terminated rancherias, American Indian groups, entities, and organizations residing in the State of 

California. The consortium serves all Native Americans in need of employment and training services who reside in 
the State. FundingsourcesfortheprogramaretheFederal Job Training Partnership Act and JOBS. The contact 
person is Jim Henry, JOBS Program Coordinator, California hidian Manpower Consortium, Inc., 4 153 Northgate 
Blvd., Sacramento CA 95834, telephone (916) 929-5485. 



34 



o : — . 31 

FRIC JAEAsio c ii tc i.toc. 



Creating A LUtnU Future 

Demomtratioa Prognm Deacriptioos 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



ERIC 



Denver Indian Center, Colorado 

The Denver Indian Center offers a variety of classes free of charge and is open to all who have an educational need. 
Classes include Adult Basic Education, GED preparation. Computer Literacy, and Family Literacy. In addition to the 
traditional academic programs,- the Center offers a variety of specialized classes designed to meet the diverse needs of 
the Native American community. Classes include Indian unity-culture sessions, classroom arts and crafts classes, life 
skills workshqw, a mentotship program, college preparation, a healthy alternatives youth program, and Native 
American arts and crafts projects. 

The greatest area of excellence are the students, staff and volunteers who arc part of a team that appreciates and 
nurtures the uniqueness and special talents that each individual brings to the workplace and classroom. Too often, a 
lack of respect for each other results in low productivity and failure to meet goals and objectives. Most importantly, it 
devalues the work of each individual. 

The program believes in being a learning organization. This phrase was coined by Peter Serve, author of Thg Fifth 
Discipline. He states that in a learning organization people continually expand their capacity to create the results they 
truly desire, vrfiere new and expansive patterns of thinking are nurtured, where collective aspiration is set free, and 
where people are continually learning how to learn together. In addition, learning organizations must become a place 
where it is safe to create visions, where inquiry and commitment to the truth are the norm, and where challenging the 
status quo is expected. Serge firmly believes the organizations learn only through individuals who learn. 

hi June, 1994, the Center was notified by the U.S. Depaitment of Education, Office of Indian Education, that they 
were selected as the Effective Showcase Program of Indian Education Projects. Only one Indian education program a 
year in the U.S. is selected for this award. This is a great honor for the Denver Indian Center and for the community 
served. The Center will receive the award at the NIEA Sijlver Anniversaiy Conference in October, 1994. 

In 1993, the National Coalition of Indian Education, located in Albuquerque, NM, published "Exemplary Programs in 
Indian Education." The Center's total program with all of its components was one of the featured programs within the 
publication. In 1993, the Association for Community-Based Education, a private foundation located in Washington, 
D.C., recognized the Family Literacy Program as being exemplary in the reahn of documentation and evaluation and 
awaxied the Denver Indian Center a $3500 grant for the project The Association recognized this program as .worthy 
of replication in other communities vrith like populations and programs. This organization has tentatively requested 
that the Denver Indian Center personnel present this model at their upcoming conference. 

The Denver Indian Colter's Fanuly Literacy Program "Old Wisdom, New Knowledge" was recognized for its unique 
curriculum designed to meet the needs of this population. This model is different from the traditional model 
associated with the National Center for Family Literacy. The emphasis of the program is on elder participation, 
culture and education. 

The Center serves the entire seven-county Denver metropolitan area with a targeted population of all Native 
Americans residing therein. The mission is to provide quality Adult Basic Education and GED preparation to urban 
Native American adults and community members at large, through family literacy, reinforcement of culture and 
collaboration with community service providers for the expressed purpose of enhancing lifelong learning and 
promoting economic self-sufficiency. 

Funding sources are Federal, State and local organizations. The contact person for the Denver Indian Center is Lynda 
Nutall Program Director, Adult Education Program, 4450 Morrison Road, Denver, CO 80219, telephone (303) 937- 

35 

J&E Associates, Inc. 



ERIC 



Demonatntioo Piogiia Descriptions uctooer i^- it. t:'^'* 

National Canttr for Family Literacy and Blackwater Community School, Family anc Child 
Education (FACE) Program, Arizona 

The FACE ptognun is a family literacy program providing adult education and early childhood education for enrolled 
families There are two components in the program, center-based and home-based. The center-based program 
combines activities that bring the parents and their children together for age-appropriate activities in a school setting. 
The home-based program requires a parent Uaison trained in early chUdhood education to work with the famihes at 
theirbome. 

The Family and Child Education Program is part of a national demonstration project funded tiirough the Office of 
Indian Education Programs, Bureau of Indian Affairs. It combines two national models in one: die National Center 
for Family Literal and the Parents as Teachers models. 

The Blackwater Community School was awarded a Family and Child Grant in 1993. This program is part of a 
network of 21 national sites funded by the Office of hidian Education Programs, Bureau of Indian Affairs. The grant 
is bx three years based on performance criteria and enrollment levels. 

To date, die FACE program at Blackwater has provided services to approximately 40 families in the communities of 
Blackwrter, Sacaton Flats and Sacaton. Families are either enrolled in die center-base program and attend school with 
their three-to-five-year old child four days a week from 8:30 am to 2:30 pm, or the families are enrolled in tiie home- 
based component and meet weekly witii the parent liaison/early child education specialist 

The parents are required to woric on personal educational goals which may include completing high school, obtaining 
a GED preparing for woric, or enrolling in post-secondary educational programs, hi addition, the parents participate 
in two special activities. The first is die Parent and ChUd Time, or PACT, which brings die parents and tiieu- child 
togedier to pl^ in activities designed by die staff. These activities are designed to address die developmental stages 
for dwse children, as part of die High/Scope Curriculum endorsed for diis program. The second activity is Parent 
Time which allows die parents to discuss parenting and personal issues in a confidential setting. These same 
activities arc included in die home-based component hi order to facilitate Parent Time for diese families, diey are 
required to attend a numthiy meeting at school. 

The Blackwater program is equipped widi a computer-assisted instruction program called INVEST. This system 
prepares die parents to become computer literate while assisting at remediating diem in academic areas, hi addition, 
diere are Ufe skills and survival skills components included in die program which arc highly motivating. 

Additional special, activities include cultural events which draw upon die elders in die community. These individuals 
share legends and cultural activities witii die families. Some examples include die planting of a community garden to 
promote die utilization of native plants, Pima language sessions, and visits to local farms. 

The Blackwater Community FACE program is part of a shared vision identified by die Bureau of hidian Affairs, 
Office of Indian Education Programs to atuin die National America 2000 Educational Goals and tadian Amwica 
2000+ in die areas of: 

School Readiness 
Higji School Completion 
Student Achievement and Citizenship 
Adult Literacy and Lifelong Learning 
Safe, Disciplined, and Drug Free Schools 
Tribal Goveniment, Language and Culture 3 8 

J &E Associates, hK. 



Creating A LitMFumre n . ^ n^!f'!^4 

DemomtratiooPrognm Descriptions . uctober i^- 1^. ty^'' 

The Family and Child Education Goals are as follows: 



To hdp parents gain motivation, skills, and knowledge needed to become employed or to pursue 
further education 

To increase the number of parents prepared to promote their children's development 



• To establish home-school partnerships 

• To provide a means for eariy detection of potential learning problems 

• To increase the developmental skills of cWldren to prepare them for academic and social success in 
sdiool 

• To reduce family problems that interfere with constructive growth and development 

This program is located on the GUa River Indian Community in Arizona and serves Native American families in need 
of adult education services and who have children between the ages of birth and five years. The goal is to assist the 
parents in completing GEDs, high school diplomas, work readiness skills, and life skills while educating them on then- 
role as the first and most important teacher of their child. The long term impact on the community is to assist families 
in becoming self-sufBcient and increase the likelihood that their children will complete school. 

The fiinding source in the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Office of Indian Education Programs demonstration grants. The 
contact person is Jacqueline Power, Coordinator, Blackwater Community School, Route I, Box 95, Coolidge, AZ 
85228, telephone (602) 215-3259. 



37 



O . , 34 

ERXC J*EAssocutes,Inc. 



CrtaditgA LilaaU Futun 
DenK»sti»tiooProgmDeacriptioos 



StP«il.MN 
October 12 '14, 1994 



Indian Adult Basic Education, Minnesota 

The primary focus of the lABE Program is to deliver services to Native Americans over the age of 16. The Indian 
Adult Basic Education Program collaborates with local public school districts and Tribal councils to provide regional 
adult basic education services. 

The lABE programs work in close cooperation vvith local Reservation Councils (RTCs), Local Indian Education 
Committees (UECs), local school districts and other adult education programs to provide instructional sites on or 
near the Chippewa hdian Communities in the northeastern region of Minnesota, at sites where there are high numbers 
of Indian adults who would benefit most from basic education skills. The lABE programs are specifically geared to 
meet the needs of American hidians who arc culturally unique and reluctant to participate in the general educational 
offerings of other public instimtions. 

The hidian Education Section of the Minnesota State Department of Education has administered programs in basic 
education for 26 consecutive years. It began as a part of a federally funded proposal in 1968, and developed over the 
years into an ongoing program to meet adult educational needs. Currently, there are two professionals in the Duluth 
Field Office (and one secretary) vibo coordinate the lABE activities with the E>uluth Public Schools' Community 
Education Office (as fiscal agent for the sites), with RTCs and instructional staff and participants at each of the class 
sites. A total of 10 sites and 20 instructional staff are involved in the lABE program. 

histructional staff at each site arc hired through recommendations by the local RTCs or LIECs in their respective area 
to assure that communities have culturally sensitive staff who arc knowledgeable and responsive to their conamunities. 
In each community, an instructional aide is hired to canvas the local community, recruit students into the programs, 
assist the teacher in the classroom, and help participants with needed services. They also help the teachers become 
more familiar with individuals in the classroom. The communication is established through the community 
personalized and individualized educational activities that are trusted by community members. Priority in recruitment 
effort is given to adults in the community who are the least educated and most in need of assistance. 

The major program component is basic skills instruction. Program components which help hdian adults cope with 
life problems and develop survival skills are also included. Basic skills are augmented through the use of relevant life 
skill areas. As individuals achieve competence and self-confidence, it is expected they will move into GED 
preparation and look toward post-secondary education options or employment opportunities. It is implicit in the 
program design that skills will vary fix)m individual to individual upon program entry, and that participants will 
up^adc or revise the individual goals with on-going program involvement 

Instruction and aides woric together to make individual assessment of basic skills to diversify their instruction and 
make it more satisfactory to each participant Learning center assessment practices and "Personal Learning Plans" are 
used to plan and clarify i^)propriate learning activities and identify learning objectives based on the needs and desires 
of each adult student The learning contracts are created based on four areas: 1) initial student responses, 2) 
assessment data, 3) instructor and student plan learning objectives, and 4) periodic review of goal-setting and 
attainment as necessary. Each learning plan is part of the Student Confidential Record for each pupil and is placed in 
a student portfolio. 

The program serves the Northeastern region of Minnesota focusing on tadian adults over the age of 16 yAio have a 
high need for adult basic education services. The funding sources are the Minnesou Federal Adult Basic Education 
fimds. The contact person is Vernon Zacher, Lead Teacher, 320 W. Second Street Room 7 12; Duluth. Minnesota 
55802, telephone (218) 723-4657, fax (218) 722-1321. 



ERIC 



o ■ .._ : ^ Ts 



J&EAsMCtates,lDC. 

s 



LIST OF APPENDICES 

Appendix A — Educational Attainment and School Enrollment and Labor Force 

Status of American Indians and Alaska Natives by State and the 
Cherokee and Navajo Nations: 1990 U.S. Census 

Appendix B — Conference Agenda 

Appendix C — Presenter/Moderator and Participants List 

Appendix D — Evaluations 



39 



Appendix A 

Educational Attainmant and School Enrollment and Labor Force SUtus of American Indians and Alaska 
Natives by State and the Cherokee and Navajo Nations: 1990 U.S. Census 



EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT 

Pwions IS to 24 yMim 

Sta m Mhooi or M without gmkMling' 
HIgli cchool giwiurtM OnekidM aquivaicncy) 
Sonw ooiogt or aMocMt dogra* 
BacMoCs dograt or highor 

F i mi l H 25 ym% and over 
Loss than Sth grMio 
SthtoSihgrada 
9lh to 12ih grada, no diptoma 
High achooi graduata fnckidaa aquivaltncy) 
Soma ooHaga, no dograa 
Co la Qt rtapraa * 

Malaa 25 yaara and ovar 
LesathanSthgiada 
SthtoSth grada 
9th to 12th grada. no dipionia 
High achoot graduata (inciudas aquivalcncy) 
Soma coHaga, nodtgraa 
CoOegadogrM* 

Peraona 25 yaara and over 

Parcant 

Laos than 9th grada 
High achooi graduate or higher 
Soma coHaga or higher 
Bachaioi'a dagraa or higher 

SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND LABOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Pennna16to19years 
Enroited in achooi 
Einploy*d 
Unempioy*d 
Not m labor foroa 
Not anroHad in a c h ooi 
High achooi graduate 
Efflptoyad 



Not m labor feroa 
Not high achooi graduate 
Empioyad 



Not m labor foroa 



Alabama 



1 899 
642 
633 
588 
36 

5176 
150 
607 
1 113 
1 547 
929 
830 

4 889 
280 
462 
920 
1 267 
1017 
943 

10 065 



14.9 
64.9 
36.9 
11.6 



1 462 
1 131 
299 
77 
751 
331 
155 
125 
8 
10 
176 
80 
37 
59 



Alaska' 



(Al) 



3420 
1 010 
1506 
868 
36 

8440 
477 
675 
1 373 
2690 
2242 
983 

8165 
385 
649 
1369 
3469 
1 443 
850 



13.2 
70.3 
33.2 
5.9 



2164 
1 420 
454 
82 
874 
744 
382 
162 
90 
124 
362 
82 
102 
178 



18 

7 
11 



119 
5 

23 
39 
19 
27 
6 

158 
10 
23 
28 
60 
20 
17 



16605 277 



2Z0 
53.8 
25.3 
5.1 



34 
28 
24 



Arizona 



(AN) 



24884 
11 514 
7836 
5395 
139 

50310 
6914 
6073 
11580 
12982 
7850 
4911 

43709 
4875 
5611 
10063 
12533 
6493 
4134 

94019 



25.0 
5Z0 
24.9 
4.5 



15 389 
11 386 
1 642 
866 
8878 
4003 
1 100 
396 
221 
480 
2903 
589 
529 
1 785 



Arkansas 



1 539 
541 
515 
444 

39 

4556 
196 
484 
934 

1 467 
806 
579 

3941 
148 
374 
819 

1 027 
850 
723 

8497 



14.1 
65.2 
35.9 
9.9 



940 
655 
179 
39 
437 
285 
113 
76 
4 
18 
172 
48 
43 
81 



30286 
10605 
9129 
9628 
924 

74961 
1947 
4717 
15581 
19352 
19427 
13937 

69227 
1 786 
4253 
12999 
17038 
18794 
14347 

144188 



8.8 
71.4 
46.1 
10.9 



15316 
10678 
3320 
1253 
6088 
4638 
2064 
1031 
227 
506 
2574 
1016 
424 
1028 



'FtetwSMefAlMlaitMimU.S.C«nMnpe>««atil«torAni«icMMiMl(AQtnd lor Alaska ForaUotwSMatkntf TiibMtMlotHarapMadhMaaralar 

t ani hawig a 



' Cll]11|Ht i ( >;ll l » H »ll | t1l rT- ~'>T---T —'-•"1 „^ „ >^ ...^ ^p^.^ ..^.^Mi^. .- 

> i ir i T" " I I' "' — — ' — ' — ' .■t.'jj-^ 

• Ciu i iti i iKi iWta HH i H i« i i r i nmi iT"r--|T-- — - 

III C l ini l i li ll i lw. rati n |-— ' " --| - - ' ^ FerlhaNava|oNaton.«MalaaragMn«orttMNav(|e(M<*nBinAi<nna. 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



® 40 

ERIC 



Educational Attalnimnt and School Enrollmtnt and Ubor Force SUtus of ^rican Indians and 
Educaj»wi«D»^^^^ and tha Charokta and Navajo Nations: 1990 U.S. Census (cont) 




P«fMi«l8to24y«m 
SM in sctMol or M tHittMUt gndueling' 
High tUiuul Mi ■>>■>■ (lnclgw«(MV»l»ncy) 
Soim ooltgt or anociite dtgnt 
BMMoCtdtgiwerNgiMr 

F«RMlw25yMn«ndovMr 

Sttitoamgradt 

«t to 12tti gradt. no dipiaim 

Hl^ tctaol graduM (ineludM oquivaiMwy) 

Somooil*90,nodogfw 
Congo (togiM* 

Molw25yooi*andowor 
ItMthonWtgndo 
Sthtodthgndo 
Ml to 12m gndt. no diploma 
High school graduitt (inciudoo oquivatoncy) 

Somtoo«og«,nodogra» 
CologodogrM* 



Poisons 2S yMT* and ovtr 

Parewit: 

UaathanMtgrada 

High adwel graduM or highor 

S ow a c olsgoorhighor 

Bachatofsdigraaorhighar 

SCHOOL ENROUMENT AND LABOR FORCE 
STATUS 

ParMns16to19yoais 
Enroltodinadtoai 
Emptoyad 



Not in labor foroa 
Notanroladinaeiuol 
High adwel gnduato 
tin«oyw 



Not in labor forea 
Not Mghachool graduate 
Emptoyad 



Not in labor foroa 



'For »• SMi •( AIMW »• IMO us. C«ati* rapem «MM lor Afiwnew 



(AO I 



«r i H W ilmi>»»iWiiMW*»<ct»*»oni.l»>B24 



«torAlMliaNalN«*(AN). FwtUoawr 
gh Mheo) graduatM. aMn«in« MiM 
jKMMCt, a MennM. or • protoMinMl 



««d Tcibo* •>• «a*it» itpon*) horo or. tar 
oroonwig an t infu li 4ttm. 



ttoiViCarakuantfOUahumaonly. Forf)aNa*«joNaion.»olil»ar»j<*«iter»aNa«)Ot««*n9m< 



ERIC 



41 



Educational Attainment and Scliooi Enrollment and Labor Force SUtus of American Indians and 
Alaska Natives by State and the Cherokee and Navajo Nations: 1990 UJS. Census (cont) 



EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT 

P«wmieto24ynrs 
S« in aelKni or Ml without gradiaiing' 
Higit •ctwol gmkatM (indudM aquivilMey) 
Sonw oolig* pr MMcato dtgrat 
BMiMkif's dtMM or tiiohtr 

Fii w iii 2S ymn and am 
LMSthmSIhgtad* 
Sttttoflihgracte 
9th to 12th smto, no dipionn 
High Mhooi gradial* CneMw aquivaiancy) 
Sonw ooMaga, no dagraa 
Colaga dagraai* 

Malaa 25 yaara and ovar 
Laas than Sth grada 
Sth to 8lh greda 
Sth to 12th gtada, no diptoma 
High achool graduatt (indudas cquivalancy) 
Soma coNaga, no dagiaa 

Pmons 25 yearn and over 

Percent^ 

Lata than 9lh grada 

High achool graduata or highar 

Badiaiot'a daoraa or Nohar 

SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND LABOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Paraons16to19yeare 
.EnreNad in achool 
Empioyad 
Unamptoyad 
Not in labor fbcca 
Not anrotad in achool 
High achool graduata 
Efflptoyad 



NotmiaborfeRia. 

'^*Em^^'**** 
Unemployed 
Notmialwrtaroa 



Gaofgia 



1 877 
500 
832 
666 
70 

45S9 
115 
397 
804 
1 340 
1032 
871 

4810 

129 
370 
846 
1 347 
1 150 
968 

9369 



10.8 
71.6 
42.9 

^Z4 



936 
564 
140 

60 
364 
372 
178 

32 
9 

28 
194 
100 

25 

60 



Hawaii 



726 
292 
184 
250 
1 

1 548 
9 
43 
195 
415 
564 
302 

1387 
10 
71 
178 
351 
403 
374 

2935 



4.5 
84.8 
58.7 
17.6 



244 

161 
64 
9 
83 
83 
46 
31 



37 



31 



Idaho 



1 859 
762 
525 
553 
19 

3743 
49 
311 
754 

1 156 
938 
535 

3713 
89 
360 
822 

1 172 
727 
543 

7456 



10.9 
68.0 
36.8 
7.2 



1 ^B2 
787 
142 
80 
565 
395 
133 
60 
31 
32 
262 
88 
52 
122 



llhnote 



3117 
1 127 
917 
995 
78 

7172 
210 
640 
1333 
2054 
1542 
1391 

7046 
234 
521 
1091 
1 889 
1 876 
1 435 

14218 



11.3 
717 
43.9 
12J 



1568 
948 
341 
116 
495 
620 
245 
126 
68 
32 
375 
147 
43 
172 



Tor til tUtl Tt f iMft i til * ■ r*— ***^ *~ * lAti -"I i~ Ai^i.- lAUf Fwaltetwr 



'C»m$mt tf iMtai u Wil numtw tt Know ^t*»3* ytan <i*ie ¥wt« wpirti* «» high «etiool g o iiwl n . w in«i» n *cm» 
lw«iMrs««tmar(i)|Mrlmmtt*«DM iNMikwaf HnoM II M24 iMis. 

*C « i*l » i H ilil«i> i H Mili n rtmi m tm^nt mmmi tn miaetM*. « fcictiil« » 't. « m»m f t. « iicloi l i, or« p i rtm iiwl 
Till Mil ni l f ilill tIMiin. Wtl TT | — ~— - . /M,i.K_. ^ FwtwNMieNMen. 



M TitbM «• MM itpeiM ))•«• ai* Iw 
•( Mmmg Ml MMOM* Mr**, an* MMf i 



«oM« *ra fivM ler Nm|0 (Mttfng in AriaoM, 



42 

FRIC 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



EducatjoMt Attalnin«nt and School Enrollimnt and Ubor Fore. Status of /^rican «ndlans and 
Atote l^ the Charoka. and Navajo Nations: 1990 U.S. Cansus (cont) 



low I 



Loui»iani| 



EDUCAnONALATTAINMENT 

P«non»l8te24yMf» 
Sta in actMOi or Ml wttwU flradutting' 
HJ^ tchooi flndu*«« (inclu(fc» •quivalwcy ) 
Som coNig* or sMocM* dtgraa 
BaetMlM'tdogrMorNghMr 

LM»th«tSttigncl« 

Sttitoflthgrad* 

9lhto mgmdt. nodiplam 

High tchool g«ilu«« (induclw oquiwlwcy) 

SoiMcail«i.notl«rM 

Mates 25 yMHS and over 
LmthanSthgrad* ~ 
SthtoaihgnKlt 
gth to 12th grade, no diptonui 
High «chool gradiatt (includes equivalency) 
SomecoNsge.nodegrse 
Cotegedegrss* 

Psraons 25 years and over 

Percent: 

Less than Ml grade 
High aehooi graduate or higher 
Soma ootoge or higher 
Baeheloi's degree or higher 

SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND LABOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Persons 16 to 19 years 
EnroNed in school 
Emplcyad 
Unemployed 
Not in iatnr force 
Not enroNad in school ^ 
High achool graduate 

Emptoyad 

Unamployad 

Not m labor tbrea 
Not high aehooi gtaduite 

Employed 

Unemployad 

NotinMiorforee 



3900 



12632 



4273 



22S0j 


08/ 


984l 


Ml 


829} 


O * J 

304 


410 j 


233 


271 


9l 


5 442 


1689 


596 


24 


1 017 


231 


1099 


244 


1 486{ 




845! 


2BB 


387 


257 


5331 


1606 


667 


39 


1016 


178 


1 113 


269 


1 310 


687 


662 


240 


563 


192 


10773 


3294 


30.6 


14.3 


48.9 


70.1 


22.8 


30.0 


5.3 


7.6 



462 
325 
71 
28 
226 
137 
68 
25 
12 
22 
69 
31 
22 
16 



C iliii n i, l U ii x m i n , «iHU»ih w<y. 



43 



ERIC 



Educational AttaiiUMiit and School Enrollment and Labor Force Status of American Indians and 
Aiasica Natives by State and the Cherokee and Navajo Nations: 1990 U^. Census (cont) 



EDUCATIONAL ATfAlNMENT 

PtrMra18to24yMra 
Sai in aehooi or Mt wMioU gradiating' 
High Mtwol graduilM (inckidw aquivaiency) 
Soma ooNtgt or aMOcMt dagiM 
B«etMioi'«(ttgnMorhighar 

FwmlM 25 ywn and ovar 
LaaathanSIhgnda 
Sttitoflttigrada 
9lh to 120) grada. no diploma 
H igh a chool graduato (Indudaa aquivalency) 
Somaoolaga, nodagraa 
Coiaga daQTaa* 

MalaaZSyaaraandovar 
Laaa than Sth grada 
Sthtoaih grada 
9th to 12th grada. no diploma 
High achool graduala (indudts equivalency) 
Soma ooHega, no dograa 
Cotoge degree' 

Paraona 25 yaara and over 

Percent: 

Laaa than 9th grade 
High achool graduate or higher 
Somaoolaga or higher 
BachaloCa dograa or higher 

SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND LABOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Percona16to19years 
Enroiiedinachool 
Employad 



Not in labor fbroa 
NotenraiMinachool 
High achooi graduate 



NotinhaMrferoa 
Not high aehoolgrKiuate 
Employad 

I III ■■■lllllMMfl 

unempiayea 
Not in labor tore* 



rytand 




Miehigan 


Minnesote 


MieaiaeiDDi 


1 816 


14^ 


7 520 


6225 


1042 


504 


447 


2897 


2516 


456 


731 


414 


2 158 


z loo 


V» 
oo> 


529 


495 


2336 


1 487 


191 


52 


109 


129 


62 


34 


4362 


3756 


16472 


12031 


2254 


95 


140 


244 


133 


315 


202 


281 


1 110 


771 


320 


764 


642 


3714 


2818 


349 


1 225 


1 195 


5472 


3961 




976 


723 


3707 


2553 


412 


1 100 


766 


2225 


1795 


279 


4071 


3368 


15248 


11078 


2081 


151 


77 


344 


167 


236 


451 


327 


1 310 


1078 


289 


625 


583 


3475 


2397 


343 


861 


955 


5169 


3751 


640 


919 


700 


3006 


2120 


276 


1 064 


726 


1 944 


1 565 


297 


8 433 


7124 


31720 


23109 


4335 


10.7 


11.7 


9.5 


9.3 


26.8 


72.9 


71.1 


67.9 


68.1 


57.3 


48.1 


40.9 


343 


34.8 


29.2 


19.5 


14.6 


7.6 


7.6 


8.1 


729 


773 


4421 


3611 


662 


415 


601 


3121 


2336 


431 


164 


244 


1089 


564 


22 


24 


29 


423 


272 


4 


221 


328 


1605 


1 500 


406 


314 


172 


1300 


1275 


231 


173 


56 


502 


416 


78 


103 


22 


316 


169 


44 


13 


9 


74 


80 


13 


43 


19 


97 


167 


6 


141 


116 


796 


859 


153 


74 


24 


306 


171 


50 


42 




168 


185 


19 


25 


92 


318 


503 


84 



'For •« aMal AlMka tw 1900 U.S. Canwt laperti isMt toe Amtncan 



■ComMM ky auMMlifW M fiunMr «( »WMM 1 S to 24 y«Mi «itie WW* 
t ictiitor»<«ei»>« l ii|lit«li»nti»totolnuiTi>«fot»w««w»i»toa4yti». 

» C t»miH Hto tolto H ii« K iiilli iipiito « fh«»ii>e»in»<«i» M iiai<i - ».»>( 



(Aqin«tocMa*kaNatwM(Afq. ForMe«hwStMM«ndTi*M»*tototor*poi«dltor*af*toc 
r«p0Hi * m higK tchoot bi H u M ii. Hanging »o«n» coltog* v mnrnt an iiio cn to *»tm, » 



Yot»w ChMito* NMtoa «M «• rwi tor »• OwtoM* n«*n« n Nei* 
. cmm o . H i m tt mtm, mtiMttmtt. 



CwMMMiOtitohonwontr. Fer»WNM)oNMi«i.toMtai*tN«itor»*NMt«iMi«ii(in AiMm. 



44 



ERIC 



Educational AttainiiMnt and School Enrollmant and Ubor Forca Status of American Indians i 
Alaska Nativas by Stata and tha CtMrokaa and Navajo Nations: 1990 U^. Cansus (cont) 



EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT 

p«raan»l8to24yMra 
Sti h school or Mwtthout graduiting' 
High adwol otaduM OneMM oqumiMKy) 

Sorm coliog* or aMocMa d^^M 
Bachtloi^dWMerMghor 

Fimiiii 25 ymn «nd owr 
ljM»thon»igt»do 

Sit) to Olt) QRdt 

9lhto 12m gmdt. no diploma 

High achooi gnKlute (ineludM oquivaiMKY) 

Samtoollogo.nodogrM 

CotagtdigrM* 

MiiMSSyMrtandoww 
Lacs ttnn Sttt gndt 
Sthtotthgradt 
9th to 12lh grKls. no dipioma 
High sehod graduito (indudM oquivalency) 
SonMColloge.nodsgrss 
ColsgodogrM' 

Portons 25 ysMS and over 

Parotnt 

LaasthanSIhgrada 

High achooi graduala or higher 

SomaooHageorhighsr 

Baehaloi's dsgrsa or highar 

SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND UBOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Parsons 16 to 19 years 
Eivolled in school 
Employad 
Unamployad 
Not in labor tana 
NotenroNadinacltool 
High school graduate 
I Enpioyad 



Not in labor forca 
Not hig h achooi graduate 
enipioyao 



Not in labor forea 



Missouri 



2416 
815 
740 
817 



6825 
149 
899 
1579 
1959 
1350 
889 

7032 
170 
729 
1-336 
2070 
1 413 
1 314 

13857 



14.1 
64.9 
35.8 
10.9 



1 414 
944 
390 
82 
464 
470 
129 
82 
14 
22 
341 
134 
70 
130 



Montens 



5333 
2:^ 
1800 
1214 
30 

11874 
228 
1088 
2372 
3 289 
3024 
1873 

10 695 
158 
1093 

2 282 

3 255 
2 443 
1 464 

22569 



11.4 

68.0 
39.0 
7.8 



3537 
2527 
367 
232 
1 924 
1010 
259 
115 
66 
71 
751 
142 
183 
426 



Nebraska 



1578 
627 
559 
361 
31 

2990 
48 
310 
632 

1014 

412 

2788 
60 
244 
494 
952 
563 
475 

5778 



11.5 
69.1 
35.0 
8.9 



960 
562 
172 
35 
355 
398 
115 

m 

24 
22 

283 
93 
58 

130 



Nevada 



2426 
1004 
875 
534 
13 



New Hampshire 



299 
89 

126 
84 



'Fotti«SMInt*H«l»t»1»S0U.S.CtmMi ffiom tmmof Am«nc«nln<iw«(AI)«nd)etAl»«li«N»>»»«(AN). For M e«Mr SIMM 



5781 763 
113 

412 se 

1226 174 

1632 206 

1467 191 

931 135 

5989 824 

175 21 

376 116 

1259 172 

1996 119 

1360 226 

823 170 

11 770 1 587 



9.1 1Z3 

69.7 65.9 

38.9 45.5 

7.7 15.7 



1 198 154 

763 108 

166 26 

72 9 

519 73 

435 46 

225 31 

134 31 
30 
47 

210 15 

49 2 

48 11 

113 2 

«n< TribM ew toMi* itpoiM twra w* tor 



NMWi. ttMi an QMA tor Km r4awie iMriMf in ArtaM, 



45 

ERJC B£ST COPY AVAILABLE 



Educational Attainment and School Enrollment and Labor Force Status of American Indians and 
Aiasioi Nativas by State and the Cherokee and Navajo Nations: 1990 U.S. Census (cont) 



New Jersey 



EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT 

P«Mns18to24yaan 
S«M in aciwoi or Mt wtthout graduating^ 

achod gvKiurtw Onciude* •quMriMicy) 
Same eolMW or aaaodite deorae 
BadMtoi'* dogiM er Nghir 

Fomaiis 25 yoaro and mer 
LsaattwiSth grade 
Sttitoflttt grade 
9lh to 12th grade, no diplonn 
Higli achool graduate (Ineiudee equivalency) 

Malaa 25 yeera and over 
Leaa than Sth grade 
Sth to 8lh grade 
9th to 12th grade, no diploma 
High school graduate CvKkides equivalency) 
Some coHege, no degree 

Peraons 25 yeera and over 

Percent: 

Lees then M) grade 

High school graduate or higiier 

Bachelor^ degree or higlter 

SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND UBOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Per8onsl6to19years 
Enrolled in school 
Employed 
Unemployed 
Not in tabor foroe 
Not enrolled in school 
High Mhool graduate 
cmpioyeo 



Not in MMr force 
Not high achool graduate 
Employad 
Unemployed 
Not in labor force 



1 770 
815 
633 
428 
50 

4718 
121 
483 
904 

1 301 
883 
936 

4387 
114 
484 

904 
1213 
754 
918 

9105 



132 
66.9 
38.3 
14.3 



979 
596 
213 
46 
337 
383 
161 
126 
6 
12 
222 
85 
89 
48 



New Mexico 



16058 
5884 
6407 
3621 
146 

33952 
4157 
3356 
7112 
9906 
5 688 
3732 

29932 
3044 

2923 
6174 
9603 
4679 
3509 

63884 



21.1 
58.1 
27.6 
5.8 



9855 
7495 
943 
524 
6009 
2360 
972 
367 
204 
392 
1388 
319 
260 
809 



New York 



7549 
2658 
2283 
2274 
334 

18253 
788 
1646 
3 615 
5234 
3424 
3546 

15357 
610 
1 581 
3418 
4161 
2820 
2767 

33610 



13.8 
65.3 
37.4 
13.1 



3743 
2737 
739 
274 
1724 
1006 
382 
230 
61 
79 
624 
184 
141 
290 



North Carolina 



10550 
4091 
3756 
2456 
247 

23833 
1 445 
3511 
6174 
6465 
3111 
3127 

21413 

1 866 
3456 
5 526 
5564 

2 408 
2593 

45246 



22.7 
51.4 
248 
7.8 



6598 
4296 
1 126 
320 
2850 
2302 
819 
453 
86 
194 
1 483 
613 
275 
586 



North DaKote 



•(Alwla«winOU.S.CMiwM»eitttotMtorA(n«neMMiim(AQaiMtorAlMtaNa*m(A^ ForalloaM(SMMan«TiibM»i*«oM(r*poMdhM*«raloc 



' Cu iiip u li* >lf ii< mnl ii| n niimtiir r unit-r *T r T i r"^ " '"Tl'' D"" -"B r'Tpr b '" "tl — """tr ' 



m'%. « >i rt <«4a i 't. « i m iM t 'i. « aoaofin. ot « p<ote«iionil letieol ttf m . 

Til III C liiil l iii H iliiii . tin in |r in Tii rr ^i-" -"-l "rT t — ~- — ■ ■ ,■ For tMNMie Nation. MM (rainm lor thtNMVortMmg in Aiimia. 

ColMM. Nm Mmm. mi UMi ofliir. 



46 

vH 

er|c best copy available 

ummmmmm 



Educational Attainnwnt and School Enrollment and Labor Force Status of American Indians and 
Alaska Natives by State and the Cherokee and Navajo Nations: 1990 US. Census (cont) 



Ohio 



OMahoma 



Oregon 



Pennsyhania 



RhodalsUnd 



EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT 

P«Mm18to24yMis 
StM in «:toat or M wNhoU graduating' 
High achoot yatfcln QneMm aquivalancy) 
Soma co iag a or a aao c iati c t i a wi 
Bachaioi'a (iagraa or Nghar 

Fomaiaa 25 yaais and over 
iMathanSthgrada 
SthtoSttigreda 
Sttt to 12lh grada, no dipiama 
High adwol graduate Oneiudoa aquivalMwy) 
Somaoo«aga,nodagraa 
Coiaga dagrae* 

Malas2Syaaraandovtr 
LasathanSIhgrada 
SihtoSthgrada 
9lh to 1 2m gnda, no diptoma 
High school graduate Cnciudaa aquivaiency) 
Soma coltega, no dagraa 
Coiaga dagraa* 

Paraona 25 yaara and over 

Poroant: 

Laaa than 9th grade 
High achool graduate or higher 
Sonwooltoga or higher 
Bachalor'a degree or higher 

SCHOOL ENROLLMENT AND LABOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Persona 16 to 19 years 
Enroltodinachoot 
Einpioyed 
Unemployed 
Not mtebor force 
Not enroled in achool 
High achool graduate 
Employad 



Not in tabor force 
Not high achool graduate 
Employad 



Not in tabor force 



2505 
841 
973 
621 
70 

7159 
147 
574 

1 747 
2223 
1 392 
1 076 

7 039 
161 
616 
1 700 
2101 
1 451 
1 010 

14198 



10.6 
65.2 
34.7 
8.3 



1 365 
928 
305 
72 
551 
437 
158 
89 
19 
43 



279 
118 
36 
125 



27222 
8315 
9585 
8654 



70695 
1 848 
6092 
14445 
23073 
14440 
10797 

60837 
2122 
4 978 
12538 
17899 
12725 
10575 

131 532 



11.4 

68.1 
36.9 
10.8 



19130° 
14108 
3731 
1277 
9094 
5022 
2457 
1 473 
426 
530 
2565 
782 
564 
1212 



4607 
1825 
1 528 
1 177 



11 641 
95 
704 
2410 
3670 
2986 
1 776 

10658 
175 
725 
2339 
2962 
2680 
1 777 

22299 



7.6 
71.1 
41.3 

8.3 



2805 
1 818 
505 
143 
1 170 
987 
308 
175 
67 
60 
679 
195 
184 
300 



2248 
693 
757 
716 
82 

4733 
66 

287 
1 218 
1 602 

701 



4848 

155 
411 
930 
1 682 
823 
847 

9 581 



9.6 
68.0 
33.7 
1Z0 



1 177 
814 
291 

76 
447 
363 
113 

81 

21 

1 

250 
91 
70 
89 



'Fofti«e^«»<U««>«t»1«IOU.8.C»M>iiW»omto!»li«o»Am«iic«nln<itn»(AO«^ Fo»««o«h«a*M«<i*Ti»«t»t»«ot*«f»porti** 

•puiiiuliOm u Wife n itntmnitrTiTrTn — '—^'l " *^^ ..*,„.m^.^ Mi«niMiam.«»iM«of«»ii»iiB»n 

kMliMrs ««fiM ar Mftar Inm flw Mil MmMf «l »«MM 1 1 to 24 yMis. 



4eelonM. or a prelMtieMi Mhaol MgiM. 



Tj I.I Clmiiliii llXin toWi in y-"'--— ^->.^>-.-L-.^nirt.iw».«u. FortwNMie 

c«iown». m iiMiBoo,««Wihimf. 



NiMn. MM If* gnwi tor ttw r4Mio («i«nf M AicOM. 



47 



vi 



Educationai Attainment and School Enroilmant and Labor Force Status of American Indians and 
Alasita Natives by State and the Cherokee and Navajo Kations: 1990 U^. Census (cont) 



South Carolina 



EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT 

P«iMn»18to24yMf* 

Sti in school «r M without graduating' 
High whool gnKiuilwOnc|^^ 

Bachatofs dogrw or Nghar 

FoRMlao 25 yMra and ovor 
IMS than SIhgrado 
5tt) to 8lt) Qfsds 
9lh to I2ih grada, no diptoma 
. High«choolgradurie(inciudosoquivalency) 
Somaooiiaga,nodagroa 
CoNaga dagraa* 

llMas 25 yaan and over 
Leas than Sih grada 
SthtoSthgrada 
9th to 12th grada, no diploma 
High school graduate (indudas aquivatency) 
Soma coNaga, no dagraa 
CoMaga dagraa* 

Paraons 25 yaare and over 

Paroank 

Laas than 9lh grada 
High achool graduata or higher 
Soma colaga or higher 
BachakN's dagraa or higher 

SCHOOL ENR0LU\4ENT AND LABOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Per8ons16to19yeara 
Enroilad in school 
Eniplov»d 
UnampioyKl 
Not in labor fMca 
NotanrelMinachool 
High achool graduate 

Employad 

unani)iioyaa 

Not in labor forea 
Not Nghachool graduate 

^ « 

cfflpnyM 
unampnyaa 
Not m labor force 



1 167 
357 
475 
286 

49 

2499 
143 
331 
585 
682 
376 
382 

2 868 

77 
333 
562 
823 
568 
505 

5 367 



16.5 
62.2 
34.1 
10.7 



South Dakota 



585 
383 
78 
72 
233 
202 
106 
30 
6 
24 
96 
38 
15 
33 



5655 
2632 
1 890 
1090 
43 

11054 
185 
1 392 
2564 
2987 
2307 
1619 

10023 
186 
1 159 
2416 
3107 
1 891 
1274 

21087 



13.9 
62.5 
33.6 
6.8 



4037 
2756 
334 
270 
2149 
1281 
366 
144 
92 
130 
915 
223 
135 
557 



Tennessee 



1 404 
493 
462 
412 

37 

4048 

177 
494 
844 
1073 
786 
674 

3860 
157 
512 
763 

1087 
686 
655 

7908 



16.9 
62.7 
35.4 
10.4 



797 
449 
180 
17 
252 
348 
152 
63 
35 
7 
196 
74 
41 



Texas 



7990 
2766 
2470 
2526 
228 

21432 
879 
1631 
3884 
5626 
5688 
3744 

21490 
899 
1737 
3378 
5127 
5435 
4914 

42922 



12.0 
71.1 
46.0 
13.8 



4560 
3231 
924 
291 
2010 
1329 
521 
216 
62 
105 
808 
330 
109 



UUh 



3458 
1372 
1 137 
917 
32 

5215 
512 
384 
1254 
1382 
1 122 
561 

4888 
413 

504 
1067 
1256 
1022 

606 

10103 



17.9 
58.9 
328 
6.3 



2204 
1644 
334 
216 
1094 
560 
204 
97 
39 
68 
356 
94 
84 
178 



'r^»i*3IMt(AlMlaaw1M0U.S.C«MU(i«*amMMIerAin«iCMMim(Anwi«lw FotiNoeMrSMMaiKTribMeMlaMrapofMMnaraler 

'iU...,-LJl. l u i i i rmi rTr— ""tT | ■ ■- - „ — — < — ^••«~ ....ji. .. ~uu^«..«»MM«Maoii«dtdt—.«nahni(io« 

t i pT ii i i ri no — • r ■— — 

'C m tM n HtMlmiiti M ii^ nu mt m h«wn> mmt n ■ n oaMi-i. « tachiwi. » nrnmtt. « <oOo»M». or « p icl m ienl »chool 

T_ l i C l Li i u lii I l l rt i fi. imT ~ r— ' ■ " "-IT " "-— FotiMNM)aNaMn.lsM«traf«MntarntfMMtafMi«nginAitzeni. 



48 



ERIC 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



Educational Attainnwnt and School Enrollmont and Ubor Force Status of American Indians and 
Alasica Natives by SUte and the Cherokee and Navajo Nations: 1 990 U^. Census (cont) 



Vermont 



Virginia 



Washington 



Wart Virginii 



EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT 

p«Mna18to24yMr* 
StM in achool or M without gnMkating' 
High actool graduriw (bKiuito aqiwaloncy) 
Soma Mlaga or ataocMa dagpta 
Bachaioi'adagfaaorhighar 

Famaias2Syaafsandovar 
Laaa than SIh grada 
SIh to Ml grada 
9lh to 12ttt grada. no diptoma 
High adnot graduata Onckidas aquivalcncy) 
Somacoiaga.nodagraa 
Colagadagraa* 

Malaa2Sy«anandovar 
US8 than 5th grada 
Sth to 8th grada 
9th to 12th grada. no diptoma 
High school graduata CnckJda* •quivaiancy) 
SomaocNaga,nodagraa 
Colsgadagraa* 

Panons 25 yaare and over 

Pareont: 

Laaa than Sth grada 
High school graduate or higher 
Somaootegeorhighar 
Baehatoi'a degraa or higher 

SCHOOL ENROtAMENT AND LABOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Persona leto 19 yean 
EnroHadinachool 
Einpioyad 



Not in iaiMr force 
NotonroNadinachoai 
H ig h ach ool graduate 
Emptoyad 



Not in Wmt force 
Not 1^ school graduate 
Emptoyad 



Not in laber force 



324 
133 
87 
95 
9 

572 

50 
125 
183 
157 

57 

587 
11 
95 
112 
210 
68 
91 

1 159 



13.5 
66.1 
32.2 
10.4 



213 
120 
44 
14 
62 
93 
41 
33 

8 
52 
31 

9 
12 



2336 
600 
958 
692 
86 

5145 
148 
432 
930 
1 438 
1226 
971 

5006 
176 
480 
825 
1287 
1091 
1 147 

10151 



12.2 
70.5 
43.7 
14.6 



1 160 
811 
372 

40 
399 
349 
187 

75 

1 

13 
162 
51 
22 
89 



9567 
3556 
3277 
2512 
222 

22305 
249 
1825 
4241 
6310 
5999 
3681 

20005 
294 
1534 
3694 
6176 
4591 
3716 

42 310 



9.2 
72.0 
42.5 

9.1 



5 643 
3784 
1073 
328 
2383 
1 859 
706 
41 
109 
138 
1 153 
400 
208 
530 



445 

172 
140 
126 
7 

1022 
64 
151 
196 
351 
132 
126 

795 
62 
129 
174 
230 
107 
93 

1 817 



22.3 
57.2 
25.2 
6.2 



252 
162 
22 
2 
138 
90 
20 
8 
12 

70 

13 
57 



'h. ma. J Al-U U-i mo U.I. Cwm from tm nminnn tnrtni (")—'- - Fof»lnei»S»*»»«KTf»«»«lo«it»i«»Of»»*»>««i(«* 



■ dectoMi, or a trataMioMi Mhoel <*9(M. 



¥or■l•C^M«MNai«l.lgM■l•t»m<or1h•C^«ote•rMl*lgln^4el1hCwalrallM ForMNavatoNMen.teMtaragNMtorOM 



. mt hamnt a 



NMie i m t n t m AfuoM. 



49 



X 



Educational Attainment and School Enrollment and Labor Force Status of American Indians and 
Alasica Natives by SUte and the Cherokee and Navajo Nations: 1990 U.S. Census (cent) 



EDUCATIONAL ATTAINMENT 

P«Mml8to24yMra 
Sta In school or Mt wittMut grackMiing' 
High tCMi tin*Mu jjncMm •quiwtoncy) 
Soim ooNoga or anocM* dtgrat 
Baehotof* dogrM or Nghir 

FwMlw 25 yam and over 
LaasthanlSthgiada 
5th to 8th grada 
9th to 12lh grada, no diptoma 
High achooi gradMia (mdudea aquivalency) 
Soma ooiaga. no dagraa 
Colagadagraa* 

iyWaa 25 yaart and ovar 
Laaa than S(h grada 
5thto8thgrada 
9th to I2ih grada. no diploma 
High school graduate Ondudes aquivalency) 
Soma coMaga, no dagraa 
Coltgadagraa* 

Paraona 25 yaara and ovar 

Parcant^ 

Laaa than 9th grada 
High aehool graduate or highar 
Soma colaga or highar 
Baehaloi'a dagraa or higher 

SCHOOL ENROLLMENt AND LABOR FORCE 
STATUS 

Paraona 16 to 19 yaara 
EnroMad in school 
Employad 
Unamployad 
Not In labor force 
Not enrolled in school 
High school graduate 

Employad 

Unemployed 

Not In WMr force 
Not high achooi graduate 

Employad 



Not in labor foroe 



Wyoming 


Cherotcee* 


Navaio' 




(NC) 


(OK) 


(AZ) 


(CO) 


(NM) 


(UT) 


1233 


2 090 


4 A AAA 










460 


753 


3231 


5979 


155 


3988 


673 




788 


3633 


4229 


165 


3491 


593 


300 


535 


3352 


3109 


388 


1 983 


614 


20 


14 


278 


89 


26 


71 


4 


2374 


4707 


28828 


25491 


880 


19585 


2677 


6 


270 


800 


5796 


38 


3825 


402 


142 


584 


ZBOO 


^ f44 


1 Iw 




ISO 


597 


1 122 


5877 


5186 


190 


4229 


648 


/la 


1 393 


9337 


5672 


273 


4929 


611 


586 


772 


5360 


3693 


137 


2803 


554 


324 


566 


4536 


2400 


129 


1 564 


264 


2197 


4506 


25193 


22007 


837 


16553 


2249 


29 


231 


939 


3911 


24 


2673 


275 


186 


661 


2785 


2957 


74 


2042 


278 


492 


1 124 


5504 


4662 


127 


3579 


455 


676 


1221 


7217 


5893 


304 


4932 


632 


473 


737 


4935 


2780 


203 


2094 


373 


339 


531 


4263 


1804 


105 


1 233 


236 


4571 


9212 


54021 


47498 


1 717 


36138 


4 926 


7.9 


19.0 


13.7 


32.4 


14.5 


29.8 


23.4 


68.2 


56.7 


66.0 


46.8 


67.0 


48.6 


542 


37.7 


28.3 


35.4 


22.5 


33.4 


21.3 


29.0 


6.2 


5.9 


11.0 


3.8 


7.3 


3.5 


4.5 


664 


1 212 


7 552 


8564 


343 


5999 


1231 


484 


686 


5605 


6 547 


278 


4655 


1003 


100 


244 


1 666 


824 


110 


519 


207 


61 


64 


562 


447 


20 


321 


154 


316 


378 


3377 


5 276 


148 


3815 


642 


180 


526 


1947 


2017 


65 


1 344 


228 


91 


209 


961 


704 


34 


437 


74 


22 


92 


639 


199 


24 


142 


30 


25 


22 


116 


149 






7 


44 


63 


190 


356 


6 


201 


37 


89 


317 


986 


1 313 


31 


907 


154 


20 


157 


308 


210 


8 


205 


46 


16 


76 


251 


266 


9 


167 


48 


S3 


84 


427 


837 


14 


535 


60 



twtcaraler 



■uocaK d*g(M. mi IWMi( a 



'FerMaMa(MMlaM1M0U.S.CMMfwMHMIerAinmeMMim(AQ*ntflerMMtaN(l^ For*io»wSMMandTnbM«<*«M«irapoiMd 

•Co i i i e u li O yiii ttim i n itit n i -*— -'rrn — r"-V r'" *■ f.^.^ ^i^..^ f~t ji-, .^ i..ii.f. «>..»««^ 

kMMir* «*fiw « MflMr Omk M «M numMr «( ptnens II «o 24 y«HS. 

•C ii i i>l i n «luMHfliiaiia«>i r i HH« nhrilTimmr<in niiiiW T - - - --""-^ ^...,.... ..^^.1^ 

T»m>Cl n illill H MIin.>Dlil»»»rri»»«n C> iii»l m m i<»i| in Noiti Owlw* nX OMUomt uly. ForMNM^oNaion.«s 
Colon*. Nm KMM. IM UM Mr. 



I fWM lor tM NMiia « 



n|in AMOM. 



50 

BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



DfweniTAfiE OP AMERICAN MOIAN AND ALASKA NATIVE PERSONS 18 T0 19 WHO ARE NOT ENROOEO IN SCHOOL MO l)»T 

vSa^rSiSuKnuL MioZSmcM moian and Alaska native persons 2S years and over who do not have a hwh 

sSSlWmSmA BYSTATE AND THE CHEROKEE AND NAVAJO NATWNS: HM CENSUS 





PercantagaolParaorw . | 
16to19YaaraWhoAra i 

Ui± ri iir*>ri in School and i ' 
Ara Not High School j 


Paroantaga of Paraons 
8to24YaaraVVIwAr* 

StM in School or un 


2SYaarsandOvarVVho 
Do Not Hava a High School 


AiabMTMi 




190 1 


33.8 


35.1 




(AO 
(AN) 


16.7 1 
17.6 


29.S 


29.7 
46.2 


Arasona 




18.9 


46.3 


48.0 


Afkansas 




18.3 


35.2 


34.8 


CaKfomia 




16.8 


35.0 


28.6 


Colorado 




22.1 1 


33.1 


28.6 


Conmdicut 




22.1 


32.0 


30J 


Otinwra 




16.S 


29.4 


38.3 


OMrict of Columbia 




35.6 


48.1 


33.7 


FlotUa 




23.2 


39.7 


31.9 


Georgia 




20.7 


27.1 


28.4 


Hawaii 




152 


402 


17.2 


Idalw 




22.2 


41.0 


32.0 


imoia 




23.9 


362 


28.3 


Indiana 




21.9 


38.8 


3SJ2 


Icwa 




28.9 


44.1 


32.5 


Kanaaa 




14.6 


j 26.1 


24.6 


KMitucky 




20.3 


33.2 


40.1 


Louiaiana 




19.3 


43.7 


51.1 


Main* 




14.9 


23.1 


29.9 


Maryland 




19.3 


27.8 


27.1 


Miiiacliiiiatti 




15.0 


30.5 


28.9 


Michigan 




18.1 


38.5 


321 






23.8 


40.4 


31.9 


Miaaiasippi 




AW. 1 


1 43.8 


42.7 


Miaaouri 




24.1 


33.7 


35.1 


Montana 




21.2 


1 42.9 


32.0 


Nabraaia 




29.S 


39.7 


30.9 


Ntvada 




175 


41.4 


30.3 


NtwHampahirc 




9.7 


1 29.8 


34.1 


NawJanay 




22.7 


1 46.0 




<Fortti*aM>««MMk 







CetaraM. Mw Mmm. Mia UMh amy. 



51 



PERCOITiUIE OF AMEIUCAN MOIAN AND ALASKA NATIVE PERSONS « TO If WHO ARE NOT »«pUJEO »^SCHOOL AJO »^ 
HIGH SCHOOL GRADUATES. AMERICAN MOWN AND ALASKA NATIVE PERSONS It TO 24 WHO ARE STU. IN SCHOOL OR LEFT 

SCHOOL MPLOMA BY STATE AND THE CHEROKEE AND NAVAJO NATK)NS: 1»M CENSUS (conL) 





Ptrcantaga of Parsons 
16tol9YssisWhoArs 
Not EnroNod in School and 
Are Not High Sehoct 
Graduates 


Psrcantage of Persons 
18 to 24 Years Who Are 

Sol m scnooi or Lsn 
Without Graduating 


Percentage of Penons 
25 Years and Over Who 
uo Not nave ■ myn 
Dipioma 


N«wYork 




16.7 


35.2 


34.7 


North CaraiiiM 




22.5 


38.8 


48.6 


North Dakota 




15.3 


39.1 


35.6 


ONo 




20.4 


33.6 


34.8 


OMahorna 




13.4 


30.5 


31.9 


OraQon 




24.2 


39.6 


28.9 


Panncylvania 




21.2 


30.8 


32.0 


RhodaWand 




17.5 


34.0 


36.0 


South Carolina 




16.4 


30.6 


37.8 


South Dalnla 




22.7 


46.5 


37.5 


Taonaaaaa 




24.6 


• 35.1 


37.3 


Texas 




18.3 


34.6 


28.9 


Utah 




16.8 


39.6 


41.1 


Vannont 




24.4 


41.0. 


33.9 


Virginia 






257 


29.5 


Washington 




' 20.4 


37.2 


28.0 


Wast Virginia 




27.8 


38.7 


4Z8 


Wisconsin 




17.0 


37.7 


33.3 


Wyoming 




13.4 


37.3 


31.8 


Chsroksa' 


(NC) 


26.2 


36.0 


43.3 




(OK) 


13.1 


30.8 


34.6 


Navajo' 


(AZ) 


15.3 


44.6 


53.2 


(CO) 


9.0 


21.1 


33.0 




(NM) 


15.1 


41.8 


51.4 




(UT) 


12.5 


35.7 


45.8 



<Fer«wSMarAI»Matta1M0U.S.C«iMi*peiti«0M*«wAm«)e(nMi>ra(AQaM ForsllMhwSMMsndTMMttwWMrapeMtMwaMto 



Aimna 



cdM*. nmt mmm ««« uwi Wily. 



»Ch«oW»i«Mtin9inNoi»Ciiolin««ndOW«honi«oii(y. For »• N»«)0 rwtton. »f» 9«tn fo» »• N«i^ itwdine in Aii»on«. 



52 



APD^dLs: Agenda October 12^14. 1994 

APPENDIX B 



AGENDA 



Wednesday - October 12, 1994 



7:00 '8:00 a.m. 



WORKING BREAKFAST 

Delegates were divided into 22 Tribal, State, and regional teams. Facilitators met with each 
team and reviewed the goal-setting process for the symposium and upcoming activities. 



8:30 - 9:00 a.m. GENERAL SESSION 

Posting of the Colors: 

"Society 1 73rd Airborne Brigade", Vietnam Veterans 

Singing of the National Anthem 
Amanda Kielpinski 

Blessing and Pipe Ceremony 
Don Goodwin, Ojibwa Tribe 



WELCOME/OPENING REMARKS 

Ronald Pugsley, Acting Director, Division of Adult Education and Literacy, 
U.S. Department of Education 

Cathie Martin, Director, Division of Program Support, Office of hidian 
Education, U.S. Department of Education 

Evonne Novak, Program Manager, Indian Education, Ojibwa Tribe, representing 
Jerry Rowley, Reservation Education Director 



9:00 - 10:30 a.m. PERSPECTIVE PANEL 

"Opportunities for Collaboration on Human and Financial Resources" 

N^oderator : 

Gilbert Innis, Director of Education, Gila River bidian Community 



53 



ERJC J*EAMOci«te«,Inc. 



AopcodixB: Agenda 



StPaulMN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



Federal Repiescotatives: 

Cathie Martin, Director, Division of Program Support, U.S. Department of Education 
Deano Poleakla, Program Specialist, Division of Job Placement and Training, Office of 
Economic Development, Bureau of Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of Interior 
Carroll Totvey, Senior Program Advisor, Division of Adult Education and Literacy, 
U.S. Department of Education 

Thomas Dawd, Chief; Division of Indian and Native American Programs, 
U.S. Department of Labor m lu 

Diann Dawson, Deputy Director, Office of Family Assistance, U.S. Department of Health 
and Human Services 

State Representatives: 

Gary Eyre, Deputy Associate Superintendent, Adult Education Programs, Arizona 
Brian Kanes, Coordinator, Adult Basic Education, Minnesota 

Representatives from Federal agencies described the programs available through their 
offices to support adult education and literacy programs for American Indians and Alaska 
Natives, along vdth the eligibility requirements, applications procedures, and annual level of 
funding for these programs. State Adult Education Directors described the American Indian 
and Alaska Native adult education and education and literacy programs currently opcratmg 
in their States, and discussed opportunities for initiating new programs. 



Teams initiated die discussions that led to the development of the draft vision and mission 
statements and to the identification of resources to support their objectives. 



Noon - 1:30 p.m. Keynote Address: Treating a Litenite Future for the Year 2000" 

Augusta & Kappner, Assistant Secretary of Vocational and Adult Education, 
U.S. Department of Education 



The Assistant Secretary welcomed participants to the conference on behalf of the 
U.S. Department of Education and encouraged them in their efforts over the next three days. 
She also provided an overview of the Administration's efforts to increase and improve 
educational services to American Indian and Alaska Native adults. The full text offer 
address to the Forum appears in Appendix A. 



10:45 -Noon 



TEAM PLANNING SESSION I 



54 



JJbEAsiocia(M,Ine. 



XV 



ERIC 



Crm6mgAUUMta¥utut€ 
Appendix B: Agenda 



St Paul, MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



1:30-4:15 p.m. 



FOCUS PANELS 



"Improving Coordination and Collaboration with Federal, State, regional, local and 
Tribal Agencies" 

GayeLda King, Chair, Department of Teacher Education, 
Haskell Indian Nations University, Kansas 

Bonnie Eastburn, Deputy Director, Employment Services Department, 
Cook Inlet Tribal Council, Alaska 

Tom MiUer, School Administrator, Hannahville Indian School, Michigan 

Don Wlesen, School Administrator, Lac Courte Orielles Ojibwe School, Wisconsin 

Moderator: 

Jean Hunt, Education Program Specialist, Office of Indian Education, 
U.S. Depaittnent of Education 

The first panel member, Bonnie Eastburn, discussed barriers to educating adults in Alaska, 
including the challenges posed by language diversity, poverty, and illiteracy. She then 
described her program, which combines funding from the BIA, the U.S. Department of 
Labor, and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. Next, Gayc Lcia King 
discussed the creation of a bachelor's degree program for teachers at Haskell hidian Nations 
University that integrates tadian principles into the degree program. The ultimate goal of the 
program is to develop self-direction, complex thinking, and community contribution so that 
teachers can go out and sparic these thoughts. 

Tom Miller discussed funding problems regarding Indian adult education, differences 
between the needs of reservation versus non-reservation populations, and problems getting 
assistance from his State. He also described the adult education program in his school and 
the steps being taken to secure additional funding at the national level. The last panel 
member, Don Weisen. talked about the need for improved coordination and collaboration 
among State, local, and Federal agencies. He also spoke about the need f(x programs to be 
flexible and recognize differences among students. Following the presentations, panel 
members addressed questions from the audience regarding funding sources and how to 
access these sources. 

"Establishing Cooperative Agreements Among all Agencies Providing Adult Education, 
Employment and Training for Native Americans and Alaska Natives" 

Bonnie Lowe, Direaor, JOBS/STRIDE, Minnesota Chippewa Tribe, Minnesota 
Peggy Sue Net, Program Manager, Tribal JOBS, Navajo Nation 

Moderator : 

C. L Henson, Consultant, J & E Associates, tac, Washington, DC. 



55 



J&EAsMciates,In6. 



XVI 



ERIC 



CmUmgA LiUrttt Future 
Appendix B: Agenda 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



Peggy Sue Ncz described her JOBS program and the cooperative agreements the program 
has entered into with other social services programs including JTPA to make the program 
work. She was followed by Muriel Lawler who ispoke about the Adult Basic Education and 
JOBS programs in her State, which services 22 Tribes and 19 consortia. She noted that new 
Federal legislation under consideration will require that programs be completed within 24 
months. 

Bonnie Lowe described how her JOBS program was developed in coUaboration with the 
State of Minnesota. The State and Tribes agreed to develop the program jointly and, after 
four years, turn it over.to Tribal control. In addition, the affected Tribes developed their own 
coUaborative agreement for operating ibt program. Panel members also discussed bamers 
to effective coUaboration, including: legal issues about sovereignty, and issues of UabiUty 
and tijrf; and \bc misconception tiiat Indians can't run their own programs. 

Following presentations by the panel members, tiierc was an open discussion with die 
audience that focused on such issues as waivers, budgets, program eligibility, tuition, GED 
and DES referrals. JTPA 50/50 matching, duplication of services, and certification. 

"Strengthening the Partnerships That Will Allow Every Native American/Alaska Native 
Adult facreased Educational Opportunity to ObUun Necessary Academic and Techmcal 
Skills to Achieve Personal Goals, Meaningful Employment and Exercise die Rights and 
Responsibilities of Citizenship along with Cultiiral Awareness" 

Susan Berg, Director, Governor's Council for Literacy and Life-Long Learning, Hawaii 
Brian Kanes, Coordinator of Adult Basic Education, Minnesota 

MfidfiiatQE: 

Down Bush, Federal Reprcsenutive, U. S. Department of Labor 

The two presenters spoke about major partnerships in Uieir respective States of Hawaii and 
MinnesoU. Susan Berg presented Hawaii's statewide "Read to Me" campaign, sponsored by 
the Governor's Council for Literacy and LIFELONG LEARNING. The Pizza Hut 
Coqwration is also a partner in the campaign. The campaign's goal is for every child in 
Hawau to read aloud for 10 minutes every day. The campaign objectives are: (1) to motivate 
fanulies to read together; (2) to increase die awareness of die importance of reading aloud; 
(3) to establish the vtlue of reading aloud to children; (4) to motivate partnershijis anaong 
govenunent agencies, businesses, labor unions, schools, librariw, agencies, organizations, 
and communities to develop plans/actions to achieve the campaign's goal. 

Brian Kanes described Minnesou's staff development project. The Literacy Training 
Networic (LTN). LTN is a partnership of die Minnesota Department of Educauon; the 
University of St Thomas; and private non-profit agencies, public school districts, and 
businesses tiiat allow tiieir teachers and oUier staff to become "tiraining facilitators." In die 
model used by LTN, die adult learner is at die center of learning, hi learner-centered 
instruction, learning is conceptualized as a shared activity between die facilitator (teacher) 
and the learner. The learKcr is viewed as a mature person vHio enters die learning 
environment widi a wealdi of experience and specific learning objectives. The teacher, or 
instructor, helps die learner defme and achieve his/her objectives. 



ERIC 



j&EAsiociates,Ioo. 



56 



xvii 



CrttdrngA IMmU Future 

Appendix B: Agenda 



StPauUMN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



FoUowing their presentations, the two speakers engaged the audience in a discussion of 
issues associated with developing success&I partnerships. 

Supporting Researdi and Danoostration Projects that Impact Native American/Alaska 
Native Adult and Continuing Education 

Sandra Fox^ ChieC Monitoring and Evaluation, Office of Indian Education Programs, 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, U. S.' Department of Interior 

Unda Sue Warner, Director, American Indian Education Policy Center, The Pennsylvania 
State University 

Moderator: 

BlmrA. Rudes, President, First Americans Research, Inc., Washington, D.C. 

The moderator opened the presentation vn&i an overview of data from the 1990 Census that 
illustrate the substantial nxd among American Indiaivs and Alaska Natives for adult 
education and literacy services. (These data appear in Appendix D.) He was followed by 
Linda Sue Warner who described the dearth of existing research on American Indian and 
Alaska Native adult education and highlighted the need to relate educational theory to 
practice, and to conduct research or demonstration programs. She also discussed the 
importance of having Indian people perform the research themsc;Ives. 

Next, Sandra Fox discussed the applicability to adult education of existing research on such 
issues as learning styles, worid views, and traditional wi^s of instruction from bilingual 
education. She noted that the research indicates that children will learn English more readily 
if diey are fust proficient in their native language, and that teachers and learners should be 
from the same culture. In addition, she spoke about the inappropriateness of current 
standardized assessment instruments for measuring the progress of American Indian and 
Alaska Native students. 



Cathie Martin, Director, Division of Program Support, Office of Indian Education, 
U.S. Department of Education 

Carroll Towey, Senior Program Advisor, Division of Adult Education and Literacy, 
U.S. Department of Education 

Ja-Na Oliver, Program Analyst, Department of Health and Human Services 
Brian Kanes, Coordinator, Adult Basic Education, Miimesota 
Lavonna Weller, Education Specialist, Eastern Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 
U.S. Department of Interior 

Moderator: 

Janice Falcone, Director of Employment and Training, 
Native American Indian Center of Boston, Massachusetts 

During the townhall meeting, the audience alternated posing questions to the panel members 
and expressing their opinions on a wide range of issues pertaining to Federal programs and 
policies. 



4:15 -5:15 p.m. 



TOWNHALL 



ERIC 



J&EAxMCiatecIac 




xviii 



AopodixB: Ageodi 



SLPaul.MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



Thursday • October 13, 1994 



7:00 ' 9:00 a.m. 



9:00- 11:45 a.m. 



Noon to 1:30 p.m. 



WORKING BREAKFAST 

The Tribal, State, and regional teams met with their facilitators to continue working on their 
action plans. 

EXEMPLARY PROGRAMS DEMONSTRATION 

Representatives from five exenqplary adult education and literacy demonstration programs 
described their programs and answaed questions from tiie audience. Summaries of each of 
the following programs are provided in Appendix C. 

JOBS Manpower Caisortium, California 
Denver Indian Center, Colorado 

National Center for Family Literacy and Blackwater Community School, Family and 
Child Education (FACE) Program, Arizona 
hklian Adult Basic Education, Minnesota 
Nine Star Enterprise, Alaska 

NETWORKING LUNCHEON 

Participants took the opportunity to meet with members of other teams to exchange ideas. In 
addition, participants watched a videotaped message from Ada Deer, Assistant Secretary for 
Indian Affairs, U.S. Department of Interior. 

Greetings! I am Ada Deer, Assistant Seaetary for Indian Affairs witii tiie Department of 
Interior. It is my pleasure to address you at tiiis National Forum, Creating a Literate Future. 
I regret ray schedule prevents me from being witii you in person, but I am tiiankfid we can 
use technology to meet some of our needs. I want to share some brief remarics witii you on 
how important education is to tiie empowennent of American Indians and Alaska Natives, 
v^ch in turn leads to employment and economic self-sufficiency. 

My responsibilities wiUun tiw Federal Government include advocating for an enhanced 
quaUty of life for members of tiie 545 federally recognized tribes and Alaskan viUages. To 
achieve tiiis goal, I have made education and economic development two of my priorities. I 
am pleased that your forum is focusing on adult education and training, which is often 
overlooked. 

The recent report, "Adult Literacy in America", stated findings of tiie National AduU 
Literacy Survey tiiat are unsatisfactory to me. It indicated tiiat over 60% of American Indian 
and Alaska Native adults lack adequate literacy and numeracy skills to fiinction effectively in 
tiieir work and family lives. This indicates tiie amount of work we have ahead of us. The 
outcomes of this coriference can improve that 60% illiteracy rate. 

The BIA does not operate adult education and training programs. Ratiier, tiie fiinds we 
receive from tiie Department of Education are distributed directiy to tribes. You can 
understtmd tiiat by tiie tixhe fimds go to 545 tribal entities, tiie amount received is very small. 



ERIC 



J&EAsaociatet,Ioe. 



XIX 



58 



CrtttimgA UUtaU Future 
Appendix B: Ageoda 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



And most tribes have to find additional dollars to nm a program of ai^ substance, such as 
GED or ABE classes or tutoring. They need your help and involvement to be able to do 
more. 

Unfortunately, there has not always been the best of relationships between Tribes and States, 
primarily due to jurisdictional issues. Tribes are accustomed to dealing with the Federal 
government on a govemment-to-govemment basis. But relationships are changing by the 
mutual, forward-thinking efforts of Tribal communities and State administrators. I think of 
my recent involvements in North Dakota and Tribal teams must be involved in phmning 
a(hilt education efforts at the state level. Research and practice have shown us that programs 
designed for Indian people work best when they have been an integral part of the planning 
fiom the beginning. I urge you to collaborate as partners. 

I cannot leave you without also speaking for our Native people who reside off the reservation 
and are not served by the BIA. Indians are.in the cities seeking training and employment 
Yet, they are often left out of the planning efforts of county and state programs. In fact, that 
is ^y your forum is being held; to remedy that long-standing situation. I urge you to 
remember the education and training needs of ALL American Indians and Alaska Natives. 

Our goal as federal, state and tribal adminisQ-ators must be the improved educational 
attainment of Native communities. With education comes that all-important sense of 
empowerment In turn, employment and economic self-sufficiency results. The dialogue and 
planning that you are etigaging in at this forum will contribute greatly to that goal. 

My congratulations to the Department of Education for sponsoring this national gathering. 
Have an excellent forum! Thank you. 



Audience members took turns asking questions of each other on such issues as the 
relationship between this Forum and others, such as the White House Conference on Indian 
Education, and what will happen to the mission statements and action plans that result fi-om 
this meeting. 



1:30 -4:15 p.m. 



TEAM PLANNING SESSION II 



Team members worked on developing their local action plans. 



4:15 -5:15 p.m. 



TOWNIiALL 



ER^C JAEAsaociates,Inc. 



59 



XX 



AopeodixB: Ageodt 



SLPaul.MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



Friday • October 14, 1994 



WORKING BREAKFAST/TEAM PLANNING SESSION III 

Team members finalized their mission statements and action plans and determined how they 
would present these at the general session. 



Maxine Glory, National Advisory Council on Indian Education 
Haro/</I>e3/o55, Nationallndian Education Association 
AUce Roach, National Indian Education Association 
Mary Jo Cole, National Indian Adult Education Association 

Moderator 

Mary Brc^boy, Branch Chief, Office of Indian Education, : 
U.S. Department of Education 

Mary Brayboy introduced the other presenters, each of whom spoke briefly on Uie purpose 
and activities of their organization, and what each could contribute to efforts to improve 
American Indian and Alaska Native aduh education and Uteracy. 



Each team summarized the vision statements, mission statements, and action plans Uiat they 
developed over die past three days. The statements and plans are provided in the third part 
of the report. 



9:00 -9:15 a.m. 



RESOURCE PRESENTATION 



9: 30 to 11:30 a.m. 



GENERAL SESSION 




J&EAssociiMi,Iao. 



60 



Crtatiitg A Utent* Future 

Appendix C: Preaeoter/Mbderator List and Participant List 



SLPaul.MN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



APPENDIX C 



PRESENTER/MODERATOR 

LIST 



Susan Berc 

State litency Director 
The Governor's CouxKil for 
Literacy and Lifelong Learning 
0£Gce of the State Librarian 
465 S.King Street, BI 
Honolulu. HI 968 13 
Telephone: 808-586-7188 

Mary Brayboy 

Branch Chief 
Grants Administration 
OfiBce of IndiaD Education 
U.S. Department of Education 
600 Independence Avenue, SW 
Portals Building - Room 4300 
Washington, DC 20202 
Telephone: 202-260-1648 

Dawn Bush 

Federal Representative 
U.S. Department of Labor 
Division of Indian and 
Native American Programs 
200 Constitution Avenue, NW 
RoomN<4641 
Washington, DC 20210 
Telephone: 202-219-5511. 

Diann Dawson 

Deputy Director 

Ofhce of Family Assistance 

U.S. Department of Health and Human Services 

370 L'Enfant Promenade, SW 

Aerospace Building, 5th Floor East 

Washington, DC 20447 

Telephone: 202-401-9275 



Thomas Dowd 

Chief 

Division of Indian and 
Native American Programs 
U.S. Department of Labor 
Employment and Training Act 
200 Constitution Avenue, NW 
Washington, DC 20210 
Telephone: 202-219-5504 

Bonnie Eastbum 
Cook Inlet Tribal Council 
Adult Education and Employment 
670 West Fireweed Lane 
Suite 200 

Anchorage, AK 99503 
Telephone: 907-265-5900 

Gary A. Eyre 

Deputy Associate Superintendent 
Arizona Department of Education 
1535 West Jefferson Street 
Phoenix, AZ 85007 
Telephone: 602-542-5280 

Janice Falcone . 
Employment and Training Director 
North American Indian Center 
105 South Huntington Avenue 
Jamaica Paric, MA 02130 
Telephone: 617-277-4804 

Deano Polealah 

Program Specialist 

Division of Job Placement and Training 

Office of Economic Development 

Bureau of Indian Affairs 

U.S. Department of Interior 

18th & C Streets, NW, Room 1458 

Washington, DC 20245 

Telephone: 202-208-2570 



ERIC 



J&E Associates, Inc. 



xxu 



61 



CnalmgA UUrmt* FtOure 

AopeodixC: Pttacoter/Modeiitor List and Participant List 



St Paul MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



Sandra Fox 

Chief 

Mooitoring and Evaluation 

OfiBce of Indian Education Programs 

DepaitDient of Interior 

1849 C Street, NW, MaU Stop • 35 12 MB 

Washington, DC 20242 

Telephone: 202-219-3817 

Don Goodwin 

Director 
Kateri Center 
206 W. Fourth 
Duludi,MNSS806 
Tekphooe: 218-722-7387 

CX.Henson 

Consultant 

J&EAssociates4nc. 

1 100 W^ne Avenue, Suite 820 

SUver Spring, MD 20910 

Telephone: 301-49S-0400 

Jean Hunt 

Education Progam Specialist/Team Leader 
Office of Indian Education 
U.S. Department of Education 
600 Independence Avenue, S W 
Portals Building Room 4300 
Washington, DC 20202 
Telephone: 202-260-1S08 

Gilbert Innis 
GRIC 

P.O. Box 97 
Sacaton,AZ8S247 
Telephone: 602-562-3878 

Brian Kanes 

Coordinator 

Adult Basic Education 

Department of Education 

550 Cedar Street 

St Paul, MN 55 101 

Telephone: 612-296-8311 



GayeKelaKing 

Department Chair 

Teacher Education 

Haskell Indian Nations University 

155 Indian Avenue, Box H1205 

UvnenccKS 66046 

Telephone: 913-749-8426 

Bonnie Lowe 
JOBS/STRIDE Director 
Minnesota Chippewa Tribe 
P.O. Box 217 
Cass Lake, MN 56633 
Telephone: 218-722-7387 

Cathie Martin 

Division Director of Program Support 
Office of Indian Education 
U.S. Department of Education 
600 Independence Avenue, SW 
Portals Building Room 4300 
Washington, DC 20202 
Telephone: 202-260-1683 

Tom Miller 

School Administrator 
Hannahville Indian School 
N 149 1 1 Hannahville B 1 Road 
Wilson, MI 49896 
Telephone: 906-466-2952 

Peggy Sue Nez 

Program Manager 

Tribal JOBS 

Navajo Nation 

P.O. Box 1889 

Window Rock, AZ 865 15 

Telephone: 602-871-7707 

Ronald Pugsley 
Acting Director 

Division of Adult Education and Literacy 
U.S. Department of Education 
400 Maryland Avenue, SW 
Wasfiington, DC 20202-7240 
Telephone: 202-205-9242 



Q - - ^ '-w xxiii 



ERJC JAEAstocittet,Inc. 62 



CretlmgA VUralt Future 

AppeodixC: Preaeoter/Moderator List and Participant List 



SLPaul.MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



Blair Rudes 

President 

First Americans Research 
727 Ei^ Street, SW 
Suite 212 

Washington, DC 20003 
Tdephooe: 202-783-1989 

Carroll Towey 

Senior Program Advisor 

Division of Adult Education and Literacy 

U.S. DepaitDMDt of Education 

400 Maryland Avenue, SW 

Room 4409 

Washington, DC 20202-7240 
Telephone: 202-205-9791 



Linda Sue Warner 

American Indian Education Policy Center 
Pennsylvania State University 
320 Rackley 

University Park, PA 16802 
Telephone: 814-865-1489 

Don Wetsen 

School Administrator 
Lac Couite Ckeilles Ojibwa School 
Route 2, Box 2800 
Hayward,WI 54843 
Telephone: 715-634-8924 



CD?/- JAEAswciate^Inc. «iv 



CrtatiHgA UUntt Future 

Appendix C: Prtaeater/Moderrtor List and Participant List 



SLPaul.MN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



PARTICIPANT 
LIST 



Patricia T. Anuberry 

Blue Mountain Conununity College 

2411NocdiwestCardin 

Peodktoii,OR 97801 

Telephone: 503-276-1260 ext. 218 

Dona Anderson 

ABE Training Facilitator 
Soutbwestem Technical College 
401 West Street 
Jackson. MN S6143 
Telephone: 507-847-3320 

Terry J.Anfinsoh 
Anishinabe OIC 
HC67 
Box 329 

Onamia,MN S63S9 
Tdephooe: 612-532-4046 

Ellen Anton 

ABE Training Faciltator 
P.O. Box 333 
Stephen, MN 56757 
Telephone: n/a 

SamudK.Apuna 

2311 South Acanthus 

Mesa,AZ 85208 

Telephone: 602-380-9486 

Linda Archuleta 
American Indian OIC 
1845 East Franklin Avenue 
Minneapolis, MN 55404 
Telephone: 612-341-3358 



Richard W. Arnold 

Lu Vegas Indian Center 

Southern Paiute 

2300 West Bonanza Road 

Las Vegas, NV 89106 

Telephone: 702-647-5842 



Nadine Auck 
Shoshone-Bannock 
P.O. Box 306 
FortHaU,ID 83203 

Telephone: 208-238-3988 exL 3883 

Dean Azuie 

Grand Ronde Tribes 
9615 Grand Ronde Road ^ 
Grand Ronde, OR 97347 
Telephone: 1-800-422-0232 

John Bailey 
Development Executive 
Michigan Department of Commerce 
P.O. Box 30008 
Lansing, Mi 48909 
Telephone: 517-373-6059 

Larry Balber 

Red Cliff Tribe 
P.O. Box 529 
Bayfield, WI 54814 
Telephone: 715-779-5717 

Tom Bauer 

California Department of Education 
560 J Street 
Sacramento, CA 95814 
Telephone: 916-323-2570 

Donna Berg 

ABE Training Facilitator 
Pipestone Public Schools 
400 Second Avenue, SW 
Pipestone, MN 56164 
Telephone: n/a 

Suzanne R. Bishop 

White Earth Reservation Tribal Council 

P.O. Box 12 

Waubun, MN 56589 

Telephone: 218-473-2141 



ERJc J*EAaiocia»et,Inc. 

UMMmmmm 



64 



XXV 



CnaHitgAUltrmeFmlmft 

AopeodixC: Preaentar/ModeratorIjstaiKiP«rtidp«ittIia 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 -14. 1994 



KuaBUdarater 
Blaclcwiter Community School 
GO* Rhra Indian Community 
Route 1, Box 95 
CooIidgcAZ 85228 
Tckphooe: 602-215-5859 

RooBowaa 

Executive Director 
American Indian Center 
1630 West Wkma Avenue 
Chicago, IL 60640 
Telephone: 312-275-5871 

Judy A. Brooks 

GEDInstnictar 

Amencsn Indian Training and 

Enq)lpymeot Program 

1501 North Cfissen Boulevard 

Oklahoma City, OK 73 106 

Tdephooe: 405-521-9047 

EddRussdl Brown 
ABE Training Facilitator 
2099 SOva BeU Road, Suite 3622 
Eagan,MN 55122 
Tdepbone: 612-228-9065 

Benjamin F.Bryant 

Educon Diversified, Inc. 
105 Robert Circle 
BellePlaincMN 56011 
Telepbooe: 612-873-6436 

Carol Burkewest 

Adult Educatioo Coordinator 

Hannafaville Potawatomi 

Indian Community 

P.O. Box 30008 

Lansing, KQ 48909 

Telephone: 517-373-6059 

CalrindaT.Burson 
Tribal JTPA/JOBS Director 
P.O. Box 613 

Fort Washakie, WY 82514 
Telephone: 307-332-6320 



Jacqueline Candelaria 

Southern Ute Indian Tribe 
P.O. Box 737 
Ignacio,CO 81137 
Telephone: 303-563-0235 

LilliaD.CasUneda 
Salt River Indian Community 
Route 1, Box 216 
ScottsdalcAZ 85256 
Telephone: 602-941-7327 

Paul W.Chavez 

Owens Valley Career Development Center 
P.O. Box 1467 
Bishop, CA 93514 
Telephone: 619-873-5107 

Eunice Christensen 
ABE Training Facilitator 
Rural Route 2, Box 92 
Westbrook,MN 56183 
Telephone: 507-274-6491 

RubyCozad 

Education Specialist 
Bureau of hdian Affairs 
U. S. Department of Interior 
1849 C Street, NW 
Washington, DC 20240 
Telephone: 202-208-4871 

Mary C. Crawford 

American Indian OIC 
234 North Mississippi Boulevard 
St Paul, MN 55104 
Telephone: 612-341-3358 

Catherine Cuddeback 
Minnesota Department of Education 
C{q)itol Square Buikiing 
550 Cedar Street, Suite 992 
St Paul, MN 55101 
Telephone: 612-296-1436 



65 



ERIC 



JftEAsnciaiM,Inc 



xxvi 



Crmliim A UUraU Future 

Appendix C: Preaeatg/Modenttor List and Participant List 



SLPaul.MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



LeoCuiBiiiia{S 

477 Administntor 

Fort Bodiold Community College 

P.O. Boot 597 

New Town, ND 58763 

Telephooe: 701-627.3634 

Dianne Dayton 

Minnesota Department of Education 
Capitol Square Building 
550 Cedar Street, Suite 994 
St Paul, MN 55101 
Tekphooe: 612*296.3690 

Harold DeMoss 

Cherokee Nation 

P.O. Box 948 

Tahlcquah.OK 74465 

Tekphooe: 918-456.0671 ext. 424 

James L. Dodd 

Florida DqMitment of Education 

Bureau of Adult and Community Education 

FEC Building 

325 West Gaines Street, Suite 1244 
Tallahassee, FL 32399-0400 
Telephone: 904-922-5829 

MarkW.Edgerton 
Gwynne Learning 

2390 East Camelback Road, Suite 300 
Phoenix, AZ 85016 
Telephone: 602-553-1144 

Tom Eland 

UnivecsiQr of St Thomas 
MN/SD Literacy Resource Center 
21 15 Summit Avenue - Mail Stq) 5019 
St Paul, MN 55105 
Telephooe: 612-962-5570 

Sbaryl Emberton 
National Center for Family Literacy 
325 West Main Street, Suite 200 
Louisville, KY 40202 
Tdephooe: 502-584-1133 



66 



Carrie A. Enos 

Salt River Indian Community 
Route 1, Box 216 
ScottsdaIe,AZ 85256 
Telephone: 602-941-7327 

Daniel D. Everhart 

Podca Tribe of Nebraska 
13 10 N«foIk Avenue 
Norfolk, NE 68701 
Telephone: 402-371-5233 

Louella J. Farrow 

Confederated Tribes Omatiila 
Indian Reservation 
P.O. Box 638 
Pendleton, OR 97801 
Telephone: 503-276-8120 

June Fletcher 
Counselor 

Grand VallQ^ State University 
P.O. Box 30008 
Lansing, MI 48909 
Telephone: 517-373-6059 

Barbara M. Floyd 

North American Indian Center of Boston 
105 South Huntington Avenue 
Boston, MA 02130 
Telephone: 617-232-0343 

AlberU R. Friday 
Shoshone-Barmock 
P.O. Box 306 
Fort Hall, ID 83203 
Telephone: 208-238-3872 

BillieMaxine Glory 

Oklahoma State Department of Education 

570 North Sixth Street 

Muskogee, OK 74401-6011 

Telephone: 918-684-3700 

Wilson C Gorman 
BIA-Adult Education 
P.O.Box 110 
Fort Defiance, AZ 86504 
Telephone: 602-729-7283 



rn9r> J A E Anodate^ Inc. 



xxvti 



Crt&tiHgAUttrmFtititrt 

ApoendixC: Preaeo»/Modenttor List and Particip«nt List 

Nancy Gnibcr 

BSTC-MilkLacs 

328 Ncctiieast Third Avenue 

St Cloud, MN 56304 

Tdephooe: 612-532^688 

Leonard Hamilton 

Nine Star Enterprise 

650 West Intetnational Airport Road 

Anchorage, AK 99518 

Telephone: 907-563-3174 

Alex Hawkins 

Michigan Jobs GMnmission 
P.O. Box 30008 
Lansing. MI 48909 
Tdephooe: 517-373-6059 

Virginia Heinricbs 
University of St Thomas 
MN/SD Literacy Resource Center 
2115 Summit Aventi? - Mail Stop 5019 
St Paul, MN 55101 
Tdephooe: 612-962-5570 

Rita Hodge 

Director 

Native American Support Program 
322 South Green Street, Room 404 
Chicago, IL 60607 
Telephone: 312-996-4515 

Mavis L. Hubble 

Department of Employment 

Lander Employment Resources Division 

P.O. Box 530 

Lander, WY 82520 

Tdephone: 307-332-5336 

Dana Jadcson 

Education Director 

Bad River Chippewa Tribe 

P.O. Box 39 

Odanah,WI 54861 

Telephone: 715-682-7111 



O 

ERJC JAEA«aociaiet,Inc. 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



Richard Jefferson 

Southern Ul!e Indian Tribe 
P.O. Box 737 
Ignacio,CO 81137 
Tdephone: 303-563-0235 

Susan Jensen 

Literacy Training Network 

2115 Summit Avenue - Mail Stop CHC131 

St Paul, MN 55101 

Tdephone: 612-962-5441 

Herman B. Johnson 
BIA - Navajo Delegation 
P.O. Box 521 
Shiprock.NM 87420 
Tdephone: 505-368-4427 

Lois Jones 

Little Hoop Community College 
P.O. Box 269 
FortTotten,ND 58335 
Telephone: 701-766-4415 

Karen Kay 

Executive Director 
Michigan Indian Employment 
and Training Services, tac. 
P.O. Box 30008 
Lansing, MI 48909 
Tdephone: 517-373-6059 

Stanley Kedelty 

Bureau of Indian Affairs 
P.O. Box 153 
Navajo, NM 87328 
Tdephone: 602-729-7282 

Rochdle King 
Fond du Lac OIC 
105 University Road 
CloquetMN 55720 
Tdephone: 218-878-0415 

Lenora Kizer 

Washoe Tribe of Nevada and California 
854 Amador Circle 
Carson City, NV 89705 
Tdephone: 702-687-3111 

xxviii 

67 



CnatiMgA UUmU Future 

Appendix C: Pieaeittcf/Modentor List and Participant List 



SLPaul,MN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



LloydELKjonicss 
Wyoming Department of Education 
Hathaw^r Building, Second Floor 
Cheyenne, WY 82002-OOSO 
Telq»hoiie: 307-777-6228 

Cheryl M.Kuks 
Director 

Indian Education 

North Dakota Department 

ofPublicInstniction 

600 East Boulevard Avenue, Ninth Floor 

Bismarck, ND S8S0S-0440 

Telephone: 701-328.2250 

Terry Lacy 

Colorado River inditm Tribes 
C.R.I.T. Education 
Route 1, Box 23'B 
Parker, AZ 8S344 
Tdqjhone: 602-669-S32S 

Muriel Lawler 

State Supervisor of Adult Education 

The Mexico State Department of Education 

Education Building 

300 Don Gasper 

SanuFe,NM 87501-2786 

Telephone: 505-827-6672 

Jackie Lcno-Grant 

Eastern Oregon State College 

1410 L Avenue 

UGiandcOR 97850 

Telephone: 503-962-3741 ext. 3892 

S. Jo Lewis 

Blackwater Community School 
Gila River Indian Community 
Route 1, Box 95 
CooUdgcAZ 85228 
Telephone: 602-215-3259 

Sharon Lteberman 

Central Wyoming College 

2660 Peck Avenue 

Riverton,WY 82501 

Tetephooe: 307-856-9291 ext. 189 



Valeria Littlecreek 

Creek Nation of Oklahoma 

P.O. Box 580 

Okmulgee, OK 74447 

Telephone: 918-756-8700 ext 234 

Melissa Mallow 

Blackwater Community School 
Gila River hidian Community 
Route 1, Box 95 
CooUdge,AZ 85228 
Telephone: 602-215-5859 

Pam Marteii 

Coordinator 

Native American Programs Unit 
Michigan Department of Education 
P.O. Box 30008 
Lansing, MI 48909 
Telephone: 517-373-6059 

Kenneth P. Martinez 

JTPA Director 
Dallas Inter-Tribal Cenu^i 
209 East Jefferson Boulevard 
Dallas, TX 75203-2690 
Telephone: 214-941-1050 

Caroi Jeanne McDougai 

VfTiiie Earth Tribal Council 
P.O. Box 95 

Naytahwaush. MN 56566 
Telephone: 218-983-3285 

Thelma McLester 

Area Manager 

Education and Training 

Oneida Tribe 

P.O. Box 365 

Oneida, WI 54155 

Telephone: 414-869-4331 

Beth Meryl 

Adult Education Coordinator 
Saginaw Chippewa Indian Tribe 
P.O. Box 30008 
Lansing, MI 48909 
Telephone: 517-373-6059 



rn?r> J A E Anocittei, Inc. ^ox 

68 



Ota^gA IMnm Future 

ApprKfccC: Preaenter/Moderttor List and Participant List 



St Paul. MN 

October 12 'i4, 1994 



Irene Migiicl 

Blackwater Community School 
Gila River iDditti Community 
Route 1, Box 95 
CoolidgcAZ 83228 
Tdepbooe: 602-2 1S-S8S9 

Inez B. Miller 

Invest Learning 

12767 73nl Avenue North 

Maple Grove, MN SS369 

Telephone: 612-424-3642 

Marlis Miller 

OfiGce of Community College Services 
25S Capitol Street, NE 
Salem, OR 97310 

Telephone: 503-378-8648 ext. 359 

JasjitS.Minhas 

LCOO Community College 

Route 2, Box 2357 

Ha>rward,WI 54843 

Telephone: 715-634-4790 ext 134 

Pamela E.MitcheU 

United Tribe of Kansas and Southeast Nebraska 
1012 Wagon Wheel Road 
Uwrence,KS 66049 
Telephone: 913-749-8476 

Beverly Moeser 
Director 

Institute for Native American Development 

Truman College 

1 145 West Wilson Avenue 

Chicago, IL 60640 

Telephone: 312-907-4667 

Theresa Monahan 
Bladcwater Community School 
Gila River Indian Community 
Route l,Box95 
CooUdge,AZ 85228 
Telephone: 602-215-5859 



Gerald Carty Monette 

Turtle Mountain Community College 
P.O. Box 340 
Belcourt,ND 58316 
Telephone: 70M77-5605 

Chrissandra Murphy-Reed 
Goshute Tribe 
P.O. Box 6104 
Ibapah,UT 84034 

Telephone: 801-234-1 136 ext 14 
or 234-1140 

Delphine Nelson 
Comanche Tribe 
P.O. Box 908 
Lawton,OK 73502 
Telephone: 405-492-4988 

Monica Nish 

Blackwater Community College 
Gila River Indian Community 
Route 1, Box 95 
Coolidge,AZ 85228 
Telephone: 602-215-5859 

Yvonne Novack 

Minnesota Department of Education 
Indian Education 
Capitol Square Building 
~ 550 Cedar Street, Suite 740 
St Paul, MN 55101 
Telephone: 612-296-6458 

Lynda Nuttall 
Adult Education Director 
Denver Indian Center 
4450 Morrison Road 
Denver, CO 80219 
Telephone: 303-937-1005 

Ja-Na Oliver 
Tribal Branch 
Jobs Program 

Administration for Children and Families 
Aerospace Building 
370 L'Enfant Promenade, SW 
Washington, DC 20250 
Telephone: 202-401-5713 



ERXC JAEAa«)ciate^Inc. 

UMWM-mmmm 



69 



XXX 



AopeodixC: Prcaealct/Mbderator List and P«rticipant List 



St Paul. MN 
October 12 '14, 1994 



JoluA.Ortiz 


Jacquelyn Power 


Kansas Dqiartment of Education 


Blackwater Community School 


JTPA Envkyme&t and Training 


Gila River Indian Community 


650 Nocth Seneca 


Route 1, Box 95 


Wichita, KS 67203-3204 


CooUdgcAZ 85228 


Tdepbooe: 316.262-5221 


Telephone: 602-215-3259 


Gwendolyn Paul 


Beverly G.Prescott 


Blackwater Conununity School 


OfHce of Community Colleges 


Gila River Indian Community 


3810 South Sixth Street 


Route l,Box95 


Klamath Fplls, OR 97603 


CoolidgcAZ 85228 


Telephone: 503-883-4726 


Tdepbooe: 602-215.5859 






Patricia E. Putney 


JoIenePatd 


Grand Traverse Band of Ottawa and 


Blackwater Community School 


Chippewa Indians 


Gila River Indian Community 


774 lM-72 East 


Routcl,Box95 


Williamsburg, MI 49690 


CooUdgcAZ 85228 


Teiephone: 616-267-9970 


Tdepbooe: 602.215-5859 






Joe A. Quetone 


INane Pecormro 


Executive Director 


Minnesota Department of Education 


FGCIA,fac. 


Ciqpitol Square Building 


1020 East Lafayette Street, Suite 102 . 


550 Cedar Street, Suite 993 


TaUahassee,FL 32301 


St Paul, MN 55101 


Telephone: 904-488-0730 


Telephone: 612-296-7500 






Cheryl Red Eagle 


Andrea Peridns 


Standing Rock Community College 


Blackwater Community School 


BoxHCl,Box4 


Gila River Indian Community 


Fort Yates, ND 58538 


Route 1, Box 95 


Telephone: 70 1-854-3861 ext 220 


Coolidge,AZ 85228 




Telephone: 602-215-3259 


Stephen Reuys 


Adult Literacy Resource Institute 


Lea Perkins 


Massachusetts Department of Education 


Minnesota Department of Education 


989 Commonwealth Avenue 


Indian Education 


Boston, MA 02215 


Capitol Square Buildmg 


Telephone: 617-782-8956 


550 Cedar Street, Suite 735C 




St Paul, MN 55101 


Laurie Rheault 


Telephone: 612-296-6407 


Minriesota Department of Education 


Capitol Square Building 


MeUW. Potts 


550 Cedar Street, Suite 995 


National Center for Family Literacy 


St Paul, MN 55101 


325 West Main Street, Suite 200 


Telephone: 612^296-8311 


Louisville, KY 40202 




Telephone: 502-584-1133 





E 

SB 



Er|c 7Q ^ 



AoDcodixC: Preacaltt/Moderatox-ListandPartiqpintU^ 



SLPauUMN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



Phyllis L. Rich 

Nevada Dquitment of Education 
400 Weat King Street 
Capitol Complex 
Carson City, NV 89710 
Tekphope: 702^87-3134 

Alice Roadi 
Indian Center, Inc. 
1100 Military Road 
Lincoln, NE 68S08 
Tdephooe: 402-438-S231 

Ernestine Rodrieuez 
Counselor 

Native American Support Program 
322 South Green Street, Room 404 
Clucago,IL 60607 
Tekphone: 312-996-4515 

Fernando Roman 

Executive Director 
SVy People Higlier Education 
Northern Arqiaho Tribe 
P.O. Box 8480 
EthetcWY 82520 
Telephone: 307-857-2011 

Pavlos X. Roussos 

State Director 

Texas Education Agency 

Adult Education Division 

1701 North Congress 

Austin, TX 78701 

Telephone: 512-463-9264 

Linda Ruiz 

Blackwater Cooununity School 
Gila River Indian Community 
Route 1, Box 95 
Coolidge,AZ 85228 
Telephone: 602-215-5859 

Randy Ruiz 

Blackwater Community School 
Gila River Indian Community 
Route 1, Box 95 
CooUdge,AZ 85228 
Telephone: 602-215-5859 



Sandy A. Runde 

Wisconsin Winnebago Business Conunittee 
1354 Van Buren 
Black River Falls, WI 54615 
Telephone: 715-284-4321 

Pat Rupp 

Minnesota Department of Education 
Capitol Square Building 
550 Cedar Street, Suite 997 
St Paul, MN 55101 
Telephone: 612-296-2704 

Karen Schiller 

Central Wyoming College 

2660 Peck Avenue 

Riverton,WY 82501 

Telephone: 307-856-9291 ext 189 

Michele Dean Scott 

Education Director - Allegany Reservation 
Seneca Nation of Indians 
P.O. Box 231 
Salamanca, NY 14779 
Telephone: 716-945-1790 

Barry Shaffer 

Minnesota Department of Education 
Capitol Square Building 
350 Cedar Street, Suite 
St. Paul, MN 55101 
Telephone: 612-297-7910 

Geri Shangreauz 

College Dean 

NAES CoUege 

2838 West Peterson Avenue 

Chicago, IL 60659 

Telephone: 312-761-5000 

Jerry Shaw 

Osage Nation 
627 Grandview 
Pawhuska,OK 74056 
Telephone: 918-287-4622 



ERIC 



JAE Associates. Inc. 



71 



xxxu 



CrealiHgAUumt Future 

Appendix C: Piewtfier/ Moderator List and Participant List 



St Paul, MN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



DdMrahSiniiBoiu 

UtenKy Training Networic 

21 IS Summit Avenue • Mail Stop CHC131 

St Paul MN 55101 

Telepbooe: 612-962-5440 

June Simon 
Kickapoo Tribe 
P.O. Box 271 
Hocton,KS 66439 
Tekphooe: 913-486-2627 

George Snidef 

Adult Education Coordinator 

Sault Ste. Marie Tribe of Chippewa Indians 

P.O. Box 30008 

Lansing, MI 48909 

Telephone: 517-373-6059 

Georgia Spivey 

Oldaboma State Department of Education 
2500 North Lincoh Boulevard 
Oklahoma Ci<y, OK 73105-4599 
Telephoae: 405-521-3321 

Maggie Steinz 

Senior Consultant, Adult Education/Literacy 
Dlioois State Board of Education 
100 West Randolph, Suite 14-300 
Chicago, IL 60601 
Telephone: 312-814-3561 

Delmar Stevens 

ABE^GED Instructor 
Adult Education Program 
Denver Indian Center 
4450 MorrisoTi Road 
Denver, CO 80219 
Telephone: 303-937-1005 

Janet S.Stotts 

Kansas State Board of Education 
120 Southeast Tenth 
Topeka,KS 66612 
Telephone: 913-296-3192 



Ellen Susbak 

Minnesota Department of Education 
C^>itol Square Building 
550 Cedar Street. Suite 992 
SI Paul, MN 55101 
Telephone: 612-297-4869 

Richard Tanner 

Minnesota Chippewa Tribe 
P.O. Box 217 
Cass Lake, MN 56633 
Telephone: 218-335-8581 

Barbara Thomas 

American Indian Language 
and Culture Education Board 
P.O. Box 7841 
Madison, WI 53707 
Telephone: 608-267-9232 

Edwardine Thomas 
Blackwater Conununity School 
Gila River Indian Conununity ^ 
Route 1, Box 95 
CooUdge,AZ 85228 
Telephone: 602-215-3259 

John E. Thompson 

Bureau of Indian Affairs 

P.O. Box 309 

Anadarko, OK 73005 

Telephone: 405-247-6673 cxt 408 

Bill Todachennie 

San Juaii School District 
Box 129 

Bluff, UT 84512 
Telephone: 801-672-2311 

Gary L. Tom 

Paiute Indian Tribe of Utah 

600 North 100 East 

Cedar City, UT 84720 

Telephone: 801-586-1 1 12 ext 34 



72 



xxxiii 



CreaHmg A Uumg Future 

:C: Preaeaia/Modentfof List and Pttticipint List 

^ilUamTio 
Nsv^o Nation 
P.O. Box 2884 
Shiprock, KM 87420 
Tdepbwie: 602.871-6370 

GsyUTulensrv 

Coo&daated Tribes Grand Roode 
1324 Price Lane 
Monmouth, OR 97361 
Telephone: 1.800-422-0232 cxl 2282 

NillaVaUo 

Education Director 
Pueblo of Jemez 
P.O. Box 9 

Jemez Pueblo, NM 87024 
Telephone: 505-834-9171 

Janice Vdgersdylc 

ABE Training Facilitator 
4516SedumLane 
Edina,MN 55435 
Telephone: n/a 

GilVigU 

Education Director 
TesuquePud>lo 
Route5,Box360.TP 
SanUFe,NM 87501 
Telephone: 505-983-2667 

JohnE.Wadda 

Shoshone Tribe 
Box628 

Fort Washakie, WY 82514 
Telephone: 307-332-3538 

Paul R. Walker 
Maine Department of Education 
Division of Adult and Community Education 
State House, Station 23 
Augusta, ME 04333 
Telephone: 207-287-5854 



SLPaul,MN 
October 12' 14. J994 



DIanneWalther 

ABE Training Facilitator 
501 East EUn Avenue 
Waseca, MN 56093 
Telephone: n/a 

PatWIeseler 
ABE Training Facilitator 
201 Lyndalc Avenue 
SaultSte. Marie 
Faribault, MN 55021 
Telephone: n/a 

CmdyWIIIard 

Osage Nation 
627 Grandview 
Pawhuska,OK 74056 
Telephone: 918-287-4622 

Linda Wlllerte 

ABE Training Facilitator 
326 West Sixth 
Blue Earth, MN 56013 
Telephone: n/a 

Waylon Wilson 
Blackwatcr Community School 
Gila River Indian Community 
Route 1, Box 95 
Coolidgc,AZ 85228 
Telephone: 602-215-5859 

Darcy WIrebaugh 

Even Start Project Director 
Wisconsin Department of 
Public Instruction, GEF 3 
P.O. Box 7841 
Madison, WI 53707 
Telephone: n/a 

Heidi L.Yaple 

Grand Traverse Band of Ottav^ra and 
Chippinva Indians 
7741 M-72 East 
Williamsburg, MI 49690 
Telephone: 616-267-9970 



/ 




CrtfmgA UtmU Future 

AopcadixC: Pttjen l er/ Modcritor list and Participant List 



SLPaul.MN 
October 12 '14. 1994 



BrittaYoiinuuu 
ABE Training Facilitator 
4124 S7th Lane, NW 
Rocbester,MN 55901 
Tdcfdwoe: o/a 

Venum M. Zacher, Jr. 
Fond du Lac Band of Ojibwe 
320 West Second Street, Room 712 
Di]luth,MN 55802 
Telephone: 218-723-4657 



rn?/- JAEAsiOciaiei.Inc. ^ xxxv 

cKJL 74 



CrmliHg ALUM Future 

cD: Evahutioos 



St.Piul,MN 
Octgberjr-14j994 



APPENDIX D 
EVALUATIONS 



There ■woe 
I. 



2. 



3. 



4. 



38cvaluatioostumedmaflathcccmfcrt^^ The results ofthosc evaluations are as foUows: 
Name of respondents State or Tribe (not reportedly due to confidentiality of responses). 
How would you rate the conference overall? 



Excellent 

VeiyGood 

Good 

Fair 

Poor 



7 
22 
3 
3 
0 



How would you rate the conference in the following categories 
LENGTH 

Too long 5 
justrigjit 27 
Too short 3 

CONTENT 

Covered too much 2 

Covered just enough 23 

Covered too litUc 6 

ORGANIZATION 

Organized too rigidly 1 
WellorspKiized 32 
Disocguiized 1 

Please rate the conference facilities: 

Hotel Accomodations Refreshments 



Excellent 
Very Good 
Good 
Fair 
Poor 



10 
15 
7 
2 
0 



7 
9 
13 
5 
I 



. O j&EAsK)ctates,Iiic. 

ERIC 



75 



Appendix P: EviluKioni 



StPttilMN 
October 12 -14, 1994 



5. What did you value most about tbecoa£arenoe? 

The primaiy ieq)oose was the (^poituniQr to networic and work with others with similar cirpimstaiyyis 
and to meet with professionals and the oppoctunity to do planning. 

6. Is there anything you would change about die conference? 

Comments coocenied the lack of federal participants available to the delegates to respond to issues 
raised. There were also comments concerning die length ofthe days being too long. 

7. Please add any further comments you have about this year's conference. 

Comments included having personnel present who can respond to specific areas of concern. Therewere 
c«wMnent» Stating that this was not a forum but a conference because of the lack of persons who could 
respond to issues of concern. 




ERIC 



JftEAssociaiea,lDe. 



xxxvii 



