DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 429 289 



CS 216 618 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



vanLent , Peter 

The Image of Higher Education in American Indian Popular 
Literature . 

1999-03-00 

13p . ; Paper presented at the Annual Joint Meeting of the 
Popular Culture and American Culture Association (San Diego, 
CA, March 31-April 3, 1999). 

Information Analyses (070) -- Speeches/Meeting Papers (150) 

MF01/PC0 1 Plus Postage. 

American Indian Education; *American Indian Literature; 
^College Environment; Cultural Isolation; ^Higher Education; 
^Novels; * Popular Culture; Student Needs 
^College Image; Native Americans; Theme (Literary) 



ABSTRACT 



In their attempts to lead a dual-life experience, characters 
in popular literature written by and/or about Native American Indians 
occasionally enroll in institutions of higher education; like many of their 
real-life counterparts very few of these student characters find the 
experience to be a positive undertaking. This narrative pattern reflects a 
"tragic reality" in American higher education today. The paper deals with 
four novels which target specific problems encountered by Native American 
students in college, i.e.: "Wolfsong" (Louis Owen); "Turtle Belly" (Joel 

Monture) ; "First Eagle" (Tony Hillerman) ; and "Agoak" (Yves Theriault) . 
Parallels can be drawn between reality and the negative image of higher 
education in American Indian popular literature, since the primary reasons 
for higher education's failure with Native Americans are outlined in the 
novels discussed: social maladjustment, disinterested faculty, irrelevant 
curriculum, lack of a support network, alienation from personal heritage, 
racism, etc. The paper suggests some ways to ameliorate the situation, such 
as establishing residence halls where a support community can be formed, 
hiring Native American counselors to facilitate positive peer communication, 
and organizing tutoring programs. Contains 6 references. (NKA) 



***************************************************************************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document . 



oo 

CN 



THE IMAGE OF HIGHER EDUCATION IN AMERICAN INDIAN POPULAR LITERATURE 

Peter vanLent , PhD 



C\ 

cn 



Native American Studies 
St. Lawrence University 



In their attempts to lead a dual-life experience, characters in popular 

literature written by and/or about Native American Indians occasionally enroll 

in institutions of higher education. Like many of their real-life 

counterparts very few of these student characters find the experience to be a 

positive undertaking. The basic thesis of this paper is that this narrative 

pattern reflects a tragic reality in American higher education today. 

# 

Normally, I am wary of drawing too close a parallel between literary 
situations and real life experience. What makes the "stuff" of good 
literature is very often not what we encounter in our everyday lives. In this 
case, however, literary fiction and social reality are closely aligned. The 
reasons why literary students are unhappy in their fictional college 
experience correspond to the reasons that real life American Indians have a 
low rate of success in higher education. 

This paper will deal with four novels which target specific problems 
encountered by Native students in college. 

Example 1. Louis Owen's novel Wolf song , 

In Wolf song higher education does not create an undue amount of trauma 
in a young Native person's life, but it is hardly depicted as a positive 
experience. Within the mechanics of the plot, Tom Joseph's absence from his 
home community of Forks in the state of Washington to attend college at the 
University of California at Santa Barbara functions primarily as a literary 
device designed to provide for the 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 




received from the person or organization 
originating it. 




□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



2 






TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



1 



structure of social and personal return. At the very beginning of the story 
Tom returns home from college for the funeral of his uncle who has died 
protesting the destruction of certain important land areas for a mine. Tom 
ends up by staying in his town of Forks and taking up the resistance effort of 
his dead uncle. Returning to college in California is never a very strong 
option for him. As he says in his own words: "I didn't fit in down 

there". [73] As he readjusts to being home, he thinks back to the contrasting 
experience of trying to adapt to American college life. There is little in 
these memories to draw him back to his studies. The pattern that emerges is 
that of a student with no successful socialization. He did not join any of 
the student activities and did not return his roommate's feelings of 
brotherhood. [18] Even with the environmentalist students with whom he should 
have shared a concern for nature, he felt alienated. [126] He was aware of 
certain spiritual forces in the land on which the campus was built, but none 
of the other students, even the Native ones, shared this. [64] In fact, he 

recalls that, while at college, he "never talked at all. "[182] His one sexual 
encounter with a woman student whom he described as "L.A. beautiful" was based 
mainly on her exotic appeal. The sex had no meaning since it was with a "girl 
he didn't know. "[160] Cynically, Tom concludes that a school like UC Santa 
Barbara is not really interested in minority students such as him, but accepts 
them and sustains them just to satisfy Affirmative Action requirements. 




3 



The only experience at Santa Barbara that has any lasting impact on Tom's 
life is the relationship with his roommate, McBride, who has a very strong 
Native American identity and heritage even though he is only one eighth 
American Indian. An enrolled Flathead raised in his culture, McBride is 
totally comfortable in both the Native world and the White world. At first 
McBride serves primarily as a character contrast to Tom in the flashbacks to 
college life. However, he goes on to become a major player in the plot when 
he visits Tom in Washington state after the funeral . McBride comes to 
understand the difficulties of Tom's life in his community and wisks him off 
to a traditional sweat with some of his own Native friends . The sweat and the 
persons' he meets there do impress Tom and are a major confirmation of his 
desire to identify with his heritage. He owes this to McBride whom he met at 
college, but these events happen miles from the campus and have nothing to do 
with his academic experience. He could have met McBride in the Army, in a 
bar, anywhere. . . College ends up being for Tom a memory of a lonely, 
friendless period of time spent away from home. 

Example 2: Joel Monture's new novel, Turtle Belly . 

What can be described as asocial maladjustment to college in Wolfsong 
becomes blatant antisocial behavior in Joel Monture's new novel, Turtle Belly . 
The first part of this novel tells of the upbringing of a half-blood Mohawk 
boy, Sam Turtle Belly, by his mother's family on the 





Six Nations Reserve in Ontario. Sam's artistic talent is noted early on and 
he is awarded an art scholarship to Dartmouth College. The second part of the 
novel is devoted to Sam's experiences at Dartmouth. While the major narrative 
focus is on his romantic/ sexual relationship with a waitress-prostitute, the 
reader is given ample opportunity to witness the painfully negative 
interaction between student and college. Even before he arrives at Dartmouth 
Sam is in a defiant state of mind. He has heard enough about this "rich- 
boys'," snobby school to be quite sure that he doesn't "belong in a place like 
this." [189] Before even setting foot on campus, Sam is displaying resistive 
behavior. In his own words: 

And so I arrived at Dartmouth College--late for registration, 
drunk with a black eye, towing along a. waitress named Judy 
in an unbuttoned pink uniform and a hair net. I told the 
admissions officer handing out packets with room keys that 
Judy was my sister. I don't think he believed me. 

I didn't give a shit. [189] 

From this point on it seems as if Dartmouth and Sam are competing viciously to 
see which is more to blame for this pitiful mismatch of student and college. 
Dartmouth is hardly portrayed as a healthy academic environment. Seim's 
studies totally fail to excite or involve him. He is on an art scholarship, 
but his three courses for the first trimester are cultural anthropology, 
classical mythology and chemistry, a course choice undoubtedly dictated by the 
need to. fulfill distribution requirements. The faculty is securely in the 
"old grey men" category, too enamoured of the academic research process to see 
any value in the life experience of a young Native man, and prone to being 
pompous and vengeful. The "buttoned up" Dean of Freshmen admonishes Sam to 




5 



g 



"straighten up" his act [189] and puts him on social probation before he has 
attended his first class. [190] Sam, on the other hand, doesn't really give 
his studies the "old college try." He cuts classes, is late for others, and 
in one case involves a professor in an unfair confrontation on the subject of 
ritual tobacco usage. Sam has an equal lack of success in the social scene at 
Dartmouth. He prefers the company of his waitress/prostitute friend Judy to 
that of the girls from "good women's colleges" who visit Dartmouth and insults 
the one woman from Bennington who seems open to his company. While hardly 
unaccustomed to the effects of alcoholism and inappropriate behavior, Sam is 
turned off by the scenes of vomiting and public urination that he sees at 
fraternity parties and in his dorm. He is convinced that the students at 
Dartmouth are very "rough on people" [202] and sees evidence of their snobbery 
and elitism everywhere. To Dartmouth's credit, Sam's maladjustment is noted, 
and the administration sends a Navajo upperclassman, Vincent Begaye, to his 
room to talk with him. But, as was the case with Tom Joseph, a fellow Native 
student is not able to help. Like McBride, Vincent is lightyears from Sam in 
his ability to deal with the White dominated college culture. His idea of 
cheering Sam up is to bring him to a fraternity party, not a successful 
situation as noted above. Sam quickly decides that Vincent is "one of 
them. "[202] Sam survives his first trimester, although he does get a D from 
his anthropology professor. However, the first time he gets access to a car, 
he drives home, and the reader is quite sure he will never return to 
Dartmouth. His final feelings are those of alienation and disdain for the 



ERIC 



6 



White college establishment where people have to "buy their knowledge at these 
here colleges" [193 ] because "...white men don't learn anything at home. "[193] 
The reader concludes that indeed both Sam and Tom Joseph seem to have learned 
more "at home" than at college. Tom was accepted to Santa Barbara on a 
athletic scholarship, but we never read about his being involved in a single 
hour of sports at college. Likewise, we never read of Sam's taking an art 
course or doing any art work and that was the basis for his scholarship at 
Dartmouth. 

Example 3: Tony Hillerman's First Eagle . 

Both of Hillerman's principal crime solving characters, ‘Joe Leaphorn and 
Jim Chee, are college graduates. They both are enrolled Navajos and occupy 
important positions in law enforcement agencies thanks to their college 
degrees. In nearly all of his mysteries, Hillerman relates that both men 
search back in their minds from time to time trying to find valuable 
information which they learned in college which might help them solve the 
murders in which they are involved. They usually don't find much. What they 
do remember is described as "vague, " [90] , and the image which Hillerman paints 
of higher education in First Eagle shows us why. The faculty who are supposed 
to be inspiring students are depicted as negligent members of a "good-old-boy 
network" [94 ] . The typical instructor, like Chee's biology professor, makes 
"no effort to hide his boredom with basic undergraduate courses nor his 
disdain for the ignorance of his students ." [133 ] . Even Leaphorn's professor 
girlfriend admits that "Academics have to be boredom- invulnerable . " 

Otherwise, they would have to go out and get "real jobs. "[158] The 



O 

ERIC 



7 



7 



undergraduate curriculum is heavy on required courses, "dreaded" exams, and 
coursework which only reflects the narrow interests of the faculty. In his 
first semester at Arizona State, Joe Leaphorn may have learned that not all 
Whites look alike, but there is nowhere in any of the Hillerman novels 
reference to close friends made in college who are non-Native. In another 
novel, Chee recalls that most of the curiosity which the Native and non-Native 
students had for each other never progressed beyond the realm of sex. Rather 
than investing him with an openminded approach to diverse cultures, (and he 
was an anthropology major!) Leaphorn remembers that he returned from Arizona 
State "full of new-won college sophistication and cynicism" [50] which made it 
painful for him to accommodate those parts of his intellectual and spiritual 
being which continued to acknowledge his traditional beliefs . At best a 
college education seems to serve only as a meal ticket to a good job for 
Hillerman' s policeman characters. 

Example 4 . Agoak by Yves Theriault 

The final and by far the most disturbing literary example of the negative 
effects of higher education on a Native person is found in the novel Agoak by 
the Quebec writer Yves Theriault. Agoak is a young Inuit who is descended 
from the character Agaguk which is the title of Theriault's best known work 
and upon which the movie "Shadow of the Wolf" was based. Agoak was born in a 
relatively small Inuit community, but distinguished himself through his keen 




8 



8 



intelligence and aptitude for conventional education. He took two study trips 
to Montreal and Toronto, completed a course in accounting and in data 
processing, set out for Frobisher Bay, now known as Iqaluit where he 
successfully landed a job in a bank. He then returns to this home town, 
marries his boyhood sweetheart, brings her to Frobisher and sets up a happy 
home there. Judith, the wife, finds a job as a waitress in the town. One 
night two drunken "rich White tourists" [105] follow her home from the 
restaurant, break into the house, and rape her since "She's only a 
native! " [94] . Agoak returns home just as the attack is taking place, kills 
the two Whites, and mutilates their bodies. Fearing that, as an Inuit, he 
would not receive justice at the hands of the White law establishment, Agoak 
steals a dog team and sled and flees with his wife across the frozen tundra. 
The second half of the novel depicts the disintegration of Agoak' s personality 
and character as he and his wife struggle to survive in flight. He loses his 
ability to communicate effectively with his wife, turns to physically abusing 
her, murders a family of former friends whom they happen to encounter, kills 
two Mounties who find the couple, and finally, when his wife gives birth to a 
daughter, he kills the baby by smashing its head with his rifle butt. As 
this horrible saga unfolds, we follow the thinking of Judith, the wife, as she 
contemplates the role of Agoak 's education in precipitating this awful 
tragedy. Judith progressively wonders how the "civilizing effect" of White 
education could be so quickly cast off by her husband. Next, she blames his 



ERIC 



9 



9 



education for propelling him and them both into the foreign world of the 
Whites where they were prey to racial hatred, violence, and injustice. 

Finally, she wonders if the effect of his education was to strip him of a 
sense of humanity he might have found in his people's traditional culture 
leaving him with no White values and no indigenous ones, in short nothing but 
a savage, animalistic reflex of killing to survive. Thankfully, most Native 
college graduates do not experience this degree of moral collapse, but, like 
Agoak, many do find that once they have an education, they are not assured of 
"living happily ever after." Racial prejudice and cultural alienation can 
still haunt the lives of the best educated Native peoples putting them in 
precarious, sometimes painful, personal and professional situations. 
Furthermore, the price for successful employment based on education is often 
the loss of contact with one's traditional Native roots. As we see in the 
case of Janet Pete in the Hillerman series, this can cast a damaging cloud 
over one's whole life. 

Drawing from statistical analysis as well as my twenty years of 
experience teaching and counseling Native American students, I know that it is 
safe to say that reality collates with the negative image of higher education 
in American Indian popular literature. Only 17% of Native people in the 
United States attempt a post -secondary education, and 75% of these leave 
before graduation. [Morris] 50% of Native students fail to complete their 
first year. [Wells, p. 87] Only 4% of American Indians graduate with a B . A . or 




10 



B.S. degree . [Morris ] The primary reasons for this failure of our education 
system with Native people have been outlined in the novels discussed above: 
social maladjustment, disinterested faculty, irrelevant curriculum, lack of a 
support network, alienation from personal heritage, racism, etc. What to do? 
If we set aside the question of establishing tribal colleges, it is probably 
wise to attack the non-academic problems first. To overcome socialization 
problems, loneliness, and alienation colleges and universities might create 
Native residence halls, wings, or suites where American Indian students and 
others who are interested in Native heritage can form a community of support 
and education within the institution. Despite the examples of negative Native 
student interaction we have noted here, experience has shown that, rather than 
isolating them from the campus, Native residences give the students a secure 
sense of a home base. This sense of security encourages them to stay in 
school and permits them to venture forth into the college community as a 
whole. Hiring Native counselors and mandating them to facilitate positive 
peer communication and to organize tutoring programs can make Indian students' 
college years more positive. Often upperclass students have to be made aware 
of the need for giving support, perhaps through big brother/big sister type 
bonding, and this makes allies out of potential off-putting "big shots." 
Secondly, within the academic realm, encouraging the development of Native 
Studies programs, working to insert Indian components into exisiting courses, 
and organizing Native cultural events awakens the entire college community to 




11 



11 



Native contributions to the mosiac of American culture. It also builds self- 
esteem among the Indian students . 

The greatest contribution that the United States has made to the history 
of education is the undergraduate college/university experience. Of all 
American ethnic groups, Native peoples benefit from and participate in this 
opportunity the least. After taking so much from them, we are neglecting to 
find an effective way to give them back something that we have created which 
could be of value in their lives. 



O 

ERIC 



12 



Works Consulted 



Hi Herman, Tony. The First Eagle . HarperCollins : New York, 1998. 

Monture, Joel. Turtle Belly . University of Oklahoma Press: Norman, 1998. 

Morris, Linda. "Planning Strategies for Successful Student Transition." 

Proceedings, Retain '96 . University of Arizona Press: Tucson, AZ 
1996. p. 27. 

Owens, Louis. Wolf song . University of Oklahoma Press: Norman, 1995. 

0 

Theriault, Yves. Agoak . McGraw-Hill: Toronto, 1979. 

Wells, Robert N. , Jr. Native American Resurgence and Renewal . Scarecrow 
Press: Metuchen, NJ, 1994. 




13 



Would, you like to put your paper 




c itfTXlIC? .Please send a clean, dark copy! . WL« 

r^iy ^ 

USspeMctirfent of Education 

Educatidrfal Research and Improvement ( OERI) ■■■ 



® 



Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 

I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 




2 i G "3 



TitiP- Paper presented at the Annual Joint Meetings of the Popular Culture Assn. /American 

. At a ^ , Culture Assn. (San Diego) 

. ^ V VAic^UeVr i »*■ A y\AxSU.A\^ ^AxX_ U V 4 v 



Author(s): 9eL=>r 



Corporate Source: 



SX • CU\ v 



Publication Date: 

Mar. 31-Apr. 3, 1999 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 

affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2A documents affixed to all Level 2B documents 







PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 






PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 




DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 


DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 




MICROFICHE, AND IN ELECTRONIC MEDIA 




DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL IN 


BEEN GRANTED BY 




FOR ERIC COLLECTION SUBSCRIBERS ONLY, 




MICROFICHE ONLY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 






HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 










* - 






c/ 9 








cP 


TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




*mS 

TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 


1 




2A 




2B 



Level 1 


Level 2A 


Level 2B 




t 




i 


t 




X 




□ 


□ 


Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination In microfiche or other ERIC archival 
media (e.g„ electronic) endpaper copy. 


Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination In microfiche and In electronic media 
for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 


Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 
reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 



Documents will be processed as Indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted , but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 




1 hereby grant to the Educational Resources information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 


to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 






r— { 


Printed Name/PostfiorVTrtie: , r 


Ofoanlzallon/Addreta: ^ n 


'“^Tj-22 ? -58«7 


FA *3 


E-Mail Address: _ , 

Pvmw 0WVOSVC • vt 


Da,e: 




t_Pt uJ O * ^ 


4 / 

(over) 



(over) 





III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to die the availability of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publidy 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 




IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 




2805 E. Tenth Street 
Smith Research Center, 150 
Indiana University 
Bloomington, IN 47408 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

‘ERIC Processing and Reference FacHtty 
41 00 W e s t-S treet, 2 nd Fl o o r 
L a ur el, Mary la n d -20707-359 8 

T elephone: 301»437-400fr 
To l l r r ee r-8 00 - 700 - 37 4 2 
-F AX ; 30 1-0 S 0 02 C 3 

.e-mail- aricfac@lnfli ed.gov 
WWW : h t tp:// erl cfac. pl cca rd .csc.co m-- 

ERIC 18 ( Rev - 9/97 ) 

ajciaaBii DUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORM ARE OBSOLETE. 



