DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 366 589 SP 035 015 

AUTHOR Bloodsworth, Gaston; Fitzgerald, Doris 

TITLE A Multicultural Model for Rural At-Risk Students. 

PUB DATE [93] 

NOTE 15p. 

PUB TYPE Viewpoints (Opinion/Position Papers, Essays, etc.) 
(120) 



EDRS PRICE MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS Academic Achievement; Cooperative Learning; Cultural 
Awareness; Elementary School Students; Elementary 
Secondary Education; Higher Education; High Risk 
Students; ^Integrated Curriculum; Language Arts; 
Minority Groups; ^Multicultural Education; *Rural 
Education; *Rural Youth; Secondary School Students; 
Self Concept; Social Studies; Student 
Characteristics; Teacher Attitudes; *Teacher 
Education Curriculum; ^Teaching Models 



ABSTRACT 

Education reform mandates that teachers be able to 
function competently in multicultural classrooms. This paper 
describes a culturally aware teaching model designed to address the 
problems and needs of rural at-risk students. The major goal of the 
model is to empower students through acceptance, understanding, 
respect, and appreciation of both the self and other cultures. The 
pedagogical ly nontraditional model, developmental in nature, stresses 
a common culture curriculum that includes contributions of Black, 
Native American, Hispanic, Asian, and religious minorities within the 
student population. The program integrates social studies and 
language arts to form a core curriculum and draws heavily from 
literature as a means of teaching much of the content area. Emphasis 
is placed not on the textbook, but on creative experiences developed 
through the unit approach and the use of appropriate literature. To 
match the unique learning styles and characteristics of rural 
students, cooperative learning experiences are introduced. This 
approach enhances the self-worth of rural at-risk students and 
strengthens the positive correlations between self-concept and school 
achievement, thus reducing the at-risk factor. (Contains 22 
references.) (LL) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made Vc 

* from the original document. * 



ON 
00 

to 

SO 

Q 

Ed 



\ MULTICULTURAL MODEL FOR RURAL AT-RISK STUDENTS 



BY 



GASTON BLOODSWORTH, ED.D. 
SCHOOL OF EDUCATION 
UNIVERSITY OF SOUTH CAROLINA-AIKEN 



AND 



DORIS FITZGERALD , ED.D, 
SCHOOL OF EDUCATION 
LANDER UNIVERSITY 



"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
MATERIAL HAS BESN GRANTED BY 



t St. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



U.t. OCMRTMCNT Or EDUCATION 
Oflica of Educational Raaaarch and tmprovemant 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

□ This doc urn ant hat baan fa produced aa 
racarvad from tha paraon or organization 
originating it 

D Minor changaa hava baan mada to improva 
raproductrofl Quality 

a Point tot viaw or cpiniona tlatad in thitdOCu- 
mant do not nacasaanly i*pratani oNiciat 

OERI position or policy 



ERIC 



A MULTICULTURAL MODEL FOR RURAL AT-RISK STUDENTS 
by Gaston Bloodsworth and Doris Fitzgerald 

INTRODUCTION 

Much has been written about multicultural education in 
teacher training programs and its implementation in public school 
classrooms since NCATE added its 1979 criterion that preservice 
teachers be able to function competently in multicultural class- 
rooms. However, we cannot lay claim to successful outcomes in 
either area. Peter Scales (1992) has provided sobering data 
obtained through questionnaires from 439 middle school teachers, 
deans, and chief state school officials. This group reported that 
they found their teacher preparation had prepared them "inade- 
quately" or "poorly" for several areas of classroom teaching. 
They rated cultural and language diversity as the area in which 
they were least adequately prepared. This information, gathered 
on the heels of the many multicultural education models imple- 
mented during the 1980' s, points out the lack of success of t hese 
models in teacher preparation programs. 

Gezi (1981) summarized the five major approaches to multi- 
cultural education as : 

1. Education for the culturally different, with a focus on 
helping to equalize educational opportunities for such 
students 

2. Education about cultural differences, with an aim to 
cul tural understanding 

3. Education to preserve cultural pluralism 

4. Education to help children function in two cultures 

5 . Education to deve lop compc Lencies in multiple systems 

The authors of this paper believe an effective design for 

1 



addressing the NCATE criterion would be to combine the five 
approaches and form a unified approach that focuses on the indi- 
vidual or the self. This would assist college and university 
students and 1heir school pupils to value students from 
culturally diverse backgrounds, while learning to appreciate the 
larger human heritage. 

One approach to this challange is to use multicultural mater 
ials from an integrated Social Studies and Language Arts curric- 
ulum. This approach is especially effective as a means of enhanc 
ing the self-worth of rural at-risk students. The use of this 
model will strengthen the positive correlation between self 
concept and school achievement, thus reducing the at-risk factor 
for these students. 

SELF CONCEPT THEORY 

Interest in the self has been evident in Amer ican psychol ogy 
since the beginning of the twentieth century, but it has been 
the behavior-oriented psychologists who have dom inated the field. 
Rogers !1969) described the self as the central aspect of person- 
ality. He and Maslow (1954) both wrote about the tendency toward 
self-actualization and growth when nurtured by the environmemt. 
They, with Allport (1955), described life as the art of becoming, 
the movement toward sel f -actual izat i on . 

Combs and Snygg (1949) provides a strong foundation for de- 
veloping an understanding of the importance of the self and self 
concept in the learning process. Since 1960, numerous studies of 
the relationship between the self concept and academic achievement 



have been conducted. Purkey (1970) gives an excellent overview of 



many of them. He states: 

Although the data does not provide clear-cut evidence about 
which come first - a positive self concept or academic 
success, a negative self concept or scholastic failure - it 
does stress a strong reciprocal relationship and gives us 
reason to assume that enhancing the self concept is a vital 
influence in improving academic performance. (p. 27) 

There is a natural connection between the individual or the 

the self and multicultural education. According to Ramsey (1989), 

the purposes of the mul t icul tural approach are : 

...to sensitize all individuals toward ethnic and racial 
differences, and to increase individual awareness of 
cultural traditions and sociological experiences. It was 
also to help all individuals understand their race and cul- 
ture, including language and socialization experiences, had 
value, and could and should exist on a coequal basis with 
mainstream American values and experiences . ( pp 8,9) 

Since the emphasis is on the individual, the self, It is 

possible to use multicultural materials to foster the development 

of a positive "self concept that will, in turn, promote positive 

school achievement . 



CHARACTERISTICS OF RURAL AT-RISK STUDENTS 



Regardless of one's race, gender, or culture, 1 he one factor 
that has the greatest probability to place a child at-risk of 
school failure is simply being poor. It is well documented that 
low socioeconomic levels are closely related to poor academic 
achievement (Chall and Curtis, 1991). Evidence from most studies 
indicates that socioeconomic status affects school performance and 
achievement more than any other variable, including race. 

While statis! ics dealing with the number of children living 
in poverty vary, all are staggering. The Center for Study of 



Social Policy (1991) lists the national average at 26 percent, 
while Reed and Sautter (1990) found that children accounted for 
39.5 percent of the nation's poor. 

Contrary to widely held beliefs, poverty is not limited to 
the inner cities nor does it follow racial boundaries. The ma- 
jority of poor people still live in small towns and rural areas 
(Reed and Sautter,). Typically, rural areas have 30 percent of 
the farm population and 24 percent of the nonfarm population 
living in poverty (Rodgers and Burge, 1982). Thus the population 
of rural at-risk students is extremely high, with the majority of 
unseved and underserved children living in these areas (Helge, 
1988). Without question, poverty and low socioeconomic status 
have affected the achievement of many rural students. 

The home life of the student is another important at-risk 
factor and it is often related to poverty and socioeconomic class. 
If the family does not have a background of educational attainment 
or does not support education, the student has a much greater 
chance of dropping out (Coleman, 1988). In general, students with 
poor family relationships and little or no parental involvement in 
their education are more at-risk (Bull, et al , 1992). Abuse and 
related dysfunctional factors also play a major role in the 
child's self roncept and academic achievement. Clearly, the more 
dysfunctional the family becomes, the greater the student becomes 
at-risk. 

Problems at school are yet another mul t i - f ace ted factor that 
is characteristic of the at-risk student and oft*n leads to drop- 
out. Problems such as retention, conflict, failing too many 



classes, competency tests, and the school's lack of tolerance for 
student diversity in background have been cited by Bull (Bull, et 
al, 1992). Other studies have found that many of the problems of 
at-risk students are created by the schools, Grossman (1991) 
cites numerous examples indicating working cla^a students ( lower 
socioeconomic) receive unfair treatment in school that can create 
problems for those students. He found they receive less attention 
and fewer rewards, but more disciplinary actions, often corporal 
or verbal punishment and suspension . He also found that most of 
the teachers were not aware of their biases* One has to wonder 
how much of this is brought about by poorly trained teachers who 
are in rural classrooms because of state policies of inequities 
in dealing with rural districts ( Bloodsworth , 1993). 

Minority students have to deal with the above factors as well 
as ones that are unique to them as minorities. They may look 
different due to racial or ethnic features and there is evidence 
that minority students do not perform or behave in the classroom in 
the same manner as do their Anglo peers ( Hale- Benson , 1986). They 
may have to adjust to cultural values, language, or teaching styles 
that are totally alien to them, but must continue to function in 
their own cultures outside school. They must also deal with the 
problems of prejudice. This may be racial, cultural, social, or 
economic, and can take many forms, both subtle and overt. It may 
well take the form of being academically suspect because as a grotip 
minorities will not achieve at the level of their mainstream peers. 
As a result, they may be lcibeled low achievers and will not be 
academically challanged and will fall farther behind and become 



more at-risk (Ornstein and Levine, 1989). 

Thus minorities become low achievers and highly at-risk often 
as a result of the educational system itself. Yet teachers and 
administrators are often not aware of what they are doing to these 
students and the students' self-esteem, nor are they aware of the 
rich cultural heritage the students may possess. 

One does not have to look different physically in order 
to receive the same treatment. Since socioeconomic class is a 
fairly good predictor of achievement in school, then underclass 
white:^ as a group are also low achievers. And they are also 
minorities. Ornstcin and Levine stated "...their problems are 
often ignored because they are not well organized as a group 
and are not deemed newsworthy by the media. " 

In addrosssing the highly at-risk multicultural rural popula- 
tions one must consider the real meaning of multicultural. More 
often than not, it is thought of in terms of a global world and 
the exotic differences among* cultures, or, more commonly in educa- 
tional textbooks, as related to minority groups, usually blacks 
and Hispanics, with only a passing reference to Native Americans 
and other minorities. Usually it is the poor inner city popula- 
tion that is stressed. Almost always multicultural education 
is addressed on the urban level. Perhaps this is a major cause 
for multicultural education programs to be less effective than 
desired in teacher preparation programs. 

Mul ticul tural ism goes far beyond this. The diversity of 
cultures within rural areas is commonly overlooked. Often there 
is more diversity within a given rural area than there is between 

6 

ERLC 8 



rural and Urban areas (Pepple 1990). Rural America is not 
homogeneous and there are many rural minor i t ies that have never 
received due recognition or have been overlooked. When one con- 
siders not only race and ethnic background, but includes socio- 
economic factors, religion, and specific and unique cultures, we 
become aware o f many groups that have not been proper! y addressed , 
yet educators must deal with them and their unique needs on a dail 
bas is „ Far too often these students are not only highly at-risk 
academically, but are also higly at-risk in developing as produc- 
tive members of society. 

The multicultural education approach provides the best oppor- 
tunity to reach a diverse population. Understanding and appre- 
ciating other cultures is the very foundation of multicultural 
education, yet there is d i sag reement over how it should be handled 
Many believe the goals of the schools should be to teach and pre- 
serve the separate identities of the racial and ethnic cultures 
and not teach a common American culture. Some go so far as to 
teach contempt for anything white or European (Ravitch, 1991). 

Probably the majority of educators believe we should teach 
our common culture, but include the contributions of other cul- 
tures. In a New York survey of educators reported in the American 
Teacher (1992), 88 percent believed we should teach a common 
heritage. Blacks and Hispanics showed the strongest preference 
with 89 percent and 87 percent. Only 70 percent of the whites 
supported this position. 

The authors of this paper believe the most positive approach 
to using multicultural education is to teach a true common culture 



curriculum that includes the contributions of minorities and other 
cultures, with special attention paid to those in the* student pop- 
ulation. In so doing, an understanding, appreciation, and respect 
for other cultures becomes a major rioal . 

IMPLEMENTATION OF THE MODEL 

In using this approach teachers may have to change their 
teaching styles. It calls for more interaction among the students 
and is more global than traditional pedagogy. Rural students are 
global learners who do not seek individual recognition and they do 
not like individual competition (Potterfield and Pace, 1992). They 
ilso like information to be given to them orally. Clearly, they 
are not at home in the typical urban or urban influenced classroom, 
so it is imperative that the teachers adapt their teaching styles 
to the student's needs. 

When properly done, the cooperative learning approach is a 
natural for rural students. It allows for interaction and hands-on 
activities in a group setting. Work is within the group and it is 
the group that receives the recognition. Working together for a 
common goal brings the students together in a different manner 
than does individual competion. It is also an excellent means of 
assisting students who have trouble dealing with time frame 
situations because of the interaction with and the progress of the 
group. Also learning becomes a social experience. It also creates 
a warm and friendly environment that reduces hostility. With a 
caring teacher and appropriate learning activities, cooperative 
multicultural education can go a long way toward addressing the 

8 

• 1 0 

ERLC lv 



needs of at-risk rural students. It will also enhance the learning 
of the other students as well as produce citizens who are aware of 
the worth of each individual in our society. 

There is also a need for an integrated approach to teach ing . 
Content information does not exist in a vacuum. There is corre- 
lation between and among the information from the various content 
areas. If any content information is to become relevant to the 
student, most especially the at-risk student, it must be presented 
in a manner that will inspire the student to personalize and apply 
it. to his or her daily life, This approach goes well with the 
strong global learning style of rural, students. 

With this approach the language arts become t he primary 
tools of communication: reading, writing, speaking, listening, 
thinking, and visioning. From this perspective, social studies 
becomes the content area and language arts the vehicle for an 
integrated approach to the teaching and learning processes. 

In dealing with specific cultures, the teacher must avoid 
ethnocentr ism and recognize that each culture is an entity that 
has an intrinsic value of Its own. Understanding this, the 
teacher can now draw from the various cultures as the basis for a 
multicultural approach to integrated instruction. 

Special attention must be given to the individual cultures 
of the area. Often this uill Include cultures so specific and 
unique that their problems may not have been addressed outside the 
immediate area, and the students who are members may well be among 
the highly at-risk population. The Travelers of Edgefield and 
Aiken Counties in South Carolina are excellent examples of this 



9 

11 



phenomenon . 

Thoro w i. 1 1 be other g roups who are also mi nor i \. ies , but may 
not, always be thought of as such. These may be large or small 
groups, almost always white, who possess common factors such as 
socioeconomic class or culture. A textile or mill village resident, 
of t he southeast would be an example . 

! 

Rural blacks, while always identified as minorities because I 

i 

they are black, are different from urban blacks. And they need to 

be dealt with as members of their own culture, not collectively as j 

blacks. There are different rural black cultures and all have made 

contributions to the overall American culture. The Qullahs of the 

sea islands of South Carolina are an example of a unique rural 

black cul Cure . 

The Native American population is also a rural minority of 
many distinct cultures. They vary greatly from the Indian stereo- 
typo portrayed in popular literature and media, but they share 
the common denominator in that they are all highly at-risk. 

There are migrant worker children who may be white, black, or 
Hispanic, and are members of Lhe lowest socioeconomic class, They 
are also among the highest of the at-risk population, yet they 
have much to offer in an integrated multicultural approach when 
their cultures and vast experiences are shared, respected, and 
apprec i.» i- ed . 

There are other rural populations that are also highly at- 
risk. Hispanics, while depicted primarily as urban in most 
educational literature, are also rural minorities. Still other 
cultures, such as Asian ones, especially South East Asian, exist 

10 

° 1 2 

ERLC lc 



in certain rural areas. 

Then there are the religious minorities. They may be 
segregated from most other cultures of the area, or semi- integrated 
into some, and the choice may or may not be theirs. At any rate, a 
unique and distinct culture emerges that may stress different 
values , modes of dress , and conduc t . 

The authors believe the needs of rural at-risk students can 
be met through this integrated curricum model. Unit teaching, 
incorporating ttie use of cooperative learning groups, a positive 
classroom climate based on tthe development of trust between 
teachers and students, and an emphasis on the unconditional 
acceptance of each individual and his or her culture are essential 
elements of this approach. This viable model recognizes the 
essence and validity of developmental learning. The development 
of appropriate, functional language skills related to real life, 
as well as sufficient communication skills to maintain a role as 
an active participant in the educational process of the school will 
empower the student. This empowerment, in turn, is a major con- 
tributor to the development of a positive sel f -concept , enabling the 
student to combat the sense of powerlessness which has long been 
acknowledged as a major cause for dropping out of school. 

Within the parameters of this unit teaching model, content 
material from both the social studies curriculum and the language 
arts curriculum will be blended. Children's and adolescent 
literature will be used as the natural bridge between the two 
curriculums. This merger becomes the basic component of the model. 

11 

ERIC 1 3 



CONCLUSIONS 

This multicultural education model is one approach to 
addressing the problems and needs of the rural at-risk students . 
The underlying basis of the model is the acceptance, understanding, 
and appreciation of the individual and his or her culture. This 
must take place between and among the teacher and the students and 
is accomplished as the teacher integrates facets of the various 
cultures into the overall instructional program. Differences, 
commonalities, explanations of customs and beliefs, and the like 
can be shared, and as a result understood and appreciated. 

The model is developmental in nature and addresses the 
educational level of the individual. And it is integrated in 
that the social studies and language arts are brought together 
to form the core curriculum. But it draws heavily from literature 
and uses it as a means of teaching much of the content area. It 
uses the instructional unit as the creative means of bringing every- 
thing together. Emphasis is not placed on the textbook, but rather 
on creative experiences developed through the unit approach and the 
use of appropriate Literature. And to meet the unique needs of 
rural students, the cooperative learning concept is used. 

The resulting learning experiences will enhance the self 
worth of the rural at-risk students. And with this comes 
empowerment and a positive self concept that can in turn bring 
about academic success . 



12 

O 

ERLC 



REFERENCES 



Allport, G.W. (1955) Becoming. New Haven: Yale University Press 
American Teacher . (July, 1992). The case for a common heritage. 
Bloodsworth, G. (1993). Rural education: Is it the step-child of 

today's educational policy makers? Teacher Education Journal of 

South Carolina . 1(1), 13. 
Bull, K.S., Salyer, K . , Montegomery, D., &Hyle, A. (1992). The 

drop-out problem: Rural educator's perspections of intervention 

priorities. Rural S pecial Education Qu arterl y. 11(3), 3-13. 
Center for the Study of Social Policy. (1991). Kids count data 

book: Stat e pro files of child well-being . Washington: Author. 
Chall, J., & Curtis, M. (1991). Children at risk. In J. Flood et 

al ( Eds . ) , Hand b ook of research on teaching the english 

language arts . New York: McMillan. 
Coleman, J.S. (Feb., 1988). Social capital in the development of 

human capital: The ambiguous position of private schools. 

(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No ED 293942). 
Combs, A.W., & Snygg, D. (1959). Individual behavior. 2nd ed . 

New York: Harper & Row. 
Gezi, K. (1981). Issues in multicultural education. ER&i 

E ducational Research Q uarterly . 6 , 5-14. 
Grossman, H. (1991). Multicultural classroom management. 

Contemporary Education . 6 2 ( 1 3 ) , 1 S 1- 1 66 . 
Hale-Benson, J. (1986). Black children - their roots , culture , 

and lear ning . Baltimore: Johns Hopkins Press. 
Helge, D. (1988). Serving at-risk populations in rural America. 

Teaching Exceptional Children . 20(Summer), 16-18. 
Maslow, A.H. (1954). Motivatio n and personalit y. New York: 

Harper & Row. 

Ornstein, A.C., & Levine, D.U. (1989). Social class, race, and 

school achievement: Problems and prospects. Journal of Teacher 

Education . 37(1), 17-22. 
Pepple, J.D., Law, A.L., & Kallembach, S.C. (1990). A vision of 

rural education for 2001. Educational Horizons . 69 (3 ), 50-58. 
PoLterfield. J.E., & Pace, M.B. (1992). Learning style, culture 

and popular instructional methods. SRATE Journal . 1(1), 40-42. 
Purkey, W. (1970). Self concept and s chool achievement . 

Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. 
Ramsey, P.G., Void, E.B., & Williams, L.R. (1989). Multicultural 

education : A source book . New York: Garland. 
Ravitch, D. (1991). A culture in common. Educationa l Leadership 

49( 1 1 ) , 34-35. . 

Reed, S., & Sautter, R.C. (1990). Children of poverty. Phi Delta 

Kappan . 71(10), K1-K12. 
Rodgers, E.M., & Burge, R.J. (1992). So cial changes in rural 

socities . 2nd ed . Englewood Cliffs, N.J.: Prentice-Hall. 
Rogers, C.R. (1969). Freedom to learn. Columbus, Ohio : Merrill . 
Scales, P. (1992). Windows of opportunity: Improving middle grade 

te acher preparation . Carrboro, N.C.: University of North 

Carolina Center for Early Adolescence. 



ERIC 



13 

15 



