NEW JOURNALISM ON 

LATilMO 


CHILDREN 



Buenos dias! Good morning 


Implementing Dual-Language Programs in Illinois 


E ach weekday morning, Ms. Griselda 
Martinez wears a bright red or blue scarf 
to the classroom, an accessory that she uses 
in teaching her kindergartners at Salt Creek 
Elementary in a Chicago suburb. If the scarf is 
red, heryoung students knowto greet herwith 


their most enthusiastic “Buenos dias!” If the 
scarf is blue, the students start the day with an 
equally eager “Good morning!” Ms. Martinez’s 
kindergarten class is part of a growing trend in 
education: a dual-language (DL) program. 




The Dual Roots of Dual-Language Programs 

Bilingual education has taken center stage in Illinois with a new 
education mandate; many public preschools will be required to 
offer bilingual education to all three- and four-year-olds who do 
not speak English. Dual-language classrooms like Ms. Martinez’s 
represent one very promising model in bilingual education that is 
being used to develop these new preschool programs. 

The interest in bilingual education arises from two, disparate 
sources. On one hand, more than 1 in 5 schoolchildren in Illinois is 
Latino, and many are English-language learners. Recent research 
indicates that a DL approach to bilingual education may be the 
most effective way to teach these non-native speakers English, as 
well as nurture their academic skills generally (Collier & Thomas, 
2004). Dual-language programs offer children the chance to 
maintain— and gain literacy in— their home language while they 
become fluent in English and prepared to succeed in traditional 
classrooms. 


Dual-language programs offer children 
the chance to maintain — and gain literacy 
in — their home language while they become 
fluent in English and prepared to succeed in 
traditional classrooms. 


On the other hand, many native English-speakers have realized 
the benefits of fluency in more than one language in our 
increasingly multicultural and global society. And, as evidenced in 
Europe and most other countries with multilingual societies, they 
have noted that starting children on a second language at an early 
age facilitates fluency (Lindholm-Leary & Howard, 2008). In fact, 
many exclusive private schools are attracting new students with 
their strong second-language programs, starting in preschool. 

In Illinois, these two groups are coming together in DL preschools 
and kindergartens. Dual-language programming is characterized 
by developing high levels of proficiency in students’ home and 
second languages, through the division of classroom instruction 
in both. While different schools take various approaches, most of 
these classrooms also encourage cross-cultural understanding 
by splitting student enrollment between native-English-speaking 
and non-native English-speaking students, and encouraging 
family involvement. 



Inside the Classroom 

Ms. Martinez’s class of 24 students will stay together as a cohort 
through the fifth grade. Currently, it is the only DL kindergarten 
classroom in the district, and is not just unique, but popular: it 
has a waiting list (five native English-speakers and 10 Spanish). 
If room opens up, program administrators will accept new native 
Spanish-speakers, but have found that native English-speakers 
are too far behind in Spanish for late-entry after kindergarten. In 
fact, the typical native Spanish-speaker arrives in class the first 
day with some knowledge of English, as most were born in the 
United States and exposed to at least some English. In contrast, 
the average native English-speaker arrives with very limited 
Spanish, perhaps from being a fan of “Dora the Explorer.” 

Young students embrace their new language skills and fervently 
call out “scarf violations.” Starting on the first day, Ms. Martinez 
teaches 80% of the curriculum in Spanish and the other 20% in 
English. Surprisingly, despite their linguistic backgrounds, the 
children do not seem to miss a beat. A blonde-haired, blue-eyed 
student helps her teacher complete a Spanish -language sentence 
on the board; a native Spanish-speaking boy leads his classmates 
in counting down the remaining days of the month in English. 

While children are encouraged to speak in the (scarf-) designated 
language, they are initially allowed to respond in their language 
of choice. As fluency increases, however, so does the demand for 
sticking with the appropriate language. While differentiations 
are aptly made during lessons about which language should be 
spoken, parents note that their children make few distinctions 
among their classmates by native tongue. 

At Gary Elementary, in West Chicago, the DL program began in 
2000, and goes through the sixth grade, with two DL classrooms 
in most grades. The students in Ms. Gianna Gatto’s kindergarten 
class are also divided between native English- and Spanish- 
speakers, yet many of the native-English-speakers are second 
and third generation Latinos. Here, too, there are waiting lists for 
families eager to enroll their children. 

Ms. Gatto engages her young students with an animated game 
about the days of the week— currently in Spanish. A math lesson 
later in the day will be in English. She orients the language of 
lessons by subject area, according to her preferences. While the 
students break into groups by home language for their literacy 
lessons, about 80 percent of the kindergarten day occurs in 
Spanish. This allotment of lessons in Spanish gradually decreases 
until the curriculum is split evenly between Spanish and English 
in the fifth grade. Administrators note that they provide a lot of 
support to their DL teachers because the language balance is 
challenging in a demanding curriculum. 

And teachers aren’t the only ones experiencing the challenge. 
Fourth graders recall their first days in kindergarten when they 
were monolingual. “It was hard for me to begin Spanish, because 
I didn’t come from Mexico,” recounted one. Another concurred, 
“It was hard for me to learn English because my family doesn’t 
speak it.” Yet, in fourth grade they shift easily between the two 
languages, and tout the benefits of their knowing both: “I can talk 
to whomever I want— in English or Spanish!” 


“I can talk to whomever I want — in English or 
Spanish!” 

-A dual-language program 4th grader 







Currently, there are 48 dual-language (DL) 
programs in Illinois, including programs 
with Spanish and Japanese curricula. The 
recent expansion of DL programs, most 
notably in Chicago’s middle-class suburbs, 
promises to create a new generation of 
fully-bilingual students — many of whom 
will be the first in their White, monolingual 
English-speaking families to master another 
language. However, somewhat paradoxically, 
it is important to note that many of Illinois’ 
190,000 English-language-learners still have 
limited access to quality bilingual education. 
(Illinois Resource Center, 2009). 


Developing the DL Programs: Responses and 
Results 

Native Spanish-speaking parents express their enthusiasm about 
the dual-language program, both for its immediate benefits, 
and those in the future. For some families, these programs 
facilitate connections among the generations. One dual-language 
program parent explained that now her children, “...are able to 
communicate with the entire family. When we go back to Mexico, 
they can speak with their grandparents, and their aunts and 
uncles, who don’t speak any English.” In some cases, parents 
report that their children are actually learning more Spanish in 
schoolthan they would have at home, as another parent explained: 
“[My daughter has] learned a more academic level of Spanish than 
what she would have learned in the street.” Parents also see 
their children’s participation in the dual-language programs as 
a promising investment: “In the future, they will be able to find a 
good job, because there is high demand for bilingual people.” 

Native English-speaking parents talk of their excitement about 
broadening their children’s perspectives starting at a young age. 
As one explained, “This is when their minds are open and can 
soak in a language— not only learning details of it, but the sound 
of it, and really make it part of them.” While some of their friends 
and neighbors apparently voiced concerns about the DL students 
falling behind their peers in traditional classrooms, participating 
parents spoke of the strong curriculum, and the research showing 
that these bilingual children do better in school. 

Schools with DL programs, and those hoping to development them, 
are seeking out recent research on best practices, and learning 
from each other. As the new DL program was being developed at 
Salt Creek, parents teamed with school administrators to talk with 
those in other districts to find out about more about established 
programs. At both schools, program administrators reiterate that 
an essential part of creating a high-quality program is getting 
highly trained, dynamic teachers. Adaptations have been made 
to fit these recommendations to the schools’ student bodies and 
their resources— and the communities have responded. 


At times, the reaction at both schools has not been all positive; 
there have been instances in which the DL programs seem to 
have activated anti-immigrant sentiments. The schools have 
responded by inviting skeptics to visit, meet the participating 
families, and experience the classrooms. By and large, those 
involved in the DL programs have found their experience to be one 
of bringing together different communities and forging mutual 
respect among them through their children. 

Administrators are proud to note that their DL students’ initial 
test scores show promise: English-language learners are 
outperforming those in more traditional, transitional bilingual 
programs, and native-English speakers are testing higher than 
their peers in traditional classrooms. And best of all, as one 
parent pointed out, “The school can actually teach your kid a 
second language by the 6th grade. How cool is this?” 


“It’s important to me that my children speak 
both languages for many reasons. They are 
able to communicate with the entire family. 
When we go back to Mexico, they can speak 
with their grandparents, and their aunts and 
uncles, who don’t speak any English. Also, in 
the future, they will be able to find a good job, 
because there is high demand for bilingual 
people. 

-A dual-language program parent 








Moving Forward with Dual-Language 
Programs 

While Illinois’s forward-looking stance on bilingual education is 
built on research showing that dual-language programs allow 
children to excel in all academic areas - including their home 
language and English— it also raises some questions. Namely, 
how can districts afford it? Expansion of dual-language programs 
to more, and younger, children requires resources, the largest of 
which is a highly-qualified workforce. Currently, most districts 
are cutting their budgets. Yet, common sense - not to mention 
research - indicates that putting students on the right track at the 
beginning of their academic careers costs much less than helping 
them play catch-up later. How can Illinois afford not to invest in its 
youngest learners? 


“The school can actually teach your kid a 
second language by the 6th grade. How cool 
is this?” 

-A dual-language program parent 


Collier, V. P., & Thomas, W. P. (2004). The Astounding Effectiveness 
of Dual Language Education for All. NABE Journal of Research 
and Practice , 2(11, 1-20. 

Lindholm-Leary, K. J., & Howard, E. R. (2008). Language 
development and academic achievement in two-way immersion 
programs. In T. W. Fortune & D. J. Tedick (Eds.), Pathways to 
Multilingualism: Evolving Perspectives on Immersion Education 
(pp. 177-200). Oxford, UK: Blackwell. 



For additional information, go to: www.ewa.org 
This project is supported by the McCormick Foundation. 

Design by Leticia Tejada 

All images courtesy of Latino Policy Forum 


New Journalism on Latino Children 

Institute of Human Development, UC Berkeley 
1117 Tolman Hall MS: 1690, Berkeley, CA 94720 










