ED468000 2002-09-00 Theoretical 
Perspectives, Research Findings, and 
Classroom Implications of the Learning 
Styles of American Indian and Alaska 
Native Students. ERIC Digest. 

ERIC Development Team 
www . eric . ed . gov 

Table of Contents 

If you're viewing this document online, you can click any of the topics below to link directly to that section. 

Theoretical Perspectives, Research Findings, and Classroom 

Implications of the Learning Styles of American Indian and Alaska 

Native Students. ERIC Digest 2 

DEFINING LEARNING STYLES 2 

RESEARCH FINDINGS ON THE LEARNING STYLES OF AMERICAN 
INDIAN STUDENTS 3 

RESEARCH ON INSTRUCTIONAL INTERVENTIONS 5 

CONCLUSION 5 

REFERENCES 6 

ERIC M Digests 

ERIC Identifier: ED468000 

Publication Date: 2002-09-00 

Author: Hilberg, R. Soleste - Tharp, Roland G. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools Charleston WV. 

Theoretical Perspectives, Research Findings, 



ED468000 2002-09-00 Theoretical Perspectives, Research Findings, and Classroom 
Implications of the Learning Styles of American Indian and Alaska Native Students. ERIC 



Page 1 of 8 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



and Classroom Implications of the Learning 
Styles of American Indian and Alaska Native 
Students. ERIC Digest. 

THIS DIGEST WAS CREATED BY ERIC, THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER. FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT ERIC, CONTACT 
ACCESS ERIC 1 -800-LET-ERIC 

Although research on learning styles has found variation between cultural groups in 
styles of learning (e.g., Park, 2001 ; Zhang & Sternberg, 2001), great variation has also 
been found within groups (e.g., Nuby & Oxford, 1998). These findings suggest that even 
in classrooms consisting exclusively of a single cultural group, as is the case in many 
reservation schools, teachers must use a variety of instructional strategies. Effective 
teaching requires teaching individuals. 

This Digest begins with a brief discussion of two prominent definitions of learning styles 
and then describes studies that have found differences between the learning styles of 
American Indian students and students of other cultural groups. The Digest then 
presents instructional interventions stemming from learning styles research. 

DEFINING LEARNING STYLES 



The research literature on learning styles comes from several disciplines, contributing to 
the disjointed, inconsistent, and often contradictory information regarding what learning 
styles are and how they can be measured. According to DeBello (1990), "There are 
nearly as many definitions of learning styles as there are theorists" (p. 203). Sternberg 
(2001) reports that most learning styles research studies have yet to be replicated. 
Further, studies tend to be tied to a particular instrument, often without sufficient 
evidence of construct validity or internal consistency, and whatever the particular 
instrument measures is called a style. Sternberg offers his own definition of styles: 
habitual patterns or preferred ways of doing something that are consistent over long 
periods and across a variety of activities. He defines five dimensions of learning styles: 
function (creative, task-oriented, or evaluative), forms (singular or distributed focus, 
flexible, or prioritized), levels (concrete or global), scope (intrapersonal or interpersonal), 
and leanings (liberal or conservative). 

Another prominent definition was put forth by Riding and Rayner (1998), who saw 
learning style as an individual's repertoire of learning strategies (the ways in which 
learning tasks are habitually responded to) combined with cognitive style (the way 
information is organized and represented). They maintain that while it may be possible 
for learning "strategies" to change over time, the cognitive "style" dimensions in their 
model (wholist-analytic, the tendency to either organize information into wholes or parts; 
and verbal-imagery, the tendency to represent information while thinking either verbally 



Page 2 of 8 



ED468000 2002-09-00 Theoretical Perspectives, Research Findings, and Classroom 
Implications of the Learning Styles of American Indian and Alaska Native Students. ERIC 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



or in images) do not. 

While Sternberg maintains that learning styles, by his definition, vary across contexts, 
may change over time, and are, to some degree, socialized, Riding and Rayner argue 
that they are relatively fixed and therefore "not" malleable. 

RESEARCH FINDINGS ON THE LEARNING 
STYLES OF AMERICAN INDIAN STUDENTS 



Research, based on a variety of theoretical frameworks and using a variety of 
methodologies and instruments, suggests that among American Indian and Alaska 
Native students, there is some tendency toward (a) a global, or holistic, style of 
organizing information, (b) a visual style of mentally representing information in thinking, 
(c) a preference for a more reflective style in processing information, and (d) a 
preference for a collaborative approach to task completion. Evidence supporting each of 
these claims is herewith fully discussed. 

Global (holistic) cognitive style. Learners who organize information globally derive 
meaning from concepts by first developing an understanding of the whole context. In 
contrast, analytic, or linear, thinkers develop understanding after all the pieces are 
understood separately then brought together (Tharp, 1989). Much classroom instruction 
is dominated by an analytic presentation of information, with little consideration of the 
overall context or meaning (Henderson & Landesman, 1995). Two studies based on this 
theoretical dichotomy examined the cognitive organization of information of American 
Indian students. First, Davidson (1992) studied differences in the cognitive strengths of 
American Indian and White students using the Kaufman Assessment Battery for 
Children. She found that, on average, students in the American Indian sample scored 
higher on simultaneous processing (used in global, or holistic, cognition) while students 
in the White sample scored higher in sequential processing (used in analytic, or linear, 
cognition). Second, Backes (1993) described two types of learners: the abstract-random 
learners, who prefer deductive, holistically presented information, and the 
concrete-sequential learners, who prefer inductive, linear instruction. Global/holistic 
thinkers benefit from (a) an overview of concepts prior to explanations of segments or 
details, (b) discussions focusing on overarching themes and use of metaphors, and (c) 
use of visual presentations. Using the Gregoric Style Delineator, Backes assessed 
learning style differences between American Indian (Chippewa) and non-Indian 
students, especially in how they process and organize information. He found that the 
largest percentage of students in the American Indian sample fell predominantly into the 
abstract-random range, and the largest percentage of students in the non-Indian sample 
scored in the concrete-sequential range. 

Visual cognitive style. Many studies have shown that there are greater proportions of 
visual information processors (as opposed to verbal) among Native American groups of 
students than among students from other groups (e.g., Rougas, 2000; Morton, Allen, & 



Digest. 




www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Williams, 1994). For example, Rougas used the Woodcock-Johnson 
Psycho-Educational Battery Test of Cognitive Ability to examine differences between 
Mohawk and White adolescents' visual abilities. Her study found significant differences, 
with students in the Mohawk sample demonstrating greater strength in visual 
processing. Though there were also differences found between the samples in 
long-term retrieval, short-term memory, auditory processing, 

comprehension-knowledge, and broad cognitive ability, the means for both samples in 
all areas fell within the average range on all these subscales. 

Morton, Allen, and Williams (1994) used the Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children to 
test differences in language and nonlanguage tasks with English monolingual Ojibwa 
and non-Indian adolescents. They found that students in the American Indian sample 
performed better on subtests linked with visual/spatial processing, and that the control 
group did better on the language subtests. 

In a study linking style to achievement, Riding and Rayner (1998) found that, given a 
choice of learning material, verbalizers will choose the text version and imagers will 
choose a version with illustrations. Imagers almost double their learning performance if 
they are presented with information that includes text and illustration compared to just 
text, while the performance of verbalizers remains the same. 

Reflective information processing. Some students learn by observing the tasks they are 
to perform, referred to by Nelson-Barber and Estrin (1995) as a watch-then-do 
approach. The Myers-Briggs Type Indicator was used to examine the learning styles of 
Native American and African American secondary students (Nuby & Oxford, 1998), 
revealing significant differences: Students in the African American sample scored higher 
on the "judging" scale, associated with quick decision making, while students in the 
Native American sample scored higher on "perceiving," associated with a more relaxed, 
reflective decision-making style. 

Collaboration. According to many American Indian and Alaska Native observers, in 
traditional Native communities and homes, children usually collaborate with others to 
accomplish tasks and solve problems (see, for example, Chavers, 2000). However, in 
most classrooms, students are expected to complete much of their work individually. 
According to sociocultural theory, children naturally and often effortlessly develop into 
competent members of their families and communities by engaging in dialogue and 
shared activity with more experienced members (Vygotsky, 1978). Riding and Read 
(1996; as cited in Riding and Rayner, 1998) found that while all students in their 
self-report study preferred pair or group work to individual work, "wholists" 

(global/holistic thinkers) were especially partial to group work, lower-ability 
"wholist-imagers" in particular. 

RESEARCH ON INSTRUCTIONAL 



Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



INTERVENTIONS 



Though disparate and often confusing, the research literature on learning styles has 
given rise to a variety of instructional interventions aimed at improving the learning of 
American Indian students. For example, Hilberg, Tharp, and DeGeest (2000) studied 
Native American middle school students in a two-week unit on fractions, decimals, and 
percentages. Students first generated survey questions of interest, then collaborated in 
small groups to analyze and depict survey results. They found that students in the 
experimental group retained more mathematics and reported more positive attitudes 
toward mathematics than students in the control groups. 

In a quasi-experiment involving sixth-grade mathematics classes on an Indian 
reservation in New Mexico over eight weeks, students in the experimental condition 
formed self-selected student-led groups in which they rotated to learning stations to 
engage in a variety of tasks. In addition to allowing self-direction, these activities 
emphasized visual, tactile, and auditory materials. Students in the self-directed, 
peer-learning condition outperformed their peers in achievement in mathematical 
concepts and skills (Cardell, Cross, & Lutz, 1978). 

Hopkins and Bean (1999) examined the effects of a verbal-visual word association 
strategy for word root instruction with middle and high school students on the Cheyenne 
Reservation in southeastern Montana, using athink-aloud procedure to model the 
strategy followed by guided practice and informal collaboration. Students created a 
word graph for each word consisting of the root, its definition, a personal association, 
and a visual of the association. Authors reported that students demonstrated increased 
achievement on quizzes and improved interest and engagement. 

Hayes and Allinson (1993) performed a review of studies that examined the interactions 
between individual learning styles and instructional strategies. Ten of 17 studies support 
the hypothesis that the instructional strategies used will influence the achievement of 
students with different learning styles. Swailes and Senior (2001) propose that learning 
styles research would benefit from development of a better, unified theory, and that 
more research is needed on the differences between preference, styles, and strategies. 
Riding and Rayner (1998) stated that much of the work on learning styles to date has 
been exploratory, and that we now must systematically investigate the aspects, nature, 
role, and applications of learning styles. 

CONCLUSION 



While there are many theories, models, and instruments that purport to measure 
learning styles, there seems to be evidence to support two useful conclusions based on 
research conducted to date. First, there are some differences in learning styles between 
cultural groups. Second, there is growing evidence that instruction for both Native and 
non-Native students that includes observational and collaborative activities, and in 



ED468000 2002-09-00 Theoretical Perspectives, Research Findings, and Classroom 
Implications of the Learning Styles of American Indian and Alaska Native Students. ERIC 



Page 5 of 8 




www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



which information is presented holistically and with visuals, produces gains in student 
achievement. 

At a recent gathering of educators and researchers working with Native students 
(Chavers, 2000), it was asserted that improving education for Native students will 
require long-term commitments and funding for research on student learning styles and 
their impact on student achievement. We propose that this research must also include 
additional tests of classroom interventions that accommodate differences in learning 
styles. 

REFERENCES 



Backes, J. S. (1993). The American Indian high school dropout rate: A matter of style? 
Journal of American Indian Education, 32(3), 16-29. 

Cardell, G. W., Cross, W. C., & Lutz, W. J. (1978). Peer learning among Indian 
students: Extending counselor influence into the classroom. Journal of American Indian 
Education, 17(2), 7-12. 

Chavers, D. (Ed.). (2000). Deconstructing the myths: A research agenda for American 
Indian education. Albuquerque, NM: Catching the Dream. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 447 985) 

Davidson, K. L. (1992). A comparison of Native American and White students' cognitive 
strengths as measured by the Kaufman Assessment Battery for Children. Roeper 
Review, 14(3), 111-115. 

DeBello, T. C. (1990). Comparison of eleven major learning styles models: Variables, 
appropriate populations, validity of instrumentation, and research behind them. Journal 
of Reading, Writing, and Learning Disabilities International, 6(3), 203-222. 

Hayes, J., & Allinson, C. W. (1993). Matching learning style and instructional strategy: 
An application of the person-environment interaction paradigm. Perceptual and Motor 
Skills, 76(1), 63-79. 

Henderson, R. W., & Landesman, E. M. (1995). Effects of thematically integrated 
mathematics instruction on students of Mexican descent. Journal of Educational 
Research, 88(5), 290-300. 

Hilberg, R. S., Tharp, R. G., & DeGeest, L. (2000). The efficacy of CREDE's 
standards-based instruction in American Indian mathematics classes. Equity & 
Excellence in Education, 33(2), 32-40. 

Hopkins, G., & Bean, T. W. (1999). Vocabulary learning with the verbal-visual word 
association strategy in a Native American community. Journal of Adolescent & Adult 
Literacy, 42(4), 274-281. 



Page 6 of 8 



ED468000 2002-09-00 Theoretical Perspectives, Research Findings, and Classroom 
Implications of the Learning Styles of American Indian and Alaska Native Students. ERIC 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



Morton, L. L., Allen, J. D., & Williams, N. H. (1994). Hemisphericity and information 
processing in North American Native (Ojibwa) and non-Native adolescents. International 
Journal of Neuroscience, 75(3/4), 189-202. 

Nelson-Barber, S., & Estrin, E. T. (1995). Culturally responsive mathematics and 
science education for Native students (Information Analyses). San Francisco, CA: Far 
West Laboratory for Educational Research and Development. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 388 483) 

Nuby, J. F., & Oxford, R. L. (1998). Learning style preferences of Native American and 
African American secondary students. Journal of Psychological Type, 44, 5-19. 

Park, C. C. (2001). Learning style preferences of Armenian, African, Hispanic, Hmong, 
Korean, Mexican, and Anglo students in American secondary schools. Learning 
Environments Research, 4(2), 175-191. 

Riding, R., & Rayner, S. (Eds.). (1998). Cognitive styles and learning strategies: 
Understanding style differences in learning and behaviour. London: David Fulton 
Publishers. 

Rougas, M. E. (2000). A cognitive profile of Mohawk adolescents using the 
Woodcock-Johnson Tests of Cognitive Ability-Revised. Unpublished Dissertation, State 
University of New York, Albany, NY. 

Sternberg, R. J. (2001). Epilogue: Another mysterious affair at styles. In R. J. Sternberg 
& L. F. Zhang (Eds.), Perspectives on thinking, learning, and cognitive styles (pp. 
249-252). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Swailes, S., & Senior, B. (2001). The learning styles questionnaire: Closing comments? 
International Journal of Selection and Assessment, 9(3), 215-216. 

Tharp, R. G. (1989). Psychocultura! variables and constants: Effects on teaching and 
learning in schools. American Psychologist, 44(2), 349-359. 

Vygotsky, L. S. (1978). Mind in society: The development of higher psychological 
processes. (J. Cole, V. John-Steiner, S. Scribner, & E. Souberman, Eds. and Trans.). 
Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 

Zhang, L. F., & Sternberg, R. J. (2001). Thinking styles across cultures: Their 
relationships with student learning. In R. J. Sternberg & L. F. Zhang (Eds.), 

Perspectives on thinking, learning, and cognitive styles (pp. 197-226). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

R. Soleste Hilberg is an education research specialist at the Center for Research on 
Education, Diversity & Excellence at the University of California, Santa Cruz. 



Digest. 




www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Roland G. Tharp is director of the Center for Research on Education, Diversity & 
Excellence at the University of California, Santa Cruz. 

This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. ED-99-CO-0027. The 
opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of OERI, 
the Department, or AEL. 



Title: Theoretical Perspectives, Research Findings, and Classroom Implications of the 
Learning Styles of American Indian and Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 

Note: Online version has link to annotated bibliography. 

Document Type: Information Analyses— ERIC Information Analysis Products (lAPs) 
(071); Information Analyses— ERIC Digests (Selected) in Full Text (073); 

Available From: ERIC/CRESS, P.O. Box 1348, Charleston, WV 25325-1348. Tel: 
800-624-9120 (Toll Free). For full text: http://www.ael.org/eric/digests/edorc02-3.pdf. 
Descriptors: Alaska Natives, American Indian Education, American Indian Students, 
American Indians, Cognitive Style, Cultural Differences, Educational Research, 
Elementary Secondary Education, Holistic Approach, Learning Strategies 
Identifiers: ERIC Digests 
### 



[Return to ERIC Digest Search Page] 



Digest. 



