DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 441 534 



JC 000 374 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

INSTITUTION 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 

PUB TYPE 
JOURNAL CIT 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Seabrook, John H. , Ed. 

Community College Humanities Review, 1995. 

Community Coll. Humanities Association. 

1995-12-00 

92p.; Published annually. For the 1994 issue, see ED 384 
394. 

CCHA, Community College of Philadelphia, 1700 Spring Garden 
Street, Philadelphia, PA 19130 ($5). Tel: 215-751-8850. 

Collected Works - Serials (022) 

Community College Humanities Review; vl6 Dec 1995 
MF01/PC04 Plus Postage. 

*Community Colleges; *Educational Strategies; *Humanities; 
Interdisciplinary Approach; *Literature Reviews; Science and 
Society; Two Year Colleges 



ABSTRACT 



This annual volume of the Community College Humanities 
Review (CCHR) presents a wide range of articles dealing with humanities- -from 
Lloyd Kaplan's attempts to set the record straight (by presenting a more 
accurate appraisal and a truer perspective of Dave Brubeck's outstanding 
contribution to the course of jazz) to Walter Krieglstein ' s exploration of 
recent discoveries in basic science (by attempting to evaluate their 
potential as a stimulus for cross- fertilization between the sciences and the 
humanities). Contained are the fcllowing articles: (1) "Comments at the 

National Conference of the Community College Humanities Association: 
Washington, D.C., I^ovember 9, 1995" (Sheldon Hackney); (2) "Conform, Go Crazy 

or Take a Nap: Nourishing the Prophetic Vision" (Mary Rose Reilley) ; (3) "The 

Legacy of Dave Brubeck" (Lloyd Kaplan) ; (4) "Interdisciplinary Study: Towards 

the Millennium" (Maryanne M. Garbowsky) ; (5) "The Silencing Canon: Native 

American Texts and Literature Study" (Mary Roseberry) ; (6) "Life in the Iron 

Mills: Differing Responses to Moral Responsibility within the Community" 

(Mary Ellen Byrne) ; (7) "Can Chaos Theory Close the Gap between the Sciences 

and the Humanities?" (Walter Krieglstein) ; and (8) "'There Are No Serbs': The 
Language of Genocide" (Mark Grimes) . (VWC) 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



ED 441 534 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

gemj , 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES ' 

INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 

1 

COMMUNITY COLLEGE 

HUMANITIES REVIEW 



December, 1995 



Volume Sixteen 





ERIC 












U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

jte'"Thts document has been reproduced as 
"received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 






Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 

y 



2 




THE COMMUNITY COLLEGE HUMANITIES ASSOCIATION 



The Community College Humanities Association is a nonprofit national 
organization devoted to promoting the teaching and learning of the 
humanities in two-year colleges. 

BOARD OF DIRECTORS 



Members at Large: 

David A. Berry, Chair 
Essex County College 
Newark, New Jersey 

Frederick W. Capshaw (ex officio) 
Presider)t 

Community College of 
Philadelphia 

Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 

Constance Carroll, President 
San Diego Mesa College 
San Diego, California 

Stephen Mittelstet, President 
Richland College 
Dallas, Texas 

Daniel Moriarty, President 
Portland Community College 
Portland, Oregon 



Division Presidents: 

Central Division: 

Rick Bailey 

Henry Ford Community College 
Dearborn, Michigan 

Eastern Division: 

Noel P. Robinson 
County College of Morris 
Randolph, New Jersey 

Pacific-Western Division: 

Jeffrey Clausen 

Green River Community College 
Auburn, Washington 

Southern Division: 

William Paquette 
Tidewater Community College 
Portsmouth, Virginia 

Southwestern Division: 

Nancy McCollum 

Pikes Peak Community College 

Colorado Springs, Colorado 



CCHA OFFICE: 

c/o Community College of Philadelphia 
1700 Spring Garden Street 
Philadelphia, PA 19130 
215-751-8860 

Executive Director, David A. Berry 
Office Manager, Joeann Logan 



The Communiti; College 
Humanities Review is published 
annually by the Community College 
Humanities Association. Its purpose 
is to offer a forum for scholarly work 
which will provide readers with 
articles addressing issues of research, 
curriculum change, and 
developments within the humanities 
disciplines. By this means, the 
Review contributes to the growth 
and development of the community 
of humanities scholars nationally. 

Editor: 

John H. Seabrook, Ph.D 
Essex County College 
Newark, New Jersey 07102 

Editorial Board; 

Myma Goldenberg, Ph.D. 
Montgomery College 
Rockville, Maryland 20850 

Pamela Benson 

Tarrant County Junior College, NE 
Hurst, Texas 76054 

Brian Damiano, Ph.D. 

Tidewater Community College, 
Chesapeake Campus 
Chesapeake, Virginia 

Robert Sessions 
Kirkwood Community College 
Cedar Rapids, Iowa 



Publisher: 

Colby & McGowan Publishing Company 
Roselle, New Jersey 



O 




Manuscripts for the Community 
College Humanities Review are 
welcome. Submissions should focus 
on issues consistent with the purposes 
of the journal and should be submitted 
to the Editor through the Community 
College Humanities Association office 
at the Community College of 
Philadelphia. Submissions should 
conform to the Review style. All will 
be acknowledged, and authors will be 
notified of the decision of the Editorial 
Board. The Editor reserves the right 
to make changes not affecting the 
substance of a submission. Authors 
will receive three reprints of their 
articles. Additional copies may be 
obtained from the CCHA office upon 
request: include a check payable to 
CCHA for $5.00, to cover costs. 



CCHA wishes to acknowledge the 
support of the Community College of 
Philadelphia; Essex County College, 
Newark, N.J; and Richland College, 
Dallas, Texas. 



4 



5 




©Copyright 1996 

Community College Humanities Association 



COMMUNITY COLLEGE HUMANITIES REVIEW 




Volume Sixteen 



December, 1995 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 

Comments at the National Conference of the Community 
College Humanities Association 
Sheldon Hackney 

Conform, Go Crazy or Take a Nap: Nourishing the 
Prophetic Vision 

Mary Rose Reilley 

The Legacy of Dave Brubeck 
Lloyd Kaplan 

Interdisciplinary Study: Towards the Millennium 
Maryanne M. Garbowsky 

The Silencing Canon: Native American Texts and Literature Study 
Mary Roseberry 

Life in the Iron Mills: Differing Responses to Moral Responsibility 
Within the Community 

Mary Ellen Byrne 

Can Chaos Theory Close the Gap Between the Sciences 
and the Humanities? 

Walter Krieglstein 

“There Are No Serbs:” The Language of Genocide 
Mark Grimes 



1 

13 

23 

32 

48 

58 

64 

74 




'■S 



CONTRIBUTORS 



Mary Ellen Byrne is Professor in the Humanities Department at Ocean 
County College, Toms River, New Jersey. 

Maryanne M. Garbowsky is a member of the faculty at the County 
College of Morris, Randolph, New Jersey. 

Mark Grimes is an Assistant Professor of English at Howard Community 
College, Columbia Maryland. 

Sheldon Hackney is Chairman of the National Endowment for the 
Humanities. 

Lloyd Kaplan is a member of the faculty in the Department of Music at 
the Community College of Rhode Island, Warwick, Rhode Island. 

Walter Krieglstein is Professor of Philosophy and Religion at the College 
of DuPage, Glen Ellyn, Illinois. 

Mary Roseberry is an Assistant Professor of English at Niagra County 
Community College, Sanborn, New York. 




7 



1 



COMMENTS AT THE NATIONAL CONFERENCE 
OF THE 

COMMUNITY COLLEGE HUMANITIES ASSOCIATION 
WASHINGTON, D.C., NOVEMBER 9, 1995 



Sheldon Hackney 

Chairman, National Endowment for the Humanities 



Speaking at the University of Texas on October 16, 1995, in the 
wake of the racially disparate reaction to the jury verdict in the 0. J. 
Simpson murder trial, and on the same day as the Million Man March in 
Washington by black men for “atonement and reconciliation”. President 
Clinton called upon Americans of all races “to clean our house of racism.” 
“We must be one,” he asserted, “ . . . all of us, no matter how different, 
who share basic American values and are willing to live by them.” 
Then, recalling the moments of crises from America’s past, when the nation 
“had the courage to face the truth about our failure to live up to our own 
best ideals”, the President said the country became stronger by becoming 
more inclusive. “At each of these moments, we looked in the national 
mirror and were brave enough to say, this is not who we are; we’re better 
than that.” 



“This is not who we are.” Well, who are we? That is the question, 
and it is a crucial question. Who we think we are influences what we do. 
The idea is tutor to the act. Archibald McLeish, in an essay published in 
1949, wrote, “The soul of a people is the image it cherishes of itself; the 
aspect in which it sees itself against its past; the attributes to which its future 
conduct must respond. To destroy that image is to destroy in a very real 
sense, the identity of the nation, for to destroy the image is to destroy the 
means by which the nation recognizes what it is and what it has to do. 



Small wonder, then, that in recent months we have witnessed 
rancorous public dispuLes about the image of our past: the aborted Enola 
Gay exhibit, the canceled American history theme park by Disney near 
Manassas, the proposed National History Standards, and perhaps the 
attempted abolition of the National Endowment for the Humanities itself. 
i^Pi^^luestion posed by those disputes is, “Who owns history?” Who 

ti\L^ 

8 



2 Hackney 



controls our collective image of ourselves? Who can show the country what 
it has to do by holding up the national mirror? 

By now we can all recite the litany of domestic social ills 
threatening our sense of wellbeing; we are also feeling the anxieties of an 
illdefined “new world order” that have replaced the ironically comfortable 
certainties of the Cold War; we are painfully aware of the depredations the 
global market place is visiting upon the domestic economy; we have seen 
the polls indicating that most Americans think the country is “on the wrong 
track, that the younger generation will have a much more difficult time 
realizing “the American dream” than their parents, that the members of 
each racial group in distressingly high percentages hold negative 
stereotypes of the members of each of the other racial groups in the 
American population; and we have heard critics as diverse as Cornell West 
and William Bennett declare that America is in a spiritual crisis. 

Furthermore, there is a long list of public policy issues whose 
resolutions will be driven by notions of the American identity: race 
conscious Congressional districting, affirmative action, immigration, 
bilingual education, Afro-centric curriculums, teaching values in schools, and 
perhaps such indirect matters as welfare policy, urban policy, and public 
education itself. It is time to look again into the national mirror. 

The National Conversation on American Pluralism and Identity, a 
project of the National Endowment for the Humanities, does just that. It 
invites diverse groups of Americans to come together — by teleconference, 
on the internet, through the radio, in face-to-face discussion groups — to 
talk and to listen to each other about what holds us together as a country, 
about shared values in a heterogeneous society, about common 
commitments in a society that contains all the divisions of race, ethnicity, 
nationality, and religion that are the source of sectarian violence in almost 
every other quarter of the globe, about the unum in our national motto, 
E Pluribus Unum. 

The National Conversation has been underway for only a few 
months, so the projects are still in their early stages.^ On the other hand, 
the Conversation was two years in the making, and I have travelled all over 
the country talking about it, conducting trial conversations, seeking advice, 
and listening to Americans respond. There are already lessons that can be 
drawn from it. This, then, is an interim report. 

The first thing to be said is that Americans are eager for the 
National Conversation. They may be a little puzzled at first if the subject is 
defined in its most abstract form, but the feeling of social fragmentation, of 
people drifting apart from one another, is very much on their minds, so 
O ^cognize the topic and understand its purpose. In addition to 

ERIC 




Number 16 - 1995 



National Conference 3 



describing the project to dozens of audiences and seeking the advice of a 
score or more of interested groups, 1 conducted six “pilot conversations” in 
communities that differed in geography, ethnic composition and economic 
base. The groups were composed of diverse cross sections of their 
communities and of people who had not known each other previously. In 
each case, the groups spontaneously asked at the end of the evening if 
there was a way they could come back together to continue the discussion. 
This was a testament to the recognition of the importance of the topic, its 
protean nature, and also to the reality that it takes some time before 
participants begin to trust each other enough to express something of their 
deeper feelings, fears, and dreams.^ 

There are, of course, flash points and dead ends to worry about in 
these discussions, but the conversation has an integrity and a currency that 
draws people along with it across the tiger pits of discord and suspicion.^ 
Perhaps a few vignettes from some of the discussions 1 have led will hint at 
the rewards and lessons of the conversation. 



1 went for my first “pilot conversation” to Garden City, Kansas, a 
remote “meat factory” town in the middle of the prairie. There, physically 
tough, low wage jobs in the slaughter houses have attracted recent Hispanic 
and Asian immigrants, making the small town quite diverse. The group that 
gathered at the public library was as diverse as the town, but the 
conversation went smoothly. They talked of tolerance, the rewards of 
pluralism, the challenge of equal opportunity, and the ideal of democracy. 
There were very few points at which tensions could be observed. At the 
conclusion, after the discussants had all left, 1 asked the host if 1 had heard 
an honest discussion. “Yes,” he said, “but at its most polite level.” 1 had, he 
thought, heard what the group thought would make their community look 
good in the eyes of a visitor, especially a visitor from, Washington. 1 was 
disappointed. Crushed might be a more accurate word. My long years of 
experience as a teacher had failed me. On the way home on the plane, 
however, 1 began to think of the conversation in a slightly more positive 
way. This diverse group, after all, when it wanted to present itself in the 
best possible light, had reverted to a set of civic values that the town may 
not have lived by but which they recognized as shared ideals — “our own 
best ideals,” as the President said. True, they had not been able to talk 
candidly in front of a stranger about how they fell short of their ideal, but 
they held in common a notion of civic virtue that was inclusive and tolerant 
and based on equal access to justice and opportunity. I felt a little better. 



1 travelled not long after that to Detroit and spent a wonderful 
evening talking about America with a group that was racially and ethnically 
Q 'iverse, but was generally well educated and prosperous. The group 
shy, but it found itself agreeing in short order with a particularly 



4 Hackney 



articulate Euro-American who argued that the essence of Americanism was 
a reliance on the Constitution and the political system it defined, along with 
a commitment to equal individual opportunity, self reliance and maximum 
individual freedom. When it became clear that a surprising agreement had 
been reached, one of the group looked around and said, “I wonder if the 
underclass would agree with us?” The ways in which opportunity is 
structured by class almost always came up in these discussions, along with 
other social justice issues. 

In Boston, I found myself engaged with a group that was not 
designed to be a pilot conversation but nonetheless fell naturally into a 
feisty discussion of the American identity. After that discussion had been 
boiling along for a while, a young Latino activist was recognized, looked 
steadily around the big table and said in a voice full of challenge, “I am not 
an American. There is nothing about me that is American. I don’t want to 
be American, and I have just as much right to be here as any of you.” What 
an American thing to say - squarely in the great tradition of American 
dissent. He was affirming his American identity even as he was denying it. I 
think he was also launching a preemptive strike against the threat of 
exclusion by declaring that he did not want to be included, and he was 
announcing that his pre-American identity was very important to him and 
he did not want America to deprive him of it. 

I was conversing in Oklahoma City long before it became a 
national symbol for both the cynicism that is corroding American 
democracy and for the kind of communal solidarity in the face of 
catastrophe that is the antidote to our alienation from what Jean Elshtain in 
Democracy; on Trial calls “democratic dispositions,” the habits of civic 
engagement and willingness to compromise that strengthen “civil society.” 

In Oklahoma City, after much talk of grievances held by various 
American groups, as well as about the ideals of equal opportunity and equal 
justice, a Chinese American man told his story. He had been born and 
raised in China and had been fortunate enough to have been sent by the 
government to the United States to get his PhD. Like a lot of his 
compatriots in that first wave of Chinese students, he defected. He stayed 
in America and now is a college teacher. For a long time, he told us, he 
thought that for him the appeal of the United States was the higher 
standard of living, the material comforts it afforded. Then, he told us, he 
began to realize that what he valued most in his new American identity was 
freedom. “Here,” he said, “no one tells me where I must live, what job I 
can have, what I can read, what I must think, what I can say, how many 
children I can have.” 

Houston is an interesting because it does not have a racial 



ERIC 




Number 16 - 1995 



National Conference 5 



majority. It is about a third Anglo-American, a third African American, and 
a third Hispanic. The group that came together to discuss the meaning of 
being American represented those major communities plus the smaller 
Asian American portion of the population. At one point, after the group 
had been discussing family and how America viewed older people, a 
Vietnamese American made a powerful point through a poignant 
autobiographical statement. In all cultures influenced by Confucian thought, 
he said, family is the highest value, and older people are revered as being 
wise and deserving honor. 

He had thus devoted his life to his family. He had risked everything 
to escape Viet Nam, and he had managed against great odds to get his 
family to the United States. Once in Houston, he had worked very hard to 
earn a living in a strange land. He was now teaching English as a second 
language to mostly Chicano young people (prompting from me Yogi 
Berra’s famous response to the news that a Jew had been elected Mayor of 
Dublin, “Only in America!” and he devoted all his resources to his family. 
By working very hard and saving, he had managed to provide a good 
education for his two daughters. They had just graduated from college and 
had gotten good jobs, but, he said, with resignation more than anger in his 
voice, “They do not bring their money home!” That is, they were not 
pooling their money with his as if they were part of the family unit. What 
he was really saying, of course, was that his daughters had become 
individualistic Americans while he was still culturally Vietnamese. 

In Lawrence, Massachusetts, a Cambodian American and a 
Vietnamese American argued over the value and wisdom of bilingual 
education. The Cambodian American took his daughter out of the program 
after the second year because, according to him, she could read neither 
Cambodian nor English. One inferred from all he said, however, that he 
was very intent on blending into his new surroundings. On the other hand, 
the Vietnamese American was pleased with the same program because he 
thought it was very important for his children to maintain their cultural 
identity. Among the other reasons he cited for this was the fact that he had 
gotten an enormous amount of help from the Vietnamese community in 
getting started after his immigration. The ethnic community as a support 
group is an old story in America. Out of all these conversations comes my 
sense that almost all Americans have an answer to the question of what it 
means to be an American, even though it may be somewhat inchoate until 
it is summoned up into full consciousness and tested. When examined, the 
question, “Who are we?” turns out to be three related questions: (1) what 
principles of governance for our common life should we hold dear, (2) what 
..j^^opread traits of character or typical behavior give evidence that we 
CRIP" ideals of admired behavior and. definitions of unacceptable behavior. 




6 Hackney 



and (3) how do we think about or describe the whole, the “ONE,” and what 
does that imply about who is really included in the nation. “How wide the 
circle of we?” 



The answer to the question of what it means to be an American 
usually begins with a belief in the universal values expressed in the 
Declaration of Independence and the Constitution, a belief that what keeps 
our differences from developing into major conflict is a shared commitment 
to the idea of democracy, an agreement about how to resolve our 
disagreements. “Civic nationalism,” this is usually called, and it is the 
foundation of almost all popular conceptions of the American identity. The 
ever changing size and shape of the gap between aspiration and 
achievement is a central theme of American history. 

There is also here the problem that is inherent in our democracy, 
the problem that flows from the fact that we committed ourselves in the 
beginning to both Liberty AND Equality. In a society with a great deal of 
liberty, one will soon have a lot of inequality. That is true because people 
make different choices, have different amounts of luck, different desires, 
different talents, start in the race at different points on the track. They 
therefore will have very different degrees of success in life, especially 
success measured by material rewards. 

Americans have handled the apparent contradiction between their 
two fundamental principles by saying that “equality” refers not to equality of 
condition but to equality of opportunity, equality before the law, and equal 
access to the political process. Much of our political dialogue historically has 
been about whether or not equality of opportunity actually exists at a 
particular time and in a particular situation. Conservatives generally argue 
that equal opportunity actually exists and that, therefore, the inequality of 
condition that is observable is justified. Liberals generally argue that there 
are all sorts of unfair barriers and impediments to equal opportunity and 
that, therefore, the inequality of condition that is observable is not justified. 
The liberal cure, of course, is some sort of government action to improve 
equal opportunity. 

Unfortunately, as we are increasingly aware, people with more 
economic resources (sometimes referred to as “special interests”) have 
much more power to influence the political process than those with fewer 
economic resources. Equality of opportunity, then, “justifies” economic 
inequality, but economic inequality erodes democracy by providing unequal 
access to the political system. Because democracy is the core value of our 
society, this is a serious and continuing tension in our system. 



ERIC 



Q That tension can not be resolved; we must simply manage it. There 
r dilemmas as well. When presented with a hypothetical situation 



1 O 



Number 16 - 1995 



National Conference 7 



that required them to choose between the values of nondiscrimination and 
loyalty to ethnic group, many conversationalists found it impossible to 
choose. Participants almost invariably expressed a desire to be tolerant of 
differences growing out of the cultural traditions or beliefs of another group; 
but some different practices were too much to tolerate. The more obvious 
examples of this are polygamy, female genital mutilation, ritual drug use, 
the subordination of women, putting the health of children at risk because 
of a religiously based refusal to use modern medicine, and so forth. The 
problem comes when trying to define what class of things must conform to 
the moral judgment of the majority of citizens and what class of things can 
be allowed to be different. Cultures may be equally legitimate but they are 
not equally admirable in their every feature. 

Assuming that these dilemma’s can be managed without rupturing 
the social bonds, the question then becomes, “Is civic nationalism enough 
to hold us together?” Most Americans with whom 1 have talked so far think 
that it is not, but they believe that there is an American culture - 
conventional ways of believing and behaving” - that is shared across 
regional, religious, ethnic and racial lines. The problem is that for almost 
every trait one can cite as being characteristically American, there is its 
opposite as well. One can construct a veritable Yin and Yang of American 
culture. 

Americans believe in equality and are instinctively suspicious of 
people who “put on airs.” Yet, Americans are also fascinated by celebrities. 
We love to see exceptional people do exceptional things, and we are just as 
eager to see them crash after attaining exalted heights. Icarus is a 
naturalized American. 

Americans proclaim that hard work is its own reward, but we are 
also constantly on the lookout for get-rich-quick schemes. From the gold 
rush to the land rush to their modern-day equivalents in Wall Street and Las 
Vegas, we think there must be a way to get rich without having to sweat. 
The lottery is a poor man s investment in the American Dream. 

Americans, thus, may be motivated by greed, but we are also the 
most philanthropic people on the face of the globe, we are materialistic, but 
we have the highest percentage of church members among the developed 
industrial nations. New Age cults and mysticism thrive amongst people who 
are pursuing the main chance. 

We are heterogeneous in almost every imaginable way, and 
tolerance of difference is thought to be a virtue; but we have sprouted the 
Ku Klux Klan, the Nation of Islam, Know Nothings, Anti-Masons, Militias, 
and assorted nativist groups. Ninety percent of Americans describe 
Q ;elves as middle class, and middle class virtues are enshrined in our 



8 Hackney 



Puritan heritage. Yet we are also the land of instant gratification, of minute 
rice and fast food, of hot tubs and easy credit, of Hollywood escapism and 
theme park fantasies. 

We think of ourselves as a practical and self-reliant people, but we 
have been host to more utopian experiments in communal living than any 
other nation on earth. Competition is such a natural thing to Americans 
that almost every activity is organized into a contest so that we can find out 
who is the best at it. On the other hand, our national imagination is full of 
the icons of cooperation: barn raisings and corn huskings, wagon trains 
going west and communities rallying in selfless solidarity after a hurricane or 
flood or terrorist’s bomb. 

Individualism is an American fetish, but our real genius is for large- 
scale organization — witness the transcontinental railroad and telegraph, 
corporate giants like IBM and GM, the winning of World War II, putting a 
man on the moon, and our devotion to team sports. 

President Clinton in his Austin speech mentioned optimism as a 
traditional American trait, and he is certainly right, but there is also a long 
and honored tradition in Puritan America of the Jeremiad. 



I believe that it is virtually impossible to tell which one or the other 
member of these antipodal pairs is more typical than the other. The pairs 
indicate fault lines in the culture, locations where there is active stress. They 
are interesting for that reason. That is where the cultural action is. 

Bearing in mind the questionable claim of such cultural traits to 
being useful in distinguishing Americans from others, it is nonetheless 
interesting to know how Americans think of themselves. Participants in the 
National Conversation mentioned not only the foregoing traits but a 
number of other characteristics they thought were especially American: a 
high value placed upon free speech and the other individual freedoms 
protected by the Bill of Rights; a tendency to favor the underdog; a belief 
that people should have a second chance and that social mobility is a good 
thing; the expectation of progress and that “things should work;” the belief 
that striving for success is the normal condition of life, and that individuals 
are obliged to attempt to improve themselves and their circumstances; that 
choices should be available; that education is a ladder for social mobility; 
and that individuals have a duty to contribute to their communities. 



When one moves from individual traits to the task of imagining the 
group, one discovers three conventional categories in use. Most writers 
agree that the dominant cultural style at least until the 1960s was Anglo- 
American (growing out of British and later out of more general European 
heritaqe), and that members of other groups were expected to conform 



ERIC 



15 



Number 16 - 1995 



National Conference 9 



The social revolution of the Sixties not only opened up the 
mainstream of opportunity to members of ethnic and racial minorities, but 
it replaced the notion of a single acceptable cultural style with a multiplicity 
of equally legitimate cultural heritages, an orientation known as pluralism. 
By then the theory of pluralism, rooted in the work of Horace Kallen and 
popularized first by Randolph Bourne, was half a century old. 

The idea of America being a melting pot has existed since Hector 
St. John de Crevecoeur defined “this new man, this American” during the 
Revolutionary struggle, but it did not become popular as a goal of social 
policy until Israel Zangwill’s play in 1908 struck a responsive chord amidst 
the anxieties about the lack of social cohesion resulting from the flood of 
immigration from eastern and southern Europe in the late nineteenth and 
early twentieth centuries. 

Anglo-conformity does not work as a model because it does not 
allow the sort of dual and mixed identities that many Americans want, and 
because it denigrates the non-European heritages of many Americans. The 
Melting Pot metaphor accounts for the huge amount of assimilation that 
has actually gone on in the United States, but it does not accommodate 
itself to the huge amount of persistence of pre-American cultural identities 
that is also part of our reality. Not only do these preamerican cultural 
identities persist, but Americans want to maintain them and will resist any 
notion of Americanism that requires the obliteration of these identities of 
descent. 

Cultural pluralism, on the other hand, comes in many forms, but in 
its most equalitarian form it does not recognize the historical fact of the 
primacy of British, European and Western Civilization’s cultural parentage. 
All heritages are equally legitimate, but all were not equally influential. 
Furthermore, there is a separatist version of Pluralism that views the United 
States as simply a holding company for a collection of nations, an umbrella 
organization for diasporic national fragments whose members get their 
identities from, and owe their loyalties to, non-American states. Such a 
vision of America is seen as a dangerous pathology by most Americans. 
Even more important, pluralism in any of its current guises does not provide 
for a shared American culture, an area of overlapped cultures perhaps, that 
actually exists and that most Americans want. For these reasons, existing 
forms of pluralism are inadequate. Americans seem to want a way to think 
about diversity that is not provided by any of these existing models but goes 
beyond them. 

There is a new conception of the American identity that one can 
assemble out of the talk created by the National Conversation and out of 
scholarship. ^ First, the new conception is rooted in “civic 



10 Hackney 



nationalism,” a shared belief in our democratic governance system and the 
universalistic values to which we committed ourselves in the Declaration of 
Independence and the Constitution. 

Second, there is a sense that out of our history has come a set of 
meanings and attitudes and preferences and typical behaviors and tastes 
that amount to a national character. However difficult it is to specify it with 
accuracy, it is nonetheless real, and it is recognized by other Americans, 
and especially by foreigners encountering Americans. 

Third, the new way of thinking about the American collectivity 
allows for both a common American identity and an identity of descent. It 
accommodates itself to the American devotion to mobility, both geographic 
and social. It permits change over time — change in the boundaries and in 
the meaning of identities, as well as the creation and demise of identities. It 
accounts for both assimilation and for the persistence of pre-American 
identities.^ Most important, it recognizes the hybridity of American culture. 
That is, it reflects the understanding that when various world cultures 
encountered each other in North America over long periods of time, the 
relationships were not simply those of dominance and submission but of 
mutual influence. The resulting American culture therefore may be built on 
a British and European base, but it is more accurately understood as a 
hybrid of many cultures, and that it is not identical to any of its root 
cultures. 

The National Conversation about American Pluralism and Identity 
is at flood tide now, so I invite you to launch your own deep draft vessel, 
either with or without flotation devices from the National Endowment for 
the Humanities. There is no more important topic before the public at this 
time. You may draw your own conclusions from the conversation, of 
course; the harbor is big enough for many ships. 

My own belief is that there is a national identity that we can share 
in a way that brings us together so that we can more easily solve our 
common problems but that also honors our differences. Based in 
democracy, this identity guards individual rights but recognizes the need for 
a sense of duty to the community. I worry that rights-based individualism on 
the Left, and market-driven libertarianism on the Right will leave insufficient 
room for a common vision for the common good. The question absent 
from our national catechism is, “What do I owe to my fellow citizens?” 

I believe, further, that there is an inclusive historical narrative in 
which we all recognize not only the stories of our kith and kin but in which 
we acknowledge that we all are playing roles in a common story, in which 
we are all linked to each other across barriers of time and boundaries of 
® which we share the shame of our mistakes and the glory of our 




17 



Number 16 - 1995 



National Conference 1 1 



achievements, in which the meaning of America is to be found in the 
common ground of its aspirations of liberty and justice for all. 



^Thus far, the NEH has awarded $1.3 million for 29 projects 
through the special grant competition, and $3 million for 33 additional 
projects that competed in our regular programs but are substantially related 
to the theme of the National Conversation. A film that is still in preparation 
and a small amount of extra funding for the state humanities councils are 
extending the conversation even more broadly. The cumulative total of 
projects funded through November 1995 is 1,540 “conversations” in 224 
cities and towns in 39 states. 

^There are certain criticisms that the National Conversation has had 
to face. Critics on the Right accused it of being a covert effort to impose a 
multicultural ideology on a naive public. Critics on the Left suspected that it 
was a camouflaged attempt to reimpose a pre- 1960s Anglo-American 
version of the American identity. Some said there is no real problem in the 
United States, so why talk? others insisted that the nation state is archaic 
and the source of much human misery, so we should be talking about 
cosmopolitanism. The search for cohesion is fundamentally misguided, 
another argument insisted, because it would deprive “the Other” of the 
right to a nonconforming identity. If the conversation is in English, isn’t that 
already an oppressive statement? Talk is like crabgrass and doesn’t need 
subsidizing, ran one line of criticism, missing the distinction between idle 
chatter and a purposeful humanities conversation based on a text. What will 
you do, asked journalists circling like vultures over the cultural battlefield, 
when people start shouting at each other rather than talking to each other? 
Indeed, was not the subject so charged with emotion that talking about it 
might make it worse? Despite these attempts to make the National 
Conversation seem controversial, it has enjoyed an enthusiastic reception 
by humanities and public interest groups and by the general public. 

^With financial and logistical assistance from the MacArthur 
Foundation, we brought together in Chicago a group of scholars to help us 
sharpen our focus, define our questions, and explore the subject. They were 
enormously helpful. They were: William Galston, Henry Louis Gates, 



ENDNOTES 




18 



12 Hackney 



Nathan Glazer, Amy Gutmann, Bennetta Jules-Rosette, Stanley Katz, 
Martin Marty, Martha Minow, Martha Nussbaum, Diane Ravitch, Renato 
Rosaldo, Arthur Schlesinger, Jr., Richard Sennett, Catherine Stimpson, 
Rennard Strickland, Ronald Takaki, Michael Walzer, Iris Marion Young, 
and Jamil Zainaldin. James Q. Wilson could not attend that meeting but 
participated in other ways and provided a short essay for the resource kit. 
The resource kit is available from the NEH; phone 1-800-NEH-1121 



"*ln addition to my discussions and pilot conversations, and in 
addition to the advisers listed above, my thinking about the American 
identity has been enriched and informed by my reading in the works of the 
following scholars and writers, though my ideas do not coincide completely 
with any of them: Joyce Appleby, “Recovering America’s Historic Diversity: 
Beyond Exceptionalism,” The Journal of American Histori; (September 

1992) ; Sheldon Wolin, The Presence of the Past (Baltimore: The Johns 
Hopkins UP, 1989); Os Guiness, The American Hour (New York: The 
Free Press, 1993); Jean Elshtain, Democracy; on Trial (New York: Basic 
Books, 1995); Robert Bellah, et ai, Habits of the Heart: Individualism 
and Commitment in American Life (New York: Harper and Row, 1986); 
Arthur Mann, The One and the Man};: Reflections on the American 
Identify (Chicago: U of Chicago P, 1979); John Higham, “Multiculturalism 
and Universalism: A History and Critique,” The American Quarter!}; (June 

1993) ; Charles Taylor, Multiculturalism: Examining the Politics of 
Recognition, edited and introduced by Amy Gutmann (Princeton: Princeton 
UP, 1994); David Potter, Freedom and Its Limitations in American Life, 
edited by Don Fehrenbacher (Stanford: Stanford UP, 1976); Benjamin 
Barber, Jihad Versus McWorld (New York: Times Books, 1995); David 
Hollinger, Postethnic America: Be\;ond Multiculturalism (New York: 
Basic Books, 1995); Michael Lind, The Next American Nation: The New 
Nationalism and the Fourth American Revolution (New York: The Free 
Press, 1995); Lawrence Fuchs, The American Kaleidoscope: Race, 
Ethnicify, and the Civic Culture (Middletown: Wesleyan UP, 1990); 
James Davison Hunter, The Culture M/ars (New York: Basic Books, 
1992), and Before the Shooting Begins (New York: The Free Press, 

1994) ; and Cornel West, Race Matters (Boston: Beacon Press, 1993). 



®As David Hollinger writes in Postethnic America, 

“Postethnicity prefers voluntary to prescribed affiliations, 
appreciates multiple identities, pushes for communities of 
wide scope, recognizes the constructed character of ethno- 
^ racial groups, and accepts the formation of new groups as 



ERIC’"'* 



of the normal life of a democratic society.” 

19 



Number 16 - 1995 



13 



CONFORM, GO CRAZY OR TAKE A NAP: 
NOURISHING THE PROPHETIC VISION' 



Mary Rose O’Reilley 



Several years ago I wrote an essay titled, “Conform, Go Crazy or 
Become an Artist.” I was keen about this subject because it touches the 
work closest to my heart, encouraging teachers about the worthiness of the 
work we do, the necessity of reawakening — if it should be sleeping — our 
definition of ourselves as artists and visionaries. 

I still believe in the prophetic vocation of the teacher, but these 
days I’m a little more weary, and a diet of honey and locusts falls short of 
my minimum daily requirements. It occurs to me that exhorting my fellow 
teachers to take risks every day, to head for the artistic edge, might be 
enough to do them in. Prepare your classes, teach school, read student 
papers, make helpful comments on them, keep office hours, meet with 
committees, spend quality time with your friends, children and partners, cut 
your fat intake, practice meditation, get in your aerobic exercise, and, oh, 
in your spare time, be a visionary — 

So I decided to think through a different series of thoughts, 
beginning with this question: what are the conditions that might make it 
possible for us to operate at a modest level of prophetic inspiration, to 
bring a daily beauty to our lives, sustaining to ourselves, our students and 
our communities? When I wrote “Conform, Go Crazy or Become an 
Artist,” I ranted against materialism and the culture of criticism as the 
enemies of art. It was quite a cosmic analysis. Right now. I’d like to be a 
little more personal. For the last few months I’ve been burrowing into my 
own experience and asking myself what I have learned about creating the 
conditions necessary to be an artist — of whatever kind, of whatever 
definition — an artist of friendship, of gardening, of making dinner, of 
making poems — whatever your gift might be. I don’t want to preach: to 
say, “This is what you have to do.” I’m just going to say, “Here are some 

A version of this essay was delivered as an address to the Community/ 
College Humanities Association Regional Conference, October 7, 1994, 
Springs. 




20 



14 O’Reilley 



things that worked for me and maybe they’ll speak to someone else’s 
condition.” 

Let me try, first, to establish a frame for thinking about this 
business of being an artist. I mean it in a very communal and inclusive way. 
1 collect folk art, especially the subclassification called “visionary” art. I 
started my collection years ago when I taught crafts in a psychiatric 
hospital. The art work people made and gave me was strange and beautiful. 
It had to be made. I like art that has a feeling of “I had to make this or die. 
1 had to make this so badly that it didn’t bother me that I don’t know color 
theory.” So my first question of you, if you wish to begin this inquiry, is 
“What do you have to make? What is calling inside you? What can only 
you make?” 

Of course I am speaking of visual art in a metaphoric sense. You 
don’t have to start painting on velvet. I am not going to pronounce that 
overworked word “creativity.” “Creativity” has for me overtones of 
superficial activity: frosting on the cake of life. What I’m hoping for is 
something better than that. How can we find our deep prophetic vision? 
How can we do what only we are called to do? Bharati Mukherjee, in her 
book Jasmine, talks about how, in the Hindu tradition, we might come to 
earth merely to perform a single minor action essential to the great tapestry 
of creation: to raise a window or draw back a blind, “to move a flowerpot 
from one table to another” (53). “The incentive,” Jasmine says, “is to treat 
every second of your existence as a possible assignment from God” (53- 
54). But what if we miss the moment? What if we are grading papers when 
we are needed by all the forces of humankind to move a flowerpot? How, 
given the noise of our lives, can we listen to our deepest call? 

Seven years ago I spent a sabbatical in a contemplative Quaker 
community which pretty much unfitted me for the academic world I had left 
behind. When I came back to my university, I was as confused and 
befuddled as some kind of alien from a neighboring galaxy. In the year after 
my sabbatical, I would stare at a photo from the Science Museum called 
“Pink Nebula in Orion,” a splatter of rosy light, and long for home like E.T. 

The problem was, nothing I had learned on sabbatical had fitted me 
to sit at a university desk. In fact, I had not come back from sabbatical. 
Somebody had come back, but it was not the person who left. Still, I had 
hundreds of things to do, inherited from the person I used to be and no 
longer was. Teach school, for example. That person had a contract. 

I tried very hard to do the work left behind for me by this woman 
who had gone away and not come back, but the harder I tried, the more I 
became physically or metaphysically ill. That woman, the former inhabitant 
of my body, lectured four days a week, three hours a day, just like her 

O 

ERIC 



21 



Number 16 - 1995 



The Prophetic Vision 15 



colleagues up and down the hall. When I opened my mouth to deliver her 
lectures, my chest started to hurt and a smothering sensation came over 
me. I ran out of breath and got faint. It had nothing to do with “getting used 
to it again,” as my helpful colleagues suggested. I just didn’t believe the 
words I was expected to deliver, and my vocal apparatus refused to make 
the sounds. 

I was no longer able to tell my students what they needed to know, 
because I didn’t know what they needed to know, though only a year ago I 
had been quite sure. 

What arc you doing? What are you really doing? What is your 
deepest sense of call? Your true vocation? My “consultant’ (something like 
a spiritual director) in the contemplative community had asked me those 
questions week after week, and I had come to a vague answer. To listen 
deeply, whatever that meant. On re-entry to this galaxy, I quickly became 
aware of what it did not mean: lecturing on Joseph Conrad, shmoozing at 
academic cocktail parties. These activities and a few others (some of which 
were contractual obligations) brought on symptoms that felt like a heart 
attack. Heart break, maybe. It’s easy for me to resist my deepest sense of 
call — especially if the call interferes with my ambitions about making a living 
and gaining prestige. But you can’t teach school if your lungs won’t work. I 
was confused about priorities, about what I was supposed to be doing. I 
couldn’t possibly get through all the work delegated to the woman whose 
contract bore my alias, and I was going home every day feeling that, no 
matter what I had accomplished, I had not done the right thing. 

Somewhere in the middle of this crisis, the idea of composing a job 
description for myself occurred to me. I decided to write down a sentence 
that reflected my clearest sense of the task. Then I could feel that, whatever 
else got screwed up, I had been faithful to some inner light. Peaceful 
listening, I wrote on a three-by-five card, and tacked it over my desk. The 
phrase helped me to pull my days together. When all the telephones were 
ringing, committees meeting, students lining up, I could tell myself. The 
only thing that needs to happen is peaceful listening.” This turned out to 
be a useful role for me. Since not too many people were listening to 
anybody, ever, around the university, I could take up a little slack. 

Lecturing and even the form of pseudo-lecturing called leading 
discussion yielded place to peaceful listening. I began to ask students what 
they wanted to know. They were willing to tell me. I — the energetic pacer — 
began to sit down in the classroom, talking to small groups, sometimes 
talking to one or two students, sending others off to pursue this or that and 
report back. Gradually I learned to breathe again. Things still piled up on 
my desk like one of those Welsh mine tips that occasionally slides down and 
‘O * s a village. But I felt I was doing my job. 



16 O’Reilley 



I have read that, in a time of crisis, the old myths tell us to loosen 
our strings. “When a woman has reached that dark moon land of No- 
Return...” writes the Jungian analyst Nor Hall, “this would be the time for 
her to undo every knot on her garments, unlock the doors, open windows, 
uncork bottles, untie shoelaces, unbraid her hair, set the cows out of their 
stall, free the chickens, free anything that is tied!” (102). 

Had I not followed some instinctive wisdom, let my academic 
chickens roam, I would have missed rich lessons. I learned a great deal that 
year about the dialectics of speech and silence, doing and being. Of course. 
I’ve blown most of it, as I inevitably do. I’ve decided, once again, that I 
know what my students need; I’m ranting away about my latest theories. I 
have stopped yearning after strange galaxies. I hardly ever listen to 
anybody. 

But I have another sabbatical this year. In a few days I’m headed 
out for a Vietnamese Buddhist community, and I’m pretty sure that I will 
not come back. 

The next step, after you figure out your job description, is scarier: 
publish it to your department chair. He or she will probably be happy to 
know. 

Maybe not. In an ideal world, we might define the task of 
administration in terms of discerning gifts. “There are a variety of gifts 
but the same spirit.” How happy, in this world, your department chair 
would be to know who you really are. Instead, so often we hitch race horses 
to pull wagons, or make those big Clydesdales run races. But let’s put aside 
the judgments of other people: your deepest business is to know what kind 
of horse you are. It took me years and years of concentrated attention to 
even begin to figure that out. When, in the course of a planning session, I 
explained to my department chair who I was and what I hoped to 
accomplish that year he listened with great courtesy and approved my 
goals. Then he told me who he was and what he wanted to accomplish. 
Both of us, I think, came away content. 

My next suggestion: keep a sabbath. My youngest daughter works 
as an accountant for our local Hasidic Jewish community, so we are always 
wrapped around in Jewish festivals and holidays. It seems that there is 
always a celebration ready to erupt, or a meaning to be affirmed and 
witnessed. My daughter was raised in the Quaker tradition; we have a 
testimony that all days are equal and all to be celebrated — which means that 
in practice nothing gets celebrated much. But she really loves the Hasidic 
sabbath. On Friday the excitement starts, with the rabbi— who runs her 
company — blessing all the workers. On Saturday nobody works and we see 
the rabbi on his front porch with his prayer shawl on, looking very different 







23 



Number 16 - 1995 



The Prophetic Vision 17 



than he does on weekdays. We prairie Quakers looked at this for a while 
and decided there must be something in it. 

A couple of months ago I talked to my friend Emily who is an 
Episcopalian. She told me that she takes a sabbath every Monday. “What 
do you mean?” I said. “What do you do on that day?” 

She said, “I just get up on Monday and spend the whole day 
without a plan. I eat breakfast in or out, or skip breakfast, I call the first 
person I think of calling. I write a letter if it occurs to me. I drive to Iowa 
and sit in a cornfield. Whatever. All day. Every Monday.” 

What is the point of making one day so different from the others? 
Obviously, this is not the place to reflect theologically, but neither do I want 
to take a sacred tradition and put it to a merely secular use. I will simply 
say, it’s impossible to hear a subtle call if you do not create a conscious time 
to listen to it. Who are you and what are you doing here? How do we even 
begin to answer this question? With our heads? With our hearts? My 
friend Bob recently told me that he used to figure things out with his head, 
but that led to overly intellectual decisions. Then he tried his heart but that 
led to overly emotional decisions. “Now” he told me, “I reason with my 
feet. I look at where I’ve been walking. Where I tend to turn up. I figure that 
this might be where I am going.” 

With her Monday sabbath, Emily is, over a period of time, gently 
watching her feet. After a while, this may tell her important things about 
who she is and what she is doing: how she feels without breakfast, who it is 
important to keep in touch with, what kind of landscape nurtures her 
spiritually. She is training her intuition. 

For my part, I am too analytical, and if someone tells me to follow 
my instincts they might as well tell me to follow a scent like my dog, Shep. 
If my hind brain ever knew how to do this, it has forgotten. But I think that 
Emily is following a syllabus for intuition. When you simply follow your feet 
around for twenty-four hours, you become sensitive to the tiny nudges of 
spirit. 

“I have a feeling I’m wrong about my thesis,” one of my students 
told me in the course of a writing conference. 

“What does that feeling feel like?” I asked, because I, the Analysis 
Queen, really wanted to know. 

“Like a little mouse-tooth, gnawing away,” the student replied. 

I think we have to give some space and time to learning to see and 
feel the subtleties of the world around us. Or maybe they are not even 
subtle, these instincts, intuitions and visions we shut out. I don’t know about 
vou, but when I take an afternoon of retreat, or even an hour of staring at 

Er|c 




18 O’Reilley 



nothing, it’s as though a parallel universe comes at me with a sound like the 
rush of trains that used to go by our house at night. 

Maybe you don’t have one day a week to practice sabbath — I think 
you should talk to my daughter’s rabbi — but maybe you have an hour a day 
or an hour a week. There are lots of mini-sabbaths around, if you know 
where to seek them out. 

Here’s a slightly different kind of sabbath. 

Several years ago I went canoeing with my friend Robin who used 
to work for the DNR. I hate canoeing, because the very idea makes me 
tired. But Robin lured me onto Lake Pokegama with some promise of 
visiting a heron marsh, and soon I was busy flailing around and feeling like 
a fool. And getting tired and ready to whine. At that moment Robin gave 
me a very important piece of information: rest in the stroke. He said, 
‘The reason you are getting tired is that you keep your paddle moving all 
the time. There is an almost imperceptible rest that you have to take at the 
end of every stroke, and that’s where you find the energy to paddle for 
hours. Rest in the stroke.” 

This advice doubled my stamina. It also gave me a new way of 
looking at a lot of physical and metaphysical processes. It’s the Garfield 
school of professional conduct: when can I take a nap? 

It is possible for us to miss lots of naps in the course of the day. Or 
let’s say, moments of rest, moments of vision, moments of beauty. I am 
capable of working so hard in my garden, whipping down a row of 
geraniums with my pruning shears, that I never see or smell them. Why am 
I growing them anyway? I am able to walk to class so full of what I’m going 
to say that I couldn’t tell you what kind of day it was. Of teaching with such 
a fix on ideas that I don’t notice who has dyed her hair magenta, or who 
has a new nose ring. In the Buddhist tradition, practicing mindfulness is the 
whole point of life: this geranium, this weather, this student. Each 
moment of attention a little sabbath. 

In struggling over time with the practice of mindfulness, I’ve 
discovered that one of the reasons I get so tired out teaching school and 
living life is that I hold a lot of unnecessary tension in my body, and that it is 
possible NOT to do that. Let me give you a couple of examples. One of the 
most hellish times in my day used to be the hour when, as a single parent, I 
left school, picked up my children from day care, trundled them home and 
made supper. My spiritual quest in those days was to get food, any food, on 
the table and I brought tremendous physical tension to the task. Now when 
I was at Pendle Hill, that community I talked about earlier, one of the cooks 
had a lovely custom. When she was feeling pressured by the demands of 
feedmq fifty people — and each of them would be practicing a different 

: 25 




Number 16 - 1995 



The Prophetic Vision 



19 



dietary fad — she would light a candle and put it on the table where she 
worked. Usually this was a raucous kitchen, one that might have a ball 
game on the radio, or a couple of Swedish fiddlers playing — 1 don’t want to 
give the impression that it was a pietistical environment. But the candle 
changed things. It called us to attention. 

1 brought home the candle custom, and it changed our kitchen, too, 
though the changes took about five years to effect. 1 learned to consciously 
let go of my tension when 1 lit that candle. 1 learned to make tamales from 
scratch. This is no great accomplishment for some people, but 1 come from 
an ethnic tradition where it’s big deal to make turnips from scratch. I 
learned, let me put it this way, the spiritual practice of making tamales from 
scratch. 1 came to love the process of stripping the com out in my garden, 
of using everything: the corn, the husks, the cobs to steam the little bundles 
on top of; 1 loved the feeling of solidarity with the ancient world of women. 
Seven years ago 1 used to toss hot dogs to children who snapped them up 
like puppies. Today, by contrast, we practice something we call The 
Religion of Food and Beauty. My friends constantly tease me about the 
hours 1 spend in the kitchen and they tell me how they send out for pizza 
and how their freezers overflow with frozen dinners — and that’s OK, 
because everybody’s idea of rest will be different — ^but I’m evangelical about 
this Religion of Food and Beauty. Last week we made a cherry pie, from 
real cherries, that we talked about all week in theological terms. 



1 am saying, if you don’t have time to breathe, if you are run off 
your feet, try spending twice as much time as you usually spend on a task. It 
may rest you very nicely. 1 try to light the candle sometimes over my 
freshman essays (resisting the obvious temptation to set them on fire). It 
may take me another seven years to establish a religion about this, and by 
then I’ll be ready to retire. But here is one thing I’ve discovered. 1 used to 
spend a lot of energy arguing in absentia with my freshman and scolding 
them, which does not promote the tranquil mind. “You dummy, 1 told you 
to put your name in the upper-left-hand comer. I’ll bet you were stoned 
when you wrote this.” And so on. If, by contrast, 1 cultivate an attitude of 
friendly visiting as 1 grade freshmen essays — you with the red hair, you with 
the nose ring — it takes longer but it’s twice as restful. And 1 feel 1 have 
done less tearing at the web of life. 

My new mantra, then, is “it takes as long as it takes.” Some short 
cuts complicate life enormously. There’s an archetypal Peace Corps story 
about a young engineer who worked in Africa. He saw the women walking 
miles every day to the well and decided to help them by digging a well in 
the village. But the culture of the village immediately began to decline. The 
children started to fight. Families stopped speaking to each other. Finally 
lage picked up its houses and moved two miles from the well. That 



ERIC 



26 



20 O’Reilley 



daily walk was essential to shaking out the troubles of the group, offering 
sympathy and friendship and solutions. I have a young Senegalese friend 
named Nambe who likes to come to my house for the tamales and she says 
“I just don’t understand Americans, they don’t take time to make dinner, 
they don’t take time to make love....” 

Making love and making dinner take time, but they also give you 

back. 

When I was eighteen I start studying yoga with a Catholic monk 
who stood on his head every day to remind himself that the world could be 
seen from a different perspective. I have never mastered standing on my 
head, but I think each of us needs to remind ourselves daily that we are 
seeing only a limited reality. The poet William Stafford used to rise every 
morning at four a.m. and write a poem. Somebody said to him, “But surely 
you can’t write a good poem every day, Bill. What happens then?” “Oh,” 
he said, “Then I lower my standards.” Three great lessons here — practice 
your art every day, lower your standards, and claim a time or place or an 
attitude that will challenge the bourgeoisie idea of reality. Four a.m.! I told 
this story to one of my friends, who immediately began getting up at dawn. 
He called me long distance from Berkeley. “It shakes up your whole soul,” 
he said of that time of day, “it changes things better than Prozac.” 

The point here is not that you should be getting up at four a.m., 
but it is a bottom-line question: What arc you going to give? To 
function as an artist of whatever kind in the academy, or to make tamales 
from scratch, the sacrifices are big. One of the first and obvious things you 
might have to put on the line, for example, is academic prestige. But, 
indeed, each of us might pause here to think about an important piece of 
self-knowledge we have gained, think about the art we do, or the art we 
live.. .Now let us reflect for a moment on what that blessing cost... 

If you met a witch in the woods and she said, “I’ll give you self- 
knowledge, but you have to give me [blankety blank].” Insert here what you 
gave, blindly or with no choice, or with an overflowing heart, for your best 
knowledge. With the options presented clearly, as they seldom are in life, 
most of us would say, no thanks. In Minnesota if you want to be a 
hardanger fiddler, the old guys will tell you, “Well, you have to go into the 
woods and when you come to a waterfall, you will hear a fossegrim, a 
kind of troll, playing his violin behind the waterfall. That’s where they live. If 
you apply to the troll for lessons, he will take your fingers and pull them. It 
will hurt unbearably, but in the end you will be a hardanger fiddler.” 

So get up at four a.m.; it’s an easy way to placate the trolls of art. 

Let me conclude with a final koan that seems to have something to 
Qi " being an artist. I’ll call this story, “Somewhere There is a Great 

ERIC 



21 



Number 16 - 1995 



The Prophetic Vision 



21 



Mystery That Wants to Live in your House and Change Everything.” I was 
out walking, again with my friend Robin the naturalist, on the university 
\ campus near his house. By the side of the road, we came upon a tiny 
newborn baby animal, covered in white hair, eyes closed, moving feebly. 
Now both Robin and I have raised baby animals pretty successfully — so we 
paused a long moment to look at the creature. After a while, as I looked 
carefully at the contours of its tail, I reached a fatal conclusion. I am from 
the East Side of St. Paul, where we do not even say a certain word, we 
spell it, as in “I think I saw an r-a-t in the basement by the drain.” On the 
East Side, we do not like this animal. So I said to Robin, I think it’s a r-a-t.” 
With that piece of labeling we left the animal and walked on. 

Later that same evening, I visited my neighbors up the street. This 
is a preacher’s family who have for years been famous in the neighborhood 
for their absolutely fastidious behavior. It’s the kind of house where you take 
off your shoes at the door, where the furniture is covered in plastic, the car 
always washed, the bushed pruned, etc. On this particular evening, as I 
stopped to pass a few moments, my neighbor the preacher wanted to show 
me the wonderful thing he had literally up his sleeve: their pet squirrel. I had 
heard about this squirrel. In fact the whole neighborhood was talking about 
it. They had found it in their yard after a storm — a tiny baby then — and they 
had been raising it for a year. What the neighbors were saying was, “Do 
you believe the transformation at the minister’s house? This squirrel has 
the run of the place. It goes up and down the drapes. It eats from its own 
little dish at the table. They let it leave its little messes all over and they just 
laugh.” With great pride, the minister showed me his squirrel. Now you see 
where this story is going. The animal was enchanting, and tame as a kitten. 
And as I looked carefully at it, observed the way its ears were set against its 
skull, the lie of its tail, I knew what I had walked away from earlier in the 
day. 

Or had I? This is a koan. How do we tell a transforming miracle, 
an angel unaware, from a r-a-t? And would my catalyst for change be the 
same as the minister’s? Surely not, as I need an angel of order rather than 
an angel of misrule. One of my friends huffily told me, “A squirrel is just a 
dirty rodent anyway. You’re always making everything into a big 
metaphor.” 

There is no simple moral to this story. It’s yours. Take it home if 
you want to, or let it be. But somewhere there is a great mystery that 
wants to live in your house and change everything. 




28 



22 O’Reilley 



WORKS CITED 



Hall, Nor. The Moon and the Virgin. New York: Harper, 1980. 



Mukherjee, Bharati. Jasmine. New York: Ballantine, 1989. 



Er|c 29 



• > C" 



Number 16 - 1995 



23 



THE LEGACY OF DAVE BRUBECK 



Lloyd Kaplan 



There are many jazz artists, past and present, who deserve further 
study, but nobody deserves reassessment more than Dave Brubeck, the 
most underestimated jazz performer since 1950. The Brubeck legacy is, in 
fact, being presented in a distorted and unfavorable way to students of jazz 
history in too many of today‘s jazz textbooks; hence, this article is 
essentially an attempt to set the record straight - to present a more accurate 
appraisal and a truer perspective of Dave Brubeck’s outstanding 
contribution to the course of jazz. 

Dave Brubeck’s place in the history of jazz is comparable to that of 
Claude Debussy’s or Igor Stravinsky‘s in the history of classical music, in the 
sense that Brubeck has consistently been a highly successful and highly 
visible modernist with the public, one who has significantly altered the 
course of jazz with a unique and totally individualistic approach. Similarly, 
just as Debussy and Stravinsky attained popular success without artistic 
compromise, so, too, has Brubeck been able to achieve the same in the 
world of jazz. 

One can be a modernist by approaching art in one of two ways: by 
breaking completely from the past and creating something almost totally 
different, or by essentially “stretching” what has been before and propelling 
the updated art form forward. Brubeck, like Debussy and Stravinsky, 
represents the latter approach, and, like the two classical music geniuses, 
Brubeck has not only been the innovator but has also been the culminator 
of a unique musical language. About this “stretching” of the art of the past, 
Brubeck has said the following in the liner notes of his LP Brubeck Plains 
Brubeck: 




The great contributors to jazz, the men whom I admire 
the most in the field, are strong individuals - and they 
can contribute the most to the art of jazz by retaining 
and developing that individuality - exploring that facet of 
jazz which has profound significance to them. Each of 
us hopes to add new dimensions to the mainstream by 
pushing its present boundaries a little wider, digging a 

30 



24 Kaplan 



little deeper, and perhaps discovering new sources of 
inspiration in neglected tributaries. 

Since the early 1950s, Dave Brubeck has emerged as a full fledged 
international star in the world of jazz, and the Brubeck groups have become 
headliners at major jazz concerts, jazz festivals (his festival career began at 
the Newport Jazz Festival in 1955 - the first year it was held in Freebody 
Park), and television specials. Through these public appearances, as well as 
recordings, Brubeck has introduced jazz to a great many young people, 
especially those of the 1950s and 1960s. 

As the sales of his recordings and the many honors and awards he 
has received prove, Brubeck’s music continues to be loved both in this 
country and abroad. About record sales, Mark Gridley says in the fine book, 
Jazz Stifles: History; and Analj^sis, that “in the period 1955 to 1985 
Brubeck ranked second in record sales among all jazz recording artists” 
(90). The awards and honors are too many to list, but consider just the end 
of 1994 to get an idea of the artist’s popularity. On October 14, President 
Clinton presented Brubeck with the National Medal of Arts Award. In this 
same general period Brubeck also received the first Connecticut Arts Award 
(a lifetime achievement award) and the San Francisco Arts Festival 
Achievement Award. 

Despite his track record of success, Brubeck has all too often been 
snubbed by authors of jazz texts, jazz critics, and compilers of jazz 
anthologies. This paper will explore this strange treatment after a brief 
presentation of biographical material and a look at Brubeck’s evolution as 
an artist, leader, and composer. 

David Warren Brubeck was born on December 6, 1920, in 
Concord, California. His father was a lifelong cattleman and a 
championship rodeo roper. His mother was a talented pianist, who had 
studied in Europe with English concert artist Dame Myra Hess. Elizabeth 
Brubeck decided to forego her promising career as a concert pianist and 
devote herself to her family. She did, however, continue in music as a piano 
teacher in the town of lone, California, where the Brubecks settled. One of 
her pupils was her son Dave, who started instruction at the age of four. As 
a youngster Dave was cross-eyed, and this may have been a major factor 
contributing to the difficulty he experienced when trying to learn how to 
read music. Dave would listen to the musical exercises played by his 
mother’s students for long periods of time. Having been blessed with an 
outstanding musical ear, he was able to memorize the exercises so that by 
the time his own lessons began he could successfully fake his way through 
while^ staring intently at the sheet music as though he were reading the 
He was so convincing at this that he was able to fool his mother 




Number 16 - 1995 



Baibeck 25 



for years. He even did the same as a music major in college, and it wasn’t 
until he was a senior that his reading problem was discovered. About this 
situation, Brubeck related that he eventually began to improve his music 
reading skills by trying to write music, rather than by any reading materials. 

Brubeck spent most of his youth in lone, California. From the age 
of thirteen he was playing in local jazz groups, but also working as a 
cowboy on his father‘s ranch and attending school. At this period of his life 
he was more interested in ranching than music. While riding his horse, he 
would, like many cowboys, think of music, but rather than create cowboy 
songs about dusty trails and dogies, his music would consist of 
improvisations of songs or polyrhythms (the simultaneous use of conflicting 
rhythmic patterns) which he would sing against the patterns created by the 
pounding of animal hooves. He continued this way until he graduated from 
lone High School in 1938. 

From high school, Brubeck went on to the College of the Pacific in 
Stockton, California. He intended, at first, to become a veterinarian, but he 
switched to music after a year. Meanwhile, he kept playing the piano 
professionally in night clubs in order to help pay his way through college. 

1942 was an important year for Brubeck. He graduated from the 
College of the Pacific. He also started to study music with Darius Milhaud (a 
twentieth century French avant-garde composer), which was the start of a 
very significant artistic and personal relationship. And he entered the Army, 
becoming the leader of a jazz group that toured the west coast and Europe. 
Finally, about three months after joining the army (while on leave) he 
married lola, his first and only love. Their marriage was to eventually result 
in six children, several of whom would become musicians of consequence, 
and more than fifty years of wedded bliss, which is no easy achievement for 
a couple, one of whom is a touring musician. 

After being discharged in 1946, Brubeck resumed his studies with 
Milhaud, who taught the young man some of the technical aspects of 
composition such as counterpoint (music consisting of two or more melodic 
lines sounding simultaneously) and polytonality (music in two or more 
tonalities or keys simultaneously). These studies took place at Mills College 
in Oakland, California, and they lasted for about three years while Brubeck 
was in pursuit of his master’s degree. 

During this period Milhaud strongly encouraged Brubeck to be 
himself (follow his own instincts) and to retain jazz in his compositions. 
Milhaud also emphasized the importance of modulation (the changing of 
musical keys) and the idea of having a strong feeling of direction of the 
music. About 12-tone music, a technique of composition created by Arnold 
^0 jnberg to destroy the concept of “key” or the domination of any single 

ERIC 



32 



26 Kaplan 



tone, Milhaud once told Brubeck “The reason I don‘t like 12-tone music is 
that you’re never someplace. Therefore, you can never go someplace.” 
While still at Mills College, at the urging of Milhaud, Brubeck formed and 
became the leader of the Dave Brubeck Octet, a group assembled to play 
the compositions of the graduate students. The octet included Paul 
Desmond - alto sax, Dave Van Kriedt - tenor sax. Bill Smith - clarinet, Dick 
Collins - trumpet. Bob Collins - trombone. Jack Weeks - bass and Cal 
Tjader - drums. The group’s theme song, “Curtain Music,” was a thirty- 
three second composition by Brubeck, and it is included in the wonderful 
collection of Brubeck recordings, Dave Brubeck Time Signatures: A 
Career Retrospective (Columbia/Legacy 52945, 4 compact discs). 

The octet played music that was not commercially oriented, and 
the group was apparently too large to be sought after by club owners, so 
Brubeck had to accept a variety of playing jobs under various leaderships, 
among which was Paul Desmond’s in 1949. Desmond’s gig lasted only 
three weeks, but it was during this engagement that the seeds of their 
contrapuntal dialogue style were sown. Unfortunately, Paul Desmond pulled 
the proverbial rug from under Brubeck by accepting a job elsewhere for the 
band, with the exception of Brubeck. At this time Brubeck told his wife that 
he never wanted to see Paul Desmond again. 

In the meantime, Brubeck continued to keep his octet alive and 
managed to get a few concert dates for the group. It was at one of these 
engagements that a deejay named Jimmy Lyons was in attendance. 
Fascinated by what he heard, Lyons was able to convince the people at his 
radio station to present live broadcasts of Dave Brubeck, but it was to be a 
trio instead of the octet, a trio that included Ron Crotty - bass and Cal 
Tjader - drums and vibes. The program, emanating from San Francisco, 
was called “Lyons Busy,” and it helped greatly in the launching of Brubeck s 
career. 

Brubeck subsequently started to make recordings with this trio, and 
three of the group’s recordings were named later in 1951 on the best-of- 
the-year list in Metronome’s Yearbook, Jazz: 1951. The music of 
Brubeck’s group started to gain attention, earning honors for the budding 
artist in this very early stage of his career. 

In 1951, Desmond came back into Brubeck’s life via the influence 
and urging of lola. At this time only the personal relationship was 
reestablished, for Brubeck accepted a job in Honolulu, Hawaii, with his trio. 
While in Hawaii, he suffered a near-fatal diving accident which broke his 
back. In traction for three weeks, Brubeck saw the job end and his 
mii<;iri?ins leave Hawaii to work elsewhere. It was at this time that he wrote 

Desmond, suggesting the idea of establishing a quartet. So, in 




Number 16 - 1995 



Brubeck 27 



1951, Dave Brubeck formed the first Dave Brubeck Quartet with Paul 
Desmond, Fred Dutton - bass, and Herb Barman - drums. Several players 
would be used on bass and drums in the ensuing years, including Wyatt 
“Bull” Ruther, Bob and Norman Bates, Lloyd Davis and Joe Dodge, before 
the permanent status would fall to drummer Joe Morello in 1955 and 
bassist Eugene Wright in 1958. This foursome (Brubeck, Desmond, 
Morello, and Wright) worked as a unit from 1958 until the quartet 
disbanded in 1967. 

The quartet played standards until 1956, at which time Brubeck’s 
creative juices burst forth with “In Your Own Sweet Way,” now a jazz 
standard, and “Waltz” (both songs written in one night). These tunes were 
soon recorded on an LP entitled Brubeck Pla\;s Brubeck, on which nine 
original compositions by Brubeck were introduced, including “The Duke” 
and “Two Part Contention.” Brubeck’s compositions would come to reflect 
his fascination with polyrhythms, his love of counterpoint, sudden 
modulations, polytonality, and metrical (time signatures) diversity. The latter 
characteristic - metrical diversity - provided the common thread between the 
various selections of Brubeck‘s history-making LP of 1959, Time Out. 
Some of the most popular pieces from this LP include Desmond’s “Take 
Five” and Brubeck’s “Blue Rondo A La Turk,” and the unusual number by 
Brubeck “Three To Get Ready,” which, after the first chorus, features the 
constant shifting of meter every two measures, switching continuously from 
three beats per measure to four beats per measure. With “Take Five” 
having a time signature of 5/4 and “Blue Rondo” being in 9/8 it is clear 
that new ground was being broken in the world of jazz by Dave Brubeck. In 
the liner notes for Time Out by Steve Race, the importance of Brubeck’s 
contribution is clearly pointed out: 



Dave Brubeck, pioneer already in so many other fields, 
is really the first to explore the uncharted seas of 
compound time. True, some musicians before him 
experimented with jazz in waltz time, notably Benny 
Carter and Max Roach. But Dave has gone further, 
finding still more exotic time signatures, and even laying 
one rhythm in counterpoint over another. 



Brubeck didn’t stop working with unusual meters. In 1961, he 
made another recording for Columbia records. Time Further Out. One of 
the pieces found on the new recording was a brief two-minute work called 
“Unsquare Dance,” which was in 7/4 meter. This work hadn’t even been 
Q n down before the recording was made: it was sung by Brubeck to the 



28 Kaplan 



group on the way to the recording session. It was so difficult that Brubeck 
had to promise not to do it again. Morello‘s sigh of relief can still be heard 
at the conclusion of the original recording. In later years Brubeck recanted, 
as he did, indeed, include “Unsquare Dance” in his concerts. 

If Dave Brubeck never did a thing after his Time Out and Time 
Further Out albums, his place in jazz history would have been solidly 
secure. He did, however, continue to perform, tour, and compose 
throughout the following decades; in fact, he has never stopped. A few 
examples of his countless activities include the recording of a movie sound 
track All Night Long with Charlie Mingus, and several recordings with 
Gerry Mulligan, Alan Dawson, and others. He also did some recordings 
with his sons Darius - piano, Dan - drums, and Chris - bass and trombone, 
as well as other musicians such as Jerry Bergonzi - sax and Perry Robinson 
‘ clarinet. In recent years, Brubeck has toured and recorded with Bill Smith, 
his friend from Mills College - clarinet. 

Dave Brubeck’s many accomplishments and contributions to jazz 
are just briefly touched on in what follows, but they should suffice in 
providing the reader with some insight into the extent of Brubeck‘s 
significance. 

To begin with, Brubeck broadened and expanded the language of 
jazz by emphasizing, and in some cases, initiating such elements as 
polytonality; sudden modulations; polyrhythms; contrapuntal techniques; 
and most shockingly, a variety of meters that helped shatter the 4/4 barrier 
that had been previously “automatic” in jazz. 

Brubeck has been prolific both as a recording artist and as a 
composer. He has been responsible for 112 albums, including the 
legendary Time Out, which became the first instrumental album in the field 
of jazz to sell more than a million copies. Brubeck also surpassed the 
century mark in the area of musical composition. Along with some of the 
pieces already named, there are oratorios (lengthy dramatic-musical works 
with no stage action that are usually based on religious texts) such as “The 
Light In The Wilderness” and “Beloved Son;” cantatas (similar to oratorios, 
except they may be secular as well as sacred) such as “The Gates of Justice” 
and “Truth Be Fallen;” a mass entitled “Festival Mass To Hope;” ballets 
such as “A Maiden In The Tower” and “Points On Jazz,” and a musical 
entitled The Real Ambassador. 

Along with such jazz artists as Stan Getz, Miles Davis, Erroll Gamer 
and John Lewis, Brubeck helped keep jazz alive in the 1960s when it had 
reached its nadir in terms of popularity. This loss of popularity was not 
only due to the growing excitement over rock and the generation gap of 
:ade, but also because of the advent of various jazz styles that simply 

35 




Number 16 - 1995 



Brubeck 29 



didn’t appeal to major portions of the jazz audience, an example of which 
was free jazz with its lack of recognizable or composed melodies and the 
unsatisfying quality of unresolved dissonance. Brubeck‘s popularity resulted 
in his becoming one of this country’s major musical ambassadors, as the 
Dave Brubeck Quartet toured Europe, the Middle East, part of the Orient, 
and several iron curtain countries in the 1960s, including what was the 
Soviet Union. These concerts were often sponsored by our government and 
were consistently sellouts due to Brubeck’s international fame. 

Dave Brubeck established a new market of jazz fans; namely, 
college students. He was probably the first jazz artist to consistently perform 
in concert on college campuses. He even made live recordings of these 
concerts such as Jazz Goes to College and Jazz Goes to Junior College, 
In his Writings In Jazz, Nathan Davis points out that “beginning with 
Brubeck, colleges and universities grew to be the largest market for jazz in 
the U.S.” (119). Brubeck also helped integration efforts considerably by 
maintaining an on-going integrated ensemble from 1958 to 1967. Eugene 
Wright, an African-American, was the regular bass player during these 
years. Doing this reflected Brubeck‘s courage and his character, as it meant 
a loss of work, not only in certain areas of the country, but also in terms of 
television appearances. Some of the black musicians who paid tribute to 
Brubeck over the years include Charlie Mingus, Willie “The Lion” Smith, 
and Miles Davis. 

Just as Louis Armstrong convinced the public of his time of the 
greatness of jazz, especially the jazz solo, and as people like Benny 
Goodman, Charlie Parker, Dizzy Gillespie, and Thelonious Monk convinced 
their audiences, becoming the spokespeople of their eras, so, too, was 
Brubeck the man of his time, the leader in convincing the audience of the 
1950s that jazz could be considerably modernized - rhythmically, 
harmonically and texturally - and still swing in the traditional way. For 
Brubeck, jazz had to retain the jazz beat and the element of improvisation in 
order to remain jazz. 

Having contributed so much to the world of jazz, one would assume 
that there would be several biographies of Dave Brubeck, but at the time of 
this writing no authorized biography has been published. One would also 
assume that there would be ample coverage of his accomplishments in the 
various jazz history textbooks, but here, too, with a few exceptions (Gridley, 
Martin) such has not been the case. Most authors manifest little 
understanding and/or appreciation of Brubeck’s contributions, or they 
promulgate an elitist attitude, maintaining that if he has been so successful 
with the public at large then he couldn’t have been that great, because the 
O is not capable of recognizing true genius. 

ERIC Qe 



30 Kaplan 



A small, but representative, sampling of the paltry coverage 
afforded Brubeck in some of today’s jazz books is presented in the following 
material. 

In The Jazz Tradition (New and Revised Edition, 1983), Martin 
Williams presents a series of essays about 21 people in jazz history but 
ignores Brubeck completely; in fact, Brubeck is not listed once in the index. 
This is not too surprising though, for Williams, responsible for the 
Smithsonian Collection of jazz records, excluded any of Brubeck’s 
recordings in this famous anthology. In the 457 pages of Jazz: A Historii 
(1977), Frank Tirro dispenses with Brubeck in a paragraph on page 333 
and one line on page 338. Fortunately, in his latest book. Living With 
Jazz: An Appreciation (1996), considerably more time is devoted to 
Brubeck, including some analyses of Brubeck’s compositions. 

In Jazz: A Listener's Guide (2nd edition), James McCalla provides 
no mention whatever of Dave Brubeck. (Recall that Brubeck was second in 
record sales for three decades!) For a listener’s guide not to include so 
popular and important a jazz artist as Brubeck is simply preposterous. In his 
A Short History/ of Jazz (1993), Bob Yurochko manages to devote five 
lines (of 318 pages) to Brubeck. In books by Nat Hentoff, Megill and 
Tanner, Megill and Demory, and a host of others, Brubeck is treated in a 
similarly shoddy manner. Along with the lack of understanding and the 
elitist theory, another possible explanation for this completely inadequate 
treatment of Brubeck is reverse discrimination. One would have hoped that 
racism, too much a factor in the jazz scene of the past, would have 
disappeared by now, but apparently this is just wishful thinking. In his 
recent article “The Color of Jazz Becomes a Hot Issue for Musicians” (Dec. 
23, 1994), Howard Reich, syndicated columnist for the Chicago Tribune, 
points out that accusations of racism are occurring with increasing 
frequency nowadays. Ironically Dave Brubeck, a long time champion of civil 
rights and a firm believer in integration, might just be another victim of 
reverse prejudice. 

Dave Brubeck’s greatness has too long been overlooked by too 
many of the so-called academicians in the field of jazz. The underestimation 
of his solid contributions has resulted in a biased version of jazz’s evolution. 
Hopefully this situation will be corrected in the near future and Dave 
Brubeck will be listed among jazz’s greatest innovators and most creative 
geniuses. 



ERIC 



37 



Number 16 - 1995 



Brubeck 31 



SELECTED RECORDINGS 

Dave Brubeck Trio, Featuring Cal Tjader, Ron Crotty (1949, Fantasy 
3204); Jazz Goes to College (1954, Columbia CL566 and CS8631); 
Brubeck Pla\;s Brubeck (1956, Columbia CL878); Time Out (1959, 
Columbia CL1397 and CS8192); Time Further Out (1961, Columbia 
CL1690 and CS8490); Bravo! Brubeck! (1967, Columbia CL2695 and 
CS9495); and Back Home (1979, Concord CJ-103). 



SELECTED BIBLIOGRAPHY 

D. Brubeck. “Jazz Evolvement as Art Form,” Down Beat xvii (1950): 13. 

Brubeck and D. Brubeck. “Jazz Perspective,” Jam Session, ed. R. Gleason. 
New York: 1958. 

D. Morgenstern: ’’Two Generations of Brubecks: a Talk with Dave, Darius, 
and Chris,” Down Beat xxxix (1972): 12. 

C. J. Stuessy. The Confluence of Jazz and Classical Music from 1950 to 
1970 (diss., U. of Rochester, 1978). 

“Dave Brubeck,” Swing Journal, xxxiv (1980): 164 [discography]. 

Storb, I. “Dave Brubeck, Komponist und Pianist,” Jazzforschung, xiii 
(1981): 9-43. 



SPECIAL RECOMMENDATION 

Perhaps the best way for someone to become acquainted with the 
music of Dave Brubeck is to get access to the collection of four compact 
discs entitled Dave Brubeck Time Signatures: A Career Retrospective 
(Columbia Legacy 52945). This marvelous assortment of pieces includes 
recordings spanning the years from 1949 to 1991, involving not only the 
Brubeck octet, trio and quartet, but also some recordings with such artists 
as Carmen McRae, Gerry Mulligan, and Louis Armstrong. This set is also 
accompanied by a wonderfully written booklet featuring insightful material 
O ug Ramsey and Juul Anthonissen. 

ERIC 



38 



32 



INTERDISCIPLINARY STUDY: TOWARDS THE MILLENNIUM 



Maryanne M. Garbowsky 



"To build a house” 



... there was a construction crew that wanted to 
build a house. So the crew opened a college, which 
soon split into departments that specialized in 
hammerology and saw science. 

It was not long before members of the 
hammerology department divided into two sub- 
specialties, due to a split between the physical 
hammerologists and the cultural hammerologists. 

Specialties continued to proliferate, until one day 
somebody realized that no house was being built. 

(Mooney 11) 



This fable told by Robert Costanza, an associate professor at the 
University of Maryland’s Center of Environmental and Estuarine Studies, 
parallels the situation in most traditional college curriculums. There is too 
much “over-specialization” for the faculty and not enough of “the big 
picture” for students (Mooney 11). 

Recently Jacques Barzun, Professor Emeritus at Columbia University, 
accepted the university’s 1994 Hamilton Medal given to commemorate the 
college’s core curriculum, one of “the oldest uninterrupted programs of 
general education in America” (“The Hamilton” 4). Accepting the award on 
behalf of all those who have taught the course. Professor Barzun said that 
the program fought against Specialism” and that one of its main purposes 
was to enlarge the vision, by unfolding a panorama against which to place 
whatever the student would learn in college and during the rest of his life” 
(4). 



This “panorama” is what interdisciplinary study attempts to provide. 
We do not live in a vacuum. Nor do we live in isolation from our neighbors. 




39 



Number 16 - 1995 



Interdisciplinary Study 33 



our community, and our environment. Yet when it comes to education, this 
is precisely the case. Certainly, as human beings it comes as no surprise 
that we lead “interdisciplinary lives” (Sbaratta 38). Yet that is not what we 
present to our students. Instead, we show them a fragmented replica of life 
found in the traditional curriculum, where we study individual subjects cut 
off and isolated one from the other. Thus we approach literary works and 
their authors as if they had no relation to the world around them, as if they 
had sprung up without regard or reference to their era, to the events of 
their time, or the current of ideas that nourished and inspired them. 

In the interdisciplinary curriculum, this is not the case. Literature is not 
separate from history, nor music from art, nor philosophy from science. 
The classes become a microcosm of the real world outside the classroom 
door and the syllabus reflects the breadth and diversity of real life rather 
than the narrow restriction of the textbook. 

Ernest L. Boyer, president of the Carnegie Foundation for the 
Advancement of Teaching, believes that the substance of general education 
should be the “study” of “such issues as the cycle of human life and the role 
of religion in the world, along with the arts, the environment, and 
sociological and anthropological issues in other cultures” (Mooney 12). 
These goals can be best fulfilled through interdisciplinary study. “Subjects 
are not wholes from the world to be studied in isolation. Nor are they 
experiences of a special kind with no relation to experiences of other kinds” 
(Sbaratta 38). 

Recently the U.S News and World Report highlighted several schools 
in which curriculum renovation has yielded good results. In University 
Heights (Bronx), faculty are not divided into departments but make up “six 
interdisciplinary teams” guiding students to look at themes from varying 
perspectives (Toch 53). In this way, students study “fewer subjects more 
intensively.” School “reformer” Theodore Sizer argues that the answer to 
the superficiality of U.S. schools is “to teach fewer subjects in greater 
depth” and to “illuminate the connections between them” (53). 

The results have been positive; students have been drawn “deeper into 
the subject matter” and “understand the relationship of the information they 
are learning” (Toch 56). A similar program in Los Angeles shows that 
students not only improved their writing and understanding of “abstract 
concepts” but also had less absenteeism and lower drop out rates (Toch 
56). 

But let’s clarify what interdisciplinary means. The term refers to a 
variety of attempts to bring together disciplines such as English, history, and 
art into a common curriculum. An interdisciplinary course crosses both 
'^^^‘imental and divisional boundaries - from the humanities to science to 




40 



34 Garbowsky 



business technology. Most often done in the humanities, interdisciplinary 
courses can also include vocational areas as well. 

A workable definition of interdisciplinary study is found in a recent 
issue of Change: “Multidisciplinary programs are those in which faculty 

members bring to bear a discrete set of disciplinary skills and perspectives 
on common problems” (Miller 28). An interdisciplinary course allows for 
focus on a “topic, rather than a discipline” (Hoffnung 31). It emphasizes 
“integrating available approaches and resources rather than mastering a 
single disciplinary approach” (31). 

Traditionally, critics of this “inclusive” (Watters 17) classroom argue 
that “combining more than one discipline in a course weakens each of the 
disciplines” (Sbaratta 33). In the Academic Crisis in the Communiti; 
College, Dennis McGrath and Martin B. Spear caution against such 
programs, especially at the community college level where faculty are trying 
to “bridge the gulf between nontraditional students and academic life” (88). 
To add interdisciplinarism to this already difficult task tends “to weaken the 
academic culture further by diluting discipline-based standards of rigor and 
norms of discourse” (89). 

Most recently, Harold Bloom, in The Western Canon: Books and 
Schools of the Age , bemoans the future when “we’re not going to have 
departments of English or literature. A lot of them already are being named 
departments of cultural studies, and doing Batman comics and theme parks 
and all sorts of hazari, to use the grand old Yiddish word for it” (McMillen 
25). 

However, lest we lose all sense of perspective, let us examine the 
benefits such programs can yield as adjuncts to — rather than replacements 
of — the traditional curricula. 

The advantages of an interdisciplinary approach are multiple and 
include benefits for the institution, the faculty and the students. Since the 
nature of interdisciplinary study is “ inclusive rather than exclusive,” it 
allows for using the resources a college has already on hand in a new way. 
Thus, in a period of constrained monies and cutbacks, a college can add to 
its course offerings without the expense of hiring new faculty — “all 
personnel and other resources are already extant through existing 
departments” (Miller 32). Thus the cost of funding a new program is little or 
nothing. 

Furthermore, in a time of declining enrollment it is a way to attract 
new students. Thus, a “new or growing institution” has the opportunity to 
start a program in “ a small, new field rather than a mediocre one in an 
established area” (Miller 30). 



O 




Number 16 - 1995 



Interdisciplinary Study 35 



In an effort to strengthen the humanities in a time of eroding 
enrollment, North Shore Community College implemented a series of 
interdisciplinary courses under a new department of interdisciplinary 
studies. Since that time, an array of courses has been developed which have 
grown in number and have “enjoyed consistent popularity” among students 
(Sbaratta 38). 

For the community college especially, student retention has become a 
major problem. Interdisciplinary study has been shown to be highly effective 
in addressing this problem, especially considering that only “1/3 of all 
beginning full time students at their level” go on to get their degrees (Tinto 
26). In this regard, Seattle Central Community College in Washington 
started a Coordinated Studies Program which not only crosses departments 
in the humanities, but also in the math-science and professional/technical 
division. Students meet together in one large class which then breaks up 
into smaller group sessions. 

The students in this program are more involved, not only in their 
courses, but also in campus wide activities. They see themselves as learning 
more and participating more than students not in this program. According 
to Vincent Tinto, this “multi-disciplinary approach... provided a model of 
learning that encourages students to express the diversity of their 
experiences and world views.” As an added benefit, “it allowed differences 
in age, ethnicity, and life experience to emerge and become part of the 
course “ (Tinto 27-28). The result of this program was that students were 
retained in greater numbers, not only those who were adequately prepared 
for college but also those with “substantial remedial needs” (29). 

In other programs, results have been the same. Faculty at Santa Rosa 
Junior College have found that by using an interdisciplinary approach in 
their remediation program, students not only did better, but the rate of 
attendance and retention was higher (Palmer 62). 

Another advantage to the institution is that an interdisciplinary 
program provides an opportunity for faculty development. Teachers, as well 
as students, can “lose interest in their lessons....” But with the challenges of 
interdisciplinary courses, “each learning situation becomes a novel way of 
using imagination to create new routes to personal understanding” (Sautter 
436). In the exchange and planning that goes into an interdisciplinary 
curriculum, teachers are challenged to build bridges and make connections 
between disciplines. It means more work for teachers but assures them a 
new way of thinking and seeing than simply out of the narrow lens of one 
discipline. 

For faculty the benefits are many. It helps participating faculty 
'^'jorr^ome the isolation of their individual departments and gives them an 



36 Garbowsky 



avenue by which to explore “special interests, talents, and expertise which 
do not fit the traditional discipline mold” (Sbaratta 38). 

In my own college, faculty are not only divided by disciplines but also 
have physical barriers such as separate buildings to contend with. An 
interdisciplinary course would engage and stimulate faculty from different 
departments and allow them to overcome such real physical dividers as well 
as purely artificial ones. This cross-pollination would be healthy for the 
faculty as a whole as well as for the individual participants. In New Jersey, a 
survey of attitudes among those involved in the Raritan Valley Community 
College’s interdisciplinary program found that faculty enjoyed the presence 
of “other teachers in the classroom” and thought of team teaching as “one 
of the main draws to participate in the program” (Valasek 18). 

Such courses ground academics in a common goal and help them 
overcome the normal “insularity of faculty” (Sbaratta 38). According to 
Philip Sbaratta, “the interdisciplinary structure is a forum for faculty 
creativity”; it is “an antidote for the ‘learned ignoramus,’ Jose Ortega y 
Gasset’s label for the specialist confined by the myopia of his specialty” 
(39). In addition to regeneration and recreation, the challenge of synthesis 
in the curriculum might well lead faculty to new research and to produce 
“scholarship that otherwise might fall though the cracks” (Mooney 12). 

But it is the student who reaps the greatest rewards. The traditional 
classroom has been known to stifle “imagination and creativity,” but in the 
interdisciplinary curriculum the student can fully exercise imagination and 
creativity in the context of meeting broader academic goals” and for “longer 
term learning” (Sautter 436). 

The classroom is enriched by the broader base of knowledge and 
experience presented by the faculty team teaching the course. “Multiple 
instructors bring to students “a wider range of academic and experiential 
background” (Hoffnung 31). Students are not fed “isolated facts,” but are 
encouraged “to discover how ideas are connected” (Geoghegan 458). 
According to Ernest Boyer, “without an understanding of large patterns,” 
we are not preparing students “for wisdom but for a game of Trivial 
Pursuit” (458). 

In the interdisciplinary classroom where instructors are brought 
together “to teach collaboratively” the atmosphere takes “on an intellectual 
richness that traditional courses lack” (Tinto 28). Both students and faculty 
enjoy the experience of being in class with more than one teacher (Valasek 
18). The diversity in the classroom opens up conversation that empowers 
students to add their own experiences as well as validate “their ability to 
contribute to the progress of the course” (Tinto 28). 

^**'ire are many varieties of interdisciplinary studies, ranging from 

Number 16 - 1995 



43 



Interdisciplinary Study 37 



whole new departments, to core curricula, to individual courses, to modules. 
Some simply merge the humanities area, while others bring together the 
vocational and professional with the academic. One outstanding example of 
the latter is at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, which offers an 
“integrated studies program ” for freshmen. In a year-long course, students 
study six technologies by reading about the subject as well as using a hands- 
on approach. Thus, a unit on timekeeping begins with comparative cultural 
readings and ends with students designing their own timepiece. In this way, 
students acquire “an understanding of technology’” and at the same time are 
better able to “understand economic and social history.” MIT’s goal is to 
graduate students who have both “a broad knowledge of industry” and 
“transferable skills that will serve them well in later career changes” 
(Rosenstock 436). 

However, courses that commonly make up interdisciplinary studies 
involve a combination of humanities, such as those offered at Raritan Valley 
Community College for the past decade. Such courses have been offered 
successfully at other local New Jersey colleges such as Bloomfield College, 
Fairleigh Dickinson, and Stockton State College. 

The County College of Morris, my own institution, has a history of 
such courses. Back in the early 1970s, the college offered Humanities 1 and 
II, a six credit sequence that encompassed a broad chronological study of 
history, philosophy, music, and literature. Team taught, it was a humanities 
elective course. 

Today, 20 years later, we are rethinking such a course offering. 
Currently we offer only a handful of courses that use an interdisciplinary 
approach. But in the near future we are planning to resurrect a course 
similar in structure to our Humanities I and II. In preparation for such a 
change, our college received an NEH grant in the summer of 1993 for an 
intensive study of poetry. During a four week period, twenty-four 
participants selected from both the full and part-time faculty would 
complete a “Journey through the Humanities” which would allow them to 
travel through time and across continents studying poets as diverse as 
Geoffrey Chaucer, W.B. Yeats, Emily Dickinson, and Jorge Louis Borges. 
The poets were varied in language, in era, in country of origin, and in 
theme. 

Diversity characterized the poets studied and the participants as well: 
there were faculty from math, visual arts, languages, and music-along with 
those from English. One of the objectives of the project as stated in the 
proposal was “To enable the teaching of poetry in English classes where it 
is traditionally taught, in foreign language classes, and in humanities courses 

e it is not presently included or minimally utilized” (“Journey” 6). 



38 Garbowsky 



Thus one of the offshoots of the project was that these faculty would 
cross traditional disciplinary divides to bring the subject of poetry into their 
respective classrooms. Not only would the four week saturation in poetry 
revitalize faculty, but it would also become a challenging interdisciplinary 
experiment. During the closing week, visiting scholar Linda Georgianni 
from the University of California at Irvine presented her experiences along 
with sample syllabi from her college’s Humanities Core Courses, a “three 
quarter sequence dealing with the problem of cultural differences over belief 
systems, race, and gender” (syllabus). The course readings range from 
Dante’s Inferno to John Berger’s Ways of Seeing to Freud’s New 
Introductori^ Lectures. Faculty participating in the course came from 
philosophy, English, history and languages. 

One option offered as a follow-up project at the end of our grant was 
to prepare “a course proposal and/or evidence of substantial integration of 
poetry into existing courses” (“Journey” 19). One participant submitted the 
literature component to a larger interdisciplinary course which would 
incorporate philosophy, history, the visual arts, and film among other 
disciplines. Organized around the theme “the artist as social critic,” the 
proposed course would follow a chronological format from Plato to WWII 
and would be offered as a humanities elective. Thus, our summer grant 
allowed our college to reconsider and reactivate an earlier interdisciplinary 
course. Currently the course is under consideration, and we hope to offer it 
in the next year or two. 

But why now? Why after twenty years is our college reconsidering 
interdisciplinary coursework? Why is “higher education experiencing 
significant new growth in interdisciplinary scholarship and programs” 
especially in the humanities? (Miller 28). One reason for the timeliness of a 
move towards interdisciplinarism is the current “crisis” in the humanities, 
which according to one professor has been “tortured vocationalism,” been 
called “irrelevant” and is “declining” in enrollment (Bauman 38). 

Walter Jackson Bate and William J. Bennet have both discussed this 
crisis over the last decade. In “The Crisis in English Studies,” Bate argues 
that “The humanities are not merely entering, they are plunging into their 
worst state of crisis since the modem university was formed...” (noted in 
Jeffords 102). William Bennet agrees and describes the “heart of the 
humanities” as “fragmented, even shattered” (102). One of the major 
culprits is the “increasing fragmentation and specialization within the 
university” (Jeffords 102). 

In answer to the problem of “over specialization,” they suggest 
“interdisciplinary” or “collaborative” projects- both within and across 
departments (Jeffords 106), focusing on connections rather than 

O 




45 



Number 16 - 1995 



Interdisciplinary Study 39 



differences, on commonality rather than diversity. In the traditional 
humanities curriculum, information is “thrown out to... students like brightly 
colored bits of confetti.” Faculty do not “tell students how this information 
links to other disciplines or how all learning is interconnected.” It is as if 
the “disciplines were created by a supreme being and that we cannot cross 
lines between them” (Englehardt 105). 

In sharp contrast, courses which are interconnected (like an Ethics and 
Values course used as an example in a journal article) were extremely 
successful. Linking philosophy, literature, religion and history, this course 
has been ranked one of the most “enjoyable” by students and has helped 
them to learn more effectively since it used “more than one discipline” 
(Englehardt 105). 

According to Murray Krieger, director of the University of California’s 
Humanities Research Institute, “we are facing a revolution of the 
curriculum... The disciplines are being undone, redone, amalgamated in new 
ways by questions that we weren’t asking only a few years ago” (Miller 31). 
Mary Clark, the organizer of a five day conference on “Rethinking the 
Curriculum,” says “The world is changing, and we are standing still” 
(Mooney 12). 

An article in The Futurist, on the “University of the 21st Century,” 
suggests that interdisciplinary studies better serve the needs of our students 
future. The belief is that the “interdisciplinary approach” is “needed to deal 
with a changing world” since our current system is becoming “ increasingly 
inadequate” (53). The Commission on the University of the 21st century 
called for “an end to the ‘tyranny of the disciplines’” (“University” 53), 
believing that the problems students will face in the future will not be 
“organized according to the categories of scholars” (Gaff 57) and that the 
solutions will “cross the lines of traditional disciplines.” “Given the 
competitive climate around the globe, it is essential that we draw from all 
the intellectual resources of every field to improve productivity and to attack 
the scourges of the human community” (Gaff 57). 

In addition, since many of our students in the two-year college do not 
go on to more in-depth study in an academic subject, the interdisciplinary 
approach gives them a broad base and serves their individual educational 
needs better. According to various studies reviewed by ERIC, “ the 
interdisciplinary approach... makes room for the generalist” (Palmer 59). 

Beyond purely academic concerns, interdisciplinary studies can be an 
effective way to prepare students for the future. Every study indicates that 
the jobs of the future will require “more thought, more analysis, more 
decision making and more understanding” (Renyi 444). To this end, the 

disciplinary focus on integration between subject areas will benefit 



40 Garbowsky 



students. “An academic, aesthetic, creative, and social learning environment 
is one way to equip students for the challenge they will face in the complex 
cultural mosaic that will be their future” (Geoghegan 458). 

Peter Drucker, in a recent issue of the Economist, describes our world 
as one “in the midst of a transformation in which the organizing principle 
of life is evolving from analysis (or rational thought) to perception” 
(Oddleifson 451). He believes that “the world’s new realities are 
configurations and as such call for perception as much as for analysis” 
(451). If we do not prepare for this change, Drucker predicts a dismal 
future. From the year 2992, he looks back and sees “democracies” 
marching “straight from the climax of their 20th century victory over 
totalitarianism towards disaster” (451). 



This dire prediction should encourage educators to rethink the 
curriculum and see how it can better prepare students for a world that will 
be multi-cultured and more “globally oriented” (Perrin 453). Students of the 
future need to be trained not for “specific tasks” but as “creative thinkers 
and problem solvers... able to work well with others” (Perrin 452). 

Interdisciplinary course work can better prepare students for these 
goals. Since it is the occasion of an “interdependence of learning” 
(Hoffnung 31) and departs from the traditional “content oriented” 
classroom, it “focuses on skills of thinking, analyzing, and understanding” 
(Renyi 439). In answer to the U.S. Department of Education’s observation 
that our nation is “at risk” because of our schools’ inability to prepare 
“students for the complex lives they will face as adults in the new 
millennium,” Judith Renyi suggests an artsAumanities based curriculum 
using an interdisciplinary approach. In these courses the goals are long 
term rather than immediate. Instead of producing an end product, the focus 
is on improving our human state, trying to open ourselves to the past, the 
present, and to the future by stressing commonalities, not differences. 



A recent article in the New York Times confirms this new trend. One 
Juilliard School of Music graduate, who is currently a founder of a new 
multimedia company called Music Pen, states that when she was a musician 
performing as “a concert pianist,” she would never have thought she would 
go into the technology business. “It’s delightful to see that the future of 
technology has so much to do with creativity” (Pulley B2). 



In an innovative yet extreme position, M. Garrett Bauman suggests a 
whole new core curriculum for the liberal arts of the 21st century. Its four 
components include global studies, self-reliance skills, interdisciplinary 
studies, and selected traditional studies (Bauman 40). He stresses one 
“essential element,” that “all courses must combine skills performance and 
• ^-^- -^ual rigor” (41). 

ERIC 



47 



Number 16 - 1995 



Interdisciplinary Study 41 



To remedy the “smorgasbord” (Bauman 42) that most curricula serve, 
that is “subjects pedagogically unrelated to one another — or to real life” 
(Hanna 603), Bauman proposes “interdisciplinary courses, particularly 
those combining technologies and traditional liberal arts” (42). Thus, 
students will be taught to “deal with the edges between fields and systems” 
and will be “required to synthesize as well as specialize” (42). Some courses 
he foresees in this curriculum would include Technology in Literature, 
Technology and Values, or Social Effects of Technology (43). He suggests 
that such courses, along with courses from the other three areas, would 
make up the students’ first two years of college and would give them “a 
solid base of general liberal education on which to erect a major” (43). In 
the community college, this is especially appropriate. 

Bauman is not alone in calling for a complete revamping of today’s 
liberal arts curriculum. There are other such proposals, such as the one at 
University College in Toronto which insists “on breadth, at least at the 
beginning of a university career, before the student moves on to more 
specialized work” (Morgan 35). To that end, the new “Integrated Studies 
(Unity of Knowledge) program” allows for time spent on “interdisciplinary 
studies in the fields of the humanities, social sciences, and natural sciences” 
(Morgan 36). Not as drastic as Bauman’s proposal, this program aims at 
“curriculum renewal” (Morgan 37) and at “unity” rather than 
“fragmentation of knowledge” at the university level (38). 

For many educational prognosticators, the 21st century looms ahead 
with frightening (even apocalyptic) prospects. A whole issue of Change 
magazine focused on the question of technology’s impact on the liberal arts. 
Because today’s world and the world of tomorrow is “vastly more complex” 
(Edgerton 5), we cannot ignore the place of technology, which some call “a 
new liberal art” (Edgerton 4). One of the key questions faced by the 
contributors to this issue of Change is how to “infuse the stuff of 
engineering in a deeper way throughout the entire curriculum” or the 
question posed by the editor — ’’Why Would a Humanist Envy an Engineer?” 
(4). 



As the 21st century beckons, our educational curriculum must be 
rethought, revitalized, and renewed. One direction clearly indicated through 
research is interdisciplinary courses, “championed” by the Sloan 
Foundation and the Carnegie Report on the Improvement of Postsecondary 
Teaching for “the thinking skills they foster” (Bauman 43). If we are to 
prepare students for a world in which “problems. . . tend not to have the 
fixed, single correct answers that characterize” academic problems (Eisner 
595), and if “fragmentation — or lack of interconnection. . . is one of the 
chief characteristics of contemporary American society,” we must give 
students something that aids them in seeing “overall relationships” 
„^^^veen diverse parts” (Jeffords.,104-105). 

ERJC 48 



42 Garbowsky 



The next question is how to begin such a change. One of the best ways 
is to follow the pattern of a successful program from its inception through 
its current operation and to learn from it. There are many such 
opportunities available both nationally and locally. Journals such as 
Alternative Higher Education: The Journal for Non-traditional Studies 
and The Education Digest publish many such studies. 

A particularly healthy pattern is found in the experience of the Utah 
Valley Community College (now Utah Valley State College) in Orem. In 
1987, they began a sophomore level interdisciplinary core course in Ethics 
and Values (Englehardt). The first necessity was administrative support; in 
this case a highly supportive dean rallied faculty and ran interference with 
the administration. The timeline was another important consideration since 
there are hurdles to overcome, so that this particular program began work 
at least two years before its projected implementation. 

The proposal first went through a humanities committee and then 
through a college curriculum committee. A three-year grant from the 
National Endowment for the Humanities funded a pilot program which 
gave faculty a chance to prepare through several summer seminars in which 
visiting scholars came and lectured. Faculty workshops were offered with a 
consultant from the NEH — Donald Schmeltekopf, a former Midcareer 
Fellowship participant and founding president of the Community College 
Humanities Association (Englehardt 98). After this preparation and 
development, the course was set up and continues to be an exceptional 
adjunct to the curriculum, one that students say is “the most important and 
most enjoyable class they have taken in college” (105). 

A local and more recent program to use as an example is that offered 
at Raritan Valley Community College. In the fall of 1993, three 
Introduction to Humanities courses were offered. Student opinions 
surveyed by Thomas E. Valasek confirmed that students enjoy “the 
interdisciplinary team-teaching approach it employs” (21). 

Despite the positive effects of such programs, there are many obstacles 
to overcome, not the least of which is “subject-matter turf” between faculty 
and the amount of time and work that goes into such a change. One 
experienced instructor notes that there is also the expectation on the part 
of students that the teachers have “control” over the subject area, when in 
reality this “is impossible in new courses drawing on intellectual traditions 
outside their own” (Englehardt 101). Thus another problem may be “fear,” 
which, on the part of the instructor, “is a natural accompaniment to new 
interdisciplinary courses” (Englehardt 101). 

However, the benefits clearly outweigh the drawbacks. For in the end it 
f^^^only the students who will gain, but the faculty as well. Team-teaching 




49 



Number 16 - 1995 



Interdisciplinary Study 43 



offers faculty the opportunity to work together, to learn from each other, 
and to build mutual respect. Though teaching styles may differ, they will 
enrich the course and may, as one participant found, build an effective, 
creative tension in the classroom (Hoffnung 33). 

As the professor moves into the next century and faces the prospects 
of “a period of limited mobility and growth” (Watermeier 280), cross- 
disciplinary courses can fire the imagination of faculty, renewing their 
vitality and giving them new opportunities for professional development and 
growth. “At their best, interdisciplinary programs go beyond intellectual 
integration (as important as that is) to create a community of learning 
between students and faculty” (Gaff 60). 



BIBLIOGRAPHY 

Bauman, M. Garrett. “Liberal Arts for the Twenty-First Century.” Journal 
of Higher Education. January/February 1987: 38-45. 

Bodino, Angela. “Using Writing to Integrate the Curriculum: The 

Constructs at the Core.” Paper for Midcareer Fellowship Program, 
Princeton 1988. 



Boer, Ildy. “Interdisciplinary Science Teaching— New Direction.” CCM 
Update, January 1995: 10. 

Collett, Mary Jane. “Music as the Basis for Learning.” The Education 
Digest. May 1992: 61-64. 

Culley, Margo. “We are Here to Stay”: Curriculum Transformation in the 
90’s. Transformations. Winter 1991: 4-14. 

Eber, Janet. “NEH Study Project: ‘Journey Through the Humanities’ 
Literature Component for Proposed Humanities Course.” County 
College of Morris, 1993. 

Edgerton, Russell. “Feeling in Control: Or, Why Would a Humanist Envy 
an Engineer?” Change. March/April 1986: 4-5. 



O 

ERIC 



50 



44 Garbowsky 



Eisner, Elliot W. “The Misunderstood Role of the Arts in Human 
Development.” Phi Delta Kappan 73 (1992): 591-595. 

Englehardt, Elaine E. “Curriculum Diversity Through a Core Approach to 
Ethics.” International Conference for Community College Chairs, 
Deans, and other Instructional Leaders. February 17-20, 1993. 

Everett, Marianne. “Developmental Interdisciplinary Schools for the 21st 
Century.” The Education Digest. March 1992: 57-59. 

Fogarty, Robin. “10 Ways to Integrate Curriculum.” The Education 
Digest. February 1992: 53-57. 

Gaff, Jerry G. “Interdisciplinary Studies in Higher Education.” The 
Education Digest. October 1989: 57-60. 



Geoghegan, Wendy. “Re-Placing the Arts in Education.” Phi Delta 
Kappan. February 1994: 458. 

Georgianna, Linda. “Confronting Differences in Belief Systems; Humanities 
Core Course.” Syllabus for University of California. 1991. 

Gough, Pauline B. “Art for Our Sake.” Phi Delta Kappan 73 (1992): 579. 

The Hamilton Dinner Honors the Core Curriculum’s 75th Anniversary.” 
Columbia. Fall 1994: 3-4. 



Hanna, Judith Lynne. “Connections: Arts, Academics, and Productive 
Citizens.”Phi Delta Kappan 73 (1992): 601-607. 



Henderson, Andre. “Los Angeles: Humanities For All.” Governing. Oct 
1992: 40-41. 



Hoffnung, Michele and Pearl Brown. “Interdisciplinary Studies.” 
Transformations. Spring 1992: 29-35. 

Jeffords, Susan. “Present Rhetoric and Future Opportunities in the 
Humanities.” Liberal Education 72 (1986): 101-108. 



O 




51 



Number 16 - 1995 



Interdisciplinary Study 45 



“Journey Through the Humanities: A Faculty Study Project on the Diversity 
of Poetry.” County College of Morris. June 1992. 

Kolde, Rosemary F. “Integrated Learning for a Competitive Work Force.” 
Phi Delta Kappan 72 (1991): 453-456. 

McGrath, Dennis and Martin B. Spear. The Academic Crisis in the 
Community College. New York: SUNY P, 1991. 

McMillen, Liz. “Literature’s Jeremiah Leaps Into the Fray.” The Chronicle 
of Higher Education, 1 September 1994, sec. A: ll-i-. 

Miller, Margaret A. and Anne-Marie McCartan. “Making the Case for New 
Interdisciplinary Programs.” Change. May/June 1990: 28-35. 

Mooney, Carolyn J. “Long-Ignored Interdisciplinary Teachers Seek Support 
for Changes in Curriculum.” The Chronicle of Higher Education 5 
July 1989, sec. A: 11+. 

Morgan, Peter. “Bloom, Frye, and the Academic Aspiration after the Unity 
of Knowledge.” Interchange 22 (1991): 29-38. 



Oddleifson, Eric. “What Do We Want Our Schools To Do?” Phi Delta 
Kappan 75 (1994): 446-453. 

Palmer, James C. “Interdisciplinary Studies: An Eric Review.” Communiti^ 
College Review, Summer 1983: 59-64. 

Perrin, Stephanie. “Education in the Arts is an Education for Life.” Phi 
Delta Kappan 75 (1994): 452-453. 

Proposal for Summer Institute at Raritan Valley Community College. April 
1992. 

Pulley, Brett. “New York Striving to Become Technology’s Creative 
Center.”Neu; York Times February 13, 1995: A1 +. 

Renyi, Judith. “The Arts and Humanities in American Education.” Phi 
Delta Kappan 75 (1994): 438-445. 

O 

ERIC 



52 



46 Garbowsky 



Rosenstock, Larry. “The Walls Come Down: The Overdue Reunification of 
Vocational and Academic Education.” Phi Delta Kappan 72 (1991): 
434-436. 

Sautter, R. Craig. “An Arts Education School Reform Strategy.” Phi Delta 
Kappan 75 (1994): 432-437. 

Sbaratta, Philip A. “Defeating the Learned Ignoramus: Interdisciplinary 
Education.” Community; College Review 10 (1982-83): 33-39. 



Schneiderman, Jill S. “Curriculum Transformation in the Earth Sciences: 
Women’s Studies and Geology.” Transformations. Spring 1994: 44- 
56. 



Shoemaker, Betty Jean Eklund. “Education 2000 Integrated Curriculum.” 
Phi Delta Kappan 72 (1991): 793-797. 



Smith, Bruce M. “The Art of Being Human.” Phi Delta Kappan 75 
(1994): 427. 

Smith, Page. Killing the Spirit. New York: Viking, 1990. 

Tinto, Vincent. “Constructing Educational Communities.” Community; 
College Journal 64 (1994): 26-29. 

Toch, Thomas, et al. “Less-is-More Curriculum.” U.S. News and World 
Report., 11 Jan. 1993: 53-56. 

“University of the 21st Century.” The Futurist. September-October 1990: 
53. 

Valasek, Thomas E. “A Survey of Student Attitudes in ‘Introduction to 
Humanities,’ An Interdisciplinary, Team-Taught General Education 
Course at Raritan Valley Community College. Paper for Midcareer 
Fellowship Program. Princeton 1994. 



O 

ERIC 



53 



Number 16 - 1995 



Interdisciplinary Study 47 



Watermeier, Daniel J. “The Avant-Garde (1890-1925): An Interdisciplinary 
Approach to the Humanities Through the Arts.” Alternative Higher 
Education. 6 (1982): 269-280. 

Watters, Barbara L. “Turning ‘Baby Steps’ into ‘Great Strides’.” 
Transformations. Spring 1994: 17-24. 




54 



48 



THE SILENCING CANON: 

NATIVE AMERICAN TEXTS AND UTERATURE STUDY 



Mary Roseberry 



I will tell you something about stories, 
[he said] 

They aren’t just entertainment. 

Don’t be fooled. 

They are all we have, you see, 
all we have to fight off 
illness and death. 



You don’t have anything 
if you don’t have the stories . . . . 

Leslie Silko 
Ceremony 



Over the last twenty years, some of the most significant changes in 
the humanities have occurred in the study of literature and the analysis of its 
nature. Debates have raged, especially, over what new texts will be 
permitted (emphasis mine) to join the sacred (emphatically mine) canonical 
texts selected by the high priests of literature after World War I. Fueling the 
debate, and the best thing that could have happened to literature, is the 
appearance of texts by traditionally marginalized writers: African 
Americans, women, immigrants. Native Americans, and writers of Asian 
and Hispanic descent. 

But professors of literature, and perhaps professors of history, 
philosophy, and art, have yet to re-focus their courses around these exciting 
texts. Rather, we tinker, adding or including a few new writers to the fixed 
and formulated canon, unwilling to let it live and change as it should be free 
to do. Unless we radically alter our concept of literature study and prepare 
O teachers to do so, we will perpetuate a passive, static academic 

ERJC 



55 



Number 16 - 1995 



The Silencing Canon 49 



culture which de-centers not only minority students but all students. And 
that passivity, in turn, contributes to a cultural passivity that as humanists 
we claim to struggle against. 

The critic Frederic Jameson describes literature as “a symbolic 
meditation on the destiny of community” (70). This definition requires that 
we ask: Whose meditation do we examine? Whose community is reflected 
upon in the classroom? Whose destiny is at stake in such a meditation? 
Whose symbols illuminate experience for students? What we do when we 
present the standard canon to students is limit their access to the rich 
meditations of other cultures. And in so doing, we also limit their ability to 
truly see and contemplate their own. 

Let me articulate what I see to be the task of literature courses 
through two meditations of my own. During the fall semester of 1992, 
Niagara County Community College presented a series of events by and 
about indigenous people, in honor of their survival in the face of 500 years 
of colonization. The College, near Niagara Falls, is located on land that has 
been inhabited by the people of the Iroquois Confederacy for many 
generations and is only a few miles from the Tuscarora reservation. The 
semester’s events included poetry readings, traditional storytelling, dance 
performances, art exhibits, films, lectures and discussions. 

Two contemporary poets, Sherman Alexie and Joy Harjo, were 
invited to read their work. After Alexie’s reading, one of our students, a 
Tuscarora woman, stopped me in the corridor to ask if I had something to 
do with organizing the semester’s events. When I acknowledged that I had, 
she said,”I want you to know something: I have always wanted to be a 
writer. I’ve been writing all my life, but I never knew until I heard Sherman 
Alexie read today that I could write about being an Indian.” 

And a second story: Recently, the poet Lucille Clifton read in 
Buffalo, New York, where she was raised. She recalled that in the 
elementary and high schools she attended, there were photos of writers on 
the walls in the classrooms, and all of the writers were white males. What is 
sad, she commented, is not that she did not see herself in those photos, but 
that she did not miss herself. 

The young Ms. Clifton and the community college student have 
much in common: an educational practice which refused them the 
opportunity to recognize themselves in the language of literature. 

These two observations elucidate what needs to be done to 
transform literary study into the living, powerful force it could be. Rather 
than restrict it to its past practice of examination, admiration, and 
description, we might better apply the meaning more common in fine arts, 
the object of study is the student’s work, and a model (the human 



50 Roseberry 



body, a still life, a geometric shape) is merely the catalyst for meditation by 
students themselves. 

The re-focusing of literary studies encourages and assists all 
students to meditate on the destiny of the multiple, sometimes 
confrontational, communities in which they live and in which they must 
forge their own identities. 

Although many literature courses have moved away from the 
ahistorical approach espoused in the 1960’s, relatively little effort has been 
made to engage students in the multiplicity of cultural and literary traditions 
that would shed real light on both the mainstream and ‘marginalized’ 
traditions. 

We continue to ignore the multiple contexts from which texts and 
writers emerge, the cultural contexts of the “Others” whose experience 
places a given text in relief. A white male writer comes out of a historical 
experience different from that of a person of color or a woman. How can 
students grasp the uniqueness of that writer s meditation unless they can 
also see the perspective of persons of color or women? As one who puts 
words on paper, a writer identifies herself with a particular form of self- 
expression and use of language that is different from the oral tradition. But 
how can students, raised within the confines of a writing tradition, grasp its 
unique characteristics unless they also understand the characteristics of the 
oral tradition? 

Native American texts, in particular, offer perspectives on 
language, art, and culture that can illuminate literature for all students. Texts 
by Native writers come from a rich unbroken tradition of forms (both oral 
and written), linguistic devices, symbol systems, and the constituent 
elements of mythology and cultural and political background. This tradition 
has existed contiguously with the Euro-American tradition and has been 
profoundly at odds with it. 

The forced separation of indigenous people from the mainstream 
led to disenfranchisement and neglect that continues today. Yet, ironically, 
by virtue of this separation. Native communities have retained a cultural and 
literary history that mirrors, confronts and revitalizes the mainstream, while 
offering continuity to their own future generations. 

Contemporary Native writers and traditional storytellers provide 
that angle of light in which to see mainstream texts. By placing their 
experience of this nation at the center of any given text. Native writing offer 
students new perspectives on patterns of knowledge and cultural origins, 
on philosophical and historical reality, on literary form and content, on the 
nature and functions of art, and on the role and value of language. 



ERIC 




Number 16 - 1995 



The Silencing Canon 51 



While traditions vary from East to West and from North to South, 
common elements appear in the texts as well: textual forms including oral 
texts (now transcribed) such as songs, chants, and vision narratives; and 
written texts including autobiography, and more recently, poetry, short 
fiction and the novel. We find similar narrative devices such as the trickster 
or the use of multiple narrators; myths of origin and survival; rituals of birth, 
marriage and death; and the incorporation of traditional symbols. In both 
the oral and written texts, we find repeated themes of the land and its loss, 
with the psychic rootlessness that follows such loss; the need for community 
and the ancestors; the connection between the sacred dimension and 
everyday life; the devastation of racism and religious conflict with whites. 
Comparisons with the mainstream’s view of itself and of Native cultures 
provides students with an invaluable perspective. 

Among the many “literary” differences is that between the oral 
tradition, whose presence remains even in contemporary Native texts, and 
the written Euro-American tradition whose roots in spoken language and 
community are all but lost. Western literature idealizes and authorizes the 
individual author, while oral traditions authorize the communal voice. In 
Foucault’s words, “The coming into being of the notion of ‘author’ 
constitutes the privileged moment of individualization in the history of ideas, 
knowledge, literature, philosophy and the sciences” (in Owens 10). 

But in Native cultures, which retain a connection to the oral 
tradition long since lost in Euro-American cultures, the individual is not 
privileged above the community. The Native tradition does not privilege 
either the individual writer or the Olympian protagonist in his splendid 
isolation. Rather, stories arise from the cornrnunit}^ and are about the 
communiti^. Even though contemporary Native authors participate in the 
‘privileged moment of individualization’ of affixing their names to their 
texts, the content and structure of those texts makes clear the vital role of 
the community. As Native writer Paula Gunn Allen points out. 

The purpose of traditional American Indian literature is 
never simply pure self-expression.... the tribes do not 
celebrate the individual’s ability to feel emotion for they 
assume that all people are able to do so.... The tribes 
seek — through song, ceremony, legend, sacred stories 
(myths), and tales — to embody, articulate and share 
reality, to bring the isolated, private self into harmony 
and balance with this reality.... (85) 



O 



Among the best-known contemporary Native novels are Leslie 
masterful Ceremoni^, N. Scott Momaday’s House Made of Dawn, 



52 Roseberry 



and the works of James Welch (Fool's Crow, Winter in the Blood) and 
Louise Erdrich (Tracks, Love Medicine). All use contemporary western 
novelistic techniques, but each also resounds with a powerful communal 
voice. Wisdom is handed down from the grandmothers and grandfathers. 
The community shapes the individual. Without community, the individual is 
silenced and paralyzed. These novels refer to traditional ancient songs and 
chants which evolved in their various communities through generations, 
reinforcing the role of the community in the life of the individual. 

Further, as Native critic Louis Owens writes, the self from which 
contemporary Native American protagonists are alienated is generally 
moved “toward a coherent personal identity entirely dependent upon a 
coherent cultural identity”(20). Owens goes on to point out that while 
postmodernism celebrates the fragmentation and chaos of experience, texts 
by Native authors tend to restore the individual to community and 
continuity. The individual regains balance (an important cultural theme) by 
re-membering with the community. The protagonist in Momaday’s House 
Made of Dawn “had lost his place. He had been long ago at the center, 
had known where he was, had lost his way, had wandered to the end of the 
earth, was even now reeling on the edge of the void” (96). Later, the words 
of the traditional Navajo Night Chant restore him to health: 



Happily I go forth. 

My interior feeling cool, 
may I walk. 

No longer sore, may I walk. 



The protagonist in Silko’s Ceremoni} must also make a ritual journey and 
return to his origins in the ancient stories in order to be healed. 



The use of traditional songs and chants in Native texts (and this is 
true as well of African American, Chicano, and the literatures of other 
American communities) also returns literature to its roots in spoken 
language. Oral traditions ‘read’ language very differently from writing 
traditions, in that they perceive language as transformative, not merely 
descriptive. To speak is to create, to bring a listener into being. As Owens 
explains, “With written literacy, language becomes descriptive/historic and 
begins to lose its unique power as creator of reality”(9). Written language 
becomes absolute, and so is, at the same time, disconnected from life. 
Unless there is a “listener” who has a story to tell, the inscribed word has 
no real bearing on life. Oral traditions keep the past while reinterpreting it 
to each new generation in story and song, chant and dance. 



ERIC 



59 



Number 16 - 1995 



The Silencing Canon 53 



You don’t have anything 
If you don’t have the stories. 

(Ceremoni;) 

It is perhaps the richness of the oral tradition, or the connection 
with the land, or both, that gives so much of Native literature its stunning 
beauty. The poetry and fiction of current writers is radiant with imagery, 
compelling and immediate in its appeal. The list of “must reads” includes 
Joy Harjo, Lucy Tapahanso, Charlotte DeClue, Simon Ortiz, Lance 
Henson, Sherman Alexie, Leslie Silko, Scott Momaday, Linda Hogan, 
Wendy Rose (several anthologies are included at the end of this article). 

In her poem “Story Keeper,” Wendy Rose writes of the continuity 
of the past and the present: 

The stories 

would be braided in my hair 

between the plastic comb 

and blue wing tips 

but as the rattles would split, 

the drums begin, 

along would come someone 

to stifle and stop 

the sound 

and the story keeper 
I would have been 
must melt 
into the cave 

of things discarded 

and this is a wound 
to be healed 
in the spin of winter 
or the spiral 
of beginning. 

This is the task — 

to find the stories now . . . (25) 

Another compelling element in Native texts is the presence of the 
mythic world. Spirit, dream and magic are as real as, and interact with, the 
daily lives of people. The western split between rational and non-rational, 
thpuqht and emotion, the sacred and profane, does not exist in the Native 
the novels mentioned above, as well as the short fiction and 

60 



ERIC""" 



54 Roseberry 



poetry, Spirits, Watchers, Shape Changers, Tricksters all participate in the 
dance or the journey or the remembering which return humans to 
themselves. 

Perhaps the most familiar referent in Native texts is the land — in 
fact, perhaps the land is the primary text. Land is essential to the Native 
view: one’s ancestors and rituals and community are connected to the land. 
Not only does wisdom and health come from the land, but one’s very 
identity. In the words of Wendy Rose in her poem “Walking on the 
prayerstick”: 

When we go to the fields 
we always sing; we walk 
each of us at different times 
on the world held 

like a feathered and fetished prayerstick. 

We map our lives this way: trace our lineage 
by the corn, find our words in the flute, 
touch the shapes that feed us with dry seed. 

We grow as shrines grow from human belief; 

we sing a penetration through our pottery bodies.... (Green 194) 

To lose the land is to lose the past and one’s ancestors, and to lose 
them is to lose one’s identity. “It takes a while to speak with these two 
voices/as it takes a while to walk on two feet/each one going the other 
way,” writes Diane Glancy in “Iron Woman” (61). And in his poem “old 
country,” Lance Henson writes, “i am crossing/the 
same/endless/bridge/wrapped in a strange garment/ looking for/myself” 
(Hobson 158). 

The past is present at all times in Native thinking, while for the 
Euroamerican mind, especially in modem and postmodern America, the 
past is over and done with. Native texts reestablish connections between 
one’s past and one’s future, one’s ancestors and one’s identity. The 
integrity of the past, recreated in story, makes an integrated future 
possible. Linda Hogan writes in her poem “Heritage”: 



From my mother, the antique mirror 
where I watch my face take on her lines . . . . 




From my father I take his brown 

eyes the plague of locusts that leveled our crops, 

they flew in formation like buzzards .... 



61 



Number 16 - 1995 



The Silencing Canon 55 



From my uncle the whittled wood 
that rattles like bones 
and is white .... 

From my grandfather who never spoke 
I learned to fear silence .... 

And grandmother, blue-eyed woman 
whose skin was brown, 
she used snuff .... 

That tobacco is the dark night that covers me. 

From my family I have learned the secrets 
of never having a home. ( Green 165) 

The unique cultural and “literary” tradition is found not only in the 
works of contemporary authors mentioned above, but in much earlier, 
overlooked texts as well, those of D’Arcy McNickle, Pauline Johnson, 
Zitkala Sa (Gertrude Bonnin), John Joseph Mathews, Dan Talayesva, 
among others in the early part of this century. (See Allen (ed.). Spider 
Woman's Granddaughters, 1989] Voice of the Turtle, 1994.) Native 
literature in particular offers the opportunity for meditation because it 
illuminates the complexity of life and art that actually form one’s individual 
and communal identity. Native texts can open up conversation about 
literary form, language, audience, symbolism, and about worldviews and 
power. Finally, Native texts, emphasizing as they do community and 
continuity, and evoking the power of language and myth, can help to 
return literature to the hands of students, where it belongs. 



SOURCES 

Allen, Paula Gunn. The Sacred Hoop: Recovering the Feminine in 
American Indian Traditions. Boston: Beacon, 1986. 

, ed. Spiderwoman's Granddaughters: Traditional Tales and 

Contemporari^ Writing fay Native American Women. Boston: 
Beacon, 1989. 

, ed. Voice of the Turtle: American Indian Literature 1900-1970. 

New York: Ballantine, 1994. 

Alexie, Sherman. / Would Steal Horses. Niagara Falls: Slipstream, 1992. 




62 



56 Roseberry 



Ashcroft, Bill, Gareth Griffiths, and Helen Tiffin. The Empire Writes Back: 
Theori; and Practice in Post-Colonial Literatures. London: 
Routledge, 1989. 

Brant, Beth, ed. A Gathering of Spirit: Writing and Art by North 
American Indian Women. Sinister Wisdom, 1984. 

Bruchac, Joseph,ed. New Voices from the Longhouse: An Anthology; of 
Contemporary; Iroquois Writing. Greenfield Center, NY: Greenfield 
Review, 1989. 

Bruchac, Joseph, ed. Returning the Gift. Tucson: U. Arizona P, 1994. 

Dooling, D.M., and Paul Jordan-Smith, eds. / Become Part of It: Sacred 
Dimensions in Native American Life. New York: Parabola, 1989. 

Glancy, Diane. Iron Woman. New York: New Rivers Press, 1990. 

Green, Rayna, ed. That's What She Said: Contemporary; Poetry; and 
Fiction by; Native American Women. Bloomington, IN: Indiana UP, 
1984. 

Greenblatt, Stephen, and Giles Gunn, eds. Redrawing the Boundaries: the 
Transformation of English and American Literary; Studies. New 
York: MLA, 1992. 

Heilbrun, Carolyn. Writing a Woman's Life. New York: Ballantine, 1988. 

Hobson, Geary, ed. The Remembered Earth: An Anthology; of 
Contemporary; Native American Literature. Albuquerque: U. New 
Mexico P, 1981. 

Hogan, Linda. Saumgs. Minneapolis: Coffee House Press, 1988. 

Jameson, Frederic. The Political Unconscious: Narrative as a Socially; 
Sy;mbolic Act. Ithaca, NY: Cornell UP, 1981. 

Krupat, Arnold. The Voice in the Margin: Native American Literature 
and the Canon. Berkeley: U. of California P, 1989. 

Mander, Jerry. In the Absence of the Sacred: the Failure of Technology; 
and the Survival of the Indian Nations. San Francisco: Sierra Club, 
1991. 

Momaday, N. Scott. House Made of Dawn. New York: Harper, 1968. 



ERIC 



63 



Number 16 - 1995 



The Silencing Canon 57 



Morrison, Toni. Plaj^ing in the Dark: Whiteness and the Literary 
Imagination. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard UP, 1992. 

Niatum, Duane, ed. Harper's Anthology of 20th Century Native 
American Poetry. New York: Harper and Row, 1988. 

Owens, Louis. Other Destinies: Understanding the American Indian 
Novel. Norman: U. Oklahoma P, 1992. 

Riley, Patricia, ed. Growing Up Native American: An Anthology. New 
York: William Morrow, 1993. 

Rose, Wendy. The Halfbreed Chronicles and Other Poems. Albuquerque, 
NM: West End Press, 1985. 

Ruoff, A. LaVonne Brown, and Jerry W. Ward, eds. Redefining American 
Literary History. New York: MLA, 1990. 

Ruoff, A. LaVonne Brown. American Indian Literatures: an 
Introduction, Bibliographic Review, and Selected Bibliography. New 
York: MLA, 1990. 

Silko, Leslie M., Ceremony. New York: Penguin, 1977. 

Velie, Alan R., ed. American Indian Literature: An Anthology. Norman: 
U. Oklahoma P, 1991. 

, ed. The Lightning Within: An Anthology of Contemporary 

American Indian Fiction. Lincoln, NE: U. Nebraska P, 1991. 



ERIC 



64 



58 



LIFE IN THE IRON MILLS: 

DIFFERING RESPONSES TO MORAL RESPONSIBIUTY 
WITHIN THE COMMUNITY 



Mary Ellen Byrne 



In 1861, in the prestigious Atlantic Monthly, the young Rebecca 
Harding published her first work, Life in the Iron Mills, a devastating 
critique of the contemporary structure of American society. One hundred 
years before Carol Gilligan’s In A Different Voice, with its ground-breaking 
research on women’s moral development, Harding portrayed women as 
defining their moral and social responsibilities to their fellows in far different 
ways than men define theirs. Just as Gilligan came to understand decades 
later, the women in Harding’s world act with compassion, concern and 
empathy for others whereas men often act with distance, arrogance and 
indifference. With only the seminary education appropriate to her social 
class and gender, and without the psychology background of Gilligan, 
Harding, a young Southern woman, crafted a scathing indictment of the 
male dominated, business owner elites. As she dissected the plight of the 
poor wage slaves of the iron factories, Harding countered her condemnation 
of the male world with a celebration of women’s social involvement and 
mercy. 



More than forty years later in her memoir. Bits of Gossip, Rebecca 
Harding Davis wrote, “It always has seemed to me that each human being, 
before going out into the silence, should leave behind him, not the story of 
his own life, but of the time in which he lived” (30). In Life in the Iron 
Mills, Rebecca Harding Davis does indeed write the story of the time in 
which she lived, a story of the abject social and economic conditions of her 
day. 



In the midst of these horrific social conditions, men and women 
view their moral responsibilities toward the workers within the community 
very differently in Life in the Iron Mills. Central to the novella is the 
question of the moral and social responsibility of the owners/aristocrats to 
the wage slaves/workers. Almost a quarter of the book is devoted to the 
question of the responsibility of the upper class males — labeled the “Head,” 
^'”eart,” the “Pocket,” (38) and the “Christian reformer” (49) — in 




Number 16 - 1995 



Life in the Iron Mills 59 



regard to the wage slaves, the mill workers. In her study Sensational 
Designs: The Cultural Work of American Fiction 1790-1860, Jane 
Tompkins notes that the popular American fiction of the first half of the 
nineteenth century, often written by women, attempted to “redefine the 
social order” (xi). These writings, often classified as “sensational or 
propagandistic,” sought to prod their audience to certain actions, to 
question religious beliefs, social practices, and the economic and political 
circumstances that produced these social conditions (xiii). Moreover, 
stereotypes were common “instruments of cultural self-definition,” 
according to Tompkins (xvi). These stereotyped male characters, allegorical 
figures from the class structure of the age, articulate outlooks on society and 
its structure which are fundamentally dissimilar from the outlooks of the 
female presences in the novel — the author, the narrator, Deborah, and the 
Quaker woman. 



The male upper-class attitude in Life in the Iron Mills suggests 
that “to be fully human... a person must belong to one class... which gives 
physical, social and spiritual identity to the person and dignity and worth” 
(Tompkins 118). These men believe that one’s goodness or badness comes 
from one’s position in the social and class structure. The conversation of 
the three males, the Head, the Heart and the Pocket, visitors to the 
nighttime world of the mill, reveals their lack of moral development, their 
selfishness, their lack of understanding for the causes of suffering, and their 
total disregard for any individual responsibility for the wage slave poor. 



Kirby, the son of the mill-owner, is accompanied by the town 
physician, Dr. May, along with Mitchell, a visitor to the South. They have 
come “for amusement” (28). They quickly “forget” the presence of the 
furnace-tenders, the working class lessers. However, when watching them, 
Hugh Wolfe (the worker/artist figure in the novella) recognizes his own 
“filthy body, his more stained soul” in contrast to the “refinement” of 
Mitchell, “the thorough-bred gentleman” (29-30). In Mitchell, Hugh Wolfe 
finds “the pure face, the delicate sinewy limbs, in harmony with all he knew 
of beauty or truth” (40). For Wolfe, Mitchell epitomizes “Man all-knowing, 
all seeing, crowned by Nature, reigning,” the Emersonian ideal (40). Wolfe 
recognizes with the “sharpness of the bitter certainty that between them 
there was a great gulf never to be passed. Never!” (30). 



Kirby, “the pocket of the world” (36), the allegorical figure of 
business, is the Pilate-like presence in the scene. This mill-owner’s son 
boasts that “my father brought seven hundred votes to the polls for his 
candidate last November” (28). Yet even though these masters control their 
workers, the owners express fear of the worker and the threat of strike. 
" them have a clear idea of the rights of the soul, and I’ll venture next 
they’ll strike for higher wages” (38). Clearly, the 



ERIC 



60 Byrne 



owners/aristocrats/masters had to maintain the workers’ ignorance, 
illiteracy, deprivation and disease to perpetuate the system of their own 
success. Yet Kirby can repeat, “ I wash my hands of all social problems — 
slavery, caste, white or black .... I am innocent of the blood of this man” 
(36). “I am not responsible” (35). He views his duty to his workers as a pay 
check. With a coarse, jeering laugh, Kirby states, “If I had the making of 
men, these puddlers and furnace tenders who do the lowest part of the 
world’s work should be machines — nothing more — hands” (34). 

Mitchell, the blase, scholarly “head” figure, who is the allegorical 
representative of “taste, culture and refinement,” declares, “ I am not one 
of them!” (38). His insufferable disgust at the smells and shapes in the 
night-world factory scene is reflected in his “cool probing eyes — mocking, 
cruel, relentless” (33). His is the “Self of ice though brilliant still” (29), a 
presence “bright and deep and cold as Arctic air” (36). Mitchell, the 
dilettante, views Wolfe as a “rare mosaic in the morning; only the man was 
the more amusing study of the two” (36). To Mitchell, “reform is bom of 
need, not pity” (39). The masses must raise up their own Messiah. It is 
Mitchell’s pocket that Hugh’s faithful friend Deborah picks; she hopes the 
money will free Hugh from his deadening work world. Ironically, however, 
Hugh is falsely accused of the crime and sentenced to prison. There in his 
cell, Hugh becomes bitterly aware of his desperate, impossible plight and 
commits suicide. Although Mitchell’s and Hugh’s fates have become 
intertwined, it is only Hugh who suffers. 

Dr. May, the town physician, the “heart” (36) figure, the allegorical 
do-gooder, the “philanthropist in a small way” (36), pleads that “I have not 
the means to help Wolfe” (37). Still, he glows with self satisfaction at the 
vague idea that “much good was to be done here by a word or two: a latent 
genius to be warmed into life by a waited-for sun beam” (37). His is the 
“affable smile which kind hearted men put on, when talking with these 
people” (33). In a “way people have with children and men like Wolfe,” 
May talks “down to the capacity of his hearer” (37). While pleading lack of 
funds. May “glows with his own magnanimity” (37). After adopting 
Mitchell’s theory that the masses must raise themselves. May “prayed that 
power might be given these degraded souls to rise; (then) he glowed at 
heart” (39). 

A month later, after Hugh Wolfe has been imprisoned for the theft 
he did not commit. Dr. May reads to his wife of Hugh Wolfe’s “conviction 
for grand larceny and his sentence of nineteen years hard labor in 
penitentiary.” May exclaims, “Scoundrel! Serves him right! After all our 
kindness that night! Picking Mitchell’s pocket at the very time!” His wife 
+he “ingratitude of that kind of people” (50). 

ERIC 



67 



Number 16 - 1995 



Life in the Iron Mills 61 



Finally the old man, “the Christian reformer,” (49) the allegorical 
presence of Christian faith, zeal and charity, speaks in the church a 
language suited to “another class of culture” (49). Seeking solace, Wolfe has 
wandered into this church, a “Gothic pile... built to meet the requirements 
and sympathies of a far other class” (48), but the preacher there spoke as 
“in an unknown tongue” (49). Because he saw with an eye that had never 
glared with hunger and a hand that neither poverty nor strychnine-whiskey 
had taught to shake” (49), the reformer failed to reach Hugh Wolfe’s needs. 

While these males in the community are hypocritical and aloof 
from the worker poor, the female presences and characters in Life in the 
Iron Mills are closer to and more a part of the commonplace world. 
Moreover, for Harding Davis, women exemplify a higher model of moral 
and social responsibility. Deborah, the actual thief who filched the money 
from Mitchell’s pocket, does so for love of Hugh, an unrequited love at that. 
It is Deborah who feeds the hungry, who “almost nightly” (19) walks to the 
mill with food for Hugh, from whom she gets little thanks. Deb’s is the story 
of a “soul filled with groping passionate love, heroic unselfishness, fierce 
jealousy, of years of weary trying to please the one human being whom she 
loved, to gain one look of real heart-kindness from him.” (21-2). Deb 
sorrows in the neighboring prison cell because Hugh suffers wrongly for her 
deed. 



Into the prison cell on the day after Hugh Wolfe’s suicide comes 
“only one woman. She came late, and outstayed them all. A Quaker, a 
Friend, as they call themselves. I think this woman was known by that name 
in heaven” (61). This Quaker woman cleaned the cell, “laying straight the 
limbs” (61) of the dead Hugh, and in “a still, gentle way, brought a vase of 
wood-leaves and berries, and placed it by the pallet, then opened the 
narrow window ” (61-2). This Friend plans the burial of Hugh on the hills 
above the river. When Deborah is released from prison, the Quaker woman 
takes her to live in the Quaker community on the hill where the Friends 
gather “in their grave earnest way, waiting for the Spirit of Love to speak, 
opening their simple hearts to receive His words” (63). 



Here at the close of Life in the Iron Mills, the Quaker woman 
vivifies by her maternal actions one of the favorite stories of nineteenth 
century American culture, namely “the story of salvation through motherly 
love” (Tompkins 125). Thus Harding Davis rejects the old society and its 
ways, a society mled by men. By focusing at the close of the novella on the 
Quaker woman and her community of Friends, Harding Davis highlights 
not the exploitation of the worker, but, rather, cooperation among equals. 
Furthermore, these Quakers live the ideal of the Good Samaritan, an ideal 
Harding Davis extols in her turn-of-the-century memoir. Bits of 
p. She upholds the “methods of t^^ood Samaritan who out of his 



ERIC 



bo 



62 Byrne 



own pocket, helped the man fallen by the wayside” (148-9). She condemns 
those who “wanted all alms given through agents of organized charity 
boards, only to those found worthy” (148-9). Those business men who buy 
charity and good will in an impersonal fashion, to Harding Davis, do not 
practice brotherly love. But the reformer who uses “the most feminine 
methods of attack” (231) does her work most effectively. In Life in the Iron 
Mills women, not the enlightened men, practice the corporal and spiritual 
works of mercy. 

In addition, Harding Davis constructs her novella so that the 
narrator is present at the start and finish. This narrator can arguably be 
identified as the author herself. It is this female narrator/creator presence 
which articulates the strongest statements of moral and social responsibility 
in the novella. Immediately in the beginning the narrator sneeringly 
addresses “the amateur psychologist” and invites him “who studies 
psychology in a lazy, dilettante way” to enter the “massed, vile, slimy lives” 
of these wage-slave poor (12-13). The narrator asks this psychologist what 
it means to be alive like this and answers that for these huddled masses, life 
is a drunken jest, a joke (12). Theirs are lives of “incessant labor, sleeping 
in kennel-like rooms, eating rank pork and molasses, drinking.” Reformers, 
political and private, have “gone among them with a heart tender with 
Christ’s charity, and come out outraged, hardened” (15). 

But such is not so of the women \n Life in the Iron Mills. They are 
not hardened by life among the lowly mill workers. The narrator exhorts the 
reader to “be just” in judging Hugh Wolfe’s actions — “not like man’s law, 
which seizes on one isolated fact, but like God’s judging angel whose clear, 
sad eye saw all the countless cankering days of this man’s life, all the 
countless nights” (25). Finally the narrator declares, “I do not plead his 
cause. I only want to show you the mote in my brother’s eye: then you can 
see clearly to take it out” (46). 

Here, then, in Life in the Iron Mills, the dichotomy within the 
community between male and female values, and between the male and 
female senses of moral responsibility, is clear. Men are legalistic, disdainful, 
indifferent to others. Men view their fellows as property. They deny 
involvement or responsibility for others, for their lessers. They intellectualize 
life; they are distant and aloof in their arrogant self-righteousness. They feel 
no necessity to act to correct the wrongs of society. Women, however, 
exemplify the Christian concept of “brotherly” love; women care for their 
brethren. They do not judge by man’s law. They are compassionate and 
concerned. Women view their fellows as suffering humans whose plight 
must be attended to. They involve themselves with others. Having 
;.rl'r^w;iedged the social wrongs, women act to correct them. Prophetically, 
a century before Carol Gilligan and her research on women’s 

O 9 Number 16 - 1995 



Life in the Iron Mills 63 



moral development, Rebecca Harding Davis recognized that women spoke 
and acted “in a different voice.” 



WORKS CITED 

Davis, Rebecca Harding. Bits of Gossip . New York: Houghton, Mifflin and 
Co., 1904. 

. Life in the Iron Mills. Edited by Tillie Olsen. Old Westbury, NY: 

The Feminist Press, 1972. 

Gilligan, Carol. In A Different Voice. Cambridge, MA: Harvard UP, 1982. 

Tompkins, Jane. Sensational Designs: The Cultural Work of American 
Fiction 1790-1860. New York: Oxford UP, 1985. 




70 



64 



CAN CHAOS THEORY CLOSE THE GAP BETWEEN 
THE SCIENCES AND THE HUMANITIES? 



Walter Krieglstein 



“Chaos Dreaming, Chaos Screaming, Want To Be 
More, Want To Be More.” 

The Dead Poet Society 



This paper will explore recent discoveries in basic science and 
evaluate their potential as a stimulus for cross-fertilization between the 
sciences and the humanities. 

In the modem world, science has taken over the place that once 
was reserved for philosophy. When one wants to know what the future will 
bring, or seeks explanations for contemporary problems or behaviors, one 
turns to science in search for answers. Scientific thinking, in turn, produces 
philosophical world views that express the strength, the arrogance, but also 
the limits of science. 

Throughout the nineteenth and well into the twentieth century, all 
fields of academia tried to emulate science and its method. Sociology, 
psychology and political science are just a few of the disciplines that 
adopted empirical methods such as quantification and statistics in order to 
be accepted as scientific by an increasingly more science-conscious society. 
Arts and the humanities were largely left out in this general run for 
measurability, though, and conflict developed between these disciplines and 
the sciences. Robin Williams’ satirical presentation of a quantitative 
approach to poetry in the movie The Dead Poet Society; is well known. 
Few would not get the irony of reducing a poem to a graph. But the depth 
of the conflict becomes perhaps more apparent when one reflects about the 
lines sung by the students in the dead poet cave: “Chaos dreaming. Chaos 
screaming, want to be more, want to be more.” So, at the close of the 
twentieth century, science has lost some of its security and prestige. This 
was caused by a number of significant discoveries in basic physics. 

At the core of a recent critique of science and scientific 
— '■^"^':)logy is a new evaluation of chaos. As an intuitive expression of the 

ERIC 




Number 16 - 1995 



Chaos Theory 65 



subconscious mind, chaos has traditionally been part of the artistic heritage. 
It was because of this connection to chaos, which often resulted in 
unmeasurability and unpredictability, that the humanities seemed to lag 
behind modern intellectual development. The arts were seen by many as an 
old fashioned mode of expression connected with a mythological past. 
Under the scientific paradigm, numbers seemed to be at the center of truth, 
order seemed to be the proper appearance of the divine. But then, nearing 
the end of the twentieth century, scientific thought took a new turn. No 
longer could it be assumed that nature was destined to an ever increasing 
representation of order. Chaos suddenly became respectable. 

But what good can be expected from chaos? What has changed in 
the modern mind, that chaos suddenly assumes a reputable role as a force 
to be reckoned with, at times even the role of creator? And perhaps more 
importantly, aren’t there real reasons for alarm, even fear? 

The Dead Poet Societi; is only one example of how discoveries in 
the Science of Chaos, a scientific theory that mathematically describes non- 
linear systems, has put a new emphasis on creativity and open-endedness, 
ways of understanding and thinking which were traditionally reserved for 
the humanities and the arts. Another popular movie, Jurassic Park, held 
the collective imagination in grip for well over a year. This film stressed the 
other side of chaos, the destructive, dangerous one, the one that is hostile 
to our concept of goodness and progress. Jurassic Park, nevertheless, 
made the Science of Chaos and the Butterfly Effect almost subjects for 
dinner table conversation. 

In the development of Chaos Theory, a new generation of scholars 
has taken a fresh look at the traditional hierarchy of order over chaos, first 
established by Greek philosophers. Order as the creation of the 
demiourgos was placed on the top, while chaos and disorder were at the 
bottom, a mistake of lower celestial gods. Chaos was simply an apeiron, an 
open space, a void, which needs to be filled with form. Nothing was better 
suited to fill the void than the human mind with its logic and rationality. 
Creativity and art, the dark, subconscious side of the human being, though 
still in relative high esteem among the early Greeks, lost more of its 
importance as Western Civilization merged with Judaeo-Christian thought, 
which interpreted chaos as the work of Satan. Hand-in-hand with the 
denunciation of chaos in Western civilization went the gradual rejection of 
all animistic practices, the disregard for imagination, a low esteem for our 
emotional self and even the domination of women. The Age of 
Enlightenment finally fully established the priority of reason. 

Even art was cultivated as primarily a moralizing activity, as it was 
in the service of reason and rationality. Ethical norms, just like the laws 

ERIC 



72 



66 Krieglstein 



of nature, were seen as the pillars of a decent life and were projected into 
art and literature. Whenever a rebellious art refused to adopt this ethical 
responsibility, it was quickly branded as marginal, asocial and unworthy. 
Through academic expulsion or censorship such art was kept on the 
sidelines. Conservative analysts, from Rome and Berlin to Washington, 
more than once tried to establish a canon of acceptable art and literature, 
which they believed would teach the proper selection of texts that are 
suitable to educate Western man. 

Little wonder, then, that the acceptance of chaos as a respectable 
force has many enemies. Perhaps rightly so. But let us take a closer look. 

After a lecture I recently gave about the implications of Chaos 
Theory and the connections between science and art, a science professor 
warned his students that they should be aware of the dangers inherent in 
such ideas. Chaos Theory addresses the heart of traditional science. It puts 
in question the fundamental faith of the scientific world view. In a “Point of 
View” article in the Chronicle of Higher Education fApril 10, 1992), J. 
Trefil and R. Hazen explored the effectiveness of general science courses as 
the key to scientific literacy. The most useful way to study science, the 
authors found, was “to organize scientific knowledge around a series of 19 
overarching scientific principles.” The most basic principle of science, the 
authors stated, is “the idea that the universe is regular, predictable, and 
quantifiable.” 

It is this faith of traditional science that Chaos Theory now puts 
into question. In a recent article in the Wall Street Journal (July 11, 
1994), Dennis Famey discussed the implications of Chaos Theory on the 
ecology debate and on secular humanism. “If nature is not governed by an 
ultimate order,” Famey asks, “what is the place of man?” He continues 
pessimistically: “Chaos Theory seeps into ecology debate, stirring up a 
tempest.” 

Famey contends that with the spreading of Chaos Theory “one of 
history’s great intellectual upheavals is unfolding. It amounts to a reshaping 
of the thought-world that Western man inhabits like a turtle in a shell.” 
Farney quotes Irving Kristol, a fellow at the conservative American 
Enterprise Institute, who calls it “a shaking of the foundations of the 
modem world.” Kristol is convinced that “we are at a unique moment in 
Western culture, the collapse of secular, rationalist humanism.” 

Farney and Kristol may be right when they predict that, with the 
popularization of this new scientific theory of chaotic systems which 
describes nearly all of nature, a more or less unproved faith in the ability of 
hum^ reason and rationality to always make the right choices will have lost 
ncing edge. Equally, therefore, a traditional brand of atheism based 

73 




Number 16 - 1995 



Chaos Theory 67 



on the gospel of materialistic and reductionist science is also in question. 
But since Allen Bloom, in his heretical and somewhat confusing book on 
the Closing of the American Mind, had blamed European, and particularly 
German, nihilism for the demise of reason in America, many scholars have 
recognized the true agent that puts traditional rationality into question. It 
has become clear that the real cause of the loss of intellectual certitude is 
not only to be found overseas, in Europe, where Bloom would place the 
blame, but also right here at home, in the commitment to scientific 
thinking. Traditional positivistic practitioners may still dismiss the new 
discoveries as marginal when they try desperately to hold on to the only 
world view they know, dogmatic materialism masquerading as science, but 
this dogmatic materialism is nothing other than scientific fundamentalism, 
not unlike religious fundamentalism, the true enemy of the humanities. 

A truly humanistic world view, I believe, was never built on 
dogmatic materialism. Humanism, as it was understood by some of the 
pillars of the continental Enlightenment, was built on the premise of a 
changing, open-ended and creative universe. It was in the works of art, 
where the human mind meets the spirit within the material world, never to 
fully comprehend it, but to enter into a dance with it just like two lovers 
enter a union of opposites. One and united in the dance, but never monistic 
and singular in intellect. Great works of art, from the Greeks to modernity, 
were always searching for the place of humanity in the universe, hardly ever 
assured of having found it. Only deeply ideological works and propaganda 
pieces for limited world views ever claimed to have arrived at the truth. In 
other words, humanistic art is more Socratian (a dialogic search for truth) 
than it is Aristotelian (having arrived at a universal concept of truth). 
Searching for, but not being there, was and is the motto for true humanism. 

Many prominent scientists often diligently avoided ultimate 
questions and were content with the successful application of scientific 
principles in technology and the real world. In the face of the enormous 
success of science and technology, a narrowly understood and popularized 
pragmatic philosophy seemed to provide a seal of approval. But neither 
secular humanism nor other humanistic philosophies were ever totally 
based on a scientific pseudo-creed of total rationality. Thus, it is actually a 
popularized belief in the scientific principles expressed in the positivist faith 
that is now under attack by the science of chaos. 



What are some of the principles that emerge from this new science 
that cause such an upheaval in our thinking? The idea of the Butterfly Effect 
is indeed central to the understanding of Chaos Theory. To quote again 
from Jurassic Park: "When a butterfly flaps its wings in Peking, it may 
caiise a hurricane in New York.” Chaos Theory, indeed, implies the 
r-n i/^^down of the traditional connection between cause and effect, which. 



68 Krieglstein 



since Aristotle, has guaranteed the stability of scientific prediction. If we 
were not able to assume that in nature, at least most of the time, the same 
cause may have the same or a similar effect, science the way we know it 
would not be possible. Moreover, traditional theory teaches that a small 
cause must have a small effect, and a big cause will produce a 
correspondingly larger event. Chaos Theory now shows that in chaotic 
systems this may not be the case. Very small initial conditions, after many 
sequences of feedback, may produce totally unexpected and large-scale 
results. Thus, in order to predict the outcome in such a system, it would be 
necessary to know the totality of all initial conditions, which in nature are 
almost limitless. In order to predict any event in the universe with total 
accuracy, one would need a computer the size of the universe, capable of 
working not only in the three standard dimensions but in the fourth 
dimension of space/time as well. This is quite obviously an impossible task, 
and those scientists and philosophers who anticipated a total predictability 
of natural events are understandably disturbed. Natural systems almost 
without exception are chaotic or at least have an element of chaos lurking 
within. Thus, Chaos Theory negates the notion of a total predictability of 
natural events. A nagging question is placed between scientific prediction 
and scientific result. 

But is conservative pessimism really justified when it leads us to 
believe that Chaos Theory questions all progress? In his Wall Street 
Journal article, Denis Farney, echoing Allen Bloom, proclaims: “Progress is 
the promise of humanism; reason is its tool.” And: “Through reason man 
would discover the ‘laws of nature.’ If man would just know enough and 
apply this knowledge, things would get better and better.” 

Do we have to concede now to right-wing fundamentalists who 
have prayed all along for the death of humanism and rallied against 
progress through reason and rationality? I believe not. 

It is true that Chaos Theory puts into question all ideas that claim 
absolute veracity derived from a reference to nature and the natural world. 
But true humanism has never done this and therefore is little influenced by 
the Science of Chaos. For religious fundamentalists, God spoke through the 
prophets to the world. They alone were privileged to receive his message. 
And for these fundamentalists, from Augustine to Jerry Falwell, it has not 
been of much concern whether God’s word agrees with scientific findings. 

On the other hand the scientific community has never been as 
solidly dogmatic as popular perception might have it. The mechanical 
universe of the nineteenth century was never as fully Newtonian as it was 
the product of wishful thinking spurred by the popularization of scientific 
which turned science into faith. This occurred when the 



ERIC 




Number 16 - 1995 



Chaos Theory 69 



Newtonian laws of mechanics, which initially were understood only as a 
workable approximation to nature, became popularized as the universal 
laws of a machine-like universe. 



In the wake of scientific positivism, some philosophers, among 
them Wittgenstein, realized the impotence of the scientific world view in 
answering the burning questions of metaphysical understanding, and they 
commanded silence. Under the same influence, philosophy itself, according 
to Bertrand Russell, gave up efforts to deal with “fuzzy metaphysical 
questions.” Out of this developed a popular philosophy that put a nearly 
complete trust in human rationality as the engine of progress, leading to an 
assumption of total human control. 

But total control has never really been the program of Secular 
Humanism. Both Manifestos of Secular Humanism have stressed the 
importance of creativity and art in human life and the role religions have 
played in the past in the creation of meaning. “The First Manifesto of 
Secular Humanism,” published in 1933 and signed among others by John 
Dewy and Edwin H. Wilson, acknowledged the role traditional religions 
played in the establishment of the highest human values but conceded the 
need for a new secular religion in the face of “man’s larger understanding 
of the universe, his scientific achievements, and deeper appreciation of 
brotherhood” (Humanist 1933 1-5). “The Second Manifesto of Secular 
Humanism”, published in 1973, while acknowledging that “Reason and 
intelligence are the most effective instruments that humankind possesses” 
stressed the limits of reason as well as the limits of science and again 
emphasized the importance of creativity and art (Humanist 1973 4-9). 

It was, rather, through the popularization of the scientific model 
and with the help of philosophers such as Comte, who adapted scientific 
principles to the social sciences and started a new science of sociology, that 
the principles of science were absolutized and began to serve as a 
hierarchical model for all of life. Once applied in the social sciences, these 
principles were introduced as a useful mechanism to establish influence and 
power. In this model, order was at the apex while disorder, chaos, had to 
be eliminated. Supported by the Christian- Judaic view that the human 
mission in this world is to bring order wherever it is lacking, and equipped 
with the principles of science and the tools of technology, human beings 
undertook the task of ordering and “cleaning up” the planet - with an eager 
eye to do the same to the rest of the universe. 



Newton and Leibniz, each in his own way, knew that the accuracy 
of the scientific world view was based on approximation only. The calculus, 
which these two men invented, made modern technology possible by 
i^w^y^-iding scientific laws in the closest approximation to universal laws 

76 



70 Krieglstein 



possible; but Leibniz, especially, was deeply aware of the difference 
between an approximation to a universal and a true universal. 

The empiricist camp solved the problem by ignoring it, — and 
opened the doors for a near limitless succession of technological advances. 
The laws of mechanics are based on the faith that the scientific world view 
is close enough to the way the world works; a vestigal amount of 
uncertainty is - in most instances - insignificant. Unfortunately, many 
scientists preferred to forget this basic element of uncertainty in their 
science and inferred from the near absolute efficiency in the application of 
scientific principle to an absolute universality of the principles themselves. 
This, then, led to the popular view of the universe as a machine that 
operates according to eternal, predictable and quantifiable laws. 

Quantum Theory and the Theory of Relativity began to question 
the machine model of the universe. The Copenhagen Agreement, Bell’s 
Theorem and Heisenberg’s Uncertainty Principle put a question mark 
behind all claims of scientific certainty. The new scientists of Chaos, led by 
Ilya Prigogine, a Russian scientist living and working in Belgium who, in 
1977, received the Nobel prize in physics for his research work on the 
thermodynamics of non-equilibrium systems, extended uncertainty to cover 
all of scientific theory, whether it deals with the smallest quantum or the 
large-scale objects in the universe. 

Out of the uncertainty of the quantum world and the re-evaluation 
of chaotic systems grew a new scientific understanding of the interplay of 
order and chance in the universe. 

Driven by their discoveries of self-similarity, self-organization and 
feedback as systematically ordering principles that spontaneously create 
order out of chaos, those scientists are at the forefront of asking the big 
questions again: “What is truth?” or “What is the purpose of life?” or 
“What is truly good?” 

Thus, with the advent of Chaos Theory, a number of prominent 
scientists, among them Prigogine, have already engaged in the attempt of 
reconnecting the humanities and science. Their endeavor is spurred not by 
the fear of losing control but by the rather exciting observation that 
creativity and openness is found to be the basis of all natural systems, as it 
is also the basis of art. These prominent chaos theorists do not stress the 
fearful and disquieting aspect of the new science; they emphasize that the 
self-organizing creativity of natural systems not only contradicts the 
deterministically predicted decay of the universe, as postulated in the 
Second law of Thermodynamics, but introduces a kind of conscious 
decision making aspect into what was traditionally considered an inanimate 




Number 16 - 1995 



Chaos Theory "71 



of shamanism and of the return of spirits in a dispirited world, quantum 
physicists speculate about quantum animism and the presence of 
consciousness at the quantum level. (Herbert 1993). 

The dissolution of universal laws (and here Bloom may be right) 
was to some extent the quintessence of Continental rationalism. It was an 
outgrowth of Kant’s Copemican revolution and was philosophically initiated 
by Hegel’s dialectic. Nietzsche only completed the job by pronouncing the 
death of the scholastic god, while, at the same time, giving birth to a 
dancing God who could be found in art and ecstasy. 

In the nineteenth century the philosophical realization of a 
dogmatic nihilism ran against the solid wall of classical science. 
Newtonianism as the paradigm of classical physics, according to Alvin 
Toffler, pictured a world in which every event was determined by initial 
conditions. “It was a world in which chance played no part, in which all the 
pieces came together like cogs in a cosmic machine” (Prigogine 1984 xiii). 

This was not a world view that could agree with Hegel’s dialectic 
principle of a contradictory world and with Nietzsche’s trust in the power of 
the creative mind. A new reading of Nietzsche, who once said “One must 
have chaos in the heart to give birth to a dancing star,” may yet some day 
vindicate this unhappy philosopher and recognize him as the first true 
chaostician. 



But, alas, the machine paradigm often still rules the sciences of 
modern times. Sociology and economics, especially, came under the firm 
grip of scientific determinism and to some extent still are held by that 
paradigm. 

Newtonianism, according to Toffler, will eventually fit into a larger 
scientific image of reality. The old “universal laws,” as Chaos Theory 
shows, are not universal at all, but apply only to local regions of reality. 
These regions happen to be the ones to which traditional science has 
devoted the most effort. Chaos Theory finally vindicates those scientists 
who made earlier attempts to apply the uncertainty that was found on the 
molecular level to higher structures as well. Chaos Theory extends the 
image of the dice-playing God, confirmed by Heisenberg for quantum 
processes, as ruler of the larger parts of the cosmos. It defines a new co- 
presence of chance and necessity, “not with one subordinate to the other, 
but as full partners in a universe that is simultaneously organizing and de- 
organizing itself” (Prigogine 1984 xxiii). 



Many scientists of chaos, certainly not all, view this new science as 
holistic in its approach. As each system is a self-organizing unit, creating 
order out of chaos on its own terms, the human mind loses its special place 
® le sole ordering agent in the universe. Unsettling, perhaps, to those 



72 Krieglstein 



who wish total control, natural systems sometimes make choices of their 
own that are different from those that we as humans with our own self 
interest in mind might have preferred. The natural world, from the smallest 
inanimate speck of materia to the large conglomerations of galaxies and 
galaxy clusters, appears suddenly not as a place of isolated units, fighting 
each other for survival but as systems within systems within systems, each 
equipped with an ordering sense, a community of single systems and yet 
with a sense toward establishing higher units. Order, it appears, is the 
cooperative result of all its members. Therefore, just as chance and 
necessity exist alongside each other, so do competition and cooperation. 
When order becomes stifling, a system often works itself to the edge of 
chaos to let the evolutionary dice fall into a new direction. Chaos 
guarantees the flexibility that a system needs for survival in times of stress. It 
has been demonstrated by scientists in computer-simulated models that 
when too much order is enforced in a system, the chances for weathering 
the onset of uncertainty from the outside diminish. Thus, within each 
system it is not so much order, but the skillful balance of chaos and order 
that assures survival. 

In the light of Chaos Theory, the creativity expressed in the open- 
endedness of all the humanities, far from being a negligible, pre-scientific 
activity, is vital in the interplay of humanity with the rest of the world. 
Chaos Theory also puts new emphasis on the need for emotional 
attachment and imagination. 

Most of all. Chaos Theory teaches us a new relationship to our 
own human nature, which itself contains a vital and necessary element of 
chaos at all levels. This chaotic element, a necessary evolutionary tool for 
survival we now realize, became - as a result of fundamentalism and 
dogmatism - almost extinct in the mind of the dominating world culture. 
The consequence of this near extinction, sought by all fundamentalist 
ideologies, would have been the suicide and extinction of the human 
species, because it would have prevented humanity from further adaptation 
and learning. 

“Learning,” suggests the late Heinz Pagels, is most 
intense and effective when it has an emotional, not just 
an intellectual component, when there are no explicit 
rules and the organism is thrown upon its basic 
resources for survival. These need not be negative 
emotions; Plato saw the erotic as an essential 
component of any real education. Our emotional life lies 
outside the framework of reason (although it can be 
examined by reason), and at its most intense we realize 

79 




Number 16 - 1995 



Chaos Theory 73 



that there are no rules or regularities to guide us into 
new territory. This is an opportunity for creativity, and 
we often emerge from an emotional crisis with newly 
learned rules and values. (327) 



And so we return to The Dead Poet Societ};: “Chaos dreaming, 
Chaos screaming, want to be more, want to be more.” Perhaps the dream 
of reason and the dream of chaos are not so far apart after all. 



WORKS CITED 



Bloom, Allen. The Closing of the American Mind. New York: Simon and 
Schuster, 1987. 



Farney, Dennis. “Natural Questions: Chaos Theory Seeps into Ecology 
Debate, Stirring Up a Tempest.” Wall Street Journal 11 July 1994: A 
1 . 

“First Manifesto of Secular Humanism.” New Humanist VI (1933): 1-5. 



Hazen, Robert and James Trefil. “General Science Courses are the Key to 
Scientific Literacy.” Chronicle of Higher Education 10 April 1991: A 
44. 

Herbert, Nick. Elemental Mind, Human Consciousness and the New 
Phi^sics. Penguin, 1993. 



Lange, Diane. “In Pursuit of the Big Questions.” Insight 25 Sept. 1989. 



Pagels, Heinz. The Dreams of Reason. New York: Simon and Schuster, 
1988. 

Prigogine, Ilya. Order out of Chaos. New York: Bantam Books, 1984. 



“Second Manifesto of Secular Humanism.” The Humanist XXXIII (1973): 
4-9. 



er|c 



.80 



74 



THEY ARE NOT SERBS:’’ THE LANGUAGE OF GENOCIDE 



In 1993 the journalist T.D. Allman, visiting a Serbian-run 
concentration camp, noted with all the beleaguered cynicism close 
observers of war accrue, “how grown men starve differently from the way 
children do” (Ali and Lifschultz xiv). As he wandered through the camp, he 
came upon a small group of Ukrainians known as Ruthenians, who had 
been living in Yugoslavia when the Serbian ethnic cleansing began in April, 
1992. Surprised that such “ethnic innocence” should find itself victim of 
mass Serbian hatred, he asked a camp official who “answered benignly as 
though explaining the obvious to a child: They are not Serbs” (Ali and 
Lifschultz xiv). 

The purpose of this paper will be to examine the language used by 
the Serbian perpetrators of genocide in Bosnia. Such statements as “They 
are not Serbs” show a non-logic that nonetheless has a specific intent. 
The “logic” is of an all-too-simple species that does not incorporate 
anything more than the face value of words at first. It is the shallow 
iconography of advertising: “Drink Coke, not Pepsi.” For what was indeed 
being “advertised” among those who were peaceful Serbian citizens living in 
the multinational, multicultural society of Bosnia in the early 1990’s was the 
dictum: “Kill thy neighbor.” Fabricated tales of Bosnian Muslim atrocities 
against innocent Serbs spread easily among the more gullible, the more 
fearful, as if through thin air. 

Among members of the Serbian Democratic Party, who quickly 
became the “shock troops” of Radovan Karadzic and General Ratko Mladic, 
this “face-value language” of strident, racist nationalism easily translated 
into an all-consuming push to rid Bosnia of all Muslims for the sake of a 
“Greater Serbia.” The word had become flesh in a most violent birth. 
One-dimensional ideologues quickly became hardened civil war street 
fighters. In Slaughterhouse: Bosnia and the Failure of the West, David 
Rieff writes, “Getting individuals to fight is not that difficult. There is 
savagery in every civil war, and rarely any moral bottom” (Rieff 106). This 
was certainly true of the “shock troops” who became the instruments of 
"Oi cleansing.” 



Mark Grimes 





Number 16 - 1995 



Language of Genocide 75 



Their more peaceful Serbian brothers, however — especially those 
who lived in outlying ethnically mixed villages — called for a “tailoring of 
tactics.” 



They had to transform those local Serbs who were either 
still undecided about joining the fight or frankly opposed to 
it. One common method used was for a group of Serb 
fighters to enter a village, go to a Serb house, and order the 
man living there to come with him to the house of his 
Muslim neighbor. As the other villagers watched, he was 
marched over and the Muslim brought out. Then the Serb 
would be handed a Kalashnikov assault rifle or a knife . . . 
and ordered to kill the Muslim. If he did so, he had taken 
the step across the line the Chetniks had been aiming for. 
But if he refused, the solution was simple. You shot him on 
the spot.” (Rieff 110) 



We who are oceans away from the sundering and violent enigmas 
of who we are in relation to our “neighbors” perhaps do not hear the 
language that paves the way for mass murder. We do see the assault rifle 
and the knife handed to the innocent. And we do see the blood next door. 
But not having heard the self-honing language of “They are not Serbs” — as 
it ever sharpens its effects in an atmosphere of fear — we are prey to a 
dullness of our own. For some in the West do not see the transformative 
effects of shrill propaganda. They do not feel the informing effect of such 
“honied” visions as Karadzic’s “Greater Serbia” where, to some at least, 
peace might eventually seem to await. 

In M/hy Bosnia: Writings on the Balkan War, Rabia Ali and 
Lawrence Lifschultz list many examples of those who have fallen prey to 
what amounts to a summarily dismissive chauvinism. William Hyland, 
former editor of Foreign Affairs, called the war in Bosnia “a fight among 
gangsters” (Ali and Lifschulz xviii). The current editor of Foreign Affairs, 
James Hogue, characterized the Bosnian conflict as a “civil war” where 
“there are no good guys,” while US Secretary of State Warren Christopher 
played the refrain of “a problem from hell” when referring to Bosnia’s 
tragedy (Ali and Lifschulz xviii). 



Perhaps the most frightening example is A.M. Rosenthal, former 
editor of The New York Times, who could write: “There are no 
‘Bosnians’ — ^just Slavs who call themselves Serbs, Croatians or Muslims” (Ali 
and Lifschulz xix). In tone, in logic, in its summarily dismissive lack of 
we hear in this statement a distinct echo of the Serbian official who 



FRir say, “They are not Serbs.” 



D O 



76 Grimes 



What keeps our collective conscience alive, of course, is the fact 
that we live in a pluralist world with a diversity of voices, suffering but ready 
and courageous enough to speak the truth. Whether it be a Muslim resident 
of Prijedor saying, “Sir, I am going to be killed soon. Is there some way you 
could get my children to Stuttgart?” {Allman 39) Or whether it is Diego 
Arria, Venezuela’s Ambassador to the United Nations, earnestly speaking 
truth to power when he addressed the UN Security Council: “Already two 
hundred thousand people have died .... it is the international community’s 
inconsistent attitude in the adoption of measures to stop aggression that has 
given free reign to the escalation of the conflict” (Ali and Lifschulz xxix). 
The complicated equation is balancing. The genocidal propaganda of the 
perpetrators is releasing a loud and long anguished cry from the victims, 
and the world is listening with a moral awareness heightened by the 
dialectic of embarrassed inaction. Likewise, the reactionary chauvinism of 
some in the West is beginning to “ring hollow” against the growing number 
of investigations of Bosnia’s victimization which are filling the shelves of 
book stores. Nevertheless, land mines still explode. 

As I write, the world community has sent multinational forces into 
Bosnia to enforce the Dayton Accord. We can only hope it is not too little 
too late. Daily we read of mass graves being discovered. We watch the 
delaying, politicized reaction of the West as Serbs, Croatians and Bosnians 
still throb under the promise of treaty. Snipers fire through the language of 
intent. NATO obfuscates through one Lt. Col. Mark Raynor, who assures 
US: “Sniping can take place in any town in any place in the world, and 
does” (The Baltimore Sun 1 February 1996). It is a slow balancing. The 
syrupy taste of denial coats the tongue and does not wash away easily. 

Creating the Beast 

In The Histori; and Sociology; of Genocide, Frank Chalk and Kurt 
Jonassohn define genocide by giving special attention to the “intent” of the 
perpetrator and the “definition” assigned the victim. “Genocide is a form of 
one-sided mass killing in which a state or other authority intends to destroy 
a group as that group and membership in it are defined by the perpetrator” 
(23). For Chalk and Jonassohn, intent and its language, definition, are what 
create the “beast” the victim is to become in the eyes of the perpetrator. In 
support of this definition, they cite such far-reaching cases as the diatribes 
of the ancient Roman senator Cato against Carthage and the early railings 
of Hitler in Mein Kampf against the Jews. In the former, Cato “created” a 
new, militarily-threatening Carthage out of what was in actuality a rather 
benign, twice-defeated merchant-state. His words, ’’for the rest, it is my 
■’ 0 “ that Carthage be destroyed,” chiseled in stone what A.N. Sherwin- 
FRICalls Rome’s “neurosis of fear” (Chalk and Jonassohn 77). In Mein 




Number 16 - 1995 



Language of Genocide 77 



Kampf, Hitler eerily predicted his own success in redefining the Jew when 
he spoke of the “volcanic eruptions of human passions” that can only be 
“stirred” by the “firebrand of the word” (Shirer 129). 

As Chalk and Jonassohn suggest in their definition, genocidal 
language is not only “volcanic” but also revisionist. It makes beasts of the 
innocent and victims of the guilty. Its workings perhaps find no clearer 
illustration than with the Serbian perpetrators of the Bosnian genocide. 

In Seasons in Hell: Understanding Bosnia's War, Ed Vulliamy 
notes that “our century tells us that the fabrication of giant conspiracies 
against a besieged race is a necessary prerequisite to unleashing the kind of 
violence that was to follow” (48). One of the prerequisites for the Serbs was 
“Radovan Karadzic’s biggest lie of all: the imminent jihad in Bosnia” (48). 
Muslims were to be persecuted because they lived on land that was to be 
“Greater Serbia.” The effect was the creation of a “mystical aura of 
Serbian nationalism” founded on a prior creation of a “persecution 
complex” that left hundreds of thousands of Muslims dead and that 
tangentially flowered in such absurd, “glossy” booklets as “Genocide against 
the Serbian People” (42). 

Karadzic’s lies abounded before, during and after the violence 
began. His in-prison, genocidal “revelation” about “historic ethnic 
struggle” — which hauntingly echoes Hitler’s Mein Kampf transformation — 
shows him fabricating “reports of crucified Serbian babies supposedly cast 
into the River Drina with their eyes gouged out” (Vulliamy 48). Later, when 
the beleaguered Bosnian government made one of its numerous aborted 
attempts to defend itself against Serb aggression, Karadzic responded over 
and over again that the Serb army was “just trying to defend themselves” 
through its series of mobilizations (Rieff 84). 

Such lies reach their apogee of intent when they blithely waltz on 
to the international stage and baffle world response. The Radovan 
Karadzic/Slobodan Milosevic lie, single in its intent, thoroughly 
outmaneuvered, for instance, the timid, politicized truth bartering of the 
Vance/Owen attempts to broker a UN peace in Bosnia. In his article, “A 
House Built on Sand,” Marko Prelec writes: 



Milosevic chose his tactics astutely . . . master of 
manipulating the peace process to serve his own 
ends, he cultivated the Serbs’ image of dangerous 
unpredictability, violating countless agreements and 
committing spectacular outrages. The result of this 
was that the United Nations mediators ceased being 
surprised or angered by the Serbs’ failures to live up 



78 Grimes 



to their promises and came to see keeping them at 
the peace table as a valued goal in itself. (Ali and 
Lifschulz 192) 

But long before the international arena became aware of 
this tragic drama the script was being written and revised. The 
authorship, Ed Vulliamy suggests, grew from a combination of old 
historical wounds and personal pathology. Vulliamy describes 
Slobodan Milosevic, one of the progenitors of the new, genocidal 
national language of Serbia, as a “depressed, paranoid, master 
schemer” with the manic hobbies of “gardening and whiskey,” who 
springs from a suicidal family: his “favorite uncle” and his father 
both shooting themselves, his mother hanging herself (Vulliamy 49). 

Radovan Karadzic authored his “stories” of “crucified 
Serbian babies . . . with their eyes gouged out” from the curiously 
un-dried blood of a Serbian defeat 600 years earlier at the hands of 
the Turks. David Rieff shows the far-reaching effects of such un- 
dried blood trickling down to whet the hatred of the Serbian soldier. 
He describes a “history lesson” he received on the battlefield outside 
Priejdor, where the Serbian “footclan,” in all their absurd and 
elliptically deductive logic, “talked about their defeat at the hands of 
the Turks at Kossovo in the late fourteenth century.” When he left, 
he says, “I was sent on my way with a handshake, a jerrican of 
homemade slivovitz . . . and the word ‘1389’ — the date of the Serb 
defeat at Kossovo” (Rieff 69). Where, no doubt, there were 
“crucified Serbian babies . . with their eyes gouged out. ” 

Ratko Mladic, commander of the Bosnian Serb army, also 
has an apparently deeply begotten irrationality, evidenced by such 
statements as: “The Muslims? If you make way for one of them, he 
will come along with five wives and before you know what is 
happening, you have a village” (Vulliamy 47). If the world did 
indeed mirror Mladic’s fears, there would now still be 300,00 
Muslim villages in Bosnia. 

It is utter distortions like these that continue to breathe life 
into the fanged chimera that is “Greater Serbia.” The delusion, 
regrettably, is also fostered by academics like Dobrica Cosic, who 
continuously fuels this “fire dream” through his many tracts about 
the “diaspora of some two million Serbs scattered as the mercy of 
their enemies” (Vulliamy 52). 

The effects of such propaganda, though, reach their 
pathetic and horrifying extreme in the inarticulate street fighter. 

O 

ERIC 




Number 16 - 1995 



Language of Genocide 79 



Attila Balzas, a journalist and Serbian citizen of conscience, found 
himself talking to a Serbian soldier in a bar on Budapest’s Great 
Boulevard. In the article that resulted from his evening with this 
“soldier,” “The Harsh Song of the Circular Saw,” Balzas describes 
meeting this Serb after he had just returned from an “ethnic 
cleansing spree.” When asked what villages he had “cleansed,” he 
replied, “It doesn’t matter. What difference does it make?” They 
had been ordered to take their Muslim prisoners to a saw mill and 
detain them, the soldier told Blazas, when “one of the lads noticed 
this huge circular saw and had the bright idea of making firewood 
out of the prisoners.” When asked why no one tried to stop it, he 
replied, “The boys were out of control. One of them had been 
spreading the tale about his kid being eaten by Muslims” (Ali and 
Lifschulz 101). The “kid being eaten” is the stepchild of Karadzic’s 
“tale” — ^the “baby with its eyes gouged out.” 

One cannot, of course, trace a direct line of descent 
through history by the threads of language, but there is, 
nonetheless, a surprisingly close similarity here between the 
aggressive actions which have characterized the last fifty years in 
the Balkan region, and the propagandistic language which incited 
those actions. (Religious claims and counterclaims between Croatian 
Catholics and the Serbian Orthodox church have long fueled unrest 
in the Balkans. To this day, to mention the name of the 
“excessively pious” Croatian Archbishop Alojzije Stepinac — who 
could write “If there were more freedom . . . Serbia would be 
Catholic in twenty years.” — is to immediately galvanize 
ethnic/religious opinion in Serbia and Croatia.) (Kaplan 5) The 
infusion and effects of political propaganda — which is the focus of 
this paper — appeared most noticeably with the Nazis during World 
War II and have since propelled events with all the tight 
cause/effect of the children’s tale “The House That Jack Built.” 
Here are the Croatian/Nazi Ustasha transgressors who murdered 
anywhere from 60,000 to 700,000 Serbs, depending upon 
whether you ask a Serb or a Croat, and here is the psycho-Serbian 
(and indistinguishable) anger of Slobodan Milosevic/Radovan 
Karadzic/Ratko Mladic carving a “Greater Serbia” from the homes 
of Muslims; here is the felt/unthought action of the Serbian 
footclan; and here — to use the title of Attila Balzas’ article — is “The 
Harsh Song of the Circular Saw,” where humans become firewood. 



80 Grimes 



Voices of Sorrow 

When it happened, it was a beautiful 
summer’s day. I stepped out on the balcony to 
breathe the warm air, then went back into the 
bathroom to shave. My wife was preparing 
lunch — mange-tout peas, the first of the year. I 
could hardly wait. As I came out of the bathroom, 
my wife said, ‘It’s the police.’ I was standing by 
the door, my son sitting on the couch. Time had 
stopped. (Ali and Lifschulz 104) 

For Kurt Jonassohn, in a paper delivered before the 
International Studies Association, one of the unique aspects of the 
Holocaust was that the Jewish survivors did not succumb to the 
“collective denial” so common to those who have endured forms of 
genocide in the past, where “It seemed as if the victims accepted 
their fate; they seemed to share the view that theirs was the lot of 
the weak and of the losers and was somehow ordained.” On the 
contrary, Jonassohn says, “The Jewish survivors not only voiced 
their sorrow, but also gave expression to their outrage at such 
monstrous violations of common decency, human rights, and 
civilized values” (Chalk and Jonassohn 327). 

The Bosnian Muslim victims of genocide give an added 
poignancy to this element of “voicing sorrow” — namely, its dire 
immediacy. The voices from Bosnia are indeed quite present and 
participatory. As such they pose a unique dilemma: they are dying 
as they speak. Theirs are the simple and raw and numerically 
diminishing voices of a people merely wanting to live, merely 
wanting to sit down to a lunch of mange-tout peas, the first of the 
spring. 

And while the spring of 1996 may have been the brightest 
for the Bosnian victims in the past five years, with the signing of the 
accords in Paris and Dayton, the echoes of their own recent cries 
still inform and scar the future. These are the echoes that should 
sound most resoundingly for the likes of William Hyland, James 
Hogue and Warren Christopher, who would betray the conscience 
of the West. 



A refugee from Zvornik: “I know they killed children in 
Tabaci. Among the dead was Sabit, a local driver, his 
wife, and two sons. They ordered my neighbor, Rama, 
to shoot several citizens. When he refused, they killed 
him.” (Kajan 89) 



87 



Number 16 - 1995 



Language of Genocide 81 



A refugee from Foca:”When Radio Foca fell in Serbian 
hands, Velibor Ostojic declared over the radio that the 
township of Foca was Serbian. He said that Muslims 
would no longer be permitted to live in Foca. And he 
added that every Serbian woman would have to bear 
seven children.” (Kajan 90) 

A prisoner, escaped from the “Betonirka Garages”: “I 
was convinced they were going to kill us all in the end . . 

. . I dreamt I was by the River Sava with my wife and 
children. The kids were jumping into the water, and I 
jumped with them. It was so beautifully cool .... At 
one point I felt a searing pain in my chest. The water 
was long gone. A bottle was passed around. People 
urinated in it, then drank the contents.” (Bosenic 107). 

A survivor: “Salim Abdic and Murat and Muradif Hreljic 
tried to escape the village, but the Chetniks caught them 
and brought them back and killed them ruthlessly. After 
that the Chetniks went into Salim’s house, where his 
older brother Musto Abdic, his father Saban, his mother 
Mevla, his daughter, his sister-in-law Zulfija, his son 
Samir, age seven, and his one-year-old baby were. The 
Chetniks killed them all at the same time. When we got 
to them, they were lying in blood, heaped one on top of 
the other.” (Kajan 94). 

Zlatko Disdarevic: “At dusk, on what had been a 
beautiful day, I saw a car heading toward the hospital; 
hanging out of the back door were the legs of a man 
who had been hit by a sniper bullet. The car passed by 
a little girl who was tossing a stick to her dog. A few 
minutes later, only 300 meters away, a shell took a 
whole floor off a gorgeous old house. The girl and the 
dog continued playing as if nothing had happened.” 
(Disdarevic 67). 

Roads 

You have decided to wipe me out whatever the price 

Yet nowhere will you find 

The real 

Road to me 




You cannot know of the boundless 

88 



82 Grimes 



Space of time 

In which I am 
Immanent 

From a distant yesterday 
To a far-off tomorrow 
Thinking 
Of you. 

- Mak Dizdar 



WORKS CITED 

Ali, Rabia and Lawrence Lifschulz, eds. Why Bosnia? Writings on the 
Balkan War. Stony Creek: The Pamphleteer’s Press, 1993. 

Bosnevic, Omar. “The Road to Manjaca.” Why Bosnia? Writings on the 
Balkan War. Stony Creek: The Pamphleteer’s Press, 1993 

Chalk, Frank and Kurt Jonassohn, eds. The History; and Sociology; of 
Genocide: Anal\;ses and Case Studies. New Haven: Yale UP, 1990. 

Dizdarevic, Zlatko. Sarajevo: A War Journal. Trans. Anselm Hollo. New 
York: Henry Holt, 1994 

Kajan, Ibrahim. “Is This Not Genocide?” Why Bosnia? Writings on the 
Balkan War. Ed. Rabia Ali and Lawrence Lifschulz. Stony Creek: The 
Pamphleteer’s Press, 1993. 

Kaplan, Robert D. Balkan Ghosts: A Journei; through History;. New 
York: Vintage, 1994. 

Rieff, David. Slaughterhouse: Bosnia and the Failure of the West. New 
York: Simon & Schuster, 1995 

Shirer, William. The Nightmare Years: 1939-1940. Boston: Little, 
Brown, 1984. 

Vulliamy, Ed. Seasons in Hell: Understanding Bosnia's War. London: 
Simon & Schuster, 1994. 



ERIC 



89 



Number 16 - 1995 



83 



GUIDEUNES FOR AUTHORS 



The Community; College Humanities Review is always interested 
in the writing of scholars working in community colleges and of any whose 
research might be of value to community college humanists. All 
submissions should be made to the editor through the CCHA national office 
at the Community College of Philadelphia. Please follow these guidelines : 

1. Articles should be typed and double-spaced. The body of the 
manuscript should contain only the title of the work. Number the 
pages. On a separate page, provide the author s name, rank or title, 
academic department, affiliation, full mailing address, telephone 
number, and FAX number (if available). 

2. All submissions should follow the style of the Modern Language 
Association for citations and bibliography. Please note that titles and 
foreign words and phrases are indicated by italics (not 
underlining). 

3. Writers should submit one “hard” copy of the article, for editorial board 
review. Upon acceptance, they must be prepared to provide a copy on 
computer disk, 3 1/2” size. Include with the disk the name of the word 
processing software and operating system. (The editor uses Macintosh, 
as does our publisher. We are flexible, however!) In mailing, remember 
to tell the Post Office that the package includes a disk. 

4. All articles submitted for publication are reviewed by the Editorial 
Board. Authors may be requested to edit their work, and the editor of 
the Review reserves the right to edit for length, conformity to style, 
and general intelligibility. 

5. Authors must notify the Review if a submission has been printed 
elsewhere or is accepted for publication elsewhere. 




90 



c:^oi£,iL 




91 



CD o S; 

cc UJ O) 

Og 

o o < f rH 
z CO cc 3 

i" "I 



CM 

CD 



o 

20 

•J O 

cJ CD 

O W5 

u< 

)h CD 

h w 

HH r-i 



Z 

s 

o ^ 

uffi 



•S 





U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 
Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 




NOTICE 



Reproduction Basis 




This document is covered by a signed "Reproduction Release 
(Blanket)" form (on file within the ERIC system), encompassing all 
or classes of documents from its source organization and, therefore, 
does not require a "Specific Document" Release form. 




This document is Federally-funded, or carries its own permission to 
reproduce, or is otherwise in the public domain and, therefore, may 
be reproduced by ERIC without a signed Reproduction Release form 
(either "Specific Document" or "Blanket"). 



EFF-089 (3/2000) 





