DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 371 360 



CS 214 364 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Powell, Malea D. 

Native Amerindian Theor (h) etor ic : The Periphery 

Speaks. 

Mar 94 

lip.; Paper presented at the Annual Meeting of the 
Conference on College Composition and Comunication 
(45th, Nashville, TN, March 16-19, 1994). 
Speeches/Conference Papers (150) — Viewpoints 
(Opinion/Posi t ion Papers , Essays , etc. ) (120) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

American Indian History; American Indian Literature; 
*Amer ican Indians; Cultural Context ; *Cul tural 
Interrelationships; Higher Education; >v Imperial ism; 
^Personal Narratives; Scholarship; United States 
History 

Discourse Communities; *Native Americans; *Voice 
(Rhetoric) 



ABSTRACT 

Rhetoric scholars must open space for the unheard 
counter-stor ies of American Indians, which exist alongside the echo 
of American-ness that implicates all people in this country. As the 
scholarly discourse of the academy itself is situated within a 
framework of the American narrative of conquest and imperialism, 
scholars must recognize that they are part of the system of denial, 
the "un-seeing" of the American Indian and his or her story that 
challenges this master narrative. Michael Dorris points out the 
"conviction that the West holds a virtual monopoly on 'science,' 
logic and cl ear- thinking" writes a singular narrative for the Indian 
scholar whose work is about some aspect of Indian culture. The 
academic valuing of Western "objectivity" is used to narratively mark 
(usually with asterisks and italics) the Indian who studies his or 
her own culture. Limited by the type of story he or she can tell, the 
American Indian if in an impossible bind. However, there are some 
stories that can be told, mixed blood stories told from the borders 
of Indian-ness, American-ness, and Scholar ly-n«ss . These stories 
operate across institutions and ideologies constructed by narratives, 
across f ront i ers /borders/boundar ies . This is a place for the 
"theorhetoric , " a mixed blood rhetoric that works through theories of 
history, anthropology, and literature to assemble a border-situated 
web of tactics with which various constructions of American Indian 
rhetorics can be accessed. (TB) 



*** * * *************************** ******** ********************* ********** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made * 

* from the original document. * 
*********************************************************************** 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE Thi$ 
MATERIAL HAS BEEN GRANTED 8t 



Malea D. Powell 



'•' T *>E EDu-.A T 'ONAi REi»OuRCE6 



March 1994 



o 

o 

CO 

T- 

CO 

Q 

UJ 



15 



The title of this paper is - Native Amerindian Theor(h)etoric: The Periphery 

Speaks . It is a trickster title, layered with words that are used by the Academy to 
represent an object of study. "Indian," "Native American/' and "Amerindian." In 
creating it, I had in mind a talk that would begin to think about what it might mean 
to "do" American Indian Rhetoric in this postmodern age of Victor Vitanza's "post- 
philosophical rhetoric." And in thinking this proposition through, I began to 
understand that to "do" Indian Rhetoric meant thinking about what it is that we do 
when we study - or "do" ~ Indians within the larger framework of the Academy. 
So, in the next 19 or so minutes, I'm going to think aloud about some of the 
narratives that shape our acholarly understanding of Indians within the Academy, 
and I'm going to position those narratives as inextricably intertwined with a larger 
narrative that constructs America and American-ness. After all, it is because of how 
America, the ideological state and collective national culture, came into being that 
there is an "American" scholarly experience and a specific scholarly discourse about 
Native Americans at all. 

The stories that write this larger narrative of Amenta and American-ness arc 
familiar ones - "Christopher Columbus and the discovery," "the Pilgrims and the 
first Thanksgiving," "Pioneers and Manifest Destiny Familiarity is precisely the 
point here in relation to Indian peoples Jimmie Durham, Cherokee poet/artist and 
AIM activist, claims that "America's narrative about itself centers upon a hidden 
text concerning its relationship with American Indians /' Further, Durham sees the 
United States as "the first settler colonv to establish itself against and through denial 
of its original inhabits" (425) It is this denial, this un-seeing, that characterizes 
America s master narrative , * , ' ,. n , 



ERLC 



BEST COPY AVAIL AR! F 



o 



2 



An essential part of this familiar narrative is told through the settlers vision 
of the frontier, a frontier that is •wilderness;' empty of all "civilized" life. The 
settler is a brave individual who sets forth to pit his (and 1 use the male pronoun 
here deliberately) skills of "civilization" against this vast wilderness; he tames the 
wilderness, domesticates it and installs in it the icons of civilization - Euroamerican 
town life, commerce, roads, railroads, churchs, stores and schools. The un-seeing of 
Indian peoples, nations, civilizations is obvious here. What is not so obvious is the 
correspondence of this image, this myth, to the stories that construct the Academy. 
But it is this same un-seeing of material bodies that translates into an academic re- 
creation of mythic bodies that are'then configured as Native Americans. 

The academic rules of scholarly discourse, our legitimizing discourse, require 
us to write ourselves into this frontier story, to repeat and reinscribe it. Scholars are 
to set forth on the fringes of "the known" in order to stake out and define a piece of 
scholarly territory which, through our skill at explicating and analyzing, will 
become our own scholarly domain, our area of concentration. We are meticulously 
trained to identify our object of study in terms of its difference from other objects of 
study, then to do everything within our power to bring that object into the realm of 
other "known" objects. In effect, we "civilize" unruly topics. 

I don't mean to disable scholarly work here, on the contrary 1 don't believe 
that scholarly work, particularly that focused on Indians, can be fully enabled until 
we see the entire web of narratives in which it exists and works to create meaning. 
We cannot separate American scholarship from the narrative of America, but we 
can, by consciously and explicitly positioning our work within that narrative, begin 
to open space for the existing counter-stories that have been silenced by it. 

So, where does the Indian, the Native American, enter these narratives? 
According to anthropologist James Clifton, what we think about Indians forms "a 
large part of generic North American culture." We use this knowledge 



ERLC 



3 



3 



'automatically and credulously to organize behavior and to explain the behavior of 
others" (1). Clifford differentiates between what we "know" about Indians and what 
he calls "thinking clearly and critically about Indians" - Clifford sees these as 
separate kinds of knowledge, the former a sort of uncritical culturally-based 
knowledge (9), the latter requiring "special intellectual discipline" (1). Clifton asserts 
that the "Indian" was "an invention of people of European origins," based on the 
assumption that "people so called shared common characteristics" (22). 

If the "Indian" is a European, or Euroamerican, invention, then what 
purpose does it serve, how does it function in the American narrative? Modoc 
writer Michael Dorris claims that "the Indian mystique was designed for mass 
consumption by a European audience, the fulfillment of old and deep-seated 
expectations for 'the Other'" (99). The Native American is a construction, an 
integral part of the American master narrative that first claimed there "were no 
Indians in this country, only wilderness," then claimed that the Indians needed to 
be "civilized," then claimed that all the Indians had died and proclaimed those 
deaths a tragedy, and now claims that contemporary Indian peoples are "happy with 
their situation" and are, "in any event, no longer 'real Indians" (Durham 428). 

The strangest part of this narrative is the absolute necessity that this collective 
vision of the Native American not be disturbed by the material existence of 
contemporary Indians. Vine Deloria, Jr., a noted Indian scholar and historian, 
observes 

The realities of Indian belief and existence have become so misunderstood 
and distorted at this point that when a real Indian stands up and speaks the 
truth at any given moment, he or she is not only unlikely to be believed, but 
will probably be "corrected" by the citation of some non-Indian and totally 
inaccurate "expert." (qtd. in Rose Pretenders 404) 



ERLC 



1 



4 



This need to un-see Indians is complicated by the way in which the federal 
government sees Indians, in how it chooses to define who is - and of course who 
isn't — an Indian. 

The legitimizing narrative most often used is that of blood quantum, which 
requires that "Indians" be able to trace their lineage to an original tribal roll number 
(Chaudhuri 21), but this is problematic since many tribal rolls were frozen during 
the 1890s Allotment Era. One has only to consider the material status of Indians in 
the past 100 years to envision the problem of laying a paper trail of birth certificates 
that is ultimately attached tc a single name on a tribal roll. This narrative desire for 
proof of a single, locatable origin and its demand for blood-mapping immediately 
quantifies Indian peoples, and because of the federal emphasis on blood quantum, 
most Indians know themselves in terms of a fraction - quarter-blood, half-blood, 
full-blood - that represents their "worth" in the master narrative. 

On Madison Avenue, the recognition factor of "the Indian" "outranks, on a 
world scale, that of Santa Claus, Mickey Mouse, and Coca Cola combined" (Dorris 
99). It is the very centrality of this image that complicates any scholarly work that 
concentrates on Indian peoples. We are all, Indian and non-Indian alike, inscribed - 
- written - by this master narrative. Scholars who concentrate on the study of 
Indian culture, history and literature often, in their attempt to disrupt this master 
narrative, create a kind of sympathetic echo behind it, a sort of popular scholarly 
narrative about Indians that is inextricably bound up in the same "unseeing" of the 
material and re-creation of the imaginary that goes on in the American master 
narrative. This story is characterized by outrage and concern about the lack of 
Inc -an voices, and its resolution is a collective effort to re-create those voices 
without listening to them first. This is precisely the danger that I want to point out. 
When we, as scholars, convince ourselves that we are no longer influenced by that 
American narrative of Indian-ness, in our denial of the very narrative that our 



5 



studies have shown us is insidious and pervasive in the culture in which we live, 
we are at risk of simply re-inventing that same narrative in a different <ey, a 
different tone, an echo that we convince ourselves is somehow exempt from 
colonial complicities by our intent to make it so. 

If we assume that our position within the Academy will somehow protect us 
from the "smarminess" of American cultural imperialism, if we are reluctant to 
interrogate the narratives that we construct, then Indian cultures may be 
appropriated, distorted and owned by the American narrative in new and approved 
"scholarly" terms. As literary critic Arnold Krupat points out, in American we 
don't control "the production of counterstories, but their distribution'' (11). So what 
rhetoricians, particularly Indian rhetoricians, could do in the Academy is find ways 
to distribute the counter-stories that already exist as well as ways to open space for 
new ones. It is this kind of "distribution" that might be useful to subverting the 
larger American master narrative, a distribution that would serve to inject 
heteroglossia and dialogue within a now-oppressive Academic monologue. But 
this story of opportunity is no less problematic than any other story in this talk, than 
any other story that involves Indian people. It too is complicated by the American 
master narrative, and it is further complicated by the Academic master narrative. 
Hopi poet and anthropologist Wendy Rose writes: 

Always and everywhere, the inclusion of non-European intellectual content 
in the academy is absolutely predicated upon its conformity to sets of 
"standards" conceived and administered by those adhering to the basic 
precepts of Euro-derivation {Pretenders 407) 

The American and Academic narratives collide in the embodiment of 
material Indian-ness presented by the Indian scholar. With both narratives at work 
in such a location, the opportunities presented by this border position can begin to 



ERLC 



6 



look like a prison. The stories available for Indian scholars begin to be limited at the 
initiate-scholar level. As Rose points out: 

The basic "qualification 0 demanded by academe of those who would teach 
non-European content (and for those of non-European origin] is that they first 
receive "advanced training" and 'socialization" in doctoral programs steeped 
in the supposed universality of Euro-derivation. (Pretenders 407) 
Tribal knowledge is eschewed for initiate-scholars who must 'prove" themselves 
on a frontier already "settled" and "civilized.". Our story is written in two hands 
here - the left, which expects us to "speak for our people/' and the right, wh.ch 
expects us to do so in a voice that is not our own. 

The Indian counter-story to that American narrative of sameness is that 
Indian people didn't have much in common until the Europeans arrived - we had 
(and still have) different cultures, different languages, different names for ourselves; 
our only commonality was that we shared a relationship to this continent as a land 
base. Now, of course, culturally diverse groups of Indian peoples share what Ines 
Hernandez calls "the historical experience of colonization" and the simultaneous 
resistance to that colonial presence (9-10). The Indian counter-story to Academic 
"truth" is that different stories make different "truths," and that individuals from 
diverse tribal cultures don't always even tell the same stories. There is no one 
"real" Indian experience. 

The Academic narrative is "culture-bound" by its own approach to 
knowledge. As Dorris points out the "conviction that the West holds a virtual 
monopoly on 'science/ logic, and clear-thinking" writes a singular narrative for the 
Indian scholar whose work is about some aspect of Indian culture (102). The 
Academic valuing of Western "objectivity" is used to narratively mark (usually 
with asterisks and italics) the Indian who studies her own culture. Dorris 
comments that 



7 



7 



American Indians who deal as scholars with Indian materials are assumed by 
some non-natives to be hopelessly subjective and biased, and much of their 
work is dismissed as self-serving. . . . Euro-americans have not felt shy in 
writing about their respective ancestors and are not automatically accused of 
aggrandizing them; why should native scholars be less capable of relatively 
impartial retrospection? (104) 

It would seem that an Indian scholar is in an impossible bind - limited by the 
master narratives constructing her, the stories she can tell that will be heard are 
limited. But, there are some stories that can be told, stories that open space for 
counter-stories and resistance, mixed blood stories told from the borders of Indian- 
ness, American-ness, Scholarly-ness. In fact, mixed blood stories are particularly 
powerful since the concept of identification by blood is authorized by the 
governmental narrative that marks and defines Indian peoples. And the Academic 
narrative often welcomes mixed blood scholars because they are exotic but aren't 
perceived as a real threat since they aren't "real" Indians. So here is a place, here is a 
story, that operates across narratives, across institutions and ideologies constructed 
by narratives, across frontiers/borders/boundaries. And here is the space for the 
"theorhetoric" from my title - a mixed blood rhetoric that works through theories 
of history, anthropology and literature in order to assemble a border-situated web of 
tactics with which we can access various constructions of American Indian rhetorics. 

Despite the narrative structures that we are written and constrained by, the 
need for opening space for counter-stories and enacting a theorhetorical perspective 
is great. Chippewa writer and theorist Gerald Vizenor would have us play trickster 
in those narratives, to use our knowledge of the language and structure which 
compose the narratives that bind us as instruments to cut away those same 
oppressive stories, to reveal the counter-stories that have simply been silenced by 
those loud insistent narrative voices of America and the Academy 



ERIC 



S 



8 



1 want to finish my thinking aloud today with wisps of counter-stories from 
three American Indian poets. Joseph Bruchac, Linda Hogan and Wendy Rose. 
Bruchac writes "If you are ready to listen, you'll meet someone who is ready to talk" 
(245); Hogan replies "Blessed /are those who listen /when no one is left to speak" 
(qtd. in Lincoln 201); and Rose rejoins "Do you remember /when you twisted the 
wax from your ears /and shouted to me, 'You finally speak!' /because now you 
/could finally hear?" (Going 53) As rhetoric scholars, it is time we learned to open 
space for silence, so that the counter-stories of American Indians and the counter- 
stories of other unheard voices can gain volume, gain place, gain alongside - 

and even above - that narrative echo of American-ness that implicates us all. It is 
time to use mixed-blood tactics and post-philosophical Sophistic pedagogies to enact 
a theorhetoric of listening or we might as well not pretend to listen at all. 



ERLC 



9 



9 



Works Cited 

Bruchac, Joseph. "Notes of a Translator's Son." Ed Patricia Riley. Growing Up 

Native American: An Anthology. NY: William Morrow & Co., 1993. 237- 
246. 

Chaudhuri, Joyotpaul. "American Indian Policy: An Overview." Ed. Vine Deloria, 
Jr. American Indian Polity in the Twentieth Century. Norman: U of OK P, 
1985. 15-33. 

Clifton, James, ed. Being and Becoming Indian: Biographical Studies of North 

American Frontiers. Chicago: Dorsey P, 1989. 
Dorris, Michael. "Indians on the Shelf." Ed. Calvin Martin. The American Indian 

and the Problem of History. NY: Oxford UP, 1987. 98-105. 
Durham, Jimmie. "Cowboys and. : Notes on Art, Literature, and American 

Indians in the Modern American Mind." Ed. M. Annette Jaimes.77ir State of 

Native America: Genocide, Colonization and Resistance. Boston: South End 

P, 1992. 423-438. 

Hernandez, Ines. "Foreword: Rejections on Identity and Culture." Ed. Pat Riley. 

Growing Up Native American: An Anthology. NY: William Morrow & Co., 
1993. 7-16. 

Krupat, Arnold, tthnocriticism. Ethnography. History, Literature. Berkeley: L' of 
CA P. 1992. 

Lincoln, Kenneth. Indin Humor: Bicultural Play in Native America. NY: Oxford 
UP, 1993. 

Rose, Wendy. Going To War With All My Relations. Flagstaff: Fntrada Books, 
1993. 

The Great Pretenders: Further Reflections on Whiteshamanism." Ed. M. 

Annette Jaimes .The State of Native America: Genocide, Colonization and 
Resistance. Boston: South End, 1992. 403-422. 



ERLC 



10 



10 



Vitanza, Victor J. "Critical Sub/ Versions of the History of Philosophical Rhetori 

Rhetoric Review 6.1 (1987): 41-66. 
Vizenor, Gerald, ed. Narrative Chance: Postmodern Discourse on Native 

American Indian Literatures. Albuquerque: U of NM P, 1989. 



1 1 



