DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 408 117 



RC 020 970 



AUTHOR 

TITLE 

PUB DATE 

NOTE 

PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 

DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Darwin, Clayton M. 

"Now, This Is a True Story." 

Dec 95 

23p . ; For "The Education of Little Tree," see ED 272 351. 
Information Analyses (070) -- Opinion Papers (120) 

MF01/PC01 Plus Postage. 

♦American Indian Culture; * American Indian Literature; 
American Indians; Authors; Autobiographies; Books; *Cherokee 
(Tribe) ; Childrens Literature; Elementary Secondary 
Education; ^Literary Criticism; *Story Telling 
Appalachian Culture; Authenticity; Carter (Forrest) ; 
♦Education of Little Tree (The) ; United States (South) 



ABSTRACT 



This paper presents a cultural /historical interpretation of 
"The Education of Little Tree," a children's book by the late Forrest Carter. 
The 1976 book, which sold over 700,000 copies and was widely used in 
classrooms to present Native American values and lifestyles, is the story of 
an orphaned boy named Little Tree, raised by his Cherokee grandparents in the 
Tennessee mountains during the Depression. Because the book's cover carried 
the subtitle "A True Story by Forrest Carter, " critics charge that the author 
presented the book as an autobiography and true representation of Native 
American culture. In 1991, Forrest Carter was exposed as the late Asa Earl 
Carter, a Ku Klux Klan terrorist and right-wing radio announcer. The 
revelations caused an upheaval among readers and proponents of Carter's work. 
This paper suggests that Carter's representation of the book as a "true 
story" simply reflects a cultural tradition of storytelling in the South and 
that the author did not intend to misrepresent his work. For example, it is 
apparent that the Native American themes in the book are not the "truth" and 
are simply added to make the story more interesting. Carter's story does not 
accurately reflect Cherokee beliefs about creation and the natural order, nor 
their hunting, farming, and social practices. Although Carter's themes are 
more representative of Appalachian culture than Cherokee culture, the "truth" 
in the story is that Carter is portraying his own beliefs and experiences. 
What Carter has done is give the reader his philosophy on the three 
relationships that every person will encounter in life: spiritual, human, and 
environmental. The controversy over this book results from a failure to 
understand the culture of the author. This book is indeed a "true story" in 
the Southern sense of the phrase, and Forrest /Asa Earl Carter is indeed a 
true storyteller. (LP) 



* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



2 0 9 7 0 ED 408 117 



"Now, This is a True Story." 



Clayton M. Darwin 

P.O. Box 1442 

Ellensburg, WA 98926-1442 

(509) 962-1006 (H) or 963-1537 (W) 

Graduate Student, English (TESL/TEFL) 

Central Washington University 
December 1995 

Thus is a cultural/historical interpretation of The Education of 
Little Tree by the late Forrest Carter which proposes that the 
author did not intend to misrepresent himself as Native American 
and that there is nothing contradictory between the book and the 
author's controversial past. 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement 

EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
/ CENTER (ERIC) 

CZ This document has been reproduced as 
received from the person or organization 




"PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE THIS 
material has been granted by 



originating it. 



□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC)." 



ERIC 



BEST COPY 



rc,OZO<f70 



Page 1 



"Now, This is a True Story." 

Recently I read an article entitled "' Authenticity, ' or the 
Lesson of Little Tree" in which Henry Louis Gates Jr. 
investigates the role of authorial authenticity in writing, 
giving several examples of works that portray characters or 
lifestyles that are ethnically or sexually different from those 
of the authors. However, I was interested in the article not 
because of the authenticity issue but because one of the texts 
which Gates used as an example. The Education of Little Tree, had 
been interpreted to have purpose and meaning quite different from 
what I understood them to be: Many believed that the book was "a 
unique vision of Native American culture" (Gates 26). This idea 
was in fact different from anything I had ever heard about the 
book. 

The Education of Little Tree, written by Forrest Carter, was 
originally published by Delacorte Press in 1976. Since its 
republication by the University of New Mexico Press in 1986, it 
has won awards from the American Booksellers Association for 
being the most enjoyable book to "hand-sell" (Education 104), 
been converted to a screenplay which Robert Redford intends to 
direct, and sold more than 700,000 copies (Redford 30). The book 
is a story of a small, orphaned boy. Little Tree, who is raised 
by his Cherokee grandparents in the mountains of Tennessee during 
the Depression. According to Gates and others, the book was 
taken as an autobiography. Further, it was hailed as a 
representation of Native American culture, sold in Indian 




3 



Page 2 

reservation gift shops, and used by public school teachers across 
the nation because it offered a "unique opportunity for. . . 
students to understand the lifestyles and values of our earliest 
Americans..., values that are specifically Indian" (Stensland 2- 
8 ). 

The reason, however, that Gates included The Education of 
Little Tree in his article on authorial authenticity is that 
there is a question about Forrest Carter's authenticity as a 
Native American writer. In 1991, Dan T. Carter, a history 
professor at Emory University, exposed "Forrest Carter" as a 
pseudonym of the late Asa Earl Carter, whom Professor Carter 
describes as a one-eighth Indian, semi-rural, non-orphaned (Reid 
18) "Alabama native" who between 1946 and 1973 "carved out a 
violent career in Southern politics as a Ku Klux Klan terrorist, 
right-wing radio announcer, home-grown American fascist and anti- 
Semite, rabble-rousing demagogue and secret author of the famous 
1963 speech by Gov. George Wallace of Alabama: 'Segregation 

now... Segregation tomorrow... Segregation forever'" (Carter, 

D.). Asa Carter is also known for organizing and commanding The 
Original Ku Klux Klan of the Confederacy, whose militant members 
are infamous for participating in the 1956 riot resulting from a 
Black female's attempt to enroll at the University of Alabama, 
assaulting Nat King Cole during a 1956 concert in Birmingham, 
Alabama for being a "vicious agitator for integration," and 
castrating a Black man during an initiation ceremony in 1957 
(Newton 445). Although Forrest Carter denied being Asa Earl 




Page 3 

Carter, in 1991, eleven years after her husband's death. Carter's 
widow, India Carter, admitted that he was indeed Asa Earl Carter, 
saying that he took the name when his first novel. The Outlaw 
Josey Wales, was published in the mid-seventies (Reid 16). 

These revelations about Forrest Carter's former life, of 
course, have caused an upheaval among the readers and proponents 
of Carter's works, an upheaval that has caused many to rethink 
their willingness to accept the written word as truth or even 
representative of truth. Yet, the process of acceptance, 
revelation and disappointment that many readers went through with 
The Education of Little Tree was unnecessary and could have been 
avoided if these readers had bothered to investigate and question 
the text and the author's culture. 

It must be noted here that I am Southern. Even more, I am 
from the rural South. I was born in Washington County, 
Mississippi and graduated from high school in Madison County, 
Georgia. Between these times, I lived in North Carolina and 
Texas. My father's family is from Arkansas and now lives in 
Alabama. My mother is from Louisiana. Although I would never 
claim to be familiar with all the subtle variations in Southern 
tradition and culture, I do have an understanding of what it is 
to be Southern. It is this, I believe, that allows me to 
understand Forrest Carter's true purpose in writing The Education 
of Little Tree, and it is this, when I read Gates' essay, that 
caused me to be shocked not at the discovery of Forrest Carter's 
true identity — his ideas are not uncommon in the South -- but 




5 



Page 4 



at the idea that his book was viewed as a representation of 
Native American culture. 

The trouble with The Education of Little Tree stems from the 
idea that the book is non-fiction/autobiographical. Indeed, 
printed on the front cover is "A True Story By Forrest Carter," 
and the concept of "true story" seems to be the root of all the 
confusion surrounding the book and its author, one's 
interpretation of the text corresponding to the meaning one 
attaches to the word story. By dictionary definition, a story 
can be anything from a historical recounting of events to an 
outright lie, and it is logical, when true and story are 
attached, to presume the historical definition. This, however, , 
is a mistake. What Carter implies by combining the words true 
and story is much more cultural. 

In the South there is a very old and well respected 
tradition of storytelling, and it is common for the conversation 
of any group of Southerners, from the pulpit and political 
platform to the front porch, to revolve around stories, "One 
time...," "Back when..." and "I knew this guy once..." being some 
of the common beginnings to tall tales, jokes, and lies. 

However, there is one type of story that begins differently. It 
is a story that contains what the narrator considers to be a 
profound truth, a truth that his audience needs to hear, to know, 
in order to live a full and meaningful life. This type of story 
does not evoke laughter, although it may be humorous; it does not 
evoke fear, although it may be terrifying; and it does not induce 




6 



Page 5 



conversation. The fitting response is silent reflection, at 
least until the mood gets heavy enough that someone changes the 
subject. This is what is known as a "true story." 

It must be made clear, however, that when the narrator 
begins by saying "Now, this is a true story — ," and the crowd 
quiets, the audience is not expecting an objective, historical 
presentation — far from it. This would be much too boring. 

What is expected is a gripping, suspenseful oration that has in 
it, somewhere, a truth. In other words, the audience expects the 
speaker to use narrative license and "spice up" otherwise boring, 
although useful, information. Thus, the words true and story in 
the Southerner's "true story" are oxymoronic equivalents. Truth 
must be present in some form, and the appropriate "spice" must be 
used. 

A simple analogy to this idea of the Southern "true story" 
is the familiar Tootsie Pop. One could simply be given a Tootsie 
Roll (a truth), and it would be enjoyable. But, the Southern 
storyteller knows that if a Tootsie Roll is put on a stick and 
coated with the appropriate flavor of candy, a flavor the 
receiver likes, the process of eating it will last longer, taste 
better, and simply be more enjoyable. The end, however, is the 
same: the Tootsie Roll is consumed. 

With the Southern idea of a "true story" in mind, there is 
little doubt why I, as well as the other Southerners with whom I 
have discussed The Education of Little Tree, would have a 
different interpretation of Forrest Carter's "true story" than 




7 



Page 6 



those who are not familiar with Southern culture. I expected 
Carter to use his narrative license, and it is clear to me that 
he did. Knowing this, it is only logical now to ask what the 
"truth" of the story is. In the remainder of this essay I will 
address this question. 

From the beginning, to anyone with a basic idea of Cherokee 
tradition, it is clear that the Native American themes in The 
Education of Little Tree are not the "truth." As Michael Marker 
points out, "The Indian stuff is plugged into the story in a 
completely superficial fashion" (Marker 226). If one were to do 
even a small amount of research, serious discrepancies would be 
found . 

One of the first Native American aspects of the story is the 
introduction of words that Carter implies are Cherokee or 
Tsalagi, the language of the Cherokee (Kilpatrik 23). Although 
Tsalagi-English dictionaries are difficult to find -- there is 
not one in the library I use — it is not difficult to find basic 
rules about the Tsalagi language, and to determine that the words 
Carter uses in The Education of Little Tree are unidentifiable as 
Tsalagi or do not conform to Tsalagi syllabication patterns. 

The "Cherokee" word most often used by Carter is Mon-o-lah, 
which is his name for the Earth Mother. However, the traditional 
Cherokee Earth Mother, who was the first woman, is Se-lu, the 
Tsalagi word for maize (McLoughlin 17). Other similar ideas 
represented by Tsalagi words also do not correspond to Mon-o-lah : 
e-lo-hi (earth), a-ge-hyv (women), e-tsi (mother), e-qua (great). 




8 



Page 7 

u-ne- la-nv-hi (God), and u-ne-tla-nv-hi (Creator) (Kilpatrik 29- 
31). Also, considering that all Tsalagi syllables end with a 
vowel sound (v has a u sound), Mon-a-lah, by hyphenation, cannot 
be Tsalagi (Kilpatrik 8). Other words which Carter uses that do 
not match Tsalagi patterns are tal-con (hawk), tel-qui (turkey), 
ti-bi (bee) and pa-koh (panther). All of these have syllables 
which do not end with vowel sounds, syllables and sounds that do 
not exist in Tsalagi (b / ti , te, ko) , or both (Kilpatrik 6-7). 
Further, tel-qui has no relation to Gu-na-ga-do-ga, which is 
translated into English as Standing Turkey, a Cherokee Chief 
(Kilpatrik 43). 

Clearly these words, which violate simple Tsalagi patterns 
of syllabication, are not representational of the Cherokee and, 
for what it matters, may not be Native American at all. I found 
no corresponding words in the more than fifteen dictionaries of 
various Native American languages in which I searched. 

Another aspect of "Cherokee" culture on which Carter 
expounds in The Education of Little Tree is religion. In chapter 
eight. Little Tree's grandmother explains to him the nature of 
the spiritual world. She tells Little Tree that people have two 
minds: a body mind and a spirit mind. At death, she explains, 
the body mind dies with the body while the spirit mind is "born- 
back" into another body on earth. This idea of quasi- 
reincarnation is not at all representational of Cherokee 
religion. 

Traditional Cherokee religion is based on harmony, balance. 



Page 8 



order and sharing; and the concept of three worlds: the upper 
world above the sky, the human world, and the lower water world. 
If Cherokees maintained the proper harmony, balance and order in 
life, they believed that they would be blessed by the Great 
Spirits of the upper world. If not, the spirits of the lower 
world would rise out of caves and deep springs and cause chaos. 
The Cherokee also recognized the concept of the soul and believed 
that upon bodily death, if one had lived a harmonious life, the 
soul would go into a spirit world to be with the other souls who 
had led harmonious earthly lives. Those who did not live 
harmoniously on earth would receive an undetermined punishment 
after death (McLoughlin 18-22). 

As early as 1794, however, the affects of Christian 
missionaries on Cherokee religion could already be seen. Of the 
six traditional Cherokee festivals, only two were regularly held 
3-iter that year. In 1799, the first permanent Christian mission 
had been established in Cherokee territory (McLoughlin 13 and 
24), and by 1829, little traditional Cherokee religion remained. 
In a interview published that same year in the Cherokee Phoenix , 
the newspaper of the New Echota Cherokee Nation, an elderly 
Cherokee warrior, who was old enough to remember the 
Revolutionary War, gives descriptions of "traditional" Cherokee 
ideas of creation that are very much mixed and confused with 
Christian/Biblical ideas (Kilpatrik 43—46). Therefore, whatever 
it is that Carter is presenting as Cherokee religion is not, as 
far as I can determine, representative of Cherokee beliefs before 



ERIC 




Page 9 



or after the arrival of whites. 

The last aspect of Cherokee tradition that Carter presents 
and that needs to be addressed is natural order, in particular 
hunting, farming and social practices. As mentioned before, the 
Cherokee believed in order, balance and harmony, considering 
every natural wonder to be sacred and to have meaning and 
significance. Thus, at least traditionally, Cherokee men were 
taught to kill only what they needed to survive. This idea, 
however, did not last. When the Cherokee learned that he could 
trade pelts to the white man for European commodities, tradition 
quickly became history. By 1794, the Cherokees had decimated 
their game herds for trade and were no longer able to provide for 
their families. They were forced to begin to use European 
farming techniques to prevent starvation (McLoughlin 15 and 19). 
In a plea to George Washington for aid. Chief Clear Sky said 
this: 

We must plant corn and raise cattle. . . . In former times we 
bought of traders goods cheap; we could then clothe our 
women and children; but now game is scarce and goods dear. 

We cannot live comfortably (McLoughlin 16). 

Again, Carter's chapter-two description of "The Way," a 

system of conservation in hunting where only the weak and small 

are taken, is not very representative of Cherokee hunting 

practices either before or after the arrival of the whites. It 

is interesting, though, that Carter uses "The Way" to name the 

philosophy he presents. "The Way" is the Taoist/New Age religion 

practiced by Quai Chang King, the protagonist in the seventies 

television series Rung Fu, and I am reasonably sure that I have 



Page 10 



heard Quai Chang mention nature taking only the small and weak so 
that the strong will reproduce. Perhaps this ties in with 
Carter's reincarnation philosophy of chapter eight. 

There are two aspects of farming that need to be mentioned. 
The first is conservation. Traditionally, Cherokees did not till 
the land. They planted using wooden hoes that "barely scratched 
the surface" (McLoughlin 18). Plowing deeply into the Earth 
Mother as the white man did, or growing crops with the intent of 
selling them to others, was considered exploitation (McLoughlin 
22). It was not until the Cherokees were brought to near 
starvation by the exploitation of the game herd that they began 
to adopt the white man's farming techniques, the deep plowing 
that led to massive erosion problems throughout the South by the 
1930s (Culture 74). Therefore, although Carter tries to tie the 
use of mulch to Cherokee traditions of conservation, deep plowing 
of the Earth Mother cannot be considered Native American. 

The other aspect of farming presented by Carter in The 
Education of Little Tree that is not representational of Cherokee 
life is the gender-role reversal. According to Cherokee 
tradition, the Creator specifically gave Selu, the first woman, 
the ability to provide maize and beans for her family, and 
consequently, women did all the farming. Women also had the 
tasks of gathering, tanning hides, making pottery and weaving 
baskets (McLoughlin 15-17). In fact, of the Black slaves that 
the Cherokees owned prior to 1800, most were purchased to lighten 
the workload for women (Halliburton 9). For a male to assume the 




12 



Page 11 



role of cultivator or gatherer was considered to be against the 
natural order and caused him to lose status in the community 
(McLoughlin 17). Yet, in The Education of Little Tree, it is the 
grandfather who does the farming, and both he and Little Tree 
often help the grandmother with gathering. 

This leads to the topic of Cherokee social practices. As 
mentioned before, the traditional role of women was to be a 
cultivator, gatherer, weaver, potter and tanner. Basically, 
women were responsible for all domestic duties other than heavy 
chores (Halliburton 9). On the other hand, men were given by the 
Creator the ability and task of hunting and providing game for 
the family. This sexual division of labor was considered part of 
the sacred order and carried over into other areas of Cherokee 
life, so much so that men and women were believed to be two 
separate forms of humanity, the mixing of which led to chaos 
(McLoughlin 21). Thus, during the day women worked together in 
each other's households, and men held council in the town or 
common area or went on extended hunting trips. Indeed, 

"separation was the most important in activities which in their 
view [the Cherokees'] epitomized sexual identity" (McLoughlin 
18). From this it can be seen that a man and woman in isolated 
living conditions sharing daily chores and activities is hardly 
representational of Cherokee life. 

As a final note on Native Americans, it seems unlikely that 
a true Native American writer, one who had suffered the indignity 
of the derogatory comments often leveled at his race, would 




13 



Page 12 



choose the adjectives in the following passage to describe 
anything "Indian." "There was no fear, only exultation... 
Exultation that brought the rebel Indian yell rumbling from his 
chest and out his throat, screaming, savage" (Carter, F. 44). 

If Cherokee customs and traditions are not the "truth" that 
Carter is presenting in his "true story," then perhaps 
Appalachian culture and traditions are. Indeed, much of the 
story portrays aspects of mountain culture. Little Tree's 
grandmother's herbal and folk remedies, for example, are very 
much a part of Appalachian life. Concoctions for inducing 
vomiting, as the grandmother caused the city men to do, are 
common (Rabun 70), as well as snake-bite remedies using birds. 
"Put the entrails of a freshly killed chicken on the area" (Rabun 
65). In fact. Foxfire 9, a book in a series recording the dying 
Appalachian culture, lists not less than sixty- four categories of 
herbal and folk remedies intended to cure everything from aching 
feet to yellow jaundice (41-68). The same volume also has a 
chapter on log cabins that describes and gives the floor plan of 
a cabin very similar to the one Carter describes as Little Tree's 
home (413). 

The use of hounds in The Education of Little Tree is also 
very representative of Appalachian life. For poor, rural 
Appalachians, the ownership of a good hound is very important in 
establishing a sense of self-worth and pride (Culture 379), not 
to mention a source of income. Also, "grandpa's trade," as 
moonshining is called in the book, is (or was in the thirties) a 



Page 13 



well established tradition in Appalachia and is well described by 
Carter — however ironic it is considering the high rate of 
alcoholism among Native Americans. The list continues. The 
distrust of outsiders, the backpacking salesman Mr. Wine, Pine 
Billy the fiddler, the reasoning, the entertainment, the paths 
through the mountains, the visits to church and the description 
of the land are all representations of Appalachian culture. At 
least, they are representations of the nicer side of Appalachian 
culture. 

Unfortunately, there is another side to Appalachia. Those 
who dwelt in the inaccessible high mountains during the early 
parts of this century, as did Little Tree and his grandparents, 
were more often than not poor, uneducated, illiterate, ill- 
nourished, dirty, amoral, apathetic, people living in single- 
room, clay-floor, windowless cabins without water or fireplaces 
and perpetuating a culture based on the exploitation of women. 

The following is a 1935 description of the high Appalachian 
areas: 

It is here that the woman is the convenience of the man. 

She is a beast of burden. She totes the water for house use 
from the branch in the valley far below. She drags the 
timber in from the forest, chops the wood with which the 
food is cooked and the family warmed. She cuts the timber 
from the hillside, grubs the stumps and undergrowth, and 
plants and cultivates and harvests the corn which keeps her 
and the man to whom she is a slave and their brood from 
absolute starvation. She is illiterate... She is dirty and 
unkempt. She is ill-nourished and scrawny. She is stooped 
from the toil of the years since her early childhood, and 
wasted from much child bearing and from excessive sex 
demands of an undisciplined, unoccupied and sensual man. 

Her clothing is scant and vile and often in rags. She is 
aged and broken before she is thirty: to the causal observer 
she is fifty or more. (Culture 387) 



Page 14 



•Although this description may be a bit extreme and cannot 
represent all high-mountain families, it does at least expose a 
side of Appalachian culture that is not presented in The 
Education of Little Tree. Thus, although Carter's book does 
present some of the cultural tradition of Appalachia, it cannot 
be considered truly representational . 

But where is the "truth"? If the book is not about Cherokee 
culture, and it is not about Appalachian culture, what is left? 
The answer to this question is perhaps too obvious, too 
ridiculous. The answer is exactly what everyone thought it was 
in the beginning — only now the candy-coating has been taken 
away. The "truth" in this story is Forrest Carter. It must be. 

To begin with, the religion presented in The Education of 
Little Tree cannot be anything other than Carter's own. It is 
not Cherokee, it is not Appalachian, and it is not Southern. 
Carter would have no purpose in allotting such a large space in 
the book to the discussion of spirituality if he was not intent 
on passing these beliefs to the reader, and it is not logical 
that one would desire to perpetuate the beliefs of another. 

Along similar lines of reasoning, the social/cultural system 
of beliefs that Carter presents in The Education of Little Tree 
must also be his own, although they are strongly representative 
of Southern and Appalachian culture. As Dan T. Carter notes, it 
is obvious from all of Carter's writing, both Asa's and 
Forrest's, that he has a strong loyalty to friends and family and 
a distrust of outsiders: 



Page 15 



[T]here are threads that stretch from Asa Carter's racist 
pamphlets to his new— age novels of the Native Americans i 
We live unto ourselves. We trust no one outside the circle 
of blood kin and closest comrades. We have no 
responsibilities outside that closed circle. Government and 
all its agencies are corrupt. Politics is a lie. 

( Carter, D. ) 

I also believe that the relationship between man and nature 
presented in The Education of Little Tree is an idea that Carter 
intended to pass to the reader. The reason for this is that, 
being from the rural South as Carter was, I understand the 
importance that land holds for the Southerner. It must be 
remembered that the South was settled originally by "land lovers" 
because it was environmentally superior for agriculture (Culture 
52-53). Perhaps this idea is better explained by the opening 
paragraphs of Ferrol Sams' Run with the Horsemen, a Southern 
Bi ldungsroman : 

In the beginning was the land. Shortly thereafter was the 
father. The boy knew this with certainty. It was knowledge 
that was in his marrow. It predated memory and conscious 
thought as surely as hunger and thirst. He could not have 
explained it, but he knew it. 

The father owned the land. He plowed it, harvested it, 
timbered it and hunted over it. It was his. Before that it 
had been the land of his father and his father's father. 
Before that it had belonged to the Indians, who since 
Creation had held it by God's will in trust for the family, 
just waiting until it could be claimed by its rightful 
owners . 

The boy knew all this. No one told him. He also knew 
that in turn the land owned his father. Everything the 
father did eventually revolved around nurture of the land. 
Without the land there would be no family. The ungodly were 
not so and lived in town. They were like chaff which the 
wind bloweth away. Their feet were not rooted in the soil, 
and they were therefore of little consequence in the scheme 
of things. (Sams 1) 

Perhaps Carter somehow knew when he wrote The Education of 
Little Tree that his life was nearing its end. I cannot know. 




17 



Page 16 



But, what I find in this book is a man looking back over his 
life, deciding what is important, and presenting this to his 
readers. In a sense, what Carter has done is give the reader his 
philosophy on the three types of relationships that every person 
will encounter in life: spiritual, human and environmental. 

These are the previously-mentioned "profound truths" that Carter 
believed his audience needed to know. 

One might wonder at this point why, if Carter did indeed 
have these "profound truths" to offer to the reader, was it 
necessary for him to use Native Americans and Appalachians as a 
vehicle to carry his ideas. Simply put. Carter is a rhetorician. 
This is obvious from his past experiences as a radio announcer, 

Ku Klux Klan leader, and speech writer for George Wallace. Even 
more, he is Southern, and every Southern storyteller 
(rhetorician) knows that a message is often better received when 
candy- coated . This can be seen not only in The Education of 
Little Tree overall, but both inside and outside of the story as 
well. Inside, there is the snake-bite incident which Carter uses 
to present a story from Grandpa's childhood. Because I am a 
amateur herpetologist and have had the unpleasant experience of 
being bitten by a rattlesnake, it is obvious to me that this part 
of the story is not true. The venom of the Timber Rattler, the 
only rattlesnake native to Tennessee that would fit Carter's 
description (Ernst), is a hemotoxin which destroys blood and 
tissue cells. While a loss of blood cells could very well put 
Little Tree's grandfather into a coma, it is unlikely that it 



ERIC 




Page 17 

would cause delirium and hallucinations. Further, the amount of 
necrotic tissue resulting from the type of bite Carter describes 
and the wounds the grandfather self —inf licts while attempting to 
rid himself of venom would more than likely lead to blood 
poisoning, if not gangrene, without modern medical attention and 
could very well cause the loss of a hand or death (Ernst 116). 

It is ludicrous to think that Grandpa got up the next morning, 
"skinned the rattler," and was only "a little weak-kneed" 

(Carter, F. 113). Yet, for the average reader, this is a 
fascinating, believable and effective way to introduce an 
otherwise out-of-place story from Grandpa's youth. 

An example of Carter's rhetorical prowess from outside the 
text is his own name. He knew that his books would sell better 
with an environmental /New Age name like "Forrest" which did not 
link him to his past. It is, however, ironic that it does to a 
degree link him with the Ku Klux Klan whose founder was Nathan 
Bedford Forrest. 

As for "Cherokee Culture" being used as a vehicle for the 
presentation of ideas. Carter had several good reasons for doing 
this. First, since the late sixties there has been an increasing 
national interest in Native American culture. This can be seen 
in the number of copies of The Education of Little Tree sold and 
the willingness of Americans to accept anything written about 
Native Americans as fact. Second, there is a Southern nostalgia 
for Native Americans. Southerners believe that Native Americans 
hold a very important place in their history. This can be seen 




19 



Page 18 



in the quote from Run with the Horsemen. Although it is 
condescending, this passage establishes the Native American as 
the link between the Southerner and the land. Carter himself had 
this nostalgia. As his editor once said, "He [Carter] always 
said he was a white man with Indian blood" (Reid 18). 

This, of course, raises the question of how Carter, a Ku 
Klux Klanner , could be nostalgic about Native Americans. The 
answer is that the Ku Klux Klan does not consider Native 
Americans to be a racial group needing to be held in their place. 
There are several reasons for this. First, although the Cherokee 
Nation originally covered more than 40,000 square miles of the 
South (McLoughlin 14), there are now only five federal Indian 
reservations in the South which together have a total land area 
of less than 300 square miles (Indian Lands). What this means is 
that most Southerners never have contact with Native Americans, 
and if they do, it is usually in a tourist setting. Second, 
there is the issue of nostalgia which has already been discussed. 
A*id third, because there was a shortage of white women during the 
settling of the South, many white men took Cherokee wives 
(McLoughlin 25). Consequently, many in the South have Cherokee 
in their bloodline. 

Looking through Ku Klux Klan history, I was only able to 
find one altercation between the Klan and Native Americans. In 
1958, a local Klan group in Robeson County, North Carolina 
skirmished with the Lumbee Indians of that area. The unorganized 
Klanners were swiftly defeated. However, in 1966, only eight 




20 



Page 19 

years after the confrontation, the Grand Dragon of the Robeson 
County Klanners invited the Lumbees to join their organization. 
There were no takers (Newton 358). 

Similar to Cherokee culture, there is a national interest in 
the backwardness of Appalachia. This can be seen in television 
programs and movies, such as The Beverly Hillbillies, Deliverance 
and Nell. It is more likely, however, that Carter used 
Appalachia as a vehicle for presenting his ideas in The Education 
Little Tree because of his affection for mountain people. In 
fact. Carter's insistence that "the mountain people — the real 
redneck — is our strength" (Newton 100) is what caused him to 
leave the Alabama Citizens Council, a white-collar version of the 
Ku Klux Klan, in 1954 and form The Original Ku Klux Klan of the 
Confederacy (Newton 100). 

Elizabeth Hadas, director of the University of New Mexico 
Press, announced in 1991 that the press intended to remove the 
words "true story" from the cover of upcoming editions of The 
Education of Little Tree, and I have heard from colleagues that 
this has indeed happened. I think this is unfortunate. The 
mistake made with this book is a failure to understand the 
culture of the author; it is not that the author has attempted to 
fool the reader. This book is indeed a "true story" in the 
Southern sense of the phrase, and Forrest/Asa Earl Carter, aside 
from the crimes he committed in his earlier life, is indeed a 
true storyteller. 




21 



Page 20 



Works Cited 

Carter, Dan T. "Transformation of a Klansman." New York Times 
4 Oct. 1991: A3. 

Carter, Forrest. The Education of Little Tree . Albuquerque: U. 
of NM Press, 1986. 

Culture in the South. Ed. W. T. Couch. Chapel Hill: UNC Press, 
1935. 

"Education of Little Tree Wins Booksellers' First ABBY Award." 
Publishers Weekly 10 May 1991: 104. 

Ernst, Carl H. Venomous Reptiles of North America . Washington: 
Smithsonian, 1992. 

Gates, Henry Louis Jr. "'Authenticity,' or the Lesson of Little 
Tree." New York Times Book Review 24 Nov. 1991: Sec 7, p.l. 

Halliburton, R. Jr. Red Over Black . Westport Connecticut: 

G reenwood , 1977. 

Indian Land Areas . Map. United States Department of the 

Interior: Bureau of Indian Affairs. Washington: GPO, 1971. 

Kilpatrik, Jack F., and Anna G. Kilpatrik. New Echota Letters: 
Contributions of Samuel A. Worchester to the Cherokee 
Phoenix . Dallas: S. Methodist University Press, 1968. 

Marker, Michael. " The Education of Little Tree: What It Really 
Reveals About the Public Schools." Phi Kappa Kappan 20 
Nov. 1992: 226-227. 

Mcloughlin, William G. Cherokees and Missionaries, 1789-1837 . 

New Haven: Yale University Press, 1984. 




22 



Page 21 



Newton, Michael, and Judy Ann Newton. The Ku Klux Klan; An 
En cyclopedia . New York: Garland, 1991. 

Rabun County Schools (Georgia). Foxfire 9 . Ed. Margie Bennett 
and Eliot Wigginton. Garden City: Anchor/Doubleday , 1986. 

"Redford Agenda, The." Publishers Weekly 1 March 1993: 30 . 

Reid, Calvin. "Widow of 'Little Tree' Admits He Changed 
Identity." Publishers Weekly 25 Oct. 1991: 16. 

Sams, Ferrol . Run wit h the Horsemen . New York: Penguin, 1984. 

Stensland, Anna Lee. "Three Indian Autobiographies for the 

Junior High School." Microfiche. Educational Resources 
Information Center (ERIC), 1976. ED-200-967. 




23 




® 

U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 




I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 



Title: 

NOW THIS IS 


A TRUE STORY 


Author(s): 


L Mt L)a foo 


Corporate Source: 


Publication Date: 



II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 



In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced 
in the monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced 
paper copy, and electronic/optical media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS) or other ERIC vendors. Credit is 
given to the source of each document, and, if reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document 



If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following two options and sign at 
the bottom of the page. 




Check here 
For Level 1 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4* x 6* film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical) 
and paper copy. 



The sample sticker shown below will be The sample sticker shown below will be 
affixed to all Level 1 documents affixed to all Level 2 documents 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 




PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 


DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL 




DISSEMINATE THIS 


HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 




MATERIAL IN OTHER THAN PAPER 






COPY HAS BEEN GRANTED BY 


\0 




\Q> 


cP 




> 








TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 




TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 


INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 




Check here 
For Level 2 Release: 

Permitting reproduction in 
microfiche (4* x 6’ film) or 
other ERIC archival media 
(e.g., electronic or optical), 
but not in paper copy. 



Level 1 



Levei 2 



Documents will be processed as indicated provided reproduction quality permits. If permission 
to reproduce is granted, but neither box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1. 



Sign 

here-) 

please 




"/ hereby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate 
this document as indicated above . Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic/optical media by persons other than 
ERIC employees and its system contractors requires permission from the copyright holder . Exception is made for non profit 
reproduction by libraries and other service agencies to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. * 




Printed Name/Position/Title: 
/^/£ly r<o/ 


Sr^a^tloa^ddress: 

{/</$ / W2_ 


TefepRofie" 


TAX: 


E-Mail Address: 
ddroSiaat-fi ^ Coot. ) 


Date: 



RC020970 




111. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availability of the document from another source, 
please provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is 
publicly available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are 
significantly more stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 




Address: 




Price: 





IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 

ERIC/CRESS AT AEL 
1031 QUARRIER STREET - 8TH FLOOR 
P O BOX 1348 
CHARLESTON WV 25325 

phone: 800/624-9120 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
1100 West Street, 2d Floor 
Laurel, Maryland 20707-3598 

Telephone: 301-497-4080 
Toll Free: 800-799-3742 
FAX: 301-953-0263 
e-mail: ericfac@inet.ed.gov 

Q WWW: http://ericfac.piccard.csc.com 



f. 6/96) 



