DOCUMENT RESUME 

ED 354 935 JC 930 104 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 
PUB DATE 
NOTE 



PUB TYPE 



Jones, Betty B. 

Working with the nly One" in the Division. 
Feb 93 

I3p.; Paper presented at the Annual International 
Conference for Communi ty Col 1 ege Chairs , Deans , and 
Other Instructional Leaders (2nd, Phoenix, A2, 
February 17-20, 1993) . 
Speeches/Conference Papers (150) 



EDRS PRICE MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

DESCRIPTORS Administrator Attitudes; Alienation; College 

Administration; 'College Faculty; Col legial i ty ; 
Community Colleges; "Minority Groups; '^Peer 
'^.elationship; Physical Disabilities ; Professional 
Development; ''Racial Bias; Racial Discrimination; 
Teacher Alienation; Teacher Attitudes; Teaching 
Conditions; "Tokenism; Two Year Colleges; '''Work 
Environment 

IDENTIFIERS ^''Diversity (Faculty) 



ABSTRACT 

The call for greater diversity among college faculty 
and administrators is a prominent feature in the literature of higher 
education and especially of community colleges. For faculty members 
and administrators who may be the only, or the first, or even the 
token minority within their division, it is important to resolve what 
being the *'only one" means and what opportunities it represents. 
Interviews with five African Americans, two Hispanics, one Native 
American, one Asian, two physically handicapped, and one female 
vocational education instructor, each identified as the "only ones" 
in their academic departments, combined with a review of the 
literature, helped to identify a number of issues that were common in 
the experiences of the "only ones." These issues include: (1) the 
comments or behavior of these individuals tended to be enlarged and 
generalized to the groups they represented, often leading to 
overachieving behavior; (2) the individuals often experienced social 
and professional isolation, often leading to feelings of loneliness; 
(3) they often encountered false assumptions and stereotypes, 
incJuding prejudice and lack of professional respect or advancement 
from peers; (4) the individuals were expected to serve on multiple 
committees within their division to represent a minority perspective, 
and were also expected to serve as community leaders for their 
particular minority group; and (5) white and male privilege, the 
tyranny of the majority, racism, and biases were an accepted, if 
unrecognized norm. Among those interviewed, professional 
acknowledgement and respect, acknowledgement of individual 
uniqueness, recognition and utilization of expertise, professional 
trust, honest evaluations, and inclusion in collegial networks were 
identified as elements of the preferred professional environment. 
(PAA) 



^ WORKING WITH THE "ONLY ONE" IN THE DIVISION 



Betty B. Jones, Ph.D. 



,'A'£= A^ MAS oRAN'^ED 



B. B. Jones 



U S DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 

OHice c' Ed icar.O'^a. Res^a'C a'C "•p'o^efT'e^" 

EDUCATtONAL RESOURCES INFC^MATION 
CENTER <ERiC. 

Thts docuTient nas t)een feP'oduced as 
fece'ved Ucm the pe'so'^ c orga^-za'c 
O'lg'natmg .( 

Mmop ihanges f^ave Gee'^ '"aae tc -Tiprcye 

reproduction Qua"ly 



Points 01 vievs 0' OP-niO^^S Staled th.saocu 

men! do no! r^ecessa'-'y 'eo'esert 0'1'C'a 
OERi pos t O'^ o' DOi.Cy 



O Dr. Betty B. Jones is the Dean of Academic Affairs-General Education at Delta 

College, University Center, Michigan 48710. This paper was prepared for 
presentation at the International Conference for Community College Chairs and 

O Deans, February 17-20, 1993, in Phoenix, ArL' no. 



WORKING WITH THE "ONLY ONE" IN THE DIVISION 
Betty B. Jones, Phi.D. 



"We need to keep on working with difference in highier education 
until difference doesn't moke any difference any more." 
- Johnetta Cole, Keynote at 1991 AAHE Conference 



One is a lonely number. By definition "one" represer^its a single entity which stands 
clone. However, "one" also has unparalleled conceptual features and potential 
which make it important as "first", "unique" and "only". In this sense "only one" may 
represent the basic unit in a new social and professional paradigm. 

This paper will address important questions which are often obscured or 
overlooked in the literature of higher education. Much of this literature represents 
"the only one" in the negative contexts of tokenism, outsiders, general otherness 
and the kind of alienation which comes from a sense of "not belonging", i.e., 

'Being the other is feeling different, is awareness of being distinct, is 
consciousness of being dissimilar. It means being outside the game, 
outside the circle, outside the set... Otherness results in feeling 
excluded, closed out, precluded, even disdained and scorned. It 
produces a sense of isolation, of apartness, of disconnectedness, of 
alienation (Madrid 1988 p. 2).^ 

However, in the community college success in working with the "only" may 
represent a critical item on the agenda for diversity. Does being the "only one" 
necessarily lead to being an outsider? Is having an "only one" in the division an 
irresolvable problem or a unique opportunity? This paper will analyze the issues 
involved and suggest a different perspective on the group profile of "O" (Only 
One), and the academic leadership necessary to involve "0"s as contributing 
members in shaping collegial life within the division. 



THE IMPORTANCE OF "O" IN THE DIVISION 

The call for greater diversity among faculty and administrative staff in higher 
education is a prominent feature in the literature of higher education and 
especially in the community colleges. For years, research has forecast the 
ir.oreased diversity omong college students as a result of changing demogrophics 
and other societal shifts (Hodgkinson 1985). Today, diversity in the student 



^ Cited in Smith, Daryl G. The Challenge of Diversity: Involvement or Alienation 
In the Academy? . ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Report No. 5, 1989. 



ERIC 



3 



population is a visible characteristic of public institutions in higher education. 
However, this is especially true in the community colleges, where recent reports 
document the trend of growing enrollment of non-traditional students including 
adult learners, ethnic minorities and differently abled students. In addition, most 
communiiy colleges report rising enrollments of women who seek equal 
educational opportunity for career entry to technological and other fields 
previously limited to males. 

In reviewing the performance of higher education in achieving systems of open 
access to diverse groups, Daryl Smith documents that the proportion of African- 
American and Latino young adults who are currently going on to college has 
declined in the 1980's and that while absolute nuntbers have grown, these groups 
are severely under-represented in higher education (Smith 1989 p. 9). At the 
same time. Smith observes that "the theme of alienation is a powerful voice in the 
literature concerning racial and ethnic minorities" ... in higher education (Smith 
1989 p. 1). 

Alienation Is a common theme in the literature on racial and ethnic minorities in 
higher education (Anderson 1987; Armstrong-West 1988); and "chilly climate" is 
frequently used to describe the treatment of women and minorities in higher 
education (Sandler and Hall 1987). These themes suggest the need for higher 
education to develop institutional goals and departmental strategies to improve 
the collegiate experience for faculty and students. In fact, creating an 
accepting climate which encourages students to succeed, is directly linked to 
institutional success in recruiting and retaining faculty who model the potential 
futures of these groups, and who can assist their institutions to improve the 
achievement and graduation rates of students from diverse groups.^ 

While 'O" may be the ONLY ONE, the FIRST ONE, and perhaps even the TOKEN 
ONE, a more important issue is what "O" represents. Will "O" become committed 
and involved in helping the division achieve diversity? Will others of different 
backgrounds be attracted to the division and involved in its work? Will the 
division be strengthened in its capacity to appreciate and utilize diversity to 
achieve excellence in teaching and student learning? The answers to these 
questions ^\\\ be dependent on the direction and content of academic 
leadership within the division. 



^ Blackwell, J. Mainstreaming Outsiders , p. 64-65. This analysis presents 
statistical evidence which shows that 'number of black faculty" in the professional 
school is the most powerful predictor of first year enrollment and success of black 
students in professional schools. The persistence of this variable as the most 
powerful predictor suggests that institutions seriously committed to improving the 
enrollment and retention of black students in professional schools should hire and 
retain more black faculty. 



ER?C 



ISSUES FOR THE ^ONLY ONE" 

The major issues for "O", which are discussed here, hove been framed as a result 
of literature review and through interviews with twelve (12) faculty identified as 
"0"s in their department. Those interviewed include ethnic minorities, i.e., African- 
American, Hispanic, Native-American and Asian, women, and handicapped 
persons, i.e., deaf and physically handicapped.^ A major issue cf common 
interest to "0"s as teaching professionals is "how con I contribute to the division as 
a colleague in a climate of professional respect and appreciation?". In the 
interviews, I was interested in what local barriers to the collegial experience were 
perceived by "0"s, and what they would find helpful in overcoming these barriers? 

While there are important differences among "0"s in history, personal issues and 
experiences, the literature identifies some issues which appear to be universal 
among the "first' or "token" members of a professional group. Most frequently 
mentioned in the literature ore issues of isolation, surplus visibility, false assumptions 
and stereotypes, pressures to over-achieve, multiple demands of location, and 
the tyranny of the majority in decisions. This paper selects five major issues for 
discussion. These issues derive from the special status of being an "O" among Xs 
are frequently mentioned in the literature, and/or received comment from the 
local sample of "0"s interviewed on this subject. 

1 . Issues of Surplus Visibilily . Kanter (1977) discusses the ways in which varied 
proportions of group representation can shape intergroup relations, with a 
special focus on the significance of being "the only one" or a token 
member of a visible minority. Groups of individuals who are represented in 
proportions smaller than 20 percent of a population are subject to 
increased visibility, scrutiny and pressures which can result in poor 
performance and social/psychological stress. 

The phenomena of surplus visibility is described by Ratal as the "shift in 
public perceptions which occurs as traditionally poweriess and marginalized 
groups enter higher education and challenge the expectation that they 
should be invisible and silent. For those who have long been in positions of 
dominance, any space that minorities occupy appears excessive and the 
voices they raise sound loud and offensive" (Ratal, 1991). Consequently, a 
black, a woman, a homosexual or any member of a group seen as 
different from the norm in a given setting is viewed as a "token" of that 
group, rarely as an individual. These individuals are forced to choose 
between invisibility (self denial) or surplus visibility in which their comments 
or behavior are enlarged and generalized to the group they represent. 



^ Faculty interviewed include nine (9) ethnic minorities, i.e.. five (5) 
African-Americans, two (2) Hispanics, one (1) Native-American, one (1) 
Asian-American; two (2) physically handicapped, one (1) woman in Vocational/ 
Technical Education). 



Surplus visibility places the "only one" under constant scrutiny and informal 
evaluation by his/her peers. Whatever "0"s do is immediately made visible, 
identified, talked about and interpreted by the standards of the majority. 
Such visibility keeps "0"s on constant guard with a need to prove to others 
that they are "all right". "0"s who were interviewed referred to this 
phenomena as an uncomfortable self-consciousness among their peers, 
and a sensitivit^/ to how they are viewed in the conversations among tne 
"X"s in their division. They believe that the;: professional image and 
reputation can be destroyed by irresponsible comments made in jest and 
that their professional status does not receive due respect. For example, 
Sandler observes that women in traditionally male fields are vulnerable to 
direct/indirect sexist disparagement or ridicule of their abilities by male 
faculty and students (Sandler, 1986 p. 15). Worse yet, "0"s are subject to 
the negative memories of earlier failures in the department, i.e., "we once 
had a (you name it, i.e., woman, black, Hispanic, homosexual) in ;:iis 
department and it didn't work out, so we are very reluctant about hiring 
another one." 

As a result of surplus visibility, many "0"s adopt the "Super O" syndrome. 
They become "overachievers" vulnerable to the pressures of personal and 
professional overextension. Such overachievement in "O" quickly becomes 
a matter of expectation, and according to the "0"s interviewed by this 
author, it is seldom recognized or rewarded by the division or the institution. 

What strategies may be used to involve "Cs in the collegial work of the 
division with fairness, equity, respect and appreciation for their individual 
talents, diverse perspectives and professional expertise? Can high visibility 
result in positive outcomes? 

Issues of Social and Professional Isolation . These issues are frequent as a 
result of being "the Only One of a Kind" in a structure of other identities and 
social patterns. To be an "O" among "X"s, where X is the majority, is to feel 
emotional displacement and lack of accessible support. Faculty report 
perceptions of isolation fi-om networks of support and being left "out of the 
loop" of informal information and discussions. This mevCins that ethnic 
minorities and women have less access to communication and feedback 
and to informal channels of information about institution-wide issues, 
problems, challenges, directions and politics. 

Professional isolation poses high risks in a collegial system where faculty are 
expected to work together and share resources on teaching and 
curriculum issues. Sandler makes the observation that men are less likely to 
collaborate with women in an all male department (Sandler, B. 1986). 
Similarly in interviews with African-American "0"s, they mentioned the 
reluctance of White colleagues to join with them in cooperative projects. 



According to Sandler's research, "isolation leads to feelings of loneliness, to 
the persistent awareness of not 'fitting In', to always being on guard and 
to the fatigue that comes from always having to be one's own support 
system" (Sandler, B. 1991). Interviews conducted by this author also suggest 
an "isolation of the spirit". A woman located in an all male department 
talked about feelings of discomfort and disconnectedness which led to 
pervasive uncertainties and lowered self-confidence. In many cases, this 
is related to a group style and language which creates a protective 
support for the "in group". I.e., men, while leaving the lone woman out even 
when she may be physically present. Hispanic '0"s mentioned their 
"loneliness for the language" as a means of expressing strong feelings. And, 
African- American O's talked about the frustration of trying to actualize 
diversity in a system which affirms it in concept but rejects it in action. Hovy 
does an "O" actualize the institutional mission and help others like "self" 
when this is not valued behavior within the division? 

False Assumptions and Stereotypes . Frequent comment on the problems 
of prejudice and misperceptions based on stereotypes is found in the 
literature of higher education. However, the insights gained as a result of 
individual interviews with "0"s offer a unique qualitative view not often 
found in written form. 

One of the most offensive assumptions identified by "0"s is the assumption 
by colleagues that they are not qualified for their position. "They believe 
that you received special considerations and that you are not really 
qualified for the position you have" (Black male) . . . "there's always a 
constant need to prove yourself in performance. You are really compelled 
to overachieve because you know they are looking for you to fail" (Black 
female). . . "There is lack of respect for your professional expertise; they try 
to depreciate what you have to offer" (Hispanic female) . . . "The men 
faculty are more likely to be collegial with male students than with me. 
They ask questions like - can you handle this? Women are not usually good 
at this" (White female) . . . "They seem to think that because you are deaf 
you are also dumb! I think they discount me because I have a handicap 
and they think I get special privileges" (Deaf female). 

A close second, which is a source of much frustration and resentment 
among "0"s, is prejudice in the peer evaluation of performance and 
readiness for promotion. "Professional advancement is slower for ethnic 
minorifies. You work your buns off for a long time without credit or 
recognition" (Hispanic male) . . ."You are not treated as a valu3d member 
of the discipline. There is very slow professional advancement" (Black 
female) . . . Your opportunities have unfair limitations applied and 
controlled by others" (Black male) ... "I resent the constant reminder of 
who I am and all the assumptions" (Black female). 



False assumptions regarding professional and community relationships are 
also a source of irritation. "You are really self conscious about meeting or 
talking with other Black faculty. They assume it is socializing rather Than 
consulting or some other professional relationship" (Black female) . . ."The 
faculty in my department are not real comfortable with me. They don't 
know anything about deaf culture and are less interested in learning. They 
speak, smile and ovoid me when they can" (Deaf woman) . . . 'Community 
service is encouraged by the college, and is recognized in positive ways in 
most divisions. But my service in the Black community is seen as social 
rather than service. It is very unfair" (Black female). 

Multiple Demands of Structural Location . Being the "Only One of a Kind" in 
a majority of others exposes "O" to multiple demands from many sources. 
Some of these demands occur within the division and are over and above 
the expectations of majority faculty. For example, "0"s serve on multiple 
committees to represent a minority perspective in programs, serve as 
consultant to faculty and administrative staff on minority problems and 
concerns, and serve as general "window dressing" when needed to draw 
attention to the college "commitment to diversity". 

In addition to internal expectations, "0"s belong to a community of those 
with similar characteristics, experiences and background who constitute a 
reference group for their identity and support. This community also has 
expectations of "O" which derive from his/her professional position and 
location in an institution of higher education. "0"s serve as community 
leaders, board members, advisers, mentors and contributors within and on 
behalf of these groups. Commitment to community service is demanding. 
Modeling and guiding young people toward greater aspirations and 
interest in college is a compelling personal mission and community 
expectation. 

Most of the "0"s interviewed demonstrate commitment to their community 
of reference as well as to the college and the broader community. These 
commitments represent access to diverse community networks which can 
strengthen the college in its assessment of community needs and gaining 
communiiy support. How can this access be shared in the division? 

White and Male Privilege and the Tyranny of the Maiority . Peggy Mcintosh 
has written an illuminating paper which discusses male and white privilege 
as "an invisible package of unearned assets" which are cashed in each 
day, and which most whites and males take for granted (Mcintosh 1988). 
"White privilege is like a weightless knapsack of special provisions, 
assurances, tools, maps, guides, codebooks, passports, visas, clothes, 
compass, emergency gear and blank checks." It is unearned, and it gives 
the holder a distinct advantage to oppress or ignore those who do not 
have it. These privileges operate on assumptions of righteous tradition 
which frame the questions and make the rules. 



n 
u 



The view of white/male privilege was identified in tine interviews of local "0"s 
as \he "operational norms of racism". When individuals were asked "what 
is it like to be an "O", and what do you find most difficult or resentful in your 
situation?" their comments were oriented to a common theme, i.e., "You 
constantly see the double standard in operation. Yet, they refuse to 
recognize that many of the standard procedures are prejudicial or biased 
... a lot of their cherished traditions are very biased . . . these guys practice 
racism as if it is normal! They do not see themselves as practicing racists, 
and get upset when you name it or call their attention to it." 

While traditions of privilege are a source of comfort, safety, power and 
leadership for the majority, they often constitute a source of frustration and 
inequity to the minority. Unawareness of the experience of being an "O" 
leads to insensitivity and over-reliance on procedures. Chairs need to 
develop better people skills and skills for understanding and dealing with 
differences among the faculty. 



THE EXPERIENCE OF "X" - WHERE X = MAJORITY 

Very little is written about the way in which "X"s experience diversity. However, the 
desire of this group for continuity of comfortable habits of mind, social networks, 
power and privilege is not surprising. To the extent that new norms of diversity 
constitute a disruption of such patterns and create a need to learn new skills, "X"s 
are likely to demonstrate apprehension, anxiety and/or resistance (Anderson 1988, 
p. 264). Many "X"s also perceive the token introduction of "0"s as a loss of 
standards. How can institutions create incentive for change and motive for new 
learning? 

The challenge to "X"s is to learn more about diverse groups and to seriously 
embrace the norms of professional respect, team building and collegiality. The 
rewards will be found in the discovery of a new pool of personal and professional 
knowledge and skill, personal and professional revitalization, increased access 
and sensitivity to diverse students, greater motive and learning support for student 
achievement, and expanded access to multiple community networks for learning 
and support. The discovery and appreciation of multicultural community 
represents a worthy challenge, beginning with "O". 



ERIC 



ISSUES OF ACADEMIC LEADERSHIP - NURTURING "O" AS A RESOURCE 
IN THE SEARCH FOR DIVERSITY 

"There is a gift that 'outsiders' often bring to on 
institution. They ore iike the iittle boy in the toie of The 
Emperor's New Clothes who was the only one who 
noticed that the emperor was naked. Women and 
minorities, precisely because they ore outsiders, often 
bring a fresh point of view to the institution, seeing it with 
different eyes and coming up with new ideas. If we do 
not have a supportive environment for them, we waste 
talent and ultimately the academy is the loser" (Sandler 
and Hall, p. 17). 

A key question of leadership is how do we nurture and utilize the perspectives and 
talents of the "0"s in our divisions? And, how do we involve "0"s as contributing 
members in shaping collegia! life within the division? 

The nurture of "0"s is most effectively undertaken within the framework of faculty 
development. When "0"s were asked (See Footnote 3) "how would you like your 
supervisor (and peers) to work with you? What is your preferred relationship?", a 
strong commonality became apparent in their comments. The desire for 
professional acknowledgement and respect was a primary preference of all "0"s. 
In addition, the following preferences were consistently mentioned: 

* Acknowledgement of individual uniqueness, i.e., not just black, handicapped, 
woman, etc., 

* Recognition, development and utilization of expertise and talents, 

* Professional trust-to set goals and complete activities, to do a good job, 

* Honest evaluations and feedback with suggestions for improvement, 

* Inclusion in information network and collegia! networks of communication, 

* Acknowledgement and recognition for a good job. 

These preferred sensitivities and behaviors mentioned by "0"3 are not different 
from the preferences of majority faculty. They suggest the need for a renewed 
focus of leadership on the implementation of development processes within the 
division. In other words, working effectivoly with "O" means leadership within the 
division faculty as a group to construct a climate of professional grov^h and 
affirmation based on shared professional values and behaviors. 



10 



Academic deans and chairs can play an important Tv^ie in providing leadership 
which draws attention to the values of diversity and which recognizes end 
rewards individual faculty who contribute to improving the professional climate 
for diversity within the division. In addition, chairs can work with the division 
faculty to identify needs and strategies for development of diversity awareness, 
and improved skills for active appreciation of diversity in the division and in the 
classroom. In so doing, a climate will be created by which "0"s can discover a 
professional role and mission within the academic discipline and make a unique 
contribution to diversity in the curriculum and to teaching. 

The questions which follow present important issues of academic leadership which 
can make a positive difference in addressing concerns of professional climate 
and development for "0"s as well as other faculty within the division. 

1. How can the chair lead the division toward greater appreciation for diversity 
and to actively value those who represent this characteristic within the 
division? What strategies may be used to develop a climate which is 
accepting and appreciative of differences? 

2. How can the chair build an intellectual and collegial community of 
professionals in the division which encourages and supports professional 
respect, collaboration and shared resources? 

3. How can the chair build a supportive relationship with "O" in the context of the 
divisional mission and curriculum goals? By what discovery processes can "O" 
be helped to find an important role and professional mission within the 
division? 

4. How can members of the division be encouraged to provide collegial support 
and mentoring to "O"? 

As academic leader in the division, the chair has a critical role in the professional 
development of faculty and the collegial climate in which the faculty does its 
work.'' However, this assumes that the institution has personnel and instructional 
policies which guide the recruitment, development and recognition of faculty; 
and which provide institutional resources in support of these activities. 

We believe that the chair, with support from the academic administration, can 
provide the leadership necessary to involve and integrate "0"s into the work of 
the division, to avoid alienation and reduce the negative consequences of 
tokenism; and to increase the positive influence of diversity. 



" Allan Tucker presents a strong case in favor of deliberate faculty 
development initiatives under the leadership of the chair, ana a state-of-the-art 
overview of content and activities CTucker, 1984 p. 121-140). Tucker also proposes 
a model for assessing faculty readiness for involvement (p. 137). 

ERIC — 



REFERENCES 



Anderson, T. 1987. "Black Encounters of Racism and Elitism in Wiiite 
Academe: A Critique of tine System." JOURNAL OF BLACK STUDIES 18(3): 259- 
72. 

Armstrong-West, Suzan, and Magdalene H. de la Teja. 1988. "Social and 
Psychological Factors Affecting the Retention of Minority Students." In FROM 
SURVIVAL TO SUCCESS, Ed. by Terrell and Wright. NASPA Monograph Series Vol. 
9. HE 022 232. 149 pp. MF-01; PC-06. 

Asch, A. 1984. "The Experience of Disability: A Challenge for Psychology." 
AMERICAN PSYCHOLOGIST 39: 529-36. 

Beckham, Barry: 1988. "Strangers in a Strange Land: The Experience of Blacks on 
White Campuses." EDUCATIONAL RECORD 68(4), 69(L): 74-78. 

Belenky, Mary, Clinchy , BIythe, Goldberger, Nancy and Tarule, Jill. WOMENS WAYS 
OF KNOWING - Development of Self, Voice and Mind. 1986. Basic Books, Inc. 
New York. 

BLACK ISSUES IN HIGHER EDUCATION. June 1, 1988. "Black Graduate Alumni of 
White Colleges Organize National Association." p. 6. 

Blackwell, James. MAINSTREAMING OUTSIDERS. General Hall, Inc. Bayside, 
N.Y. 1981. 

Boyd.W.M. 1982. "The Secret of Minority Retention." AGH REPORTS. 24(2): 17-21. 

Cox, Tara. 1991 . "Study Examines Reasons for Lack of Campus Diversity." BLACK 
ISSUES IN HIGHER EDUCATION. Aug. 29, 1991. p. 3-4. 

Desjardins, Carolyn. 1989. "The Meaning of Gilligan's Concept of 'Different Voice' 
for the Learning Environment." In EDUCATING THE MAJORITY: WOMEN 
CHALLENGE TRADITION IN HIGHER EDUCATION, Ed. by Carol Pearson, Donna 
Shovlik and Judith Touchton, New York: MacMillan. 

Hodgkinson, Harold. 1985. "All One System: Demographics of Education, 
Kindergarten Through Graduate School. Washington, D.C.: Institute of 
Educational Leadership. ED 261-10 1. 

Kanter, Rosabeth M. 1977. MEN AND WOMEN OF THE CORPORATION. New York; 
Basic Books. 



1 



Mcintosh, Peggy. 1988. "White Privilege and Male Privilege: A Personal Account 
of Coming to See Correspondences Through Work in Womens Studies." 
Working Paper No. 189. Wellesley College Center for Research on Women. 
Wellesley, Mass. 

Moses, Yolondo T. 1989. BLACK WOMEN IN ACADEME: ISSUES AND STRATEGIES. 
Project on the Status and Education of Women, Association of American 
Colleges, Washington, D.C. 

Potoi, Daphne. 1991. "Minority Status and the Stigma of Surplus Visibility." 
THE CHRONICLE OF HIGHER EDUCATION. October 30, 1991. p. A52. 

Sandler, Bernice and Hall, Roberta. 1986. THE CAMPUS CLIMATE REVISITED: 
CHILLY FOR WOMEN FACULTY, ADMINISTRATORS AND GRADUATE STUDENTS. 
Project on the Status and Education of Women, Association of American 
Colleges, Washington, D.C. 

Smith, Daryl G. THE CHALLENGE OF DIVERSITY - Involvement or Alienation in the 
Academy? 1989. ASHE-ERIC Higher Education Reports: 5. 

Tucker, Allan. 1984. CHAIRINGTHE ACADEMIC DEPARTMENT: LEADERSHIP AMONG 
PEERo. Nev^/ York: American Council on Education. MacMillon Series on Higher 
Education. MacMillon Publishing Company. 

White, T.J. and W. Sedlacek. 1987. "White Student Attitudes Toward Blacks and 
Hispanics: Programming Implications." JOURNAL OF MULTICULTURAL 
COUNSELING AND DEVELOPMENT 18(4): 171-83. 



