DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 320 437 



FL 018 601 



AUTHOR 
TITLE 



INSTITUTION 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

AVAILABLE FROM 



PUB TYPE 

EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



Ferguson, Charles; Heubner, Thorn 
Foreign Language instruction and Second Language 
Acquisition Research in the United States • NFLC 
Occasional Papers • 

Johns Hopkins Univ^ , Washington, DC^ National Foreign 
Language Center* 
Jan 89 
13p* 

Cashier, National Foreign Language Center, 1619 
Massachusetts Ave*, N*W*, Washington, DC 20036 ($3*00 
including postage and handling; checks payable to 
NFLC) • 

Information Analyses (070) 
MFOl/PCOl Plus Postage. 

Educational Environment; ^^Educational Strategies; 
*Language Attitudes; ^Language Research; ^Language 
Teachers; Learning Processes; Literature Reviews; 
Private Education; *Public Schools; *Second Language 
Instruction; Second Language Learning 



AtsSTRACT 

Foreign language instruction and related research on 
second language acquisition in the United States can be understood 
only in the context of the role o-*" English, of American education, 
and of speech and language research. Any part of an educational 
system is both a result of historical processes and a response to 
current needs and values. The following five aspects of the language 
situation in the Un.ited States are relevant to an understanding of 
foreign language teaching and learning: (1) the dominance of English 
in American life; (2) the scarcity of foreign language instruction in 
the public schools; (3) the four distinct language professions 
(foreign language teachers, bilingual specialists, 
English-as-a-Second-Language teachers, and English as a native 
language teachers) ; (4) language instruction outside the public 
schools, and (5) myths about language held by Americans, Second 
language acquisition (SLA) research has tended to be tied to either 
linguistics or psychology, applying the theoretical models from 
differenc contexts. More complex research designs and research 
programs on SLA, while difficult to manage, are necessary • (HSE) 



*********** ****3>E******************Jt** ******************** 

* Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 

* from the original document. 



About the Authors 

Charles A. Ferguson, since 1967 Professor of Linguistics at Stanford 
University, is known for his publications in descriptive linguistics, sociolin- 
guistics, and language acquisition. Editor/author of over a dozen books, he 
was one of the fir^' linguists employed at the Foreign Service Institute of the 
U.S. Department of State and the first Director of the Center for Applied 
Linguistics in Washington, D. C. He is co-editor with Thorn Huebner of the 
forthconung book. Cross-currents in Second Language Acquisition and Linguistic 
Theories, 

Thorn Huebner received his Ph.D. in Linguistics from the University of 
Hawaii and has taught at the University of Pennsylvania and Stanford Univer- 
sity. He has worked in language education v^th the Max Planck Institute for 
Psycholinguistics in Nijmegen, His publicatior\s include articles in a number 
of journals, including TESOL Quarterly, Language Learning, Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition, The International Journal oftlie Sociology of Language, The 
Journal of Multilingual and Multicultural Development, The Modem Language 
Journal, and World Englishes, He is author of A Longitudinal Analysis of the 
Acquisition of English (Karoma 1983) and is editing, with Charles Ferguson, a 
collection of essays on second language acquisition and linguistic theory. 
Currently, he is Associate Professor of Education at San Jose State University, 
where he teaches courses in language acquisition and language teaching 
methodology and edits The Carrier Pidgin, a newsletter for scholars of pidgin 
and Creole languages. 

About the Occasional Papers 

This is the first in a sei.es of Occasional Papers publisl ed by the National 
Foreign Language Center (NFLC), Further papers are available for $3.00 each, 
including postage and handling, or $18.00 for six issi'GS. Papers may be 
obtained by sending a check and the name of llie paper desired to Cashier, 
National Foreign Language Center, 1619 Massachusetts Ave. NW, 
Washington, DC 20036. Checks should be made payable to NFLC. 

NFLC prints and distributes as Occasional Papers articles on a wide 
variet)' of topics related to foreign language researcW, education, and policy. 
The papers are read by an internal review committee. The Occasional Papers 
are intended to serve as a vehicle of communication and stimulant for discus- 
sion among groups concerned with these topic areas. The views exp;essed in 
these papers are the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily reflect 
the views of NTLC or of The Johns Hopkins University. 

Papers are accepted for consideration on a year-round basis by the 
Publications Department of the NFLC. Authors of articles approved for publi- 
cation will be asked to send a 51/4" DOS or 3 1/2" Macintosh disk containing 
the article. Any graphics must be provided in camera-ready format. The Oc- 
casional Papers follow the editorial format outlined in the Chicago Manual of 
Style. 



Copyright 1989, The National Foreign Language Center 
at The Johns Hopkins University 




Foreign Language Instruction and Second Language 
Acquisition Research in the United States 



Foreign language (FL) instruction and the related re- 
search on second language acquisition (SLA) in the 
United States can be understood only in the context of 
the role of English, of American education, and of speech 
and language research and educational research in the 
United States. Any part of an educational system is, after 
all, both a result of historical processes and a response to 
current needs and values. 

THE LANGUAGE SITUATION IN THE UNITED 
STATES 

Five aspects of the language situation are relevant 
to an understanding of FL teaching and learning in the 
United States: the dominance of English in American life, 
the scarcity of FL instruction in U. S. public schools, the 
language professions, FL instruction outside the public 
schools, and myths about language held by Americans. 

Dominance of English 

The most salient part of the language situation in 
the United States is surely the overall dominance of 
English. Not only is English by far the most common 
mother tongue, it is also by far the language most often 
learned as a second language and is overwhelmingly the 
language of participation in U.S. economic, political, and 
social life. Moreover, Americans perceive their nation as 
even more monolingual than it is. In 1975, for example, 
when th? U.S. Bureau of the Census conducted a special 
sample survey of non-English languages, almost 18 
percent of the population aged 14 years or older claimed 
a mother tongue olher than English (seven out of ten of 
them native-bom Americans), and one person out of 
eight aged four or older lived in a household in which a 
language other than English was spoken (Waggoner 
1981). Although not the national or official language of 
the United States by constitution, statute, or regulation, 



CHARLES A. FERGUSON 
Stanford University, Stanford, California 

THOM HUEBNER 
San jQ<^e State University, San Jose, California 

English is the de tacto national language, its status 
maintained by powerful social pressures, and non- 
English-speaking immigrant groups have generally 
experienced relatively rapid attrition of mother tongue 
competence and corresponding s^^ift to English (Fishman 
et al. 1966, Veltman 1983). In spite of this pattern of 
linguistic assimilation, the visibility of largp numbers of 
Hispanics and the relatively recent ir\flux of Asians have 
resulted in nwvements advocating some kind of legal 
status for English, both at state and national levels. The 
outcome of such movements is unclear, but the domi- 
nance of English is likely to persist no matter wha the 
outcome. 

FL Instruction in the Public Schools 

A complementaiy aspect of this English dominance 
is the very low incidence of FL instruction in the schools. 
Although education is basically a state, not a federal, 
responsibility and the greater part of policy making is in 
the hands of local school districts, the picture of language 
instruction in American schools is surprisingly similar 
from one pari of the country to another. About five- 
eighths of secondary schools offer some FI- instruction, 
but in 71 percent of these less than half of the students 
are enrolled in FL courses ^Oxford and Rhodes 1988). 
The most common pattern is probably two years of in- 
struction ! panish. This lack of commitment to FL in- 
structioi public education is unique anong industrial- 
ized nations. According to many observers FL enroll- 
ments have "bottomed out" and started a slow rise. But 
the fact remains that American educators give small 
place to FL instruction and on the whole do not expect 
students to acquire a working competence in the lan- 
guage they shidy; the brief exposure to a foreign lan- 
guage serves more as an inoculation against further 
study than as a foundation for achieving advanced levels. 



ERLC 



Ringing statements by national connmissions and several 
political leaders to the effect that Airserican competence 
in FLs is disgraceful and a danger for the national 
wellbeing have not yet led to significant changes in the 
pattern. 

The small place for FL instruction in public education 
is compatible with the widespread American view that 
bilingualism is a handicap, a mark of inadequate control 
of English, and a sign of membership in an unassimilated 
and presumably otherwise disadvantaged minority 
group. The support for bilingual education symbolized 
by court decisions, federal legislation, and state and local 
programs has been won on the grounds of equality of 
opportunity and quicker transition to English, not on 
groimds of conserving the nation's FL resources 
(CampbeU and SchneU 1987). 

Not surprisingly, one of the bright spots in R 
instruction and research in the United States involves the 
teaching of English to speakers of other languages 
(TESOL). Although the United States has a long history 
of teaching English to immigrants in the workplace and 
in so-called Americanization classes, the modem TESOL 
profession arose primarily in connection v^rith teaching 
English to foreign students attending American universi- 
ties and has ties with linguistics that go back to the 
intensive FL programs common during World War II. 
The TESOL profession has been an important locus of 
American research in second language acquisition, a fact 
largely responsible for the existence of a generation of 
American SLA specialists who do not themselves speak a 
second language. One can point to outstanding excep- 
tions of Americans with extensive overseas experience or 
with outstanding FL specialization, but the majority of 
contributors to the active American scene of SLA re- 
search still belong to this English-oriented group. 

One of us remembers vividly an occasion in the 1960s 
when he was invited to talk about SLA research to a 
group of university students in Sweden. He did what he 
was invited to do, in E nglish of course, with the hum- 
bling awareness that no corresponding group of Ameri- 
can graduate students could have followed and partici- 
pated in such a discussion in a language other than 
English, whereas most of the Swedish students could do 
so in two or more foreign languages. Researchers do not 
necessarily need to have personal experience with the 
phenomena they want to investigate; in fact, second- 
language-competent SLA investigators may uncon- 
sciously assume that other ieamers have acquired their 
second language competence in more or less the same 
way that they have. But it is at least worth noting that 
many American SLA researchers have little or no FL 
competence while most European SLA researchers have 
experienced the phenomena under study. 

Language Professions 

Another feature of the language situation in the 



United States that is relevant to our understanding of the 
learning and teaching of FLs is the existence of four 
different language professions, each with its own occupa 
tional goals, education or special training, and attitudes 
on language education issues: FL teachers, bilingual 
education specialists, teachers of English as a second 
language, and teachers of English as a native language. 
These groups, who could be strong allies if they shared 
important aspects of their educational perspectives and 
saw complementary roles for themselves in the American 
educational system, generally see one another as adver- 
saries or, at best, as professionally tmrelated. We will not 
attempt here to address the relation between the study of 
literature and FL instniction as such— a problenutic 
issue in most European and An>erican educational 
systems. 

FL Instruction outside Public Education 

A considerable amount of second language learning 
takes place outside the FL sector of public education. 
Private schools tend to offer more and better FL instruc- 
tion than public schools do, but they still fall within the 
patterns already described. The difference between FI. 
instruction in state and private universities is not so 
great, but private universities seem to have taken the 
lead in the reintroduction of language requirements for 
entrance and graduation. Outside the educational 
system are the numerous conunerdal language schools, 
training programs of corporate enterprises (either 
internationally oriented or with non-English-speaking 
employees), and the SI A that takes place under nontu- 
tored, "natural" conditions in the United States and by 
Americans abroad or in FL communities at home. 
"Ethnic" schools have been surveyed (cf. Bshman 1980), 
but commercial schools and corporate training programs 
have not been much investigated, and information on 
their various types of FL instruction would be needed to 
understand the full range of FL learning in the United 
States. Untutored SLA has in recent years become the 
focus of valuable research in the United States and 
Europe, although the exact relation of its findings to FL 
instruction in fonnal educational settings is sail to be 
clariHed. 

Myths about Language 

Finally, let us emphasize an aspect of the language 
situation tluit is not often treated explicitly: attitudes and 
beliefs about language widely held by Americans. We 
assume that the members of any speech conununity, 
even such a large and complex one as the United States, 
share to a considerable degree a set of such attitudes and 
beliefs, so-called myths about language (Ferguson and 
Heath 1981n(xvii-xxx). We assume fiirther that these 
myths may sometimes be of critical importance for 
understanding the activities of FL learning and teaching 
as well as the SLA research efforts of the conunumty 
These myths vary considerably by region, social class. 



2 NFLC Occasional Papers, Jatttmry 1989 Charles Ferguson and Thorn Huebner 



1 



ERIC 



and other categories, and they have not been investigated 
as much as the evaluative attitudes toward languages 
and their speakers (cf. Ryan & Giles 1982). Some of them, 
however, merit notice. 

Rrst, Americans tend to regard competence in an 
FL as a kind of all-or-none personal attribute not particu- 
larly related to the process of acquisition or the nature 
and level of proficiency. People have the competence or 
they don't: 'T>oes so-and-so speak Chinese?" "I don't 
know Spanish." Americans generally assume (with some 
justification, of course) that there is little connection 
between having studied a language and "knowing" it or 
being able to use it. The research corrective to this myth 
is the current concern with proficiency testing and other 
formsofmeastu'ement of language competence. Richard 
Lambert has called for a "common metric meaisuring in 
an objective, consistent fashion the degree of proficiency 
a person. . .has in a foreign language." (Lambert 1987:13) 

Related to this failure to connect the processes of 
acquisition to the level of competence is the notion that 
there are only a few ' real" — one might alnrost say 
"magical"— ways to learn a language. Many people have 
assured us at one time or another that the only way to 
learn a foreign language is to be exposed to it in child- 
hood, or to live in a country where it is spoken, or 
(usually said with a smile) to have a mate or lover who 
speaks the language. The widespread belief that living in 
the appropriate country will produce fluency in a lan- 
guage is evidenced, for example, in the disappointment 
that many Stanford undergraduate students feel after one 
or two quarters at a Stanford overseas campus, when 
they find that they have not automatically reached full 
fluency. American students typically do not expect to 
learn to use a language by studying it in school (and 
neither do their teachers or the surrounding community), 
but they do expect to learn it by being in the country, 
having no inkling of the time, effort, and communicative 
strategies required. When Americans are faced with a 
n©2d to acquire some FL comf)etence and the options just 
discussed are not available, they want the fastest, most 
efficient, most painless method, preferably one that 
features some new technology. The research counterpart 
to this view is the pereniual concern to test different 
"methods" to see which one is best, that is, most efficient. 

A third myth concerns the way people differ in 
their ability to leam langiiages. Americans believe that 
aptitude is very important. Although many assume that 
their compatriots in general have low language aptitude, 
they assume just as strongly or more so that individuals 
differ greatly in language aptitude. Many individual 
Americans claim that they themselves have no aptitude 
for language^; and could never leam one, whereas some 
people they kno are, as they say, "good at languages." 
Several first-rate American universities make provision 
to waive theii language requirement if a test shows that a 
particular student has poor language aptitude. 

In this coiuiection, it is interesting to compare 



attitudes toward foreign competence in En^ish with 
those toward American competence in FLs. An 
American's lack of competence in an FL is off^n attrib- 
uted to low aptitude. In contrast, a foreigner's lack of 
competence in English may be attributed to lack of 
opportimity, clarmishness, laziness, or other explanatory 
factors, but rarely to lack of aptitude. Incidentally, an 
attitude not often verbalized but apparent from incklen^ 
tal comments and behavior is that a foreigner mih an 
excellent command of English is somehow more intelli- 
gent and more competent in other ways than one whose 
conunand of English is less good. 

In addition to the emphasis on aptitude, Americans 
hold conventionalized notioi\s, almost stereotypes, about 
the relative difficulty of languages. They assume that 
there is some kind of absolute scale of difficulty such that 
Spanish is easier to study or to leam than French, or a 
more nuanced scale such that Spanish is easier in the first 
year but harder in the second year. This view contrasts 
with the implicit assumption of most American linguists 
that all languages are roughly equal in difficulty for the 
newborn and differences in difficulty in SLA, if they 
exist, are due to the nature of the structural differences 
between LI and 12 (shades of contrastive analysis!). 
Linguistic theories that make edlowance for measurement 
along these lines, such as those involving markedness or 
parameter-setting, could contribute to the understanding 
of these questions. 

RESEARCH ON SECOND LANGUAGE 
ACQUISITION 

On the theory side, SLA research in the United 
States has tended to be tied either to linguistics or to 
psychology, and the tendency has often been to "apply" 
a theoretical model derived from quite different contexts 
of language use rather than to deal with SLA phenom- 
ena as the source for theory construction. Interestingly, 
the USSR (and prerevolutionary Russia) has had the 
same pattern of theory application from linguistics and 
psychology (Pitthan 1988) and has experienced the same 
failure to coi\struct theories that start from SLA, although 
the i>attems of teaching and learning FLs in the Soviet 
Union are dramatically different from those in the United 
States. 

Research Paradigms 

Over the past decade and a half, research on second 
language acquisition has burgeoned to the point where 
even a brief lay-of-the-land discussion becomes a formi- 
dable task. A cursory review of several recent textbooks 
in the field reveals numerous approaches that have 
variously been lateled "theories," "models," or "hy- 
potheses" of SLA. The acculturation model or pidginiza- 
tion hypothesis and the monitor model are listed by 
Gardner (1985), Ellis (1985a), Klein (1986) and McLaugh- 
lin (1987). Ellis and McLaughlin list the universal hy- 
pothesis, which seems to be similar to Klein's identity 



Charles Ferguson and Them Huebner NFLC Occasional Papers, January 1989 3 



6 



hypothesis. In addition, Ellis includes accommodation 
theory, discourse theory, a variable competence model, 
and a neurofunctional model. McLaughlin covers what 
he calls cognitive theory, while in Klein we also find 
contrastive analysis and learner varieties, wliich seems 
akin to what others have referred to as "intsrianguage 
studies" (cf. Long and Sato 1984). Gardner's review of 
models from social psychology includes Carroll's con- 
scious reinforcement mode!, Bialystok's strategy model, 
Lamberf s social p^chological model, Qement's sodal 
context model, and Giles and Bynves' intergroup model, 
as well as his own socio-educational model. Yet to date, 
there exists no comprehensive theory that captures all of 
the various contexts of occurrence and products and 
processes that have traditionally been the donuiins of 
different "parent" disciplines. At the same time, while 
the most immediate goal of SLA research is perhaps to 
understand better those products and processes and the 
effects of context on them, implicit in all of the research 
are sometimes divergent long-term goals as well: to 
contribute to the disciplinary bases through a greater 
understanding of broader issues of the nature of lan- 
guage and learning and, in the more "applied" sense, to 
facilitate the language learning process itself. 

This pluralism in SLA theory has been viewed 
unfavorably in the field. Researchers seem to feel more 
and more that the emergence of a single dominant SLA 
paradigm would signal the maturation of the field as a 
discipline (cf. Rutherford 1984, Long 1985, Gregg to 
appear, and others). This view can probably be traced to 
Kuhn's (1962) work. The Structure of Scientific Ret>olutions, 
in which the sodal sciences are presented as being in a 
pretheoretical state because, unlike the "mature" hard 
sciences, they do not share an implicit and pervasive 
commitment to a single set of assumptions about ques- 
tions, topics, research sites, units of analysis, and meth- 
ods of observation and analysis. 

While recognizing the need for theory building, we 
tend to side with Shulman, who has recently pointed out 
that Kuhn erred (and we might add SLA is in danger of 
erring) in "diagnosing this characteristic of the social 
sciences as a developmental disability" (1986:4). He dtes 
the philosopher of sdence Feyerabend, who says: 

You can be a good empiridst only if you are prepared to 
v^ork with many alternative theories rather than with a 
single point of view and "experience." This plurality of 
theories must not be regarded as a preliminary stage of 
knowledge which will at some time in the future be 
replaced by the One True Theory. (1970:14) 

We do not mean to say that research on SLA should not 
be theory driven. But Shulman raises an important caveat 
against the potential tri^/ialization of the field by a single 
paradigmatic view. While theory drives much of research 
(some would say it should drive all research), there are 
many kinds of theory that need to be taken into account 
in SLA. 



The name of the field of inquiry itself suggests need 
for both a theory of language and a theory of learning. 
Given the current state of linguistic theory in the United 
States, one can find any number of competence and 
performance models. The same could be said of learning 
theory, although any theory of learning would necessar- 
ily include some specification of an initial state, a motiva- 
tion to learn, a specification of input, an acquisition 
procedure, and a description of a desired state. In addi- 
tion, researchers who deal in tutored contexts need a 
model of teaching. Gosely related to all of these areas is a 
theory of research design. In the following sections, we 
review scn?e research on learning contexts, on the nature 
of language, on the icquisition process, and on teaching 
behaviors believed to fadlitate learning. 

Learning Contexts 

Several taxonomies for the contexts of teaching and 
learning second languages are common in the literature. 
Oi'ie involves the labels assigned to teaching methodol- 
ogy. Some years ago, researchers hoped that a compari- 
son of "methods" would lead to an optimal one for 
language learning. That kind of research, which takes 
method as the unit of analysis, has proven not very 
fruitful. Several authors (Brumfit 1988, Larsen-Free* lan 
1988, Long 1988) critique this line of research; we vvm not 
review their arguments here. 

Other taxonomic distinctions, however, pen*ist in 
contemporary research. One is that between tutored and 
untutored language learning. Another divides the second 
language learning field into second language, foreign 
language, and bilingual education. Both distinctions 
implidtly reflect differences in degree, if not in kind, of 
the processes and products under investigation. While 
not disparaging the practical worth of these taxonomies, 
they are useful orJy so long as the contextual features 
used to form the bases of the taxonomies differ signifi- 
cantly across categories and are suffidently uniform 
within them. 

One danger is that thes? taxonomic distinctions 
nruiy obfuscate both cultural and indi\idual differences. 
For example, DeKeysers (1986) description of the 
learning strategies of a group cf American students in a 
one-semester study abroad course in Spain will ring 
familiar to anyone who has had experience with Ameri- 
can students in similar programs, regardless of the host 
country. At the same time, individual differences within 
the group were striking, even though they were in the 
same Fl program. 

WiOiin the North American context, research on 
these issues has tended to concentrate north of the U.S.- 
Canada border. In his review of sodal psychology and 
SLA, CJardner argues that, among the various individual 
differences examined in the SLA literature, an integrative 
motive (broadly defined) and 'language aptitude are the 
only two individual differences wWch have been well 
documented to date as being implicated in the language 



NFLC Occasional Papers, January 1989 Charles Ferguson and Thorn Huehmr 

7 



learning process" (1985:83). He argues further that 
changes in social attitudes may be affected by second 
language learning experiences and that these changes are 
perhaps greatest when programs involve novel experi- 
ences of rather short duration, such as intensive bicultu- 
ral experiences among students who maximize contacts 
with native speakers or in short intensive programs. 

From this perspective, if parents and community 
play a role in socialization and the formation of attitudes, 
they also influence the SLA process, Gardner states: 

Second language acquisition takes place in a particular 
cultural contexi . . . [Tlhe beliefs in the community con- 
cerning the importance and meaningfulness of learning 
the language, the nattire of the skill development ex- 
pected, and the particular role of various individual 
differences in the language learning process will affect 
second language acquisition. (1985:146) 

To the extent that Americans hold various "myths about 
language," researchers would want to know what 
communities expect of foreign language classrooms, 
what Americans perceive as "good" in foreign languages, 
and how these expectations become institutionalized. 
These attitudes would have important implications for 
language policy. Yet to date, most models of SLA emeig- 
ing in the United States have tended to overlook individ- 
ual and contextual differences in favor of other questions. 

Formal theories of language: Studies that focus on 
the nature of language include those within formalist 
syntactic frameworks, such as Chomsky's government- 
binding (GB)(1981), Perlmutter's (1983) relational 
grammar, Bresnan's (1982) Lexical-Functional Grammar, 
and Gazdar et al/s (1985) Generalized Phrase Structure 
Grammar. Not all of these claim to have implications for 
acquisition. For example, Gazdar et al. state with 
reference to Generalized Phrase Structure Grammar, 

In view of the fact that the packaging and public relations 
of much recent linguistic theory involves constant 
reference to questions of psychology, particularly in 
association with language acquisition, it is appropriate for 
us to make a few remarks about the connections between 
the claims we make and issues in the psychology of 
language. We make no claims, naturally enough, that our 
grammatical theory is eo ipso a psychological theory. Our 
grammar of English is not a theory of how speakers think 
up things to say and put them into words. Our general 
linguistic theoiy is not a theory of how a child abstracts 
from the surrounding hubbub of linguistic and nonlin* 
guistic noises enough evide ice to gum a mental grasp of 
the structure of a natural langiiage. Nor is it a biological 
theory of the structure of an as-yet-unidentified mental 
organ. It is irresponsible to claim otherwise for theories of 
this general sort. (1985:5) 

Other theories, such as Lexical Functional Grammar 
(LEG), have not yet been applied to SLA, although 



Pinker's work (1984) within an LFG framework on first 
language acquisition portends that it will. Rosen (1987) 
explores the implications between Relational Granunar 
and SLA. While Newmeyer (1987) points out that many 
of the assumptioi\s of these frameworks are converging, 
the bulk of the work on SLA within formal theories of 
grammar reflects a strong commitment to government- 
binding, and has focused solely on linguistic aspects of 
initial and final state. A clear articulation of this position 
is foimd in Gregg (to appear). 

The argument about SLA theory seems to be as 
follows. Since they don't have a complete theory of 
language, researchers can't look at language acquisition. 
Instead they should look at the acquisition of linguistic or 
p;ranunatical competence (the terms are used inter- 
changeably throughout our paper). Granunatical compe- 
tence is defined as our intuitive knowledge of the syntax, 
phonology, and to some extent semantics of the language 
in question. One assumption within this framework is 
that grammatical competence is independent of language 
use and involves a mental system tliat is quite separate 
from pragmatic knowledge, conceptual knowledge, 
perception, and other human faculties. This has been 
called the autonomous natu.re of grammar. At the same 
time, one sense in which language is perceived to be 
modular is that its use results from the interaction of 
linguistic competence with other mental faculties or 
modules, involving, for example, pragmatic knowledge, 
conceptual knowledge, and perception. 

Gregg's rather strong position is that SLA should be 
centrally concerned with the acquisition of linguistic 
competence. In addition to providing a sense of direc'ion 
to the field of SLA, such an orientation would bring other 
advantages to the field, he maintains: a "rigor" inherent 
in formal approaches and a knowledge of what is innate 
in language and what is acquired. 

These apparent advantages can also be seen as 
problematic areas for formal approaches as well. To date, 
agreement on the relevant parameters and their levels of 
expansion is far from universal. For example, working 
within a GB framework, Huang (1982) and Koopman 
(1984) offer differing explanations for head di'-ection in 
Chinese, which, as has been pointed out in the literature 
(Eubank 1988; Bley-Vroma;t and Chaudron 1987; Klein 
1987), have different effects on the interpretation of SLA 
data. 

A second problem involves the tapping of ^ 
learner's intuitions about a second language. Coppiwters 
(1987) argues that the linguistic competence of even very 
fluent second language sj)eakers differs in unexpected 
ways from that of native speakers. Furthermore, 
Birdsong (1988) points out that, while such research 
intends to describe the learner's grammatical competence 
at any given point in time as evidenced by intuitions 
about the second language, the interaction of multiple 
cognitive mechanisms (modularity) makes it difficult to 
base judgments about underlying linguistic competence 



Charles Ferguson and Thorn Huebner NFLC Occasional Papers, January 1989 5 



ERIC 



8 



on performance data such as imitation tasks. 

A final problem to which formalist theories have 
given little attention is the process of acquisition, either 
in the sense of accounting for how a learner is "driven" 
from one stage of knowledge to another, or in the sense 
of providing a theory of the actual time course of acquisi- 
tion. As Marshall (1979) points out and Berwick and 
Weinberg (1986) reiterate, "No one has seriously at- 
tempted to specify a mechanism that ^drives' language 
acquisition through its stages' or along its continuous 
function" (Marshall 1979:443). That is, it is not always 
clear what the learning process includes, how learners' 
linguistic competence changes from time 1 to time 2. For 
example, in distinguishing between the acquisition of 
linguistic competence and communicative competence, 
Gregg writes of his own experiences: 

Japanese is a pro-drop langtiage, and knowing that, I drop 
pronouns left and right — including at times when a 
native speaker would not. That is to say that 1 don't yet 
know the discourse restraints (at least) on pronoun- 
dropping in Japanese, and thus my "communicative 
competence" is not up to native standards, (to appear: 34 
35) 

Apparently, tltis model views the acquisition of linguistic 
competence as instantaneous. Variation is a matter of 
pragmatic competence, clearly out of the realm of legiti- 
mate inquiry for those interested in the acquisition of 
syntax. 

Functionalist approaches to language: While 
formalist approaches to SLA are primarily concerned 
with the learner's state of grannmatical competence, as 
exemplified through intuitive judgments of grammatical- 
ity, other researchers have focused more on the process 
of acquisition (that is, moving from one state to another) 
as revealed through the system, variability, and change 
in the learner's production and comprehension. At the 
risk of oversimplifying, we might call much of this 
research "functionalist." 

As an approach to the study of language, function- 
alism traces its roots to European scholars. In the United 
States it does not represent a single unified theory so 
much as an emerging school of thought that defines 
beginning assumption-;, proper goals, and interpretive 
conceptions for investigations. Nor is it in principle, as 
Kuno (1987:1 ) points out, in conflict with current formal 
models of grammar such as government-binding. How- 
ever, some beginning assumptions of this approach do 
part ways with those of most formal theories in impor- 
tant respects, and these differences have implications for 
the ways research is conducted. 

While most functionalists recognize language as a 
biological system, in ',his view, the innate capacities th^t 
account for language ability are not necessarily domain- 
specific (autonomous). A commonly held goal within this 
research program is to uncover more general universal 



cognitive abilities which underlie language use and 
acquisition. Grammar is seen as a solution to the problem 
of mapping nonlinear representations on a linear 
channel. 

Following from that view of grammar, most func- 
tionalist approaches object to the formal separation of 
morphosyntax (or grammar) from semantics and prag- 
n\atics. The conrunon view is that all aspects of language, 
including acquisition, are driven by conrununicative need. 
MacWhinney, Bates, and Kliegl (1984) write: "Thz forms 
of natural languages are created, governed, constrain>?d, 
acquired, and used in the service of communicative 
functions." 

From this perspective, any explanation of linguistic 
phenomena cannot exclude semantic and pragmatic 
considerations. Silva-<Iorval4n makes this claim most 
explicit in her discussion of Muysken's (1981) hierarchy 
of markedness for tense as applied to data on language 
attrition: "In my view of language as a system of human 
conronunication, to be explanatory, a markedness hierar- 
chy needs to be justified with reference to factors which 
lie outside the linguistic system, namely cognitive and 
interactional factors" (1987:14). 

These assumptions have implications for what is 
deemed legitimate terrain for second language acquisi- 
tion research. Rather than an overriding concem with 
abstract formulations of linguistic competence, SLA 
researchers working, either explicitly or implicitly, within 
this framework have been concerned with the production 
of discourse rather than clause length phenomena (e.g. 
Hatch 1978,Tomlin 1984), with intra-speaker variation 
(e.g. Tarone 1984, Ellis 1985b), with changes over time as 
exemplified by learner production of naturally occurring 
speech (e.g. Huebner 1983, Sato 1985), v^rlth the nature of 
linguistic input (e.g. Chaudron 1985), and with strategies 
employed for comprehension and production (Faerch 
and Kasper 1987, Chamot et al. 1988). 

This more general approach also has its problems. 
Its emphasis on language in use has often resulted in a 
failure to tap the full range of what a leame r "knows" 
about the language being acquired. In addition, often 
research of this type has not clearly articulated the 
relationship between aspects of language u^ and acqui- 
sition of specific features of a given linguistic system. 
Finally, as Gregg (to appear) justifiably points out, it has 
often failed to distinguish between what learners do 
because they are not fully proficient in the target lan- 
guage and what they do by virtue of being human. 

Given the current state of affairs of all linguistic 
theories, the prospects are as promising for SLA to 
contribute to them as vice versa. While one finds numer- 
ous claims that SLA is in fact doing so, to date the 
research in this field has been more of a confirmatory 
nature (cf. Huebner 1987). 

Models of Learning 

Another large body of SLA research on the Ameri- 



NFLC Occasional Papers, January 2989 diaries Ferguson and Thorn Huebner 



ERLC 



9 



can scene has focused on the learning and teaching of 
second languages. Work in social psychology, such as 
Gardner's (1985) and Giles and Byrne's (1982), looks at 
motivation and larger sodal variables in second language 
learning; other research has drav^ heavily on interac- 
tional models of discourse to isolate those features of 
interaction that presumably facilitate learning. The most 
comprehensive published review is (Hiaudron's Second 
Language Classrooms: Research on Teaching and Learning 
(1938). Here we highlight some conclusions that can be 
drawn from it. First, while correlations can be found 
between, for example, 

1. nK>difications in teacher talk and in-dass versus 

outK)f-dass interaction 

2. input generation and profiden*?/ 

3. task type and type or amount of interaction 

4. amount of teacher talk and Janguage proficiency 

of learners 

5. learner production and achievement test scores 

6. Jeamers' negotiation behaviors and profidency, 
there is little study of the causal relationship between the 
members of these pairs. Second, the vast majority of the 
studies dted in Chaudron, and presumably the hulk of 
the research in this area, look at English as a second 
language dassrooms. Few studies focus on the range of 
teacher and student behaviors and interaction patterns in 
FL classes in the United States. Third, the bulk of the 
studies dted in Chaudron are of the process-product, or 
more accurately the pseudo-process-produa, variety, 
^^ery few classroom<entered qualitative studies of SLA, 
and virtually none of FL acquisition, exist. 



Finally, there are few studies that take a program- 
matic look at instructional programs, espedally with 
respect to FL teaching and learning in the Uniied States. 
For example, most imiversity-level FL programs offer 
courses such as "Advanced Conversation" and "Gram- 
mar Review," which are usually offered to students at 
spedfic junctures in their language learning careers. Yet 
little research of which we are aware carefully examines 
either instructional goals and outcomes in these "special- 
ized" language courses or the assumptions about FL 
leanung that motivate their indusion at those junctures. 

CONCLUSIONS 

We have tried to present a picture of the context of 
SLA research in the United States, and to outline broadly 
and critique briefly some of the major research trends in 
the field today within that context. What emerges is a 
complex picture of the acquisition process, as seen by 
researchers from various persuasions. To deal with this 
complex phenomenon, Huebner (1987) has called for the 
emergence of more complex research designs and 
research programs in SLA that include experiment and 
ethnography, quantitative and case studies. Such ap- 
proaches cany with them the serious daisger of disinte- 
grating into utter chaos without a careful articulation of 
the questions asked and the types of knowledge pro- 
duced. The alternative, however, would be to reduce the 
richness of the fidd to "nothing more than the atomism 
of a multiple variable design" (Shulman 1985), and that, 
in our view, would be even worse. 



ERIC 



Charles Ferguson and Thorn Huebner NFLC Occasional Papers, January 1989 



10 



REFERENCES 



Berwick, R. C, and A. S. Weinberg. 1986. The grammatical basis of linguistic performance: Langmge use and acquisition. 
Cambridge: MIT Press. 

Birdsong, D. 1988. Second-language acquisilion theory and the logical problem of the data. Paper presented at the eighth 

Second Language Research Forum, University of Hawaii at Manoa, March. 
Bley-Vroman, R., and C. Chaudron. 1987. A critique of Flynn's parameter setting model of second language acquisition. 

Unpublished manuscript. University of Hawaii at Manoa. 
Bresnan, J. 1982. The mental representation ofgrammaticcl relations. Cambridge: MIT Press. 

Brumfit, C. 1988. Problems in defining instructional methodologies. Paper presented at the conference on Empirical 

Research on Second Language Learning, Bellagio, Italy, June. 
Campbell, R. N., and S. Schnell. 1987. Language conservation. Annals of the American Academy of Political and Social 

Scir.icfis 490:177-85. 

Qianrot, A. U., J. M. CMalley, and L. Kupper. 1988. Learner strategies for listening comprehension in Enghsh as a 

second language. Paper presented at the American Educational Research Association Annual Meetings. New 
Orleans, April. 

Chaudron, C. 1985. Intake: on models and methods for discovering learners' processing of input. Studies in Second 
Language Acquisition 7,1:1-14. 

Chaudron, C. 1988. Second language classrooms: Research on teaching and learning. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Chomsky, N. 1981 Lectures on government and binding. Dordrecht: Foris Publications. 
Coppieters, R. 1987. Competence differences between native and near-native speakers. Language 63,3: 544-73. 
DeKeyser, R. M. 1986. From learning to acquisition? Foreign language development in a U.S. classroom and during a semester 

abroad. Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University. 
Ellis, R. 1985a. Understanding second language acquisition. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Ellis, R. 19&5b. Sources of variability in interianguage. Applied Linguistics 6,2: 118-31. 

Eubank, L. 1988. Parameters in L2 learning: Hynn revisited. Paper presented at the eighth Second Language Research 

Forum, University of Hawaii at Manoa, March. 
Faerch, C, and G. Kasper. 1987. The role of comprehension in second-language learning. Applied Linguistics 7,3: 257-74. 
Ferguson, C. A., and S. B. Heath. 1981. Introduction. In C. A. Ferguson and S. B. Heath (Eds.), Language in the USA. 

Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 
Feyerebend, P. 1974. How to be a good empiricist — a plea for tolerance in matters epistemo logical In P. H. Hidditch 

(Ed.), The philosophy of science. Oxford: Oxford University Press, pp. 12-39. 
Fishman, J. A. 1980. Ethnic community mother tongue schools in the USA: Dynamics and distributions. International 

Migration Review 14:235-47. 
Fishman, J. A. et al. 1966. Language byalty in the United States. The Hague: Mouton. 

Gardner, R. C. 1985. Social psychobgy and second language learning: The role of attitudes and motivation. Baltimore: Edward 
Arnold. 

Cazdar, G. et al. 1985. Generalized phrase structure grammar. Oxford: Basil Blackwell. 

Giles, H., and J. L. Byrne. 1982. An intergroup approach to second language acquisition. Journal of Multicultural and 

Multilingual Development 3,1: 17-10. 
Gregg, K. R. To appear. Linguistic p)erspectives on second language acquisition: What could they be, and where can we 

get some? In S. M. G^s and J. Schachter (Eds.), Second language p^juisitiorv A linguistic perspective. Cambridge: 

Cambridge University Press. 

Hatch, E. M. 1978. Discourse analysis and second language acquisition. In E. M. Hatch (Ed.), Second language acquisition: 

A book of readings. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
Huang, C. J. 1982. Logical relatbns in Chinese and the theory of grammar. Ph.D. dissertation, Massachusetts Institute of 

Technology. 

Huebner, T. 1983. Alongitudinal analysis of the acquisition of English. Ann Arbor: Karoma. 
8 Nf iC Occasional Papers, January 1989 Charles Ferguson and Thorn Huebner 



11 



Huebner, T. 1987. SLA: a litmus test for linguistic theory? Paper presented at the conference on Second Language 

Acquisition: Contributions ^nd Challenges to Linguistic Theory, Stanford University, July. 
Klein, Vv. 1986. Second language acquisition. Cambridge: Cambridge University Press. 

Klein, W. 1987. SLA theory: prolegomena to a theory of language acquisition and i nplications for theoretical linguistics. 

Paper presented at the conference on Second I-anguage Acquisition: Contributions and Challenges to 

Linguistic Theory, Stanford University, July. 
Koopman, H. 1984. The syntax of verbs. Dordrecht: Foris Publication;. 
Kuhn, T. S. 1962. The structure of scientific revolutions. Chicago: Univr.rsity of Chicago Press. 
Kuno,S. 1987. FuTu:tioTuds}fntar Anaphora, discourse and empathy. Chicago: University of Chicago Press. 
Lambert, R. D. 1987. The improveme^at of foreign language competence in the United States. Annals of the American 

Academy of Political and Social Science 490:9-19. 
Larsen-Freeman, D. 1988. Research on language teaching methodologies: a review of the past and an agenda for the 

future. Paper presented at the conference on Empirical Research on Second Language Learning, Bellagio, 

Italy, June. 

Long, M. 1985. TTieory construction in second language acquisition. Paper presented at the sixth Second Language 

Research Forum, Univeraty of California at Los Angeles, February. 
Long, M. 1988. Focus on form: a design fe? ture in language teaching methodology. Paper presented at the conference on 

Empirical Research on Sea)nd Language Learning, Bellagio, Italy, June. 
Long, M., and C. Sato. 1984. Methodological issues in interlanguage studies: an interactionist perspective. In A. Davics, 

C. Criper, and A. P. R. Howatt (Eds.), Interlanguage. Edinburgh: Edinburgh University Press, pp. 253-79. 
MacWhinney, B., E. Bates, and R. Miegl. 1984. Cue validity and sentence interpretation in English, German, and Italian. 

Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior 23,1: 127-50. 
Marshall, J. C. 1979. Language acquisition in a biological frame of reference. In P. Fletcher and M. Carman (Eds.), 

Language acquisition. New York: Cambridge University Pre^, pp. 437-53. 
McLaughlin, B, 1987. Theories of second language learning. London: Edward Arnold. 

Muysken, P. 1981. Creole tense/mood/aspect systems: the immarked case? In P. Muysken (Ed.), Generative studies on 

Creole languages. Dordrecht: Foris Publications, pp. 181-99. 
Newmeyer, F. J. 1987. The current convergence in linguistic theory: Some implications for second language acquisition 

research. Second Language Research 3,1: 1-19. 
Oxford, R L., and N. C. Rhodes. 1988. U.S. foreign language instruction: Assessing needs and creating an action plan. 

ERICICLL News BulleHn 11,2:1, 6-7. 
Perlmutter, D. 1983. Studies in relational grammar I . Chicago: University of Qucago Press. 
Pinker, S. 1984. Language leamability and language development. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 
Pitthan, L M. 1988. A history of Russian/Soviet ideas about language: Background to Soviet foreign language pedagogy. 

Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation, Stanford University. 
Rosen, C. 1987. Relational grammar and SLA. Paper presented at the conference on Second Language Acquisition: 

Contributions and Challenges to Linguistic Theory, Stanford University, July. 
Rutherford, W. E. 1984. Description and explanation in interlanguage syntax: state of the art. Language Learning 34,3: 127- 

55. 

Ryan, E. B., and H. Giles (Eds.). 1982. Attitudes toward language variation Social and applied contexts. London: Edward 
Arnold. 

Sato, C. J. 1985. The syntax of conversation in interlanguage development. Unpublished Ph.D. dissertation. University of 
California at Los Angeles. 

Shulman, L. 1986. Paradigms and research programs in the study of teaching: A contemporary perspective. In M. C. 

Wittrock (Ed.), Handbook of research on teaching (3rd ed.). New York: MacMillan Publishing Company, pp. 3-36. 
Silva-CorvalSn, C. 1987. Cross-generational bilingualism: theoretical implicatiOiis of language attrition. Paper presented 

at the conference on Second Language Acquisition: Contributions and Challenges to Linguistic Theory, 

Stanford University, July. 

Tarone, E. 1984. On the variability of interianguage systems. In F. R. Eckman, L. H. Bell, and D. Nelson (Eds.), Universals 

of second language acquisition. Rowley, MA: Newbury House. 
TonJin, R. S. 1984. The treatment of foreground-background information in the on-line descriptive discourse of second 

language learners. Studies in Second Language Acquisition 6,2: 115-42. 
Veltmon, C. 1983. Language shift in America. Berlin, etc.: Mouton. 

Waggoner, D. 1981. Statistics on language use. In C. A. Ferguson and S. B. Heath (Eds.), Language in the USA. Cambridge: 
Cambridge University Press. 



Charles Ferguson and Thorn Huebner NFLC Occasional Papers, January 1989 

ERJC 12 



About the National Foreign Language Center 

The National Foreign Language Center (NFLC) is dedicated to 
improving the foreign language competency of Americans. NFLC emphasizes 
the formulation of public policy to make our language teaching systems 
responsive to national needs in international competitiveness and foreign 
relations. Its primary tools in carrying out this objective are: 

•Surveys— NFLC conducts surveys to collect previously imavailable 
information on issues concerning national strength and productivity in foreign 
language instruction, and our foreign language needs in the service of the 
economic, diplomatic, and secrrity interests of tne nation. 

•National Policy Plarmin^^ Groups — In order to address major foreign 
language policy issues, NFLC convenes national planning groups that bring 
together users of foreign language services and representatives of the lan- 
guage instructional delivery systems in formal education, tuj government, 
and the for-profit sector. 

•Research— NFLC conducts research on innovative, primarily individ- 
ual-oriented strategies of language learning to meet the nation's foreign 
language needs of the future. 

The results of these surveys, discussions, and research are made avail- 
able through the NFLC ; publications, such as these Occasional Papers, and 
they form the basis of fresh policy recommendations addressed to national 
leaders and decision-irukers. 

NFLC was established in 1987 as part of The Johns Hopkins University 
with funding from four private foundations: The Exxon Education Founda- 
tion, the Ford Foundation, the Andrew W. Mellon foundation and the Pew 
Memorial Trusts. 



13 



