DOCUMENT RESUME 



ED 469 810 



IR 058 506 



AUTHOR 
TITLE ' 

PUB DATE 
NOTE 

PUB TYPE 
EDRS PRICE 
DESCRIPTORS 



IDENTIFIERS 



Patton, Beth Ann 

International Students and the American University Library. 
2002-05-00 

132p.; Master of Arts Thesis, Biola University. 
Dissertations/Theses - Masters Theses (042) 

EDRS Price MF01/PC06 Plus Postage. 

Academic Libraries; ^College Libraries; ^College Students; 
English (Second Language) ; * Foreign Students; Higher 
Education; ^Information Literacy; International Studies; 
Language Fluency; Library Instruction; ^Library Skills; 
^Student Needs; Student Research; Teaching Methods 
^Language Barriers 



ABSTRACT *. 

Among the adjustments that international students encounter 
•when studying at colleges in the United States is the transition to 
.independent research in an American university library. Studies indicate that 
.Non-Native Speakers of English is the population most likely to suffer from 
library anxiety and therefore most at risk for lowered academic achievement. 
In addition to overcoming differences from their national education systems 
and library cultures,' international students also face language barriers that 
escalate difficulties in help-seeking behaviors and formulation of search 
strategies. Recent literature showcases the development of critical thinking 
as one of the most important facets of information literacy instruction 
programs. The way this emphasis interfaces with the particular needs of 
international students is analyzed to produce conclusions concerning 
effective strategies for working with international students. The 
contribution of adult learning theory, the impact of active learning 
experiences, and the correlation between learning style and teaching method 
and are all addressed. Faculty and international student focus-group 
responses mirrored the discussions found in the literature and the 
recommendations offered. (Contains 208 references.) (Author/AEF) 



© 

ERIC 



Reproductions supplied by EDRS are the best that can be made 
from the original document. 



IR058506 



INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND THE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 



oo 

ON 

NO 



Q 



W 



A Thesis 
Presented to 

the Department of Education 
School of Arts and Sciences 
Biola University 



In Partial Fulfillment 
of the Requirements for the Degree 
Master of Arts in Education 



PERMISSION TO REPRODUCE AND 
DISSEMINATE THIS MATERIAL HAS 
BEEN GRANTED BY 

B.A. Patton 



by 



TO THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER (ERIC) 



Beth Ann Patton 
May 2002 



U.S. DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION 
Office of Educational Research and Improvement 
EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES INFORMATION 
CENTER (ERIC) 

12$ This document has been reproduced as 
' received from the person or organization 
originating it. 

□ Minor changes have been made to 
improve reproduction quality. 



• Points of view or opinions stated in this 
document do not necessarily represent 
official OERI position or policy. 



9 



9 



BEST COPY AVAILABLE 



ABSTRACT 



INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND THE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 

Beth Ann Patton 

Among the adjustments that international students encounter when studying at 
colleges in the United States is the transition to independent research in an American 
university library. Studies indicate that Non-Native Speakers of English is the population 
most likely to suffer from library anxiety and therefore most at risk for lowered academic 
achievement. In addition to overcoming differences from their national education systems 
and library cultures, international students also face language barriers that escalate 
difficulties in help-seeking behaviors and formulation of search strategies. 

Recent literature showcases the development of critical thinking as one of the 
most important facets of information literacy instruction programs. The way this 
emphasis interfaces with the particular needs of international students is analyzed to 
produce conclusions concerning effective strategies for working with international 
students. The contribution of adult learning theory, the impact of active learning 
experiences, and the correlation between learning style and teaching method and are all 
addressed. Faculty and international student focus-group responses mirrored the 
discussions found in the literature and the recommendations offered. 




3 



INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AND THE AMERICAN UNIVERSITY LIBRARY 



« * 



M. A. Thesis 
Presented to 

the Faculty of the Department of Education 
Biola University 
La Mirada, California 
USA 



By 

Beth Ann Patton 
Spring 2002 



Approved by: 




Date: /-172- 

Date: S—H L " 

Date: ^ ^ 




M. A. in ED THESIS ROUTING SHEET 



Student: Beth Ann Patton 

Thesis/Dissertation Title: International Students and the American University Library 
Date student expects to graduate: May 2002 



First Draft 

First Reader: Dr. Don Ratcliff 



Date Received: 



6 * 2 - 



Date Returned 



: Mfs/o 



Initials 



be. 



Final Draft 



Initials 



First Reader: Dr. Don Ratcliff 



Date Received: M 






02 



Second Reader: Dr. Pete Meniares 



Date Received: 



■}> 









07- 



Department Chair: Dr. June Hetzel 



Date Received: 






0 2- 



Library Checker: Dr. Rodney Vliet 



Date Received: £> T- 



Date Returned: 



Date Returned: 






67- 



Date Returned: ^ p( Q 2- 



Final Library Approval Date: 



N 



Date Returned: jj " L > ■ 6 "X 

•w 



0 v 



J7R 



M. 



E4. 



After the fina l library approval, the candidate should print the required five (5) copies 
on 100% rag/cotton bond, 20-pound weight paper and submit them to the Education 
Department Secretary before the deadline. This signed routing sheet must accompany 
the copies. 



Copyright © 2002 by Beth Ann Patton 




6 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 



PAGE 



List of Figures 



CHAPTER 

1. INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 

Definitions and Statistics About International Students 

Characteristics of International Students 

Cross-Cultural Adjustment 

2. THE NEED FOR INFORMATION LITERACY 

Library Anxiety 

Definitions of Library Anxiety 

Sources of Library Anxiety 

At-Risk Populations 

Reducing Library Anxiety 

Computer Anxiety 

The Relationship Between Information Literacy and Academic Achievement .... 

3. CHALLENGES INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS FACE 

Education Differences 

Library Differences 

Language Differences 



.1 

.1 

,2 

..3 

..7 

..8 

..9 

10 

12 

15 

17 

19 

23 

23 

28 

32 



4. INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AS LEARNERS 



37 



International Students As Adult Learners 37 

Portrait of Adult Learners 38 

The Not-Quite Adult Learner 39 

The International Adult and Not-Quite Adult Learner 41 

International Students and Learning Styles 44 

Active Learning 44 

Learning Styles Preferences 49 

Metacognition 53 

Using Active Participation and Group Learning With International 
Students 54 

5. TEACHING INFORMATION LITERACY TO INTERNATIONAL 

STUDENTS 59 

Communicating With International Students 60 

Introductions and Orientations to the Library . 65 

Research Skills 69 

Critical Thinking 74 

Collaboration With Faculty 77 

6. IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS OF THE LITERATURE REVIEW ...81 

Viewing International Students As Guests 81 

Viewing International Students As At-Risk Students 84 

Viewing International Students Just Like Everyone Else 87 



O 

ERLC 



1 



7. THE REACTIONS OF THE FOCUS GROUPS 91 

Faculty Focus Group 91 

International Student Focus Group 93 

Recommendations for Future Research 96 

REFERENCES 98 



LIST OF FIGURES 



PAGE 

I . The Learning Pyramid: Retention rates of information learned by various passive and 
active learning methods 45 



CHAPTER 1 



INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 

For decades, librarians have considered instructing patrons in the use of the 
library one of their major roles. Though philosophies differ in public libraries and 
corporate libraries, the purpose in academic library instruction has always been to enable 
students to learn research practices for independent use as lifelong learners. This 
dedication to library user education includes students who come from other countries to 
study in colleges and universities in the United States. For decades, American educators 
have debated the issue of how best to teach students whose native language is not 
English. How the commitment to information literacy instruction intersects with 
international students at the American college and university is the focus of this thesis. 

Definitions and Statistics About International Students 
The Institute of International Education (2001, 2002) has collected statistics about 
foreign students since 1954/55 and annually publishes the report Open Doors: Report on 
International Education Exchange. It defines foreign or international students as those in 
college or university who are neither resident aliens on work visas nor permanent 
residents or citizens. In 1959/60, international students accounted for 1.4% of the total 
United States college enrollment, and that percentage has increased nearly every year 
since then until 2000/01 when the percentage was at its highest, 3.9%. The 2000/01 
school year showed the largest increase since 1979/80 (Institute of International 




11 



International Students and Libraries 



2 



Education, 2002). Personal or family finances fund 67% of foreign students, and in recent 
years there has been a substantial movement toward attendance at community colleges to 
take advantage of their typically lower fees. Asia presently sends 54% of the total number 
of foreign students to the United States, with China, India, and Korea as the leading 
countries. Statistics indicate that the majority of international students are undergraduate, 
male, and single. Although they study a wide range of subjects, 20% of foreign students 
major in business or management (2001). Despite these generalizations, many individual 
universities will find that their international student population differs greatly from the 
majority description. 

Characteristics of International Students 

International students are not the Statue of Liberty-eulogized huddled masses, 
wretched refuse, homeless, tempest-tossed (Kumar & Suresh, 2000, p. 332). Instead they 
are usually middle to upper class, often the upper echelon of intellectual society in their 
homelands. Most are well-educated and well-read, perhaps among the educational or 
social elite (Preston, 1992). International students are usually sent to study in America 
either because they offer the most promise or because they are already the most respected 
or most powerful in the institution in which they teach or work. They may represent the 
hopes and expectations of entire communities. 

With this burden on them, Non-Native Speakers of English (NNSE) international 
students are more motivated to make necessary adaptations than immigrants since they 
are “people in transition” (Mori, 2000, 3). Focused on their education, international 
students recognize that their accommodation of American culture is temporary and short- 
lived (Mori, 2000; Thomas & Harrell, 1994). Lee (1991), herself a former international 





International Students and Libraries 



3 



student, explains that international students tend to be acquiescent and believe that school 
is the one place in the English-speaking world where they should be able to compete on 
an equal basis. International students are receptive and strongly motivated, and the library 
survey Kline and Rod (1984) conducted indicated that personal contact with college or 
university staff is a highly significant factor to international students. Ogbu (1991) 
maintains that non-immigrants value education and buy into the American dream, 
believing that if they work hard and become educated, they will be able to succeed. 
Unlike those immigrants who have either received the majority of their education in the 
United States or who received little education in their home countries, international 
students have a basis for comparing experiences in their home countries with those in the 
United States. They consider American education important because it is seen as a way to 
improve language skills and thus enable them to get better jobs. 

In order to be eligible to study in the United States at a college level, international 
students have invested considerable time studying and practicing English prior to their 
arrival; they thus have high expectations of their ability to study in English (Greenfield, 
Johnston, & Williams, 1986). Since it is typically the most proficient English speakers 
who choose to study in the United States, it is likely that international students were 
praised and respected for their fluency while in their own countries. If they arrive at an 
American university and have social and academic language difficulties, a high level of 
frustration and stress can occur. 

Cross-Cultural Adjustment 

According to Lingenfelter and Mayers (1986), culture is the sum of the 
distinctions of a people’s society by which they organize components of life, view their 



International Students and Libraries 



4 



experiences, and appraise the motives and behaviors of others. Much has been written 
about the adjustments that any cross-cultural experience brings. Emigh’s (1991) 
interviews with international students revealed that the major transition they make is the 
social and cultural adjustment, which has ramifications in the classroom where group 
discussion or small group work underscores their alienation. Varying views on personal 
space needs, mores about nonverbal language, even the structure of a language that 
delineates between formal and informal forms of address are all areas of potential tension 
and misunderstanding. For example, aspects of Korean culture such as a hierarchical 
social structure, the desire to avoid loss of face at any cost, and strong family obligations 
can manifest themselves to Americans as self-absorption — to the neglect of others in 
need (Korean Constituents Think Tank, 1990). The Korean Constituents Think Tank cites 
these principles as examples of sources of misinterpretation on the part of the host and 
often-insurmountable hindrances to adjustment to the United States on the part of the 
guest. Thomas and Harrell (1994) label international students as “sojourners”, and they 
affirm that sojourners feel they lack power because they do not have the necessary skills 
or information to function properly in American society. For some international students, 
their purpose in attending college in the United States may be more to get accustomed to 
American culture than to get an education (Kathman & Kathman, 1998; Zimmermann, 
1995), a reminder that the concerns of international students range further than the 
classroom. Stephanie Zimmermann’ s study of international students’ communication 
experiences on an American university campus demonstrated that interaction with 
Americans was the greatest variable in adjustment to American culture, and she suggests 



International Students and Libraries 



5 



that classroom activities should facilitate more interaction for international students with 
American faculty and students as well as other international students. 

Fieg and Yaffee (1977), Morain (1987), and Kathman and Kathman (1998) each 
emphasize the importance of the nonverbal channel of expression, including eye contact 
and facial expressions, and how a variety of attributed meanings in various cultures can 
produce difficulties both in the classroom and in personal interaction. The cautions, 
repeated over three decades, make it obvious that some difficulties in cross-cultural 
adjustment persist despite the increased diversity throughout the world. 

In many cultures, aggression is the prescribed way to deal with bureaucracy or 
with those of lower social or economic status. Such behaviors, unacceptable in American 
educational society, heighten the alienation that can be created between international 
students and the university community (Brown, 2000). Another major area of contention 
between individuals from diverse cultures is the task/goal orientation versus person 
orientation. “A pattern of avoiding confrontation is characteristic of many non- Western 
cultures. Mediators are essential in such cultures to build relationships or to repair the 
breaches that conflict has tom in the fabric of social relations” (Lingenfelter & Mayers, 
1986, p. 113). 

International students are not a one-dimensional group, and Brown (2000) 
cautions that it is not helpful to stereotype international students either as members of a 
single culture or as a generic class of non- Americans. Taking the opposite view, Jensen 
and Jensen (1983) maintain that many students of varied Asian nationalities share similar 
values and experiences, and American educators will find knowledge of these values and 
experiences helpful in working with Asian international students. 



International Students and Libraries 



6 



Craig Storti’s book title Figuring Foreigners Out (1999) at first seems politically 
incorrect and offensive. His practical guide, however, makes it clear how foreign people 
feel when they encounter and interact with cultures whose values and orientations are 
radically different from their own. Storti maintains that cross-cultural awareness, the 
recognition that a culture’s values impact its methods of communication and behavior, is 
a necessary aspect of cross-cultural adjustment by both the host culture and those who are 
guests in the culture. Noting that many aspects of society and culture are not verbalized 
or taught, but rather implicitly understood by members of that culture. Archer (1994) 
speaks of a “covert culture”. Because certain issues are so ingrained or unconscious, they 
are not discussed or taught to those entering the culture. These nuances are often the very 
things that cause the most difficulty for those trying to adjust to another culture. In a 
speech to the Foreign Language Association, Genelle Morain (1987) captures the 
dilemma: 

I grew up in Iowa and I knew what to do with butter, you put it on roastin’ ears, 
pancakes, and popcorn. Then I went to France and saw a Frenchman put butter on 

radishes I realized then something I hadn’t learned in five years of language 

study: not only was speaking in French different from speaking in English, but 
buttering in French was different from buttering in English. And that was the 
beginning of real cross-cultural understanding, (p. 117) 




16 



CHAPTER 2 



THE NEED FOR INFORMATION LITERACY INSTRUCTION 

Librarians historically called teaching library and research skills “bibliographic 
instruction”, which implies acquiring skills needed to navigate the library. Bibliographic 
instruction traditionally included a physical orientation of library facilities and resources 
as well as instruction on how to search and understand the entries of the library’s catalog 
and indexes or databases, first printed and later in computerized formats. (See Fullerton 
& Leckie, 2002, for an overview of the history of bibliographic instruction.) Though not 
excluded, critical evaluation of information and the creation of a research strategy were 
often neglected due to time constraints. More recent programs propose that instruction by 
librarians be process-oriented rather than tool-oriented (Kuhlthau, 1988, 1993). 
Expanding the concept of bibliographic instruction, professional librarians and library 
associations now embrace the phrase “information literacy”, which embodies the ability 
to effectively plan research, to efficiently gather information, to critically evaluate 
information and sources, to properly use information, and to ethically acknowledge 
sources. (See Association of College & Research Libraries [ACRL], 2001, as an example 
of one organization’s guidelines.) 

Libraries play an integral role in the process of completing classroom assignments 
and conducting research. Since Western universities emphasize independent research, it 
is necessary for international students to learn basic research skills, how to choose tools. 




17 



International Students and Libraries 



8 



and how to interpret information (Ball & Mahony, 1987; Grimes, 1997). Academic 
libraries present unfamiliar territory for many incoming students, especially international 
students, and the desire to avoid failure and the appearance of ignorance can lead to 
anxiety. Kasper (2000) believes that many English as a Second Language (ESL) students 
fmd research daunting because of their limited language skills and their lack of 
preparation in using appropriate technology. For these students, “strong critical literacy 
skills are key to the research papers that are a central component of many mainstream 
college courses” (p. 187). [In this thesis, ESL is used only when an author specifically 
designates students as part of a campus English as a Second Language program.] Studies 
of the relationship between library anxiety and achievement indicate that library anxiety 
can lead to the avoidance of research behaviors, inevitably resulting in low achievement 
and poorly researched papers. 

Library Anxiety 

Anxiety in any context can be a debilitating emotion with significant behavioral 
ramifications, and in the classroom or any situation involving research, it can adversely 
affect the way students approach their tasks, often causing avoidance. The loss of face 
and the fear of appearing foolish or incompetent are powerful controlling factors for 
many students. Various researchers point to the detrimental effect that anxiety can have 
on the ability to accomplish tasks or perform skills. In his study about self-defeating ego- 
orientation and motivation, Skaalvik (1997) discloses that students who are highly 
concerned about not appearing stupid are particularly vulnerable in achievement 
situations, and Lucking and Manning (1996) identify being overanxious about making 
mistakes in front of peers as one of the primary causes of low achievement. Logical 




18 



International Students and Libraries 



9 



thought and decision making happen in the neocortex of the brain, but when a person is 
anxious, threatened, angry, or fearful, the blood flows out to the limbic system instead 
and thus “downshifts” to prevent rational decision making and to make a person less 
flexible (Christison ,1999a). Students should feel challenged, she contends, but not 
threatened. Vidmar (1998) acknowledges, “The way someone feels ultimately will help 
determine behavior. Individuals use emotions and feelings to prioritize information and 
reach decisions that can, in turn, initiate a course of action” (p. 75). 

Definitions of Library Anxiety 

Qun Jiao and Anthony Onwuegbuzie (1995), librarians who have done a number 
of studies on various aspects of library anxiety, articulate a definition of library anxiety 
which other researchers share: “An uncomfortable feeling experienced in a library setting 
which has cognitive, affective, physiological, and behavioural ramifications. It is 
characterized by negative self-defeating thoughts, and mental disorganization, which 
debilitate information literacy” (p. 2). One of the initial developers of the concept of 
library anxiety, Constance Mellon (Collins, Mellon, & Young, 1987) found in her 
surveys of college freshmen that 75% to 85% viewed the library as scary, overpowering, 
and confusing. One native English speaker commented, “‘It was like being in a foreign 
country and unable to speak the language’” (Mellon, 1986, p. 162). Mellon proposes that 
the key elements of this fear include the feelings: (a) “I am inept, but everyone else 
knows what to do”; (b) “I am incompetent which is embarrassing, and I don’t want 
anyone to know”; and (c) “I won’t ask questions or I might reveal my ignorance.” 

Egan (1992) notes that in students’ first attempts to use a university library, they 
are overwhelmed by size, by choices, and by strangers. Even asking for help is 




19 



International Students and Libraries 



10 



overwhelming — they think their questions are too simple, or they do not want to bother 
the staff. In Mellon’s (1989) investigations, students responded to library research in 
terms of fear, using words like “lost” and “helpless”. One of the participants in her study 
described the library as ‘“a huge monster than gulps you up as you enter it’” (p. 78). 
Sources of Library Anxiety 

Four sources of library anxiety were identified in Mellon’s (1986) research: (a) 
size [despite the fact that her initial research was done in a small three-floor library, most 
students said the size was a source of concern]; (b) lack of knowledge about where things 
are located in the building; (c) where and how to begin research; and (d) how to actually 
conduct research. Library anxiety may also be due to (a) barriers with the staff 
[unapproachable, intimidating, or busy]; (b) affective barriers [negative social evaluation 
or appearing ignorant]; (c) lack of comfort with the library [unsafe or unwelcoming]; (d) 
lack of knowledge of the library [unfamiliarity with resources and procedures]; and (e) 
technical barriers [reliance on unfamiliar equipment such as computers, photocopiers, 
microform readers/printers] (Jiao & Onwuegbuzie, 1998). Concluding that technological 
barriers are the most worrisome factors, Natowitz’s (1995) meta-analysis about 
international students in the library highlighted that almost all of the anxiety involved 
using computers. 

In a survey of library service satisfaction. Cook and Heath (2001) revealed a 
pervasive attitude among respondents: they want to be self-reliant and self-sufficient; 
they do not want to bother librarians; they do not want to display their ignorance. Cook 
and Heath’s interviews suggest that patrons tend to form an attachment to a person who 
has helped them in the past, in order to avoid displaying their perceived ignorance to a 




20 



International Students and Libraries 1 1 
new stranger. This is especially true of international students who attempt to establish an 

ongoing bond with individual library staff members. Even so, students still may have 
mixed feelings of guilt about the necessity of asking for help. 

Another source of library anxiety, according to Egan (1992), is that students, 
especially undergraduates, fear what William Perry (1998) calls “multiplicity” — that 
there is more than one right way of doing things, and that there is not always one right 
answer. Students may view librarians’ attempts to present a variety of possible resources 
and research techniques with apprehension since they are yet unable to reach the level of 
being comfortable with multiple answers (Collins et al., 1987; Mellon, 1989; Mellon & 
Pagles, 1987). Cerise Oberman (1991) dubs this the “cereal syndrome”, as students are 
unable to select one option when faced with too many choices, and thus they abandon the 
research process out of overwhelming confusion. 

Because students are often seeking the one right way to search for information, 
multiple correct possibilities create anxiety (Kuhlthau, 1993). For the same reasons that 
Oberman (1991) cites, Kuhlthau (1988) says that the acts of receiving assignments in 
class and being forced to choose and focus topics in themselves produce anxiety so that 
students bring this uneasiness to the library experience even before entering the building 
or beginning research. In Mellon’s (1986) study, how to begin an assignment produced 
the most fear among students, more than did problems encountered during information 
gathering. Originally done with high school seniors and later replicated and verified in 
both academic and public libraries, Carol Kuhlthau’s (1988, 1993) research suggests five 
stages in the information-seeking process. The first three stages of information seeking — 
initiation of the task, selection of the topic, and exploration of the prefocused topic — 




21 



International Students and Libraries 



12 



create and sustain the most anxiety, more than the collection stage of resource gathering 
or the presentation stage of writing and revision do. Keefer (1993) applies Jerome 
Bruner’s “hungry-rats syndrome” — skill decreases with anxiety — to the library. She 
concurs that the majority of anxiety comes in topic selection. Keefer observed that 
“anxiety overdrive” made students too eager so that they could not “get through the 
maze” of the research process, ignoring or misinterpreting the clues which could help 
them. Reminiscent of Christison’s (1991a) description of how fear affects the brain, 
Keefer (1993) states that anxiety makes a person so rigid they cannot transfer learned 
skills or broaden known strategies. She maintains that library anxiety affects both mental 
and creative thinking, and “even the physical locating operations are easily degraded” 

(p. 334). 

At-Risk Populations 

Although many, perhaps most, people experience library anxiety to some degree 
in their initial library visits, and perhaps again when beginning a new project or using an 
unfamiliar resource, some populations are more likely than others to exhibit library 
anxiety in a university setting. Jiao and Onwuegbuzie’s (1999) investigation of library 
anxiety documented that international students are the category of students most at risk to 
exhibit library anxiety and least likely to successfully use the library. Cultural and 
communication differences also make NNSE (Non-Native Speakers of English) uncertain 
about the level of services offered in a library and about expected behaviors (Jiao & 
Onwuegbuzie, 1 995). Language barriers; limited library and library technology 
experience in their home countries; and university library instruction designed for typical 
students also produce uneasiness for NNSE (K. Downing, MacAdams, & Nichols, 1993). 




22 



International Students and Libraries 



13 



In addition, their English language skills and other cultural values may produce 
“communication/conversation apprehension” (M. Liu, 1995, p. 125) and cause 
international students to rely on friends rather than librarians for information or 
instruction. 

Jiao and Onwuegbuzie encourage librarians to be proactive in approaching and 
reaching international students — to look for verbal and nonverbal clues of lack of 
understanding. Their 1999 investigation of international students indicates that 
international students tend to visit the library more, but have higher anxiety in using it 
than other populations. Surveys (1995, 1999) disclosed that library technology and 
mechanical barriers [problems with operating machines]; affective barriers [such as the 
fear of appearing ignorant]; and barriers with staff [perceived as unapproachable, 
intimidating, or too busy], caused the most worry among international students. However, 
their 1998 research with graduate students who were not international students identified 
the same barriers. In some countries, librarians are simply retrieving clerks or have low 
social status, so the necessity of approaching a librarian for help produces social 
humiliation, and because many graduate international students are competent, respected 
figures in their fields. Cope and Black (1985) and M. Liu (1995) speculate that inability 
to function in an American university library is especially upsetting and embarrassing. 

Other groups of students are also at risk for high library anxiety, and belonging to 
one of these other groups in addition to being an international student may further 
compound an international student’s difficulties. Mech and Brooks (1997) did not find 
gender or academic measures such as SAT scores or high school GPA to be important 
variables in library anxiety, but Jiao and Onwuegbuzie (1995, 1998) allege that gender is 




23 



International Students and Libraries 



14 



one of the most significant variables in library anxiety because “males attach greater 
meaning to work-related, achievement-related stressors” (1998, 20). For cultures where 
this work-related ego orientation exists, male international students may be at a double 
disadvantage. Learning styles are also related to high library anxiety (Onwuegbuzie & 
Jiao, 1998). Peer-oriented and group learners, as well as those who dislike multiple 
choices, tend to exhibit high library anxiety. In addition, visual learners, who perhaps do 
not like the hands-on learning necessary in a library environment, are another at-risk 
population. Both self-motivated students and those with lack of persistence scored high 
on measures of library anxiety, as did those who prefer to work in the afternoon. Self- 
motivated individuals may dislike asking for help, thus creating tension when they find 
themselves needing help. The fact that afternoons are often the busiest times in the library 
escalates nervousness for afternoon workers when the likelihood of others observing their 
incompetence increases. Onwuegbuzie and Jiao surmise that those who are easily 
discouraged find the library too full of challenges, asserting that sometimes experience 
with the library simply highlights an individual’s inadequacies, so for those with fear of 
appearing foolish or incompetent, pure experience alone is not the solution. The authors 
challenge librarians to offer opportunities for cooperative learning groups and sharing 
attitudes that might help to negate feelings that “only I am imperfect.” 

Although some of the library anxiety studies cited were conducted with limited 
population groups, the fact that most researchers come to similar conclusions gives 
credence to the inferences drawn. As with all surveys that rely on self-reported 
estimations of feelings, there is a potential difficulty in the variance of individual 
understanding of terms on the scales. Despite these possible drawbacks, the literature on 




24 



International Students and Libraries 



15 



library anxiety reviewed here is consistent with this author’s anecdotal evidence and 
experience as an information literacy instruction librarian. 

Reducing Library Anxiety 

One major strategy for reducing library anxiety is simply to address the fact that it 
occurs. Librarians must encourage students to realize they cannot master the 
mushrooming number of resources available, nor do librarians expect them to do that 
(Mark & Jacobson, 1995). Confessing that she gets depressed about the amount of 
information students remember from orientations, Mellon (1989) insists that the 
significant element of instruction is the interaction and rapport created with librarians. 
Both Mellon (1986) and Mosley (1997) recommend the use of introductory tours as 
anxiety reducers instead of trying to load instruction sessions with heavy content. 
Nicknamed “warmth seminars” (Mellon, 1986, p. 164), Mellon’s orientation programs 
specifically discussed fears and apprehension as part of the introductory tour. Pixie 
Mosley’s (1997) article chronicles her evaluation of the guided tours offered at Texas 
A & M University Library in order to determine if they should be discontinued. The tours 
were neither required nor related to any specific course, yet 93% of the participants 
reported they felt more comfortable about using the library after the tour, and 96% 
believed they learned useful information. Very favorable remarks about the tour leaders 
support the idea that human interaction is significant, especially for international 
students, and successful relationships with library staff are critical in making international 
students more comfortable and in orienting them to fundamental differences between 
their home countries’ and American libraries. 



1 



International Students and Libraries 16 

A discussion of change as a source of library anxiety is useful particularly since 

library technology changes so often that everyone, including librarians, is constantly re- 
experiencing the cycle of adjustment, interaction, and internalization in lifelong 
information literacy learning (Nahl, 1997). Preparing students for library use before 
research begins will also alleviate anxiety, according to Cope and Black (1985). Since 
collaborative learning tends to diffuse the fear of an individual appearing ignorant, 
Bradley and Russell (1997) contend that small-group instruction is particularly helpful 
for international students. Hands-on instruction in small groups encourages class 
camaraderie and alleviates the “others know; I don’t” feelings (Collins et al., 1987, p. 80; 
Jiao & Onwuegbuzie, 1998; Z. Liu, 1993; Mark & Jacobson, 1995; Onwuegbuzie & Jiao, 
1998). 

Researchers advise librarians to present a realistic model of research by not 
producing a demonstration in which all search strategies work the first time (Clark & 
Kalin, 1996; Mark & Jacobson, 1995; Nahl, 1997; Vidmar, 1998). Perfect presentations 
imply that searching is easy and result in aggravation when students later try the 
searching on their own and are not as successful as the librarian. Keefer (1993) believes 
watching the librarian model the same procedure of making mistakes or poor choices, and 
then succeeding through problem-solving and revision of search strategies will ease 
anxiety once the student faces problems in actual searching situations. She encourages 
instructors to discuss these threats to self-esteem and to teach students to be “fishers”, 
who search for resources as if they are casting a fishing line; then, when encountering 
barriers or no results, they cast in a wider area, try different locations/synonyms, yet are 
persistent and conscious of other possibilities. 




26 



International Students and Libraries 



17 



Computer Anxiety 

In addition to facing library anxiety, many students, and particularly international 
students, may suffer from computer anxiety. Despite the fact that computers are virtually 
omnipresent in general life and one would deduce that students now entering a university 
would be familiar with computers, “techno phobia now afflicts one-third of college 
students. . . . and the numbers have never been higher” (Gos, 1996, f 1). Although in 
many ways computers have made library tasks more efficient and less time consuming, 
D. King and Baker (1987) insist that technology has added to the complexity of library 
research. Like library anxiety, nervousness about computer use actually influences the 
degree to which the technology can be effectively used (Marcoulides & Wang, 1990). 
Three aspects of computer anxiety detected in Bradley and Russell’s (1997) study are: 

(a) damage anxiety: fear of breaking equipment or losing information; (b) task anxiety: 
fear of not understanding computer jargon, of getting stuck, or of not knowing where to 
start; and (c) social anxiety: fear of appearing ignorant to those who are watching. 

Most recent studies confirm that traditional variables prove to have little or no 
correlation with computer anxiety, including (a) age (Bradley & Russell, 1997; Rosen, 
Sears, & Weil, 1993; Todman & Lawrenson, 1992); (b) gender (Ayersman & Reed, 
1995/96; Bradley & Russell, 1997; Brosnan & Davidson, 1994; Marcoulides & Wang, 
1990; Todman & Lawrenson, 1992); (c) number of years of education (Marcoulides, 
Mayes, & Wiseman, 1995); (d) learning style (Ayersman & Reed, 1995/96); and (e) 
computer knowledge (Gos, 1996) or number of computer classes previously taken 
(Bradley & Russell, 1997). Marcoulides and Wang (1990) compared university students 




27 



International Students and Libraries 1 8 
in China and the United States and concluded nationality or ethnicity is not correlated 

with computer anxiety. 

Early literature reported that experience with computers lowered anxiety, but later 
studies clarify that experience itself does not lower computer anxiety; indeed bad 
experiences escalate anxiety (Gos, 1 996). Gos discovered that university students without 
any computer experience were also without computer anxiety, and every subject who 
exhibited computer anxiety had computer experience (f 38). It is the quality of the 
instruction or the computer experience that is the key factor in the user’s level of concern 
(Ayersman & Reed, 1995/96; Bradley & Russell, 1997; Gos, 1996; Marcoulides & 

Wang, 1990). Todman and Lawrenson (1992) conducted an experiment matching nine- 
year-old students and university students of comparable intelligence, as measured by 
scores on a non-verbal reasoning test. The primary students exhibited lower anxiety about 
using computers. The important variable was not prior experience with computers, but 
prior success with computers. The authors propose that children have relaxed, stressless 
computer experiences of game playing, art work, or simple word processing that leads to 
their lack of computer anxiety, and the authors counsel that instructors must provide 
computer experiences that will produce success and foster self-confidence. Because of 
the nature of libraries in today’s technological society, instruction librarians are faced 
with not only library anxiety, but also the added complication of computer anxiety. 
Computers do not solve the problem of library anxiety for students; rather, they introduce 
new sources of frustration, and especially for the novice, conducting research using 
computers is increasingly more stressful (Egan, 1992, f 7; Kissane & Mollner, 1993). As 
with library anxiety, the source of computer anxiety is usually the fear of failure, and the 




28 



International Students and Libraries 



19 



articles cited indicate that the only significant variable in computer anxiety is the lack of 
success in prior computer experiences. 

Low anxiety does not guarantee mastery of research skills or increased knowledge 
of the subject. Marcoulides and Wang (1990) stress that instruction and practice, guided 
by the librarian, is more likely to lead to a successful experience and more likely to 
reduce potential anxiety than individual random experimentation. Although active 
learning sessions involving hands-on opportunities decrease the time that librarians can 
lecture or demonstrate, evaluations and student journals illustrate that active learning 
opportunities result in better understanding of concepts and more successful experiences 
than lecture and demonstration-only formats (Mark & Jacobson, 1995). 

The Relationship Between Information Literacy and Academic Achievement 

Onwuegbuzie and Jiao’s (1998) empirical research on library anxiety was done in 
conjunction with a graduate psychology class instructor who indicated, “Students who are 
anxious about seeking help from a librarian tend to produce a research proposal of lower 
quality” (p. 236). A collaboration between an undergraduate English Composition faculty 
member and librarian Zahner (1993) compared the focused topics and bibliographies 
produced by two groups who received information literacy instruction. One group was 
taught in a lecture/demonstration style that focused on the library’s search tools. The 
other group examined the process of research and the cognitive strategies used. Although 
there was no difference in student perception of the usefulness of the instruction, the 
process/strategies group exhibited lower library anxiety. The classroom faculty member 
who analyzed the final product papers substantiated that the process/strategies-group 
topics were both more interesting and focused and that the resulting bibliographies were 




29 



International Students and Libraries 



20 



of higher quality than those from the group whose instruction focused on tools rather than 
strategies. 

Students’ reluctance to show their ignorance of library skills and their lack of 
actual library use leads their professors to overestimate their skills and thus not provide 
instruction in research strategies (Jiao & Onwuegbuzie, 1995). Wakiji and Thomas 
(1997) surveyed undergraduate students about how they learned library and research 
skills. The teachers polled believed that the primary way students learn to use the library 
is on their own and the least likely way is through their teachers. The students, in 
contrast, alleged that teachers are the most likely way they learn library skills. It is 
therefore not surprising that 52.5% of faculty members felt they could not spare time in 
their curriculum for any library instruction, whether taught by the teacher or by a 
librarian; yet 74.5% of the faculty were dissatisfied with their students’ research abilities 
and the ultimate products. Even faculty who do solicit help from librarians may fail to 
understand the wide variety of information librarians need to teach in order for students 
to learn and experience success in research. “All within the fifty-minute hour, which 
seems to be how long professors feel it should take their students to master library 
resources,” Mellon muses (1989, p. 77). 

Davis and Cohen (2001) analyzed bibliographies from undergraduate research 
papers written at their institution from 1996 to 1999. In the three years, they noted a 
marked increase in the use of web sites as resources listed in the bibliographies and a 
decrease in the citation of books and journals, even in their online formats. Without strict 
guidelines from faculty about which types of resources are appropriate for scholarly 
work, Davis and Cohen fear that students remain unmotivated to practice any critical 




30 



International Students and Libraries 



21 



thinking and simply rely on Internet search engines as preferred sources of locating 
information. In Davis’s (2002) update of the original analysis, he notes the continuing 
decrease in the inclusion of books in bibliographies; in fact, often the only book cited was 
the class text. A small increase in the inclusion of magazines, as opposed to journals, and 
the use of newspapers was observed. Although the addition of web sites did not change 
significantly, the type of web sites cited did: a large increase in the use of .com web sites 
was detected compared to a decrease in the use of .edu, .gov, and .org web sites. Again, 
Davis maintains that instructors must be more prescriptive in their assignment 
expectations if they desire students to improve their academic research. He insists that if 
librarians want to have any impact on the quality of student research, it must take the 
form of collaborating with faculty concerning the guidelines for research assignments. 
Mark and Jacobson (1995) recommend that teachers ask students to submit abstracts and 
citations that highlight the elements that would be useful for proposed topics. Without 
this sort of tracking, they contend, it is unlikely that students will use critical thinking and 
evaluation skills even if they are taught, and will instead conduct ineffective searches and 
then simply take the first ten results and “print and run” (p. 3 1). 

University faculty consider information literacy as important, but feel that they 
themselves need more instruction and therefore prefer that the librarians teach the 
information literacy sessions to students (Fullerton and Leckie, 2002). However, faculty 
as a whole do not support the collaboration of teacher and librarian in terms of team- 
created assignments, team-taught courses or sessions, or team grading. Because of 
students with increasingly weak academic skills and a decrease of individual contact with 
faculty, Blandy and Libutti (1995) claim that librarians must take on the role of coach and 




31 



International Students and Libraries 



22 



guide through the information gathering and processing stages of research. Factors such 
as library anxiety, computer anxiety, and the relationship between information literacy 
and academic achievement underline the importance of information literacy instruction 
for all students, especially for those from other countries who are studying in United 



States universities. 



CHAPTER 3 



CHALLENGES INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS FACE 



In some ways, international students face the same challenges of library anxiety, 
computer anxiety, and lack of instruction or experience with libraries that American- 
educated students do. However, there are some added complications that must be 
acknowledged and addressed when librarians teach information literacy skills to 
international students. Differences in education systems, libraries, and language 
structures frequently cause barriers to effectively using American university libraries. 

Education Differences 

Recognizing the importance of culture in how individuals categorize information, 
Mestenhauser (1998) offers the reminder that ideas about what constitutes critical 
thinking, creative thinking, and cognitive flexibility are culturally defined. Information 
can be categorized in numerous ways, and Pick (1998) speculates about how a society’s 
values and practices influence an individual’s cognitive processes. National cumculums 
offer diverse experience with certain types of information management — for example, the 
scientific method, logical arguments of evidence, or quantitative research — and in the use 
of and attitudes toward technology (Kaplan, 1983). Variations such as these contribute to 
difficulties faced by international students not only in the traditional classroom but also in 
library instruction classrooms and in patterns of library use. 




33 



International Students and Libraries 



24 



% 



The American education system, from preschool through graduate school, is 
“highly participatory,” according to Frances Jacobson (1988, p. 629), with an emphasis 
on interaction between the student and the teacher. This differs from many other 
education systems throughout the world where the student’s role is more observational or 
imitative. One hurdle to overcome is the difference in the nature of the roles of the 
student and the teacher. In many countries, the transmission of cultural heritage is a major 
objective (Peck, 1992), and the teacher is seen as the sole authority (Bilal, 1990). It may 
be inappropriate to argue with or question the professor, thus fostering a more formal 
relationship between student and teacher that excludes a discussion of feelings or 
opinions (Emigh, 1991). M. Liu (1995) asserts that non- Westerners have learned a 
different mindset, which assumes that students do not ask questions, do not challenge, 
and do not judge what they hear or read. Nevertheless, Fu (1995) points out that being 
quiet is not the same as being passive or reserved. Coming to an American university that 
focuses on independent learning and an active, questioning style of education presents an 
immense problem for many international students. 

Since many educational systems throughout the world consider the instructor to 
be the disseminator of information and the student’s role as note-taker or memorizer, 
another obstacle for international students may be the transition to independent gathering 
of information through the library, along with the need to create a strategy of priorities 
when sifting through resource options. Working with Chinese international students, 
McClure (2001) encountered difficulties on the part of the students with the concept of 
research as a personal responsibility rather than as part of a more hierarchical team 
approach. 




34 



V 



International Students and Libraries 25 

Sally Wayman (1984) speculates a society’s child-rearing practices influence 

learning styles. American parents, for example, usually teach children with verbal 
exchange: “Tell me how old you are”; “What color is this?”; “Where is the elephant?” 
Other cultures may employ more observation and imitation in teaching their children; 
therefore, the role of silence and reception plays an alternate role in these societies in 
general and consequently in their classrooms (Jordan, 1997; Preston, 1992). Fu (1995), as 
an example, explains that Chinese parents tell children not to speak unless they are 
completely sure they are using the correct expression. 

Some societies are written-language dependent while others are spoken-language 
dependent, so international students come to the United States with sundry histories in 
relationship to the importance of, and reliance on, the written or spoken word. Students 
demonstrate that culture impacts all facets of learning, even how individuals view 
evidence, truth, or information itself (Kaplan, 1983). Cope and Black (1985) explain that 
in locales with limited financial resources, a single textbook may serve the entire 
classroom, and thus instruction is often based on memorization and recitation. Education 
in these cultures is more rigid, dependent on the teacher as the main source of 
information and lecture as the principal method of teaching (Greenfield et al., 1986; 
Macdonald & Sarkodie-Mensah, 1988). Because they are often accustomed to learning 
by listening to the teacher, many international students find it awkward to participate in 
class discussions in an American classroom. In speaking of the assessment of Asian 
students, Fradd and McGee (1994) argue that because Asian students learn by 
observation and memorization, rote learning in itself is considered studying, and rote 
learning is not only used but also preferred over discovery learning. 




35 



International Students and Libraries 



26 



Even information seeking is culturally contextualized (M. Liu, 1995). She advises 
that “communication/conversation apprehension” (p. 125) is not always the result of 
actual or even perceived poor English skills, but may simply be a cultural or individual 
reticence to talk. M. Liu highlights the importance of social networks in education and 
describes how cultures seek information in different ways. Non-native English-speaking 
Latinos, she alleges, typically utilize a gatekeeper such as a relative or friend, who solves 
problems and facilitates access. In contrast, Asians are more likely to use informal social 
networks such as community newspapers or ethnic organizations. International students 
will typically go to peers rather than authorities for information (F. Jacobson, 1988). 

Moeckel and Presnell (1995) infer that the major difference between American 
education and non-Westem education can be described by the phrase critical thinking. 
Cultures which stress textbook learning often use restatement to show mastery of a topic, 
while in the United States, going beyond reporting information to draw conclusions is 
necessary. The American emphasis on synthesis and analysis presents a particular 
stumbling block for many other-culture learners (Jordan, 1 997), and in cultures where the 
professor is viewed as the transmitter of knowledge, the teacher rather than the student 
performs the critical thinking process of choosing and judging information (F. Jacobson, 
1988). Sternberg and Spear-Swerling’s (1996) articulation of triarchic thinking, which 
includes analytical/critical thinking, creative/synthetic thinking, and practical thinking, 
illustrates that although analytical thinking may be sufficient for work in American 
secondary schools, in an American college setting, creative thinking is needed so that 
international students must analyze and generate ideas, not just repeat them. Some 
societies consider primary and secondary education as the time for work and hard lessons 




36 



International Students and Libraries 



27 



and college as the time to form social connections that will be important in the rest of life 
(Moorhead, 1986). Given that viewpoint, classroom learning and library use may not be a 
hi gh priority for certain international students. 

One additional adjustment that international students often face in the American 
education system is the notion of intellectual property and plagiarism. Outlooks about 
copyright and plagiarism differ with the way that cultures look at language and 
information property. L. Thompson and Williams (1996) concede that plagiarism can be 
the result of lack of self-confidence in a writer’s English skills, leading to dependence on 
an original source’s phrasing. However, what an American instructor might consider 
plagiarism may instead be the result of an international student s belief that language, 
ideas, and writing are shared by the entire culture and are not the sole property of an 
individual author. ESL teacher Deckert (1993) feels the insecurity that international 
students feel about their English abilities leads them to fall back on the habit of giving 
back information as they hear it or find it, making them “recyclers” (p. 13). Many 
societies consider use of another’s ideas as a respectful compliment instead of an 
infringement of copyright. Understanding how to integrate others findings into their own 
writing style poses a difficult mindset shift for international students who are expected to 
conform to Western notions of copyright and plagiarism (Greenfield, 1989). 

In addition to alternative philosophical underpinnings of national education 
systems, worldwide school systems vary widely in their practical operations. Financial 
assets certainly play a paramount role in the types of facilities and resources available and 
in the educational backgrounds of the faculty and librarians. The level of control of the 
curriculum and teacher education programs; and the certification by national, regional, or 




37 



International Students and Libraries 



28 



local governments also contribute to the way each country’s educational system 
functions. According to Peck (1992), the importance of national-level exams necessary 
for advancing to the next step in the educational system may necessitate an emphasis on 
memorization and the transmission of teacher-chosen knowledge. Classroom-conduct 
values differ among cultures — ideas about talking and listening in the classroom, 
attendance and punctuality, and the concept of helping others versus cheating. Many 
cultures employ a grading system that is solely dependent on annual exams so that an 
American grading system, which includes many assignments throughout the semester, 
and which can incorporate class participation and/or attendance, presents an especially 
difficult challenge for international students (Wayman, 1984). 

Library Differences 

Just as national education systems and values differ throughout the world, so do 
libraries. International students face various barriers as they attempt to understand and 
efficiently use the American university library. Some of these obstacles are the same ones 
that native English speakers face: initial fears of not knowing where to go, what to do, or 
how to use equipment, and/or a hopelessness in the face of a mountain of resources (Li, 
1998; M. Liu, 1995). Even though to some degree all students face the same difficulties 
in their use of the university library, many of the hurdles that are common for all users 
are inflated or compounded for second-language learners. 

Jiao and Onwuegbuzie (1999) point out that although NNSE students may visit 
libraries more than their native-English-speaking counterparts, they use them less. One of 
the chief impediments for international students in the university library is that there are 
major differences between how libraries work in their home countries and how they work 



International Students and Libraries 



29 



on an American university campus. It is important to clarify that some international 
students may be familiar or comfortable with libraries in their home country and only 
need a transfer of their skills into an American setting. Others, unfamiliar with libraries in 
general, may need complete instruction in the culture and use of libraries (DiMartino & 
Zoe, 2000; Jordan, 1997). 

Some libraries throughout the world use classification systems other than Dewey 
Decimal Classification System or Library of Congress Classification System, which may 
introduce a complication for international students as they locate and retrieve materials in 
American libraries (Ball & Mahony, 1987; DiMartino & Zoe, 2000; Hoffman & Popa, 
1986; M. Liu, 1995; Z. Liu, 1993; Moeckel & Presnell, 1995; Preston, 1992; Rutgers 
University Libraries, 1998). Retrieving materials in itself may prove a barrier. Many 
other-culture libraries do not allow patrons to browse or gather their own materials, 
instead requiring a mediator to locate and collect materials for the student. Libraries may 
be more of a textbook repository or a study hall than a place for independent research 
(Ball & Mahony, 1987; DiMartino & Zoe, 2000; F. Jacobson, 1988; M. Liu, 1995; Z. 

Liu, 1993; Moeckel & Presnell, 1995). In libraries where resources are scarce, student 
use of materials may be restricted in order to prevent damage or loss (Macdonald & 
Sarkodie-Mensah, 1988). Their home libraries may have a non-circulating collection, 
which makes the idea of borrower responsibility a new concept, and international 
students may even be unfamiliar with the idea that loaned materials must be returned to 
the library without the library contacting the student to ask for them back (Wayman, 
1984). Nevertheless, libraries in other cultures are changing. Despite the fact that most 
researchers cite closed stacks, non-circulating collections, and direct use of technology as 




39 



International Students and Libraries 



30 



unfamiliar aspects of American libraries, Allen’s (1993) survey of the use of libraries by 
international students at the University of Illinois indicated that only 12% of the 
respondents found open stacks a new concept and only 22% reported self-service 
machines such as photocopiers were unfamiliar. It is worthwhile to note that 92% of the 
respondents in Allen’s case study were graduate students, and they may have had more 
opportunities to use a variety of libraries in their home countries than undergraduate 
international students without college experience previous to their American education. 

American libraries typically provide end-user services, in which individuals can 
directly access resources and perform their own searching, unlike many libraries 
throughout the world that provide only mediated services. Accustomed to a passive role 
in which someone else executes requested searches, international students may view the 
American library staff as “universal aunts” (Jordan, 1997, p. 213; Wayman, 1984) who 
they expect will individually shepherd them through all procedures and essentially do 
research for them. Additionally, NNSE (Non-Native Speakers of English) may be 
unaware of services such as Reference Desk help, interlibrary loan, and other options 
unavailable in their home country libraries (Ball & Mahony, 1987; DiMartino & Zoe, 
2000; Greenfield, 1989; F. Jacobson, 1988; Jiao & Onwuegbuzie, 1999; Jordan, 1997; 
Kamhi-Stein & Stein, 1999; Keefer, 1993; M. Liu, 1995; M. Liu & Redfem, 1997; Z. 
Liu, 1993; Moeckel & Presnell, 1995; Novak & Robinson, 1998; Wayman, 1984). For 
those from societies where status or age plays an important role, international students 
may expect that their status or age will permit rules to be bent or certain favors to be 
granted (Curtis, 2000). If they come from a country where librarians are simply clerks to 




40 



International Students and Libraries 



31 



bring requested materials, international students may view librarians as nonprofessionals 
and take a patronizing attitude toward them (F. Jacobson, 1988; Peck, 1992). 

In cultures that are not book-oriented, libraries are not seen as important for 
research, thus international students may be unfamiliar with the norms for library 
behavior (Bilal, 1990). Ball and Mahony (1987), DiMartino and Zoe (2000), K. Downing 
et al. (1993), Macdonald and Sarkodie-Mensah (1988), and Preston (1992) all stress that 
the overwhelming glut of resources in American libraries may be even more daunting for 
international students than it is for Americans. Standard American resources such as 
indexes may even be unfamiliar to international students who come from areas where 
financial and political support for libraries is scarce, and their home libraries may be 
unable to purchase up-to-date tools, especially those that employ technology. 

International students are often computer literate and computer savvy. Data 
collected from over 100,000 worldwide students applying to American universities 
revealed that 69.1% of the respondents used a computer for any purpose once or more a 
week, and 42.5% used the Internet once or more a week (Taylor, Jamieson, & Eignor, 
2000, p. 580). However, despite the fact that many international students are experienced 
computer users, technology is still not a common phenomenon in libraries throughout the 
world, so that many international students have little experience with computers in 
libraries and do not feel prepared to use American libraries (Allen, 1993, p. 330). Allen 
surveyed 750 international graduate students at the University of Illinois, asking, “What 
was new to you?” in American libraries. Although 85% of the respondents indicated they 
had used computers before, 69% had never previously used any type of computer in a 
library. Of those surveyed, 51% had never used an online library catalog, and 61% had no 




41 



International Students and Libraries 



32 



experience with databases. Using library-specific technology such as online catalogs, 
electronic databases, microform reader/printers, and self-service photocopiers ranked as 
the greatest anxiety-producer in all of the studies cited in this thesis with both native 
English and NNSE students. It is therefore not surprising that inexperience with the 
technological resources of an American university library creates problems for 
international students adjusting to a new library culture or perhaps libraries in general. 

Language Differences 

Culture plays an important part in communication, especially in nonverbal 
communication. In some societies, eye contact between certain individuals is considered 
impolite; nodding may signal understanding, but it may also be simple acknowledgement 
or an indication of respect for the teacher or the information. Mistakes can cause great 
shame in some cultures, while in other societies, trial and error may be an acceptable way 
of learning. Even the concept of tact or openness is culturally defined (Moeckel & 
Presnell, 1995). DeSouza (1996) counsels librarians to keep in mind that although 
international students may have values and customs that are foreign to Americans, 
international students are not all the same, nor are all Asian international students the 
same, nor are all Korean international students the same. While it is impossible to know 
or recognize all the nuances of a particular culture, understanding that cultural variations 
exist is a far-reaching step in communicating with those from outside the United States. 

In 1995, 24,000 of the freshmen entering the California State University system 
reported English was their second language; yet only 1 ,000 of these non-native speakers 
of English tested proficient in college-level English (Kahmi-Stein & Stein, 1999, f 1). 
Numbers such as these make it evident that it is crucial for instruction librarians to 




4 



o 



International Students and Libraries 



33 



acknowledge the challenges that language can present. Clearly use of English is a key 
complicating factor in international students’ use of an American university library. As 
noted previously, one major source of library anxiety is the fear of revealing ignorance 
(Mellon, 1 989). This fear is compounded for the international student who is not only 
worried about revealing ignorance of the library, but who also fears revealing 
inadequacies in communicating in English. Native speakers of English themselves often 
have trouble distinguishing library terminology such as reserves and reference, 
bibliography and biography (Preston, 1 992), and A. Downing and Klein (200 1 ) 
underscore that the problem is more difficult for the L2 (second language) student to 
whom “library-related terminology is a third language” (Kamhi-Stein & Stein, 1999, f 5). 

Language difficulties impact not only information-gathering skills but also help- 
seeking behaviors. Lack of proficiency in English can be a major concern for 
international students in their library use as it relates to asking for and receiving 
assistance. Natowitz (1995) conjectures that if students are self-conscious about their 
English skills, they may avoid the library to avoid asking questions. Because of varying 
values related to information-seeking behavior, international students may cloud the issue 
of what question they really want answered in an effort to seem less needy than they 
really are. Often the clarifying questions that library staff ask, hoping to determine the 
real need, are interpreted by the international student as intrusive or judgmental. For 
those who are from a culture concerned about accommodating others, a question such as, 
“Are you looking for maps or statistics?” poses a dilemma. While American students 
would not feel constrained to choose one of the options, international students, out of 
respect for authority, may feel obliged to accept one of the proffered choices when in 




43 



International Students and Libraries 



34 



actuality they want neither (deSouza, 1 996). Research showed that English expertise was 
the major factor in how successfully NNSE, including both international students and 
residents, used university libraries, specifically as it contributed to the frequency of 
asking for help and receiving instruction (M. Liu & Redfem, 1997). Respondents in the 
study revealed a compound fear of asking for help at the Reference Desk fear that their 
questions would not be understood and/or fear that they would not understand the 
answers given to their questions. In an analysis of the variables tracked in their survey, 

M. Liu and Redfem documented that only individuals who had spent 15 or more years in 
the United States rated themselves as confident in asking questions and as successful in 
using American libraries. Since international students are typically in the United States 
for only for a limited time while they study, there is little likelihood they will reach that 
15-year comfort zone that United States’ residents reported in M. Liu and Redfem’ s 
research. 

In addition to the challenge that language creates in help-seeking behavior, 
language structure itself can cause problems in search strategies. F. Jacobson (1988) 
observes that library terminology is often hierarchical with a skewed syntax. For 
example, instead of searching for Chinese culture in a catalog or database, control led- 
subject searching, as dictated by the Library of Congress, requires the format China- 
Social life and customs. For international students, concerned with proper sentence 
structure and precise vocabulary, this alteration of words and positions can be much more 
baffling than it is to native English speakers. The use of synonyms, a necessity in 
keyword searching, is a difficult skill to master, especially for students with limited 
English vocabulary (F. Jacobson, 1988). DiMartino and Zoe (2000) explain that NNSE 




44 



International Students and Libraries 35 
often have more formal written and spoken English skills than Americans tend to use, 
and vocabulary is the biggest impediment to L2 (second language) students in effective 
searching. 

Leki and Carson (1997) discuss the complaints of NNSE students that writing 
assignments in ESL classes often focus on using a text as a springboard, highlighting 
sentence structure and correct speech patterns. Students interviewed by Leki and Carson 
confided that this emphasis poorly prepares them for the type of writing needed in 
mainstream college classes. A stress on correct structure of the English language can also 
impede international students in search strategies. Efficient searching in online databases 
depends on the use of truncation. Boolean operators, proximity searching, the use of 
synonyms, and phrase searching, all of which may be complicated by the structure of the 
student’s native language. Research at Baruch College with both native English speakers 
and non-native speakers of English substantiated that all students had trouble with the 
above search concepts, but that NNSE had more problems, especially East Asians, and 
specifically Chinese-speaking students (DiMartino & Zoe, 2000, p. 20). If international 
students are still mentally translating languages as they listen and think, the linguistic 
patterns of their native language may interfere with their ability to construct effective 
search statements in English. Some languages do not distinguish between singulars and 
plurals, which affects the ability of second-language learners to fully understand the 
concept of truncation. For example, Chinese dialects do not use plurals, nor do they use 
connectors such as and, so truncation and Boolean searching are especially difficult 
concepts to grasp for Chinese-speaking students. 




45 



International Students and Libraries 36 
The international student faces a plethora of problems when arriving at an 
American university. In addition to cross-cultural adjustment, many international students 
also are impeded by contrasts in education systems, different library cultures, and 
difficulties with language. Wan, Chapman, and Biggs (1992) recommend that since 
institutions cannot eliminate the stressors international students face, faculty must teach 
them effective ways to cope with their stress. By being cognizant of the special 
challenges faced by international students in respect to using an American university 
library, library staff can purposely identify potential causes of concern and make 
concerted efforts to alleviate the difficulties of international students. 




46 



CHAPTER 4 



INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS AS LEARNERS 



People are complex and not one-dimensional. Because the “brain is a pattern- 
seeking device” (Christison, 1 999a, f 1 7), individuals are often categorized to facilitate 
daily routines and organization of social roles. While it is obvious that a person has 
multiple labels (for example, female, librarian, Californian), in certain situations, some 
labels take precedence and may develop into stereotypes. Brown (2000) cautions that 
international students are not a “monolithic group,” but the university community often 
compartmentalizes international students as if that were their only characteristic. 
International students are more intricate than simply originating from another country or 
being a non-native speaker of English. In a university setting, an international student is 
an adult learner and must be treated and taught as one. 

International Students As Adult Learners 
Although international students face the special challenges caused by education 
differences, library differences, and language differences, they are adults, just like other 
college learners. The fact that they are adult learners— even if they are not-quite adults, 
the traditional-age college undergraduates — indicates that librarians need to assess how 
the principles of adult learning relate to teaching information literacy skills to 
international students. 




47 



International Students and Libraries 



38 



Portrait of Adult Learners 

Many educators, following the lead of Malcolm Knowles (1970, 1990), embrace 
the concept of andragogy, distinguishing children as “compulsory learners” from adults 
who are “volunteers in learning” (1970, p. 79). Though theories vary, several common 
themes emerge when painting a portrait of the adult learner: self-directed; experience- 
based and relevance-oriented; and seeking autonomous learning through active 
participation. Variables such as age, ethnicity, gender, socioeconomic background, and 
personality preclude the construction of a one-fits-all description of an adult learner. 
However, the maturity which a variety of life experiences and the input that career and 
family obligations brings to an adult learner typically leads to the desire for self-direction 
and active participation in one’s own learning (Donaldson, 1999). In a survey of library 
service quality, the same desire for self-reliance and self-control existed for both 
undergraduate and graduate students (Cook & Heath, 2001). This need for self-reliance is 
echoed throughout the literature on adult learning as particularly important in teaching 
adults (Brookfield, 1994; Donaldson, 1999; Fidishun, 2000; Galbraith, 1990; Knowles, 
1970, 1990; Meyers & Jones, 1993; Moran, 1991; Smith & Pourchot, 1998; Stephens, 
1994; Vella, 2000). Brookfield (1994), however, believes culture and society are more 
crucial influences in learning than is age. He says “self-directed” can actually be a matter 
of being self-contained or self-obsessed. 

Another often cited characteristic of adult learners is their rich base of experience 
and their desire for immediate relevance and application in their work. Stephens (1994) 
points out that although experiences do enrich the learning environment for adults, they 
can also hinder learning by producing emotional connections to negative memories or 



ERIC 




International Students and Libraries 



39 



preventing them from being open to new ideas. As Knowles (1970, 1990) observes, 
relevance to present conditions of work or anticipated relevance to future goals is viewed 
by the adult learner as a necessary aspect of education. Graduate international students 
most likely have past work experience in their home countries, and they often come to the 
United States with the specific goal of using their American education upon their return 
home. Pinheiro (2001) interviewed nine Ph.D. international students about their positive 
and negative experiences in studying in the United States. The interviews were 
specifically structured to correspond to Knowles’ (1970, 1990) concept of andragogy. 
Answers about negative experiences centered around instances where courses did not 
allow international students to choose readings or customize their research to focus on 
what would be relevant to roles in their home countries. Although visa status prevents 
them from working outside the college campus, many international students are heavily 
involved in religious or community activities, often in positions related to career goals or 
past experience. In these cases, students expect learning to enhance present roles as well 
as future roles. 

The Not-Quite Adult Learner 

Although traditional-age college students may no longer be children, they are not 
yet, according to Perry (1998), adult learners. Perry’s stages of cognitive development 
detail how learners advance from concrete to more abstract thinking skills, and he 
describes cognitive changes as learners progress from reliance on the instructor and 
reception of information to a more advanced stage in which the learner begins to 
contribute ideas and opinions to enable a cooperative relationship with the instructor and 
knowledge. In his extensive 1960s research, which was later updated in the mid 1990s to 




49 



International Students and Libraries 



40 



broaden the original sample. Perry concluded that most American college freshmen and 
sophomores are unable to move beyond the dualism stage. In this stage, students view 
themselves as receivers of knowledge, under obligation to demonstrate they have learned 
the right answer; instructors are seen as givers of knowledge because of their authority. 
Knowledge, at this stage, is seen as a collection of information, and right and wrong 
answers exist for everything. Moran (1991) characterizes accepting uncertainty as a 
unique factor in adult learners and asserts, “The essential quality of mature thinking is 
exercising judgment in dealing with tasks that involve multiple variables and have no 
universally accepted solutions” 12). 

Writings about the differences between generations are legion, but one distinction 
is often mentioned — computer literacy (Flory & Miller, 2000, p. 5). Many educators 
describe the impact of technology and media on learning and teaching styles and the pace 
of information processing (Ricigliano, 2001; Roth, 1999), reducing learning to bite-sized 
pieces and making learning less linear. Equally as important as the influence of the fast 
pace of technology is its pre-packaged passivity. In a course evaluation, one of Sacks’ 
(1996) students complained, “Higher education doesn’t work any more. We [students] 
thin k the media is more substantial than you the teacher. Machines are easier. The media 
is passive, safer. It doesn’t really affect us. But a teacher, it’s real, it’s close” (p. 145). 

The constantly changing pace of technology-driven learning has also produced 
learners who are capable of multitasking. Outlining the learning style preferences and 
characteristics of Generation Y, Faust, Ginno, Laherty, and Manuel (2001) call not-quite 
adults the “headphone- wearing, itchy mouse-fingered, and frequently paged”. They 
contend that Nexters are holistic learners, play-oriented, expecting teachers to provide the 




50 



International Students and Libraries 



41 



learning, but expecting that learning to be graphic, visual, active, and customizable. Lori 
Roth (1999) explains that more nonlinear, nonsequential modes of perceiving, thinking, 
and investigating have resulted from the visual means of communication that has become 
our “unifying cultural force” 7). Like the adult learner, the not-quite adult begins to 
desire more immediate or perceived relevance than the child learner. Joumalist-tumed- 
college-lecturer Peter Sacks (1996) insists pragmatism has taken over Generation X so 
that they ask not, “Is it true?” but rather, “What use is it?”. This “What’s in it for me? 
mentality makes the promotion of the relevance of library instruction especially vital for 
the not-quite adult (Wamken & Young, 1991). 

The International Adult and Not-Quite Adult Learner 

As adults and not-quite adults, international students desire self-reliance, 
relevance, and participation in the decisions about their own learning. Librarian 
instructors must squelch the inclination to treat NNSE learners as they would children, 
simply because of their language difficulties. The educator s role, declares Fenwick 
(2000), is to facilitate participation in the meaning of an individual’s education, not to 
concentrate on the personal development of the individual. Pinheiro’s (2001) work 
uncovered negative attitudes about faculty who did not acknowledge the educational 
backgrounds and professional experience of the Ph.D. international students and ‘“treated 
us as empty slates’” (p. 9). On the other hand, international students who are not-quite 
adults may still be in Perry’s (1998) dualist stage, relying on the instructor for guidance. 
This gui dan ce, according to McNeer (1991), is especially important in group work where 
desired self-reliance and participation in one’s own learning can be developed in non- 
threatening ways. 




51 



International Students and Libraries 42 
It is vital to remember that almost all of the students presently in college — 

including international students, whether undergraduate or graduate — are part of the X 
and Y generations. The impact of technology is not limited to the United States, or even 
to high-technology societies. Television, radio, music technologies, and computers have 
extended throughout the world to transform the face of society, education, and 
communication. The passivity and fast pace of technological information has gripped 
individuals worldwide. Taylor et al. (2000) administered surveys to over 100,000 
students taking the Test Of English As a Foreign Language (TOEFL). A passing score in 
this test is generally required for admission to universities in the United States. 
Questionnaires were given to individuals, who were ages 20-30 and evenly distributed as 
to gender, in their home countries (including Africa, Asia, Europe, Latin America, Near 
East, Pacific Islands, and United States/Canada). Overall, 69.1% of the respondents 
indicated they used a computer once or more a week; 42.5% used the Internet once or 
more a week (p. 580). Latin America ranked highest in computer use in general, and 
Africa revealed the lowest use. Despite these regional variations, it is clear that though 
experience with computers is uneven, most international students come to the United 
States accustomed to the impact of technology. Obviously the same admonitions about 
instructors addressing the needs of the “headphone-wearing, itchy mouse-fingered, and 
frequently paged” (Faust et al., 2001) also apply to international students. 

It is equally important to recognize that other nations’ education systems may be 
based on values that deviate from American educational values; however, though 
different, those values must not be discounted as inferior. Most of the cited observations 
and characterizations about adult learners and Generations X and Y come from North 




52 



International Students and Libraries 



43 



American educators and research conducted in North American settings. Adult and not- 
quite adult learners from countries other than the United States do not necessarily 
conform to these generalizations. Perry’s (1998) dualist stage, relying on the teacher as 
the disseminator of knowledge, may be more the result of a cultural value of respect than 
of a cognitive stage of development. On the other hand, older adult international students 
may still be operating cognitively as dualists because of their past inexperience with 
critical reflection techniques or lack of opportunities for input and interaction with 
faculty. 

Stephen Brookfield (1994), like many others, concentrates on the role of culture 
in shaping learning. In low-context, individualistic societies such as the United States, 
individual participation is not only desired in education, but it is also required. In high- 
context, collectivistic societies, however, participation by individuals outside the group 
setting may not be valued in academic venues. The way in which adult learners want 
active participation to take place in their learning varies considerably depending on the 
culture. Describing growing up in China, Fu (1995) reports she was taught that 
conformity to the group is honored over individual uniqueness. Storti (1999) offers cross- 
cultural workshops throughout the world, and in each workshop he asks participants to 
rate themselves and their country on various traits. His graphs show generalizations 
culled from these self-ratings. The United States ranks lowest in context; that is, it is the 
most individualistic. There is then a huge gap between it and any other country, with 
France coming closest and Japan at the opposite extreme (pp. 98-99). It is essential for 
American librarians to remember that although international students are adults and 




53 



International Students and Libraries 



44 



desire participation in their own learning, American culture in general and American 
educational culture in particular is very foreign to the rest of the world. 

International Students and Learning Styles 

Students’ experiences in their education systems affect their learning styles and 
their preferred ways of learning. One aspect of American education presents an especially 
significant change for international students as they come to study in American 
universities — the use active participation and group or cooperative learning. Research 
shows that these are important components of American education, but they tend to be 
unfamiliar, and therefore uncomfortable, for international students. 

Active Learning 

In the 1950s and 1960s, Ohio State University educator Edgar Dale conducted a 
series of studies on the effectiveness of various teaching methods. He designed the Cone 
of Experience (1954, p. 43), which visually depicts the narrowing effectiveness of 
learning experiences such as direct purposeful experiences; contrived experiences; 
dramatized experiences; demonstrations; study trips; exhibits; educational television; 
motion pictures; recordings, radio, or still pictures; visual symbols; and finally verbal 
symbols. Dale maintains that the learning experiences at the higher part of the cone — 
verbal and visual symbols — are least effective and only with the most abstract concepts. 
Similar research, conducted in the early 1960s at the National Training Laboratories in 
Bethel, Maine, produced The Learning Pyramid (see Figure 1), which summarizes the 
retention rates for various learning methods. Although the source and original data 



International Students and Libraries 



45 



PacifiCorp CSS Train the Trainer 



PEOPLE GENERALLY REMEMBER 



An important learning principle, supported by extensive research, is that people learn 
best when they are actively involved in the learning process. The “lower down the 
cone” you go, the more you learn and retain. 



1 0% of what they READ 



20% of what they HEAR 



30% of what they SEE 



50% of what they 
HEAR AND SEE 



70% of what they 
SAY or WRITE 



90% of what 

they SAY AS THEY . vi— , * 

DO AN ACTIVITY / Do the real 



Adapted from Audio-Visual Methods in Teaching, Edgar Dale Dryden Press, N. Y. 1954. p. 43. 



Read 



Hear a lecture 



'Look at exhibits, mock-ups 

^ Watch live demonstrations, videos 
or movies, go on a site visit 

Complete worksheets, manuals, 
discussion guides 



Simulate a real experience 
' '' coaching) 

thing 



Figure 1. The Learning Pyramid: Retention rates of information learned by 
various passive and active learning methods. Note: From The Learning Pyramid, NTL 
Institute for Applied Behavioral Science, n.d. Reprinted with permission. 



International Students and Libraries 46 
cannot be verified 1 , The Learning Pyramid is still widely cited (Ricigliano, 2001 ; Sousa, 

2001) and used. Compared to 10% retention of reading and 20% of hearing. The 
Learning Pyramid (see Figure 1) illustrates that 70% of what is learned when engaged in 
group discussion and 90% of what is practiced with coaching is retained (NTL Institute 
for Applied Behavioral Science [NTL], n.d.). 

'in an attempt to find the original research and information about The Learning 
Pyramid, I contacted the NTL Institute via e-mail. This was their response: 

Thanks for your inquiry about The Learning Pyramid. Yes, it was developed and 
used by NTL Institute at our Bethel, Maine campus in the early sixties when we were still 
part of the National Education Association’s Adult Education Division. Yes, we believe it 
to be accurate - but no, we do not any longer have - nor can we find - the original 
research that supports the numbers. We get many inquiries every month about this — and 
many, many people have searched for the original research and have come up empty 
handed. We know that in 1954 a similar pyramid with slightly different numbers 
appeared on p. 43 of a book called Audio-Visual Methods in Teaching, published by the 
Edgar Dale Dryden Press in New York. Yet the Learning Pyramid as such seems to have 
been modified and always has been attributed to NTL Institute. [They enclosed a copy of 
The Learning Pyramid, with permission to reproduce it in this thesis.] 




56 



International Students and Libraries 



47 



4 



American educators maintain that an important component of learning should be 
active participation. Best known for his groundbreaking work in experiential learning, 
David Kolb (1984) defines experiential learning as a multilinear process in which the 
transaction of the internal with the external, and the transaction of personal knowledge 
with social knowledge, result in cognitive development (p. 132). Many educators before 
and after Kolb advocate active learning as a necessary and productive method of 
teaching, especially with adults (Erickson & Strommer, 1991; Felder & Brent, 1996; 
Galbraith, 1990; Gresham, 2001; Kloss, 1994; Masek, 2000; Shoffner, Jones, & Harmon, 
2000; Vella, 2000; Wamken & Young, 1991). McKeachie (1994) argues for a shift in 
teaching strategies from lecture and recitation to coaching and helping learners find 
solutions to problems, from whole-class to small-group instruction, from competition to 
cooperation and collaboration, and from passive to more engaged learning. Interactive 
learning affords the opportunity to voice opinions, to give and receive constructive 
feedback, and to learn to support one’s own opinions. Active participation is equally 
viable in bibliographic instruction, according to Kirk (1999), who views the increased use 
of active learning in library instruction as the most important educational change in 25 
years of library bibliographic instruction. 

Despite educators’ recommendations about the use of active learning, empirical 
and anecdotal evidence indicates that college learners tend to view education from a 
consumer’s viewpoint in which they dislike active participation and expect the teacher to 
take charge of the learning (Beishline & Holmes, 1997; Boumer, Hughes, & Boumer, 
2001). When professor Benevenuto (1999) attempted to initiate active learning methods 
and required participation in his American college class, undergraduates demanded that 



O 

ERIC 



57 



International Students and Libraries 



48 



he “get to the [expletive] board!” to write out his lecture notes so that they could copy the 
material he “was paid” to impart 5). In spite of this, Benevenuto insists that although 
they do not want to interact or participate, learners need to interact and participate. This 
sentiment is repeated throughout the literature (Beets & Lobingier, 2001; Reid, Vicioso, 
Gedeon, Takacs, & Korotkikh, 1998). Thomas and Harrell (1994) generally agree but 
caution that teachers must carefully weigh the potential benefits against the amount of 
emotional risk to the international student learner. 

Some modem instructors rush to technology as the remedy to experiential and 
active learning. Nevertheless, technology itself is not the sole answer and faculty must 
“go beyond the mouse click” (Roth, 1999, 9-10) to employ more methods by which to 
engage students in learning. McKenzie’s (2000) criticism of the use of PowerPoint™ 
presentations alleges they have often become the visual version of a boring lecture. Some 
librarians (Tricarico, Tholl, & O’Malley, 2001) support the use of online tutorials for 
certain elements of information literacy instruction because the self-paced, self-regulated 
learning coincides with the nonlinear approach that many not-quite adults employ. An 
analysis of online information literacy tutorials led Dewald (1999) to conclude that 
although they were effective, web tutorials should not be used in isolation because 
learners need human interaction. Dupuis (2001) agrees, insisting that online tutorials, 
even her institution’s — TILT — arguably the most well-known and widely used library 
tutorial, must supplement and not replace live instruction. 

Librarians face hindrances in attempts to use active learning techniques in 
information literacy instruction. The most formidable problem is the difficulty of 
incorporating active learning into a 50-minute, one-shot opportunity to impart all the 




58 



International Students and Libraries 



49 






information and skills students will need. Additionally, without prior rapport with the 
class, librarians may find students reluctant to participate in discussions led by the 
librarian or cooperate in small-group exercises (Lorenzen, 2001). 

Learning Style Preferences 

In a model reminiscent of Perry’s (1998) stages of cognitive development, David 
Kolb (1984) introduced his Learning Style Inventory to assess individual orientations 
toward learning, based on concrete experience, reflective observation, abstract 
conceptualization, and active experimentation. Kolb’s inventory and discussions of 
experiential learning concentrate on the way that individuals learn best, and he speculates 
on the crucial role of experience in learning. Howard Gardner’s (1993, 1999) 
revolutionary model of multiple intelligences created a new perspective on the variety of 
ways in which learners learn and the need for teaching styles to address that variety. He 
observes that in adults, multiple intelligences are less visible than in children, and they 
become more internalized and often translate into learning styles (1999, p. 107). 

DiMartino and Zoe (2000) and Joy Reid (1998, p. xii) consider accommodation of 
learning style preferences paramount in teaching both non-native and native English 
speakers alike. Reid’s Perceptual Learning Style Preference Survey (PLSP) (1998, 
Appendix 3) and other similar instruments were administered to secondary and tertiary 
students of most ethnic groups around the world. Some individual survey samples were 
small — between 100 and 200 participants in a single setting — but the total number of 
countries examined lends credence to the findings. Combined results indicate that most 
groups’ primary learning style preferences were auditory, visual, and kinesthetic. Of the 
learning style options offered in the PLSP (auditory, visual, kinesthetic, tactile, group. 



EKIC 



59 



International Students and Libraries 



50 



and individual), only the Arabic and Malay culture groups chose group learning as a 
preferred style, both groups listing it as a secondary preference. Group learning was the 
only learning style designated as a negative choice by any of the cultures. In fact, only 
Arabic and Malay respondents did not indicate a negative attitude toward group learning, 
and they did not register negative feelings toward any of the learning styles. These 
statistics showcase a dilemma acknowledged by other researchers and authors; that 
although group, cooperative, or collaborative learning is the method most often identified 
as contributing to the best learning, it is the style least preferred the by both teachers and 
students (Boumer et al., 2001; Felder & Brent, 1996; Hansen & Stephens, 2000). 
DiMartino and Zoe (2000) advise that it is important to take learning styles into account 
in library instruction, but they warn against falling into the trap of making generalizations 
about specific cultures or creating stereotypes. 

Beishline and Holmes’ (1997) study compared self-reported teaching style 
preferences in two university settings. The results showed no significant differences 
between undergraduates and graduates in their preferences. The most preferred teaching 
styles were (a) lecture with volunteer individual participation, and (b) lecture with group 
discussion. Least preferred were (a) lecture only with no interaction, and (b) student 
presentations. Respondents expressed the belief that fellow students were not qualified to 
teach, and even the graduate students maintained they wanted to learn from an expert and 
desired learning to be teacher-led. Students also did not want to be required to participate, 
even in class discussions, despite the fact that group discussions were one of their 
preferred styles of learning. 



V 



International Students and Libraries 5 1 

Studies present an interesting conflict between the fact that many university 

students prefer to learn by auditory and visual methods (Beishline & Holmes, 1997; Reid 
et al., 1998), even though research proves they retain less through these types of 
presentations (Dale, 1954; NTL, n.d.). Many writers are careful to point out that the 
lecture is not an inferior way to teach as long as it engages the learner, and Astin (1993) 
insists that delivery, not method or technique, is the most important factor in reaching the 
student. For example, an enthusiastic and well-constructed lecture may be far more 
engaging to learners than a disorganized group assignment in which the instructor is 
removed from participation or contribution. Supplementing verbal information with 
visual information and guided experience is necessary with those who employ right-brain 
learning styles. In discussing the importance of addressing right-brain learners, Gedeon 
(2000) and Sousa (2001) recommend the use of metaphors and mind maps as especially 
effective with those who have only basic knowledge of a subject or skill. G. Freeman 
(2001) touts the use of graphic organizers, but McKay’s (1999) empirical research on 
their use suggests that the method produced immediate achievement in students but 
seldom resulted in a transfer of skills to new situations, even in those with visual and 
nonlinear learning styles. McKay observes that using a combination of both visual and 
text is most effective in both immediate achievement and future use. 

Beets and Lobingier’s (2001); Germain, Jacobson, and Kaczor (2000); and 
Sankaran, Sankaran, and Bui (2000) each conducted empirical studies comparing 
teaching formats and student achievement. Techniques examined included chalkboard 
lecture, lecture with overhead transparencies, computer-assisted teacher presentations, 
hands-on experiences, and web tutorials. All researchers determined that the method of 




61 



International Students and Libraries 



52 



teaching did not affect academic performance in the course, but the relationship between 
the teaching style and the learning style preference of the individual student did influence 
performance. Results also indicated that student attitudes were better if the course format 
matched their own learning style. Corroborating previous findings, Lucy Holman’s 
(2000) experiment noted that academic performance showed little statistical variation 
between freshmen groups receiving live classroom library information literacy instruction 
and those receiving the instruction online. Post-test surveys, however, indicated that 
attitudes toward learning and self-confidence in projected use of the skills learned were 
more positive for those in the live presentation group. Holman suggests that one possible 
reason for this is that many college freshmen feel more familiar with and comfortable in a 
classroom setting and with the traditional teacher-generated style of learning. 

Stephens (1994) emphasizes the importance of matching methods and purpose; 
exposition, direction, discovery, and a variety of other methods must take into account 
learner differences as well as the characteristics of the information to be learned. 
Bemoaning the fact that in comparison to other sources of information and learning such 
as television, magazines, and the Internet, school is nonengaging, Sousa (2001) highlights 
the importance of relevance with a connection to past experience and of teaching and 
assessing for the whole brain, an idea endorsed by Howard Gardner (1993, 1999) and 
Masek (2000). Onwuegbuzie, Bailey, and Daley (2000) caution instructors about the 
relationship between the learning style of the student and that of the teacher. Their 
investigation disclosed that when the learning style of the teacher and student matched, 
student achievement scores were higher than for those in which the student’s learning 





ff 



International Students and Libraries 53 
style did not coincide with the instructor’s. The authors warn educators to carefully target 

all students, including those with learning styles that differ from their own. 

Metacognition 

In their discussion of learning style preferences, Reid et al. (1998) clarify that 
although students seem unwilling to participate in group learning, they are not unable to 
learn through these situations. Others support this contention of the importance of gaining 
experience and expertise in learning styles other than the one preferred (Mack & Delicio, 
2000; McClanaghan, 2000; Smith & Pourchot, 1998). Since studies on academic 
achievement indicate that the most important correlate is the fit between teaching style 
and the learning style preference of the student (Beets & Lobingier, 2001 ; Germain et al., 
2000; Holman, 2000; Onwuegbuzie et al., 2000; Sankaran et al., 2000), it is obvious that 
the broader the learning-style repertoire of a student, the greater the likelihood of a 
successful college academic experience. 

Roth (1999) underscores the significance of metacognition in educating learners 
to become both more effective learners in the present and more autonomous learners in 
the future. Because the explosion of information has made it impossible for students to 
ever completely master a subject during college, she urges institutions to concentrate on 
metacognition, “the lifelong skill of learning how to learn” 12). Librarians must teach 
critical thinking and metacognition as part of information literacy instruction rather than 
as individual skills, in order to encourage the transfer of skills from one discipline to 
another (Herro, 2000; Smith & Pourchot, 1998). Gardner (1999), too, says that 
metacognition is an important skill but one that should not be taught in isolation from a 
given discipline (p. 107). McClanaghan (2000) coaches faculty to validate all learning 




63 



International Students and Libraries 54 
styles and help learners identify which style fits them best, but then facilitate the 
development of an ability to go beyond their preference and use other learning styles, 
since their preferred style will not always match teaching styles. However, it is vital for 
instructors to consciously exercise a variety of styles to accommodate as many learners as 
possible so that students are at times addressed in their preferred style. 

Using Active Participation and Group Learning With International Students 

Although Americans embrace experiential learning, the appeal is not duplicated in 
other cultures throughout the world (Althen, 1994; Kathman & Kathman, 1998). Their 
experiences with Japanese students, for example, disclosed negative responses to group 
work. The students rejected the concept of “assertive verbalization,” (p. 189), disagreed 
with the concept of the teacher as a facilitator, and denied that hearing from others in 
class is as important as teacher-directed learning. McClure’s (2001) work with 
postgraduate Chinese students studying in Singapore exposed similar opinions. 

McClure’s narrative discusses her attempts over several semesters to introduce group 
work and familiarize students with successful active learning experiences. Kinsella 
(1996) relates her conversations with international students, who felt that hearing from 
other students “‘confuses us; it is better to listen to the teacher who knows’” (p. 30). A 
background of disappointing experiences in interacting with English speakers and lack of 
practice in discussion skills may make international students reticent to continue group 
learning. Consistent with research with native English speakers, Pinheiro’s (2001) 
international Ph.D. students, representing Africa, Asia, and Latin America, reported 
negative attitudes toward the “facilitator teacher” who initiates discussions but leaves 
students to discover meaning for themselves. All of the interviewees desired a professor 



* 



International Students and Libraries 55 
who directs and focuses student learning and shares experiences and expertise with 

students. 

International students may dislike group learning for a number of reasons. One is 
unfamiliarity. Students who have learned by the “passive receptacle” approach will 
probably not appreciate cooperative learning at first (Meyers & Jones, 1993, p. 162). 
Collaborative learning also presents philosophical or moral difficulties (Hansen & 
Stephens, 2000). They note that students typically dislike group learning because of 
learned helplessness, low tolerance for challenge, social loafing, political correctness, 
anxiety over their peers’ evaluations that impede honest discussion, and a fixation on 
learning as a product rather than a process. Hansen and Stephens stress that these 
attitudes must change in order for cooperative learning to become an effective teaching 
method. Alison King (1993) elaborates on the need for giving individuals in a group the 
incentive to help each other learn and the need for encouraging interdependence. Often, 
successful group work experience itself results in an attitude shift. A librarian 
lecture/demonstration followed by individual completion of a worksheet was compared to 
small-group completion of the worksheet without any librarian participation other than a 
brief introduction of the assignment (Prorak, Gottschalk, & Pollastro, 1994). The pretest 
measured confidence in performing library searching and asked students their preferred 
method of instruction. Responses indicated 50% preferred lecture; 37% preferred 
working in small groups; and 14% preferred independent work. These results confirm 
other survey conclusions that teacher-driven instruction is generally preferred. Posttest 
scores on the skills test and ratings of confidence level increased for both groups, with no 
apparent relationship to the format of the instruction, to the reported preferred method of 




65 



International Students and Libraries 



56 






instruction, to the preinstruction confidence level, or to gender. However, responses on 
the posttest showed attitudes about the effectiveness of the teaching method were 
generally higher for the small-group method even though pretests revealed it was not 
preferred, supporting the theory that positive experiences with group learning will 
heighten positive attitudes about cooperative learning. 

Sullivan (1996), who taught English in a Vietnamese university, theorizes that the 
definition of group work is perhaps different in non-American cultures, influencing 
international students’ attitudes toward American-defined group work. In Vietnam, 
classes progress together throughout their education, often studying together outside of 
the classroom. These individuals, acting as a whole, become a lifetime social network. 
Sullivan observes that silent, passive listening, so often described by writers as the 
standard method of learning in Asia, was not her experience. She describes how her 
individual students gained support from the whole class by speaking as one — interrupting 
each other and branching off from others’ statements. A Vietnamese student reported that 
when he came to the United States to study, he did not like group work since it separated 
him from the rest of the class, his support, and working in a small group made him feel 
isolated from the whole (p. 34). 

Mori’s (2000) work on academic stress among international students indicates 
that the stress created by constant intense concentration on reading and listening in order 
to comprehend English could be alleviated through group work in which the 
responsibility is not individual. Reiterating that advantage for all students, Dolores 
Fidishun (2000) states that group learning allows students to experiment without being 
solely responsible in assessment. Although the benefits of cooperative learning are well 




66 



V 



International Students and Libraries 57 
documented, not all students gain the same benefits from cooperative learning (Oxford, 

1997). Those international students who deal well with uncertainty are more suited to 
cooperative learning, and gifted students who prefer individualistic learning may be more 
discouraged than challenged through group learning. Promoting positive interdependence 
by assigning roles to members, by identifying a clear group goal to which each must 
contribute, and by defining group accountability as part of the grading or assessment will 
make group learning less stressful for international students, Oxford advises. 

Sometimes cooperative formats interfere with learning for international students 
who may not want to admit the deficiencies of others in the group or do not want to 
achieve ahead of their peers — so a group will rise only to the level of its weakest member 
(Lee, 1991). Confirming Reid et al.’s (1998) findings that international students often 
resist group learning, DiMartino and Zoe (2000) conjecture that sometimes the resistance 
may be more related to social rules about behavior and relationships than to learning 
styles. For example, in some cultures, the presence of an older male in the group 
necessitates that he be the default leader whose opinions are accepted even if wrong or if 
he is the least knowledgeable in the group. Kinsella and Sherak (1998) echo these 
observations and suggest not overusing group work with international students and 
making sure the group tasks are designed well. The chapters in Reid’s edited book (1998) 
detail many useful recommendations for the design and use of group work with non- 
native speakers of English. Learning styles are not innate nor are they unalterable, but 
they are ingrained. All learners are capable of using all learning styles, but some students 
are less willing to participate in certain experiences without the assistance of the teacher. 
Students tend to want to remain with what has worked for them in the past, so teachers 




67 



International Students and Libraries 58 
must help international students risk incorporating new learning styles to become more 

flexible learners (Kinsella, 1996; Kinsella & Sherak, 1998). 

Incorporating principles of adult learning such as the need for self-direction and 
relevance to experience can assist the instruction librarian in planning sessions that will 
speak to these needs of international students as adults. College international students are 
often not-quite adults, impacted by technology and a consumer’s viewpoint; librarians 
should acknowledge these variables and attempt to use technology wisely and highlight 
benefits of becoming information literate. The American- valued use of experiential and 
cooperative learning experiences and learning style preferences in relationship to 
teaching styles should also influence the librarian’s design of information literacy 
instruction for international students. 




68 



V 



CHAPTER 5 

TEACHING INFORMATION LITERACY TO INTERNATIONAL STUDENTS 

Because of the existence of library and computer anxiety, as well as faculty 
assumptions about student research abilities, for decades librarians have offered 
bibliographic instruction sessions to enable students to efficiently use the library’s 
resources. These sessions often included general orientations to the physical facilities, the 
details of using available resources, and an explanation of services offered. Spurred on by 
advances in technology, information literacy has become a recent focus in user education 
to supplement locating skills with evaluation skills (ACRL, 2001). Wan et al. (1992) 
claim many international students, finding the new educational environment of an 
American university too overwhelming, “wrap themselves up in their academic 
struggles” (p. 620). Their stress is then compounded by the self-created isolation from the 
campus community, which could offer support. The authors recommend that since 
institutions cannot eliminate the stressors of language difficulties and differences in 
education systems, the key is to reach out to international students, teaching them ways to 
cope with their stress. A coordinated program of orientation to the library, teaching 
research skills, and instruction in critical thinking can assist international students to 
reduce academic stress and increase the likelihood of success in American education. 




69 



International Students and Libraries 



60 



Communicating With International Students 

Communicating effectively with international students, especially those whose 
English language skills are limited, is of paramount importance in the teaching 
interactions that librarians experience. Stephanie Zimmermann’s (1995) analysis of 
communication experiences on an American university campus indicates that interaction 
with Americans is the greatest variable in international students’ adjustment to American 
culture. Just as positive contact with American students diminishes social stress and 
increases general social adjustment for international students, relaxed contact with library 
staff contributes to lowered library anxiety and enhances the ability to acquire skills for 
effectively using the American university library (Kline & Rod, 1984; Mosley, 1997). 

Educators must not discount the role of nonverbal behavior in communicating 
with international students. Areas of potential problems include body movements, facial 
expressions, gestures, concepts of personal space, and eye movement (Fieg & Yaffee, 
1977; Kathman & Kathman, 1998; Morain, 1987). In some societies, eye contact between 
student and teacher is inappropriate; nodding the head may imply agreement or it may 
mean the opposite. Even specially trained cultural experts cannot master all the variant 
connotations of nonverbal communication among cultures. The instruction librarian, 
however, should be aware of the intertwined difficulties inherent in cultural differences — 
of international students failing to understand instructors and instructors failing to 
understand international students. 

Clear verbal exchange is equally crucial in teaching second-language students. 
Meyer (2000) advises instructors to lower four barriers in order to make instruction 
meaningful: cognitive load, culture load, language load, and learning load. She urges not 



International Students and Libraries 61 
to overload the number of concepts, especially new ones, taught in one session. Teachers 

must also be careful of cultural differences, both in actual meanings of words and in 
expectations of how and when “talk” happens. The language load should not be weighed 
down with technical, academic vocabulary in either written texts or teacher talk, and the 
learning load must also be carefully balanced. Some activities are difficult for 
international students because of the pace. For example, class discussions in English, in 
which American students speak in incomplete phrases and brainstorm ideas at a rapid 
speed, are often too intense for NNSE to compete with native speakers. 

Researchers offer similar advice for those teaching students whose native 
language is not English: (a) avoid complex sentence structures, (b) do not use slang or 
cultural allusions, (c) check often for comprehension, and (d) use repetition and 
synonyms and elaboration to enhance understanding. Many writers comment that using a 
louder voice or slowing down speech is not only humiliating for the listener, but also 
actually makes comprehension more difficult (Greenfield et al., 1986; Natowitz, 1995; 
Rosenthal, 2000). Macdonald and Sarkodie-Mensah (1988) counsel librarians to code 
switch (i.e., adjust language patterns and vocabulary to accommodate the needs of the 
listener), but not to the point where speech patterns or syntax deteriorate into an 
embarrassing version of baby talk. 

Most of the ideas for communication with L2 students span content borders and 
are appropriate applications for all age levels and subject matter, including information 
literacy instruction at the university level. Suggested issues to consider include: (a) use 
comprehensible input [use vocabulary appropriate to the level of the audience]; (b) 
augment speech with gestures and graphics; (c) provide a scaffold for individual skills 




71 



k 



International Students and Libraries 



62 



and concepts; (d) limit the number of new concepts introduced at one time; (e) avoid 
jargon and use a clear, slow, but normal speech pattern; (f) make frequent comprehension 
checks; and (g) paraphrase and elaborate to enhance understanding. These general 
teaching techniques will assist the instruction librarian as well as the classroom faculty 
(Y. Freeman & Freeman, 1998; Greenfield, 1989; F. Jacobson, 1988; Kamhi-Stein & 
Stein, 1999; M. Liu, 1995). 

Although international students may be part of the English As a Second Language 
program to improve their English use, the same students may be well versed and 
competent in their subject disciplines, and Rosenthal (2000) reminds faculty not to view 
ESL programs as remedial coursework. Librarians as well as classroom teachers can 
facilitate improvement of English language skills by using visual accompaniments, by 
writing down important points or tasks, and by allowing extra time for responses. 
International students’ reading skills may be of higher quality than their speaking and 
listening skills (Preston, 1992), and Fu (1995), a former international student from China, 
observes, “As a non-native English speaker, I need more time than others to phrase my 
thoughts before I speak; as a result, often the topic changes before I get a turn [to speak]” 
(p. 198). F. Jacobson (1988), M. Liu (1995), and Preston (1992) each encourage 
rephrasing and elaborating concepts, not simply repeating phrases that were not initially 
understood. Graves (2001), on the other hand, maintains that the speaker should repeat 
sentences in exactly the same way as initially spoken. She explains that the listener, who 
on first hearing failed to comprehend several words of the sentence, is now listening 
carefully for those same words when the speaker repeats the sentence. If the speaker 
instead uses completely different words in an attempt to clarify meaning, the listener is 




72 



International Students and Libraries 63 
further confused by failing to hear the problem words for which s/he was attending. 

Although Jiao and Onwuegbuzie (1999) propose using humor in presentations, M. Liu 
(1995) and Macdonald and Sarkodie-Mensah (1988) warn that humor is not usually 
successful with NNSE since it often employs slang, plays on words, or cultural allusions 
that are beyond the grasp of most international students. 

Interaction with former NNSE students about effective and ineffective teaching 
practices revealed that individual help, games, use of visuals, and hands-on experience 
were appreciated (G. Thompson, 2000). Most important was the ability of the teacher to 
create a welcoming environment, to be patient, and to build confidence in the students. 
Many educators and librarians articulate this need for making international students feel 
comfortable and secure. Moeckel and Presnell (1995) maintain instructors need to convey 
to international students that learning by making mistakes is an acceptable American 
value. International students interviewed at Biola University in La Mirada, California by 
Emigh (1991) reported what helped them the most in their adjustment to the academic 
community was faculty spending time with them on an individual basis, so that they felt 
cared for. 

Communication problems are culturally compounded, sometimes by gender, 
sometimes by social status, but perception of approachableness is paramount (Wayman, 
1984). “A leader in the international community explained that some [intematipnal] 
students will steal books or even catalog cards to avoid approaching staff they consider 
unfriendly” (p. 340). Also discussing the role of affectivity. Hall (1991) urges librarians 
not to waste time trying to develop just the right approach to working with people of 
color. Instead he endorses the importance of connecting with students on a personal 




73 



International Students and Libraries 64 
level — “relationship is the key to effective pedagogy” (p. 324). This is repeated by 
DiMartino and Zoe (2000) who perceive that with the increase of students accessing 
online library databases from locations outside the library, librarians are less able to 
personally help researchers when they aren’t physically present. The irony, DiMartino 
and Zoe observe, is that personal interaction, which benefits non-native students most, is 
the very element eliminated when remote searching occurs. 

Effective communication with international students can be improved if the 
faculty and library staff receive training in intercultural communication and cross-cultural 
understanding (Brown, 2000; DiMartino & Zoe, 2000; Greenfield, 1989; Greenfield et 
al., 1986; M. Liu, 1995; Natowitz, 1995). Greenfield et al. (1986) describe the workshop 
they developed to train their library staff. One portion is an explanation of the interlibrary 
loan procedure, delivered in a language not spoken by any of the staff, to more clearly 
highlight the emotions of international students attempting to learn about the library. 
Riedinger (1989) underlines the idea that there must be a double orientation — training 
library staff to be sensitive to international students and training international students to 
be sensitive to American ways. Success is a function of both the host institutions and the 
international students cooperating, Ogbu (1991) insists, and both guest and host can 
achieve accommodation of the other without demanding assimilation of the international 
student into the American culture. 

Understanding how cultural values affect communication between individuals and 
how instructors can facilitate better comprehension are two of the most important aspects 
of teaching international students, secondary only, perhaps, to the creation of an 
atmosphere of trust and security. Moorhead (1986) describes the program built at 




74 



International Students and Libraries 



65 



Roosevelt University’s library for international students, “Essentially we were out to 
build two foundations, one based on useful information and the other based on trust” 

(p. 586). 

Introductions and Orientations to the Library 
Educators and librarians alike recommend offering a separate introduction session 
or program for international students with more printed material, less complicated and 
slower-paced speech, and a deliberate acknowledgement of special challenges that might 
be encountered by international students (Bilal, 1990; Cope & Black, 1985; DiMartino & 
Zoe, 2000; Hoffman & Popa, 1986; Z. Liu, 1993; Moeckel & Presnell, 1995; Peck, 1992; 
Preston, 1992; Wayman, 1984). On the other hand. Jiao and Onwuegbuzie (1999) 
maintain that these special sessions do not alleviate anxiety for international students, and 
although they agree that an orientation is important, Kumar and Suresh (2000) argue that 
isolating international students into a separate program implies that all international 
students are alike in their individual needs concerning the library. The authors feel that it 
is better to integrate their orientation into introductions for American students. Mark and 
Jacobson (1995) disagree, explaining that some conventions commonly known to 
Americans may be unfamiliar to international students. For example, that a shelf tag C-G 
means call numbers beginning with the letters C, D, E, F, and G will be located in that 
aisle may be a concept unknown to some international students. The Last name, First 
name organization of catalogs and encyclopedia entries can be a constant confusion for 
some international students — -just as it can be for an American librarian, trying to 
decipher which of three elements of a Korean name is the one by which the student is 
referred. 




75 



International Students and Libraries 



66 



Frances Jacobson (1988), Ziming Liu (1993), and Bonnie Preston (1992) argue 
that international students need a physical library tour early in their program, using native 
language speakers if possible, to avert initial anxiety. Others believe that these library 
tours tend to be introduced at the most distracted and anxious time — at the beginning of 
the semester when it is even harder for NNSE to listen attentively and understand (A. 
Downing & Klein, 2001). The authors advocate instead orientations at the point of need, 
when the first assignment requiring library use is introduced. Baruch College, which has 
the highest population of international students in the United States, offers a text and 
audio multilingual web tour of the library. A. Downing and Klein make it clear that 
although this enhances the usefulness of instruction by offering initial, basic instruction 
in the students’ native languages at a pace each student can control, it does not and 
should not replace face-to-face interaction with librarians. 

Kumar and Suresh (2000), Z. Liu (1993), and Ruelle (2001) assert that 
international students need printed materials along with a physical orientation and verbal 
description. It is also important to provide sufficient written material during instruction 
lectures or demonstrations so the international students do not have to concentrate on 
note-taking while simultaneously trying to comprehend oral input (Moeckel & Presnell, 
1995). Handouts provide the security that if they do not understand the librarian’s words, 
students have a printed document that can be studied privately. Rutgers University 
Libraries (1998) and S. Thompson (1997) offer examples of lessons and vocabulary lists 
specifically tailored for international students, which detail general reference use, 
classification systems, call numbers, and use of the catalog. 




76 



International Students and Libraries 



67 



Although written material and verbal instruction are both useful, active learning is 
equally important (Fidishun, 2000; Z. Liu, 1993). Emphasizing that including practice at 
the point of instruction is particularly important for international students, Moeckel and 
Presnell’s (1995) five-part model includes an instructional program for international 
students in which a hands-on tour is included. Cope and Black (1985) advocate that at 
least half of all introduction sessions should be active, presenting opportunities to apply 
information and diminishing the stress of trying to mentally absorb too much verbal 
information at one time. This was echoed by the freshmen in a First Year Seminar course 
who found the physical tours of the library too confusing and too intimidating (V amer, 
Schwartz, & George, 1996). If this is true for native speakers of English, it is likely even 
more true for international students. The freshmen in the study reported mild indifference 
to library instruction although they thought it was valuable, but negative attitudes were 
reported if the instruction did not include hands-on experience. In a similar case study, 
Dabbour (1997) found that 91% of the freshmen responded positively to the California 
State University at San Bernardino program. However, 89% of those surveyed indicated 
they would change the orientation to include more use of computers (p. 305) even though 
the orientation did include some active participation. It is apparent that active learning 
must be an integral component of any library instruction program. 

Librarians view consideration of the emotional dimension of an introduction to 
the library vital. In the tradition of Constance Mellon (1986, 1989; Mellon & Pagles, 
1987), K. Downing et al. (1993) exhort librarians to include the goal of feeling 
comfortable and positive about the library as a core purpose of any session. A focus 
group of undergraduate international students discussing their library expectations 



International Students and Libraries 



68 



emphasized they wanted the librarian to do their initial sifting for them, to tell them 
which were the best sources to use, and to select the best results for them. Introductions 
to services such as Reference must make it clear to international students that these 
decision-making tasks are not the librarian’s role, but are instead the individual student’s 
responsibility (Li, 1998). Hoffman and Popa (1986) describe the program at the 
University of California at Davis, which made use of small groups of international 
students paired with a specific librarian with whom to create a relationship. The authors 
emphasize the importance of generating a sense of belonging and assurance, as do Kumar 
and Suresh (2000). Bilal (1990) proposes the use of a buddy system in which American 
students are paired with individual international students to assist them in their library 
problems. Although the connection with librarians or American students is an essential 
feature in international students’ success in the library, there is also a danger. 

International students may view the Americans as “universal aunts” (Jordan, 1 997, p. 

213) who they assume will act as a buffer for all library problems and who will find 
needed material for them. This concept of faithfully returning to the person who has 
given previous help or with whom you feel comfortable is hardly restricted to 
international students, but in many cultures it is more than a desire for familiarity. Some 
societies are built around the concept of exclusively dealing with one contact, with the 
mutual expectation and obligation of repeat-customer loyalty and receiving special favors 
and treatment. It is important that librarians exhibit a welcoming attitude and a helpful 
spirit but not let the relationship deteriorate into a situation where the international 
student is dependent on one person for library instruction. The goal of all assistance must 
be eventual independence. 




73 



International Students and Libraries 



69 



Research Skills 

Most librarians agree on the concepts they feel are necessary for students to 
master in order to be information literate: the ability to (a) effectively plan research, (b) to 
efficiently gather information, (c) to critically evaluate information and sources, (d) to 
properly use information, and (e) to ethically acknowledge sources (ACRL, 2001). 
Opinions and ideas abound regarding how those goals should be accomplished and what 
form hands-on experience and active learning might take in the process. Nearly all 
authors, Conger (2001); Cudiner and Harmon (2000); Dewald (1999); Drueke (1992); 
Felder and Brent (1996); Fidishun (2000); Grealy (1998); Holman (2000); and Kamhi- 
Stein (1996) among them, advise the use of combining librarian explanation or 
demonstration with opportunities for students to practice concepts either as individuals, in 
pairs, or in small groups. DiMartino and Zoe (2000) feel that 20% of information literacy 
instruction with NNSE should be description or demonstration, and 80% should be 
hands-on experience. “Library Jeopardy”, “Good Site vs Bad Site”, crossword puzzles, 
and a game in which clues are given to help find an article citation, are activities 
Bicknell-Holmes and Hoffman (2000) include in their review of the use of discovery 
learning in information literacy instruction. Other examples of group learning projects 
that deal with database construction and headings and the comparison of scholarly and 
popular periodicals are offered by Mark and Jacobson (1995). Gradowski, Snavely, and 
Dempsey’s (1998) and Iannuzzi, Mangrum, and Strichart’s (1999) books incorporate 
ideas for lessons and offer actual handouts, forms, diskettes, and teaching aids. Since the 
purpose is to allow active participation, and each of the ideas and lessons includes only a 
small, contained research skill, they would be ideal for use with international students. 




79 



International Students and Libraries 



70 



Even demonstrations are passive and receptive, according to Conger (2001). 

Active learning, she says, allows analysis instead of receipt of information. Rather than 
explaining what Boolean operators are and then demonstrating a search using them, she 
advocates conducting two searches, one of which employs Boolean operators, and then 
asking the class why results were different. Conger’s article describes a program of 
teaching online resource strategies without any hands-on computer use by the students. 
She uses creative brainstorming in small groups and class discussions so that the class 
discovers the same information the librarian could have passively taught: which sources 
to use for research, which are best for which purpose, and how to best construct a search 
strategy. Conger insists, “The learning takes place not because the student is sitting in 
front of a computer, but because she is intellectually engaged with the problem before 
her. The computers are not necessary; the engagement is” (p. 313). Anticipating 
arguments that international students do not welcome small group work and are not 
comfortable with creating their own learning. Conger claims she has used the method 
with international students, including entire ESL classes, and has found it successful. 

Active learning is important, but Cooper, Robinson, and McKinney (1994) 
remind instructors to structure the activities so that students must “learn something, not 
just do something” (p. 83). Gresham’s (2001) experience in a new electronic library 
classroom proved that technology can offer learning experiences through concrete 
examples. However, she warns librarians not to abandon concept-based instruction and to 
continue a commitment to teaching that promotes lifelong information literacy. Gresham 
suggests that instruction should allow learners to experience multiple cycles of Kolb’s 
(1984) design of concrete experience, reflective observation, abstract conceptualization. 



International Students and Libraries 



71 



and active experimentation, emphasizing, along with Christison (1999b), that reflection is 
equally as important as experimentation. The content of instruction is more important 
than the technique (Shoffher et al., 2000). Cohen (2001) encourages librarians not to 
teach tools since they change so often. Information literacy instruction, he maintains, 
must focus on the principles of searching, not on the features of a particular database. 
Blandy and Libutti (1995) concur, pointing out “automated systems with a three- to five- 
year shelf life result in presentations and skills with a three- to five-year shelf life” 

(p. 281). Tool-based learning, they contend, is not conducive to lifelong learning. In a 
comparison of a tool-oriented demonstration with a process-oriented lesson that focused 
on cognitive strategies, data indicated that those involved in the process-orientated 
session garnered better skill-test scores, reported lower levels of library anxiety, and 
exhibited more positive attitudes toward the library. Additionally, the classroom faculty 
who analyzed the resulting research papers and bibliographies considered them more 
focused and more interesting than those from the tool-based instruction group (Zahner, 
1993). 

Seiden, Szymborski, and Norelli (1997) examined undergraduates and discovered 
that most have a poor understanding of the digital information environment. The authors 
found that students often chose to search in a database because a faculty member or a 
friend told them about that database — even if it was inappropriate for their topic, and they 
typically considered the World Wide Web to be equally reliable as other subscription 
databases. Seiden et al. observed almost no use of controlled-subject searching, of either 
printed or online thesauri, and of the subject tracings to lead searchers to other sources on 
the same subject. Students seldom tried synonyms if their initial search word did not 




81 



International Students and Libraries 



72 



produce adequate results, and they often attempted to use protocols from one database 
that did not function the same way in another database. Since most undergraduates do not 
have in-depth experience with their subject, they most often evaluated articles by article 
title alone, ignoring abstracts and failing to use journal titles to determine if an article was 
appropriate for academic work. Gresham (2001) states that librarians must not simply 
transfer passive teaching techniques into the electronic environment, and technology 
must relate to the learning goals, not simply be a method of transmitting information 
(Meyers & Jones, 1993). Students want to do their research on the Internet because they 
perceive it is superior in speed, currency, and ease. Librarians must show students that 
online subscription databases offer those same qualities plus the advantage of quality 
(Kapoun, 1998). 

A study of library self-efficacy by Ren (2000) revealed that students need 
adequate searching practice so they can experience accomplishment and overcome 
feelings of frustration or of being overwhelmed by too many choices and results. People 
will continue activities that have yielded success but avoid those that have produced 
failure (Sousa, 2001), and M. Liu and Redfem’s (1997) investigation validated that 
statement. They concluded that the second greatest correlate to success in using the 
library was success itself, which in turn developed self-confidence and led to additional 
successes. Although the above studies were not conducted specifically with populations 
of international students, it is safe to assume that non-native speakers of English would 
exhibit similar behaviors and attitudes. 

Specifically discussing potential problems NNSE searchers might face, along with 
strategies for overcoming the problems, will increase the likelihood of successful 




82 



International Students and Libraries 



73 



independent experiences (DiMartino & Zoe, 2000; M. Liu, 1995; Z. Liu, 1993; Natowitz, 
1995). Mark and Jacobson (1995) recommend demonstrations that show some searches 
are ineffective, followed by strategies to use in avoiding and rectifying failed searches. 
Cahoon (1998) agrees, arguing librarians must focus on “error recovery” 27) and the 
transfer of skills learned to other disciplines and situations. Librarians need to share their 
expertise with students since students benefit from advice about how long to spend on a 
source before giving up or from an estimate of how much time and effort it will take to 
locate three to five useful sources on a topic (Blandy & Libutti, 1995). DiMartino and 
Zoe (2000) concur, explaining that purported user-friendly products often have hidden 
difficulties that the librarian is best suited to examine. The Keyword box in Lexis-Nexis 
Academic Universe™, for example, searches only the headline and lead paragraph, not 
the entire article text as most people assume, and knowing this peculiarity can prevent 
frustration that will occur in searching that database. Emphasizing the importance of 
using Help or Search Tip screens to determine how a database works will facilitate 
overcoming disenchantment about using databases rather than using Internet search 
engines. 

Some authors observe that difficulties with the English language can cause 
problems with database searching skills that are dependent on word choice and 
comprehension. L2 learners often struggle with mastering the concept of Boolean logic 
and vocabulary-based search strategies, foundational to online searching. Vocabulary is 
the biggest impediment to effective searching for international students, and synonym 
use, a necessity in keyword searching, is a difficult skill to master, especially for speakers 
with limited English vocabulary (DiMartino & Zoe, 2000). Macdonald and Sarkodie- 




83 



International Students and Libraries 74 
Mensah (1988) specifically encourage the use of analogies with ESL students in 

explaining certain library terminology and library concepts, such as associating 
controlled-subject construction with the phone book yellow pages. Librarian-guided 
exercises in subject-heading tracings or descriptor links in catalogs and databases can 
also clarify differences between keyword searching versus subject-heading searching 
(Kamhi-Stein, 1996). 

With the reminder that the “brain is a pattern-seeking device,” Christison (1999a, 
17) admonishes teachers to offer emotional hooks of need, novelty, and emotional 
meaning to aid students in understanding research strategies. Sousa (20001) claims it is 
urgent to teach the unique attributes of concepts so that learners can effectively retrieve 
information they learn since the brain seeks novelty (p. 27) and stores information in the 
memory by similarity, but retrieves it by difference. So that the pace can be slower to 
give extra time for comprehension, Greenfield (1989) alleges that what might be taught to 
American students in one lesson should be stretched to three sessions with international 
students. DiMartino and Zoe (2000) and Greenfield (1989) add that that it is useful to 
choose sample topics for search demonstrations that are relevant to international students 
and that show cross-cultural understanding. 

Critical Thinking 

In her 1991 article, Cerise Oberman compares the paralyzing dilemma faced by 
shoppers with too many choices of breakfast cereal with the equally paralyzing dilemma 
faced by students with too many choices of databases and search results. The outcome, 
she says, can be the same: the shopper or the student either gives up in the face of 
overload and withdraws from the situation or simply chooses the easiest or first thing 




84 



International Students and Libraries 



75 



available. Students need literacy skills — the ability to reflect on, select, and evaluate 
information — in order to overcome push-button, mindless information gathering, which 
can result from an overload of resources, quickly located on the Internet. Because the 
novice searcher “lacks the most important instrument for weeding through those 
matches — informed judgment” (p. 487), Kissane and Mollner believe that technology has 
made research more difficult. Writers throughout the literature highlight the importance 
of information literacy — abilities for evaluating information as well as locating it (ACRL, 
2001; Fister, 1992; Fullerton & Leckie, 2002; Herro, 2000; McDermott, 2000). 

Researchers need to learn to filter through the mountains of available sources, and 
librarians have the tools to teach those critical skills (Blandy & Libutti, 1995). One of the 
most important responsibilities of a librarian is to help students understand and make 
judgments about the appropriateness of information found (Kirk, 1999), and Brem and 
Boyes (2000) indicate that librarians must teach students to develop an “evaluative 
stance” 16). Davis and Cohen (2001) and Davis (2002) note the recent increase of 
Internet web site citations replacing citations from scholarly books and academic journals 
in bibliographies. They propose that most undergraduates are unable to distinguish 
between appropriate and inappropriate sources, and they challenge professors to be more 
prescriptive in their requirements for critical evaluation. Reinforcing this observation, 
librarian Kapoun (1998) calls for faculty and librarians alike to give instruction and 
experience in critical evaluation of web sites as well as printed materials. We should be 
looking at the learning tasks, not the teaching tasks, argues Vella (2000), complaining 
that the teacher spends too much effort in planning the teaching process without enough 
consideration given to the role of the student in learning. Developing critical thinking 




85 



International Students and Libraries 



76 



involves questioning, and the level of thinking in a classroom is influenced by the nature 
and quality of questions asked by the teacher (A. King, 1994; Vella, 2000). Cooper et al. 
(1994) illustrate encouragement of critical thinking through guided reciprocal peer 
questioning, jigsaws, structured controversy, think/pair/share, and other activities, all of 
which combine active participation and small group work with critical thinking exercises. 

Students from non-American educational systems may find the analysis of 
classroom assignments and the ability to evaluate results from databases especially 
difficult since this type of reflection may not be stressed or even valued in their home 
countries. Brown (2000), DiMartino and Zoe (2000), A. Downing and Klein (2001), 
Emigh (1991), T. Jacobson and Williams (2000), and Korean Constituents Think Tank 
(1990) all discuss the need for librarians and faculty to pay special attention to 
international students in this regard. However, this special consideration must not take the 
form of stereotyping individual students or culture groups (Kumar & Suresh, 2000). 

Since international students do not have the background of American education or 
American culture, librarians must recognize that evaluation skills include more than the 
simple choice of a scholarly journal over a popular magazine. When the titles People and 
TESOL Quarterly are equally unfamiliar, determining which periodical is appropriate for 
research takes on new difficulties. Showing that some databases identify peer-reviewed 
journals or give other useful source descriptions may enable international students to 
make more informed choices. Metacognition and critical thinking must be taught as 
generative skills so that students can create their own strategies from those already 
known and apply them in new situations (Taraban, Rynearson, & Kerr, 2000). Evaluation 
practice done in small-group settings can remove the stress of individual accountability, 




86 



International Students and Libraries 77 
as well as offer opportunities for observing others’ strategies for reflection. Even so, 

particular care must be taken when using small group exercises with international 
students so that group roles are clearly defined, and the task is structured to require 
interdependence and a group product (Reid et al., 1998; Thomas & Harrell, 1994). 

Collaboration With Faculty 

Although Perry (1998) talks about inserting risk-taking into the learning 
environment so that students can grow cognitively, and there is much written about group 
work and collaboration between students, there is much less written about the 
collaboration between faculty members. Much of the existing discussion about 
collaboration occurs within library literature, promoting the collaboration of librarian and 
classroom teacher and often an ESL specialist (Barclay & Barclay, 1994; Bell & 
Benedicto, 1998; Cudiner & Harmon, 2000; DiMartino & Zoe, 2000; Furlong & Roberts, 
1998; Hurren, 1993; F. Jacobson, 1988; Macdonald & Sarkodie-Mensah, 1988; Peck, 
1992; Preston, 1992; Riedinger, 1989; Russell, 2000; Varner et al., 1996). 

Fullerton and Leckie’s (2002) overview of the approaches to library instruction 
mentions that course-related demonstrations or lectures requested by individual faculty 
are the most commonly used method. Curriculum-integrated instruction, although widely 
advocated, is less common because of the high degree of coordination needed between 
the library and individual faculty members and even more so with the entire department 
or school and any university- wide curriculum committees. Dewald (1999) and Dupuis 
(2001), in their analysis of online tutorials, emphasize that even library tutorials need to 
be related to course study or assignments. Collaboration between the library, the 
classroom, and the ESL program is supported by Hurren (1993), Kahmi-Stein and Stein 




87 



International Students and Libraries 



78 



(1999), and Macdonald and Sarkodie-Mensah (1998) so that instruction will be relevant 
to actual classroom needs and will offer opportunity for authentic practice. The authors 
advocate “adjuncted lessons” in which the librarian, after a subject assignment has been 
given, teaches an information literacy lesson specifically targeted to the classroom 
assignment. The ESL professional follows up the classroom subject instruction and the 
information literacy instruction with sessions that concentrate on the writing skills needed 
for completing the assignment. 

At the request of faculty. Bell and Benedicto (1998) experimented with a 
discipline-specific research course that could be taken as an optional companion to the 
faculty-taught course in Business, Journalism, or Women’s Studies. About half of the 
students who chose to enroll in the librarian-taught research course were international 
students. Although only a small percentage of the total course enrollment chose to take 
the companion library course, those who did gave it high marks and thought it 
worthwhile. At Valparaiso University, Daugherty and Carter’s (1997) course for 
psychology students produced similar results. Librarian Dickstein and lecturer McBride 
(1998) collaborated using a class e-mail bulletin board system to discuss the research of 
their topics. Though the trial did not work as well as planned, one advantage of the 
format was that, although the librarian fell into the role of giving reference assistance on 
a personal level, all class members could read and benefit from the postings. In 
subsequent semesters, overwhelming class sizes made the collaboration take a different 
form as the librarian reverted to in-class demonstration/lectures. Individuals were 
required to list key sources they had discovered on the class electronic bulletin board, 
together with an analysis of the strengths and weaknesses of the sources. One positive 




88 



International Students and Libraries 



79 



outcome was that through the e-mail assistance of the librarian, attitudes toward the 
library improved. 

Collaboration between the library and the classroom is especially important with 
international students (Kamhi-Stein, 1996). She describes California State University at 
Los Angeles’ Project LEAP in which a content faculty member, an ESL teacher, and a 
reference librarian team teach a ten-week program of hands-on database searching, 
integrated into a multi-step writing assignment. The library instruction is both active and 
cooperative as small groups create search strategies and conduct the hands-on searches 
and evaluations together. The workshops have grown from a few experimental classes to 
use throughout the university in connection with 60 to 70 undergraduate courses. 
Responses from international students indicate that, from their point of view, the project 
has been successful. 

Teaching information literacy to international students is, in some regards, 
comparable to teaching it to American students. The importance of orientations to 
alleviate anxiety is not exclusive to international students, nor is the importance of hands- 
on active learning with database searching. Even more so, critical thinking instruction is 
imperative for all students, not just NNSE. In another sense, international students face 
some special challenges in regard to information literacy that perceptive librarians can 
address. Offering adequate print materials to accompany verbal presentations is one step 
that can be taken. Another is alerting international students to potential problems with 
physical facilities and database searching and then offering solutions to the difficulties. A 
third facet of assistance is to enlist the assistance of the ESL faculty as well as the content 
faculty so that library instruction can be course-related or focused on given assignments. 




89 



International Students and Libraries 



80 



Because international students are likely to suffer from the “cereal syndrome” (Oberman, 
1991 ) created by an overload of potential resources and database results, suggestions and 
hints from instruction librarians should give international students added clues in their 
quest for academic success. This is especially true in relationship to critical evaluation 
skills and elements of database searching that are related to language skills, such as 
truncation. Boolean operators, and the use of synonyms. 



CHAPTER 6 



IMPLICATIONS AND APPLICATIONS OF THE LITERATURE REVIEW 

Viewing International Students As Guests 
Hosts in any situation face the delicate balance between accommodation of the 
guest and maintenance of their own standards. Ogbu (1991) maintains that this 
accommodation must be two-way. Hosts will often adapt their meal planning to the 
preferences of the guests; guests will often graciously eat foods they do not like out of 
polite respect for the host. Storti’s (1999) charge to gain cultural awareness showcases 
the necessity for understanding that variances in cultures need not generate discord. The 
realization that there are not only cultural differences, but also individual differences 
within each culture, should prompt librarians to avoid making assumptions about 
individuals or assigning motives to others’ actions based on their own values. Librarian 
instructors must, in some sense, play the role of the parent, accepting some behaviors in 
recognition of lack of knowledge or understanding about American etiquette or library 
protocols on the part of the international student. 

Archer’s (1994) discussion of a covert culture highlights that many behaviors and 
attitudes that Americans take for granted are mystifying to international students. An 
older woman came to class one day wearing a shirt with a large Playboy Bunny logo on 
the front of it. Biola University is a Christian university, opposed to the morals the logo 
symbolizes, and so American students responded with wide eyes and whispered 




91 



International Students and Libraries 



82 



embarrassment. A gentle friend privately explained the symbolism to the international 
student, who had purchased the shirt because she liked rabbits. Similarly, a mature man 
in a black suit and tie approached the Reference Desk to ask a question. He sat down in 
the chair and removed his backpack, a pink plastic Hello Kitty™ one, which was 
currently popular with elementary-aged girls. The next person in line, an American not- 
quite adult, rolled his eyes in disgust. Cross-cultural sensitivity is needed in order to 
prevent the alienation that misunderstandings can create. Painful cultural adjustment can 
sometimes manifest itself as a self-focused, persecuted attitude. An international student 
came to the public desk to complain that the library was prejudiced toward international 
students. She protested loudly and angrily that both she and her American friend had lost 
a library book that semester, but the American student was charged a smaller amount 
than she was. This, she perceived, was directed specifically at discriminating against 
Asian students. This writer explained that the charges were based on the cost of ordering 
a new copy of each book, and that the book she lost was more expensive than the book 
the American student lost. Refusing to accept this explanation, the student made a 
complaint to the supervisor, but attempts to defuse the situation found little success. 

International students may always be and feel foreign on some level (Storti, 

1999), and they need understanding hosts. Remembering that international students are 
“people in transition” (Mori, 2000, f 3) and “sojourners” (Thomas & Harrell, 1994) who 
stay in the United States a short time should result in the latitude afforded to guests. In 
the Old Testament, God exhorted the Jews, “Do not mistreat an alien, or oppress him: for 
you were aliens in Egypt” (Exodus 22:21, New International Version), and Deuteronomy 
10:17-19 describes God as One who loves the stranger and asks His people to also love 




92 



International Students and Libraries 



83 



strangers. Throughout both the Old and New Testaments, exhortations to treat others as 
you want to be treated should serve as an example that one principle of interacting with 
international students should be demonstrating empathy and accommodation. 

Although international students are guests in the United States, many individuals 
in American society feel that the onus for adjustment is on the guest alone. International 
students encounter a myriad of difficulties, such as language comprehension and 
conversation problems; opposing cultural customs, mores, and values; and educational 
differences. Kahne (1976) maintains that American universities always put the burden on 
the foreign student to cope and fit in with the American curriculum, and he argues that 
American higher education institutions need to become more understanding and tolerant 
of ways other than their own. Fu (1995), twenty years later, reaffirms that same outlook 
when she calls for classrooms to become “communities that accept the fact the people 
learn differently and have different ways of knowing” (p. 214). That repeated pattern 
occurs in library literature when Brown (2000), DiMartino and Zoe, Hall (1991), and 
Moeckel and Presnell (1995) offer many of the same recommendations about working 
with international students that Fieg and Yaffee proposed in 1977. Christison (1999b) 
declares that each brain is unique, and teachers and librarians must be open to varied 
interpretations and numerous ways of viewing information. The key to success in 
education as well as relationships is “to accept others as having a viewpoint that is as 
worthy of consideration as our own” (Lingenfelter & Mayers, 1986, p. 1 18). 

Kathman and Kathman (1998) pose the difficult issue, “How much should ‘they’ 
change? How much should I ‘accept’ what they do?” (p. 379). This is especially thorny in 
the library instruction classroom when there are no guidelines to follow, no rules to 




93 



International Students and Libraries 



84 



maintain. How much accommodation of learning style preferences should the librarian 
make? If international students dislike group work, is it important not to force American 
ways of learning on others and instead weigh the risk to international students’ attitude 
against the potential benefit? (Thomas & Harrell, 1994). Rather than leaving them to 
dictate their own education, Fu (1995) argues that international students often come to the 
United States to take the opportunity of experiencing the American education system. 

She maintains teachers should not be afraid of doing something “foreign” with 
international students as long as a culture’s ways of doing things are not belittled. 

Helping international students reach goals and achieve dreams will be more appreciated 
than if instructors simply leave visiting students to struggle on their own. 

How far should library personnel go to assist international students? Bilal (1990) 
advocates a buddy system to pair American students with international students to aid 
them in their use of the library, but Jordan (1997) warns of the danger of becoming 
“universal aunts” (p. 213). The delicate balance between accommodation of the guest, 
maintenance of standards, and nurturing independence is no less important in the library 
than it is in the home. Nevertheless, one vital aspect of working with international 
students is to regard them as guests, exhibiting a willingness to accommodate and to be 
empathetic and understanding. 

Viewing International Students As At-Risk Students 

Viewing international students as guests may accelerate social adjustment, but 
more than simple kindness is required to help them succeed in their academic pursuits. 
Obstacles such as language complications and library anxiety put the international 
student at risk for academic failure. Wan et al.’s (1992) investigation of primarily Asian, 




94 



International Students and Libraries 



85 



male graduate international students revealed that the person’s age and the length of stay 
in the United States were the variables most related to how much cultural distance, 
isolation, and academic stress international students faced and how well the individual 
coped with that stress. The authors advocate making a concerted effort to reach out to 
vulnerable international students, helping them cope with academic stress. 

In some respects, the hurdles which international students face in mastering 
information literacy are identical to those of native English speakers. However, research 
indicates that international students are at-risk students as they use the library’s resources. 
Studies on library anxiety document that international students are the category of 
students most likely to exhibit library anxiety and least likely to successfully use the 
library (K. Downing et al., 1993; Jiao & Onwuegbuzie, 1995, 1999; M. Liu, 1995). 
Although lack of prior computer use is not a hardship for most incoming international 
students (Taylor et al., 2000), and computer anxiety does not seem to be culturally based 
(Marcoulides & Wang, 1990), Allen’s (1993) survey specifies that many international 
students suffer from a lack of experience with library-specific technology and resources, 
which compounds anxiety and difficulty in the use of sources. 

Cultural differences that affect information use and information-seeking behavior 
also put international students at risk. Dissimilarity between their home country’s 
education system and the philosophy of American education can create a stumbling block 
for students studying in the United States. Active participation, the use of group work, 
and an emphasis on critical thinking both in the regular classroom and in the library 
instruction classroom may be distressing for those international students who have been 
accustomed to a more receptive style of learning. Reid (1998) and her co-authors offer a 




95 



International Students and Libraries 



86 



variety of ideas and suggestions on preparing international students to work in groups and 
providing successful experiences in active learning opportunities. 

Language problems also threaten the international student in relationship to 
information literacy. “Communication/conversation apprehension” (M. Liu, 1995, 
p. 125), from fear of appearing ignorant or out of the fear of being misunderstood or 
misunderstanding others, may inhibit international students in seeking help and thus from 
receiving and benefiting from the assistance offered by the library. Difficulties with 
English can also put the international student at a disadvantage when performing database 
searches that are dependent on proficient use of synonyms. Boolean operators, truncation, 
and even plurals. Recognizing that effective online searching and evaluation of results 
rely on high vocabulary and comprehension skills makes it obvious that second-language 
learners approach library tasks at a disadvantage. It is incumbent on the instruction 
librarian to call attention to these potential risks and to offer elaboration and additional 
opportunities for comprehension as well as occasions for successful practice. 

Variations in home-country libraries or lack of experience with libraries in 
general may also put international students in jeopardy for increased library anxiety. 
Librarians may need to offer a detailed identification of behavioral expectations, existing 
services, and available resources. Without knowledge of the American library culture, 
international students are likely to become embroiled in conflicts over library procedures 
or to fail to take advantage of services that are known by American students, unless there 
is intervention by the library staff. Notions vary as to whether or not international 
students should be separated from American students in their library instruction sessions; 




96 



International Students and Libraries 



87 



nevertheless, authors agree that recognition of some common areas of difficulty will aid 
international students in avoiding time-consuming and frustrating obstacles. 

Storti (1999)’s use of the word foreign should be a blunt reminder that 
international students are at risk because they are different. Although the word 
international is much more appropriate in today’s society, it can perhaps blur the reality 
that international students find America just as foreign as America finds them. 
Occasionally librarians should allow the word foreign to prompt them to more carefully 
support those whose adjustment to the American university library can be traumatic and 
can put them at risk of failing to accomplish their academic goals. Although written in the 
framework of mission work, Lingenfelter and Mayers’ (1986) admonition is equally true 
in the American university library: 

So often in our cultural arrogance we scoff at what we perceive are the 
weaknesses of those to whom we minister. Tragically, they in turn scoff at what 
they see as weaknesses in us. This attitude of “vain conceit” creates walls of 
rejection between us . . . and greatly impairs the work of the body of Christ. 

(P- H6) 

Viewing International Students Just Like Everyone Else 
Although they are guests and although they are at-risk students, in some regards, 
international students are “just like everybody else” when it comes to using the library 
efficiently. Whether writing about American students or about international students, 
authors emphasize the importance of human interaction in teaching students. In that 
regard, international students are just like everyone else, needing respect, understanding, 
and kindness. Almost every student experiences library anxiety to some degree, and even 




97 



International Students and Libraries 



88 



a small university library can seem huge and overwhelming compared to a high school 
setting (Egan, 1992; Keefer, 1993; Mellon, 1986, 1989) or for a graduate student who has 
not been in an academic arena for a number of years. Both undergraduate and graduate 
students often exhibit computer anxiety as well as library anxiety (Bradley & Russell, 
1997; Gos, 1996; Marcoulides & Wang, 1990). Even if they do not suffer from computer 
anxiety, most American freshmen enter the university library with limited experiences in 
searching databases or evaluating sources, just as international students do. For those 
graduate students who did their previous research before the arrival of online searching 
and full-text databases, the transition to a new procedure is daunting. International 
students are not alone in their anxiety. 

As adults, international students, like their American counterparts, want their 
education to be relevant to their immediate needs or career goals, and they expect faculty 
and librarians to acknowledge and take account of their life experiences. International 
students, like others, have been affected by the impact of technology, by its quick pace 
and its anonymity. When Faust et al. (2001) offer suggestions about teaching the 
“headphone-wearing, itchy mouse-fingered, and frequently paged”, they also describe 
international students. 

How should librarians teach the international students encountered in university 
library instruction classrooms? In one sense, librarians must simply become better 
teachers, teaching with more acknowledgement of varying styles of learning (Gardner, 
1993, 1999; Perry, 1998; Reid et al., 1998), heeding Hancock’s plea to engage students in 
learning by offering a more adventurous style of teaching (1993, f 6). The design, 
management, and evaluation of cooperative and active learning experiences must be 




93 



International Students and Libraries 



89 



improved (Dabbour, 1997; Gradowski et al., 1998; Kinsella, 1996; Kinsella & Sherak, 
1998; Reid, 1998), and critical thinking, critical reflection, and metacognition as 
interdisciplinary skills must be highlighted, both in instructional content and experiences 
offered (Brem & Boyes, 2000; Cooper et al., 1994; Herro, 2000; Kissane & Mollner, 

1993; Mark & Jacobson, 1995; Oberman, 1991; Sternberg & Spear-Swerling, 1996). 
Because international students are consumer-oriented, instructors must take the time to 
help them make real-world connections to their learning and view active participation as 
a necessary and valuable contribution of their American education (Althen, 1 994; 
Kathman & Kathman, 1998; Kinsella, 1996; Meyers & Jones, 1993). Teaching librarians 
must encourage international students to view education as a process and not a product. 
Because international students are technologically saturated, instruction librarians must 
recognize the fast-paced, passive ways in which they process information (Faust et al., 
2001 ; Roth, 1 999). Educators must foster a variety of learning experiences, recognizing 
that technology can be an ally, but that it must not be a substitute for human interaction. 

Speaking of the strategies for teaching international students, F. Jacobson (1988) 
maintains that the recommendations given by various educators of breaking down large 
concepts into smaller components; combining lecture/demonstration with opportunities 
for active practice; and using handouts to supplement verbal presentations are primarily 
good teaching tenets and do not reflect international students’ needs, but merely the needs 
of the uninitiated. 

Librarians do not need to become English as a Second Language experts nor do 
they need to restructure successful instruction strategies and techniques. The skills 
that librarians have used in communicating with native student populations can 




99 



International Students and Libraries 



90 



easily be adapted to intercultural settings, with the addition of more finely tuned 
levels of sensitivity and awareness. . . . Libraries need to pass on the basic 
message articulated so well by Kwasi Sarkodie-Mensah (1986) — that the library 
is an integral part of one’s academic journey, that a systematic approach to 
finding information is a lifetime benefit, and that the person sitting behind the 
desk is not there to ridicule, but to assist, (p. 632) 

Nearly all of the studies cited in this thesis were conducted at a local level with 
relatively small samples, sometimes not even with representative samples. The 
conclusions are nonetheless useful, but it is important that each librarian become 
responsive to her or his own location and population. Librarians cannot possibly make 
conjectures about every individual’s attitudes, learning styles, thinking patterns, or 
cultural values, whether the individual is an American student or an international student. 
The important factor is to be aware that differences exist throughout the world and to 
treat them with acceptance. In essence, “Although we might be doing a work of love with 
our hands or heart or mind, unless we show people our love in a personal way by 
interacting with them as individuals, our work will mean nothing to them” (Lingenfelter 
& Mayers, 1 986, p. 89). And that, of course, is what good teaching is all about. 



O 

ERJC 



too 



CHAPTER 7 



THE REACTIONS OF THE FOCUS GROUPS 
Faculty Focus Group 

Input from five librarian and classroom faculty members with experience in 
teaching international students was solicited to compare their perspectives to the 
literature reviewed in this thesis. Only two broad questions were offered to guide the 
conversation: 

1 . Do you think the experience of international students in the university library differs 
from that of American students? If so, how and why? 

2. What do you believe librarians and library staff can do to help international students 
in their use of the library and its resources? 

Responses from the participants mirrored viewpoints in the literature, citing 
language skills as the major obstacle in the use of American libraries. The librarians’ 
comments focused primarily on the barrier that language creates in the help-seeking 
behaviors of international students. Librarians clarified that the difficulties were 
two-way: that specialized library vocabulary or informal, non-standard English words or 
idioms used by the library staff create comprehension problems for international students, 
while word choice, pronunciation of English words, and sentence structure by the 
international students pose obstacles for the library staff. The role of culture in nonverbal 
communication was also noted as a hurdle for both the international student and the 
librarian; for example, cultural mores about gender and age, and values such as eye 




101 



International Students and Libraries 



92 



contact and masking of emotions so that librarians were frustrated when they could not 
determine if students were satisfied with proffered help or still confused. One participant 
mentioned the tendency of some international students to speak in a very low and soft 
voice, contributing to both comprehension difficulties and to the faculty’s challenge of 
appearing welcoming and patient as they requested several repetitions from the 
international student. In contrast to Kahne’s (1976) complaint that international students 
are always made to shoulder the burden of coping, one librarian indicated that she felt at 
fault for her inability to understand the communication of some international students. 

The faculty also recognized the challenges caused by variations in world library 
cultures, even to the needed adjustments produced by reading patterns — for example, the 
English concept of reading from left to right and the idea that each section of six shelves 
of call numbers reads down like a page before going to the next section instead of reading 
the top row all the way across an entire aisle before going to the second shelf. 
Accustomed to retrieval of materials by library staff, an international student at the 
Reference Desk handed a librarian a card tom out of the card catalog, intending it as a 
paging slip. This aspect of expectations was also cited by librarians who pointed out that 
many international students attempt to pressure library staff to perform the actual locating 
of materials and plead with librarians to make decisions for them about to which sources 
are appropriate or valuable, confirming the “universal aunt” theory of Jordan 
(1997, p. 213). 

Classroom faculty, in contrast to the library faculty, viewed international student 
challenges in the library a function of language skills in understanding and interpreting 
library materials themselves as opposed to problems in locating them. Faculty believed 




102 



International Students and Libraries 



93 



that few international students had any experience with library computer technology and 
surmised that most of the difficulty encountered was due to inexperience with electronic 
databases and online journals. Librarians’ experience with American students made it 
clear to them that few American undergraduate students have much prior experience with 
library computer technology either and face problems similar to international students’ . 
While classroom faculty tended to assume that technology itself was the problem, 
librarians recognized that language problems and critical thinking skills were more likely 
the culprits. Classroom faculty also noted difficulties with a reliance on direct use of the 
exact wording of sources, with a lack of critical thinking, and an inability or 
unwillingness to avoid American-defined plagiarism. 

Classroom faculty felt that separate instruction sessions for international students 
and more individual help were the two main ways that library staff could assist the 
international student. Librarians were less convinced of the necessity for separate 
instruction sessions since international students are not a homogeneous group. However, 
recognition that language difficulties require additional thought-processing time and that 
additional hands-on practice is valuable, librarians conceded that separate instruction 
lessons could be beneficial for international. A more likely candidate for a specific 
international-student session, they felt, would be an orientation to the local physical 
facilities and specialized services offered by the campus library. Library staff 
recommended informal and formal instruction about cross-cultural interaction for the 
entire library staff as a strategy for increasing cooperation between the international 
student and the library’s staff. 




103 



International Students and Libraries 



94 



International Students Focus Groups 

Ten international students were consulted to compare their experiences in 
American libraries with the literature cited in this thesis. Of the ten, six were male and 
four were female; seven were graduate students, and three were undergraduate students. 
Several leading questions were used: 

1 . How do libraries in the United States differ from libraries in your home country? 

2. How is doing research different in the United States from in your home country? 

3. How can the classroom faculty help you do more effective research? 

4. How can the library staff help you do more effective research? 

Students verified the difficulties faced by the transition from other classification 
systems to the Library of Congress classification system and from closed stacks to 
browsable collections, although several respondents indicated they had experienced both 
open and closed stacks in different libraries in their home countries. One item reiterated 
was the initial anxiety of determining which computers or resources would help with 
their particular need (books versus periodicals) and which location in the building would 
house the specific subject in which they were interested. 

Several participants, especially those who were graduate students and had used 
university libraries in their own countries, mentioned that although they were familiar 
with online catalogs and databases, they had trouble adjusting to databases which were 
“more sophisticated” than the ones in their home libraries and to the large number of 
separate and specialized databases available. Nearly every contributor expressed 
frustration over being unable to determine the “right words” to use in search strategies to 
exactly match their desired subject. Several explained that when they tried to execute a 




104 



International Students and Libraries 95 
search that was (what they perceived) identical to what their friend or a librarian had 

done, they could never produce the same useful results. They wished that librarians 
would work with them as individuals to teach them to find exactly what they were 
looking for. 

One difference in “doing research” in their home country versus the United States 
was the requirement by faculty that students “tell where we got all of our information”. 
Keeping track of where ideas were found and creating a detailed bibliography was not 
only unfamiliar but also frustrating to several students who explained that in their 
countries, they were not required to credit ideas, only exact quotations. “All of the ideas I 
get from reading someplace,” explained one respondent. 

Participants felt that faculty could help international students by giving more 
direction in describing the types of sources required for a research paper. They also 
wished that faculty would reserve some class time to let librarians teach students how to 
use databases and then allow class time for hands-on searching with the faculty member 
present to help make decisions about which results discovered through databases would 
be useful in their paper. 

In responding to the query as to how the library could help them, many verified 
that physical tours of the facilities and special workshops on finding a variety of sources, 
for example, a workshop on how to locate books or on how to find articles, would be 
useful and appreciated. Most confirmed that although they had received this type of 
instruction, the sessions included too much information, and they wished a specific skill 
could be the entire focus of one session. The need for individual practice, not only during 
or following an instruction session, but individual practice with individual assistance was 




105 



International Students and Libraries 



96 



desired. Many students discussed feelings of reluctance in asking for help since they felt 
they should first “try to find it myself’. Although the students did indicate they felt the 
library staff was welcoming and helpful, they admitted their self-perceived limited 
English skills often discouraged them from approaching the Reference Desk or from 
continuing to ask clarifying questions even though they did not completely understand 
answers given by library staff. 

It became evident that most international students wanted prepackaged help — one 
suggested a sign at the front door, listing “all the subjects” with corresponding call 
numbers and locations of where to find those numbers. Another request was for 
instruction sheets that would list which database should be chosen for specific topics and 
then describe how to use each database. Even though a document is available which lists 
databases related to broad disciplines, such as Education or History or Religion, students 
seemed to have difficulty deciphering topics such as domestic violence or terrorism as 
related to databases listed under Social Sciences. Similarly, although Help or Search Tips 
screens are links in all online databases, the respondents still wanted a printed document 
for each database that would summarize how to conduct a search that would produce 
desired results. 

Recommendations for Future Research 

Despite the fact that there is considerable literature on the use of active learning in 
library instruction, much of the active learning presently incorporated is hands-on 
computer searching by individual students. More research on the effectiveness of the use 
small-group learning in information literacy instruction is needed. This is especially true 




106 



International Students and Libraries 



97 



in relationship to how active methods and group work can be designed and managed 
within the “50-minute, one-shot” opportunities that librarians most often receive. 

Conflicting opinions on whether or not to offer separate information literacy 
instruction sessions for international students implies that this area of library literature 
would benefit from additional examination, particularly the balance between avoiding 
information overload and identifying potential difficulties. A related area of inquiry 
might be the dilemma of how, with limited time and staff resources, librarians can 
effectively offer a measure of the individual help that international students desire. 

Another area of continued study should be the weighing of the emotional risks to 
the international student involved in group work contrasted with the potential benefit of 
enlargement of their learning style repertoires. How instruction librarians can incorporate 
group-learning techniques and at the same time encourage stress-relieving successful 
experiences is a topic worth investigating more thoroughly. 




107 



References 



Allen, M. B. (1993). International students in academic libraries: A user survey. College 
& Research Libraries, 54(4), 323-333. 

Althen, G. (1994). Recurring issues in intercultural communication. In G. Althen (Ed.), 
Learning across cultures (Rev. ed., pp. 189-190). Washington, DC: NAFSA. 

Archer, C. (1994). Managing a multicultural classroom. In G. Althen (Ed.), Learning 
across cultures (Rev. ed., pp. 73-87). Washington, DC: NAFSA. 

Association of College & Research Libraries. (2001). Objectives for information literacy 
instruction: A model statement for academic librarians. Retrieved February 8, 2002, 
from http://www.ala.org/acrl/guides/objinfolit.html 

Astin, A. W. (1993). What matters in college? Four Critical Years revisited. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Ayersman, D. J., & Reed, W. M. (1995/96). Effects of learning styles, programming, and 
gender on computer anxiety. Journal of Research on Computing in Education, 28(2), 
148-161. Retrieved March 18, 1999, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Ball, M. A., & Mahony, M. (1987). Foreign students, libraries, and culture. College & 
Research Libraries, 48(2), 160-166. 

Barclay, D. A., & Barclay, D. R. (1994). The role of freshman writing in academic 
bibliographic instruction. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 20(4), 213-218. 
Retrieved February 27, 2001, from Academic Search Elite database. 




103 



International Students and Libraries 



99 



Beets, S. D., & Lobingier, P. G. (2001). Pedagogical techniques: Student performance 
and preferences. Journal of Education for Business, 76( 4), 231-236. Retrieved 
October 10, 2001, from Academic Search Elite database. 

Beishline, M. J., & Holmes, C. B. (1997). Student preferences for various teaching styles. 
Journal of Instructional Psychology, 24(2), 95-99. Retrieved October 29, 2001, from 
WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Bell, C., & Benedicto, J. (1998). The companion course: A pilot project to teach 
discipline-specific library research skills [Electronic version]. RSR: Reference 
Services Review, 26(3-4), 117-124. 

Benevenuto, M. A. (1999). In an age of interactive learning, some students want the same 
old song and dance. Chronicle of Higher Education, 45(39), B9. Retrieved October 
10, 2001, from Bell & Howell/ProQuest Research Library database. 

Bible. (1984). The Holy Bible: New International Version. Grand Rapids, MI: Zondervan. 

Bicknell-Holmes, T., & Hoffman, P. S. (2000). Elicit, engage, experience, explore: 
Discovery learning in library instruction. RSR: Reference Service Review, 28(4), 
313-322. 

Bilal, D. M. (1990). Problems of foreign students in using United States libraries and the 
difficulties of translating an international education to Lebanon. In J. I. Tallman & J. 
B. Ojiambo (Eds.), Translating an international education to a national environment 
(pp. 23-36). Metuchen, NJ: Scarecrow Press. 

Blandy, S. G., & Libutti, P. O. (1995). As the cursor blinks: Electronic scholarship and 
undergraduates in the library. Library Trends, 44(2), 279-305. 




109 



International Students and Libraries 100 
Boumer, J., Hughes, M., & Boumer, T. (2001). First-year undergraduate experiences of 

group project work. Assessment & Evaluation in Higher Education, 26(1), 19-40. 
Retrieved August 29, 2001, from Academic Search Elite database. 

Bradley, G., & Russell, G. (1997). Computer experience, school support and computer 
anxieties. Educational Psychology, 17(3), 267-285. Retrieved March 22, 1999, from 
Academic Search Elite database. 

Brem, S., & Boyes, A. J. (2000). Using critical thinking to conduct effective searches of 
online resources. Practical Assessment, Research & Evaluation, 7(7). Retrieved 
September 29, 2001, from http://ericae.net/pare/getvn.asp?v=7&n=7 
Brookfield, S. D. (1994). Adult education: An overview. In T. Husen & T. N. 

Postlethwaite (Eds.), International encyclopedia of education, Vol. 1 (2nd ed., pp. 
163-168). Exeter, England: Elsevier Science. 

Brosnan, M. J., & Davidson, M. J. (1994). Computerphobia: Is it a particularly female 
phenomenon? The Psychologist, 7(2), 73-78. 

Brown, C. C. (2000). Reference services to the international adult learner: Understanding 
the barriers. Reference Librarian, 69/70, 337-349. 

Cahoon, B. (1998, Summer). Teaching and learning internet skills. New Directions for 
Adult and Continuing Education, 78, 5-13. Retrieved December 18, 2001, from 
WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Christison, M. A. (1999a). Applications of brain-based research to second language 
teaching and learning: Part 1 . TESOL Matters, 9(2). Retrieved January 4, 2002, from 
http://www.tesol.org/pubs/articles/! 999/tm9904-0 1 .html 




no 



International Students and Libraries 



101 



Christison, M. A. (1999b). Applications of brain-based research to second language 
teaching and learning: Part 2. TESOL Matters, 9(3). Retrieved January 4, 2002, from 
http://www.tesol.org/pubs/articles/1999/tm9906-04.html 

Clark, K., & Kalin, S. (1996). Technostressed out? How to cope in the digital age. 

Library Journal, 12 1( 13), 30-332. 

Cohen, L. B. (2001). 10 tips for teaching how to search the web. American Libraries, 
32(10), 44-46. Retrieved January 7, 2002, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Collins, B. L., Mellon, C. A., & Young, S. B. (1987). The needs and feelings of 

beginning researchers. In C. A. Mellon (Ed.), Bibliographic instruction: The second 
generation (pp. 73-84). Littleton, CO: Libraries Unlimited. 

Conger, J. E. (2001). Wake up that back row! Interactive library instruction without 
hands-on student computers. The Reference Librarian, 73, 309-322. 

Cook, C., & Heath, F. M. (2001). Users’ perceptions of library service quality: A 
LIBQUAL+ qualitative study. Library Trends, 49(4), 548-584. 

Cooper, J. L., Robinson, P., & McKinney, M. (1994). Cooperative learning in the 

classroom. In Halpem and Associates, Changing college classrooms: New teaching 
and learning strategies for an increasingly complex world (pp. 74-92). San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 

Cope, J., & Black, E. (1985). New library orientation for international students. College 
Teaching, 33(4), 159-162. 

Cudiner, S., & Harmon, O. R. (2000). An active learning approach to teaching effective 
online search strategies: A librarian/faculty collaboration. T. H. E. Journal, 28(5), 
52-57. Retrieved December 18, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 



ERIC 




International Students and Libraries 102 

Curtis, S. C. (2000). Listening to Generation X. Journal of Educational Media & Library 
Sciences, 38(2), 122-132. Retrieved September 21, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus 
database. 

Dabbour, K. S. (1997). Applying active learning methods to the design of library 
instruction for a freshman seminar. College & Research Libraries, 58(A), 299-308. 

Dale, E. (1954). Audiovisual methods in teaching (Rev. ed). New York: Dryden Press. 

Daugherty, T. K., & Carter, E. W. (1997). Assessment of outcome-focused library 
instruction in psychology. Journal of Instructional Psychology, 24(1), 29-33. 

Retrieved March 24, 1999, from Academic Search Elite database. 

Davis, P. M. (2002). The effect of the web on undergraduate citation behavior: A 2000 
update. College & Research Libraries, 63(1), 53-60. 

Davis, P. M., & Cohen, S. A. (2001). The effect of the web on undergraduate citation 
behavior 1996-1999. Journal of the American Society for Information Science and 
Technology, 52(A), 309-314. 

De Souza, Y. (1996). Reference work with international students: Making the most use of 
the neutral question. RSR: Reference Services Review, 24(A), 41-48. 

Deckert, G. D. (1993). Perspective on plagiarism from ESL students in Hong Kong. 
Journal of Second Language Writing, 2(2), 131-148. 

Dewald, N. H. (1999). Transporting good library instruction practices into the web 

environment: An analysis of online tutorials. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 
25(1), 26-32. Retrieved August 29, 2001, from Academic Search Elite database. 




112 



International Students and Libraries 



103 



Dickstein, R., & McBride, K. B. (1998). Listserv lemmings and fly-brarians on the wall: 

A librarian-instructor team taming the cyberbeast in the large classroom. College & 
Research Libraries, 59(1), 10-17. 

DiMartino, D., & Zoe, L. R. (2000). International students and the library: New tools, 
new users, new instruction. In T. E. Jacobson & H. C. Williams (Eds.), Teaching the 
new library to today’s users (pp. 17-41). New York: Neal-Schuman. 

Donaldson, J. E. (1999). A model of college outcomes for adults. Adult Education 
Quarterly, 50(1), 24-41. Retrieved September 6, 2001, from Academic Search Elite 
database. 

Downing, A., & Klein, L. R. (2001). A multilingual virtual tour for international students. 
C&RL News, 62(5), 500-502. 

Downing, K. E., MacAdam, B., & Nichols, D. P. (1993). Reaching a multicultural 

student community: A handbook for academic librarians. Westport, CT: Greenwood. 

Drueke, J. (1992). Active learning in the university library instruction classroom. 
Research Strategies, 10(2), 77-83. 

Dupuis, E. A. (2001, Spring). Automating instruction. Library Journal Net Connect, 
pp. 21-22. Retrieved August 29, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Egan, P. J. (1992). Bridging the gap between the student and the library. College 
Teaching, 41(2), 67-70. Retrieved July 7, 2000, from Academic Search Elite 
database. 

Emigh, T. (1991, March). International students: Easing the transition. Paper presented 
at President’s Faculty Luncheon, Biola University, La Mirada, California. 



113 



International Students and Libraries 



104 



Erickson, B. L., & Strommer, D. W. (1991). Teaching college freshmen. San Francisco: 
Jossey-Bass. 

Faust, J., Ginno, E. A., Laherty, J., & Manuel, K. (2001, March). Teaching information 
literacy to Generation Y: Tested strategies for reaching the headphone-wearing, itchy 
mouse-fingered, and frequently paged. Poster session presented at the biannual 
meeting of the Association of College and Research Libraries, Denver, CO. Available 
online: http://www.library.csuhayward.edu/stafB' ACRL 

Felder, R. M., & Brent, R. (1996). Navigating the bumpy road to student-centered 
instruction. College Teaching, 44(2), 43-47. Retrieved September 15, 2001, from 
WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Fenwick, T. J. (2000). Expanding conceptions of experiential learning: A review of five 
contemporary perspectives of cognition. Adult Education Quarterly, 50(4), 243-272. 
Retrieved September 7, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Fidishun, D. (2000). Teaching adult students to use computerized resources: Utilizing 
Lawler’s keys to adult learning to make instruction more effective. Information 
Technology and Libraries, 19(3), 157-15. Retrieved September 10, 2001, from 
WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Fieg, J. P., & Yaffee, L. C. (1977). Adjusting to the USA: Orientation for international 
students. Washington, DC: Washington International Center of Meridian House 
International. 

Fister, B. (1992). The research process of undergraduate students. The Journal of 
Academic Librarianship, 18(3), 163-170. Retrieved November 1, 2001, from 
Academic Search Elite database. 




114 



International Students and Libraries 



105 



Flory, R. W., & Miller, D. E. (2000). Gen X religion. New York: Routledge. 

Fradd, S. H., & McGee, P. L. (with D. K. Wilen). (1994). Instructional assessment: An 
integrative approach to evaluating student performance. Reading, MA: Addison- 
Wesley. 

Freeman, G. (2001). Graphic organizer homepage. Retrieved July 31, 2001, from 
http://www.graphic.org.goindex.html 

Freeman, Y. S., & Freeman, D. E. (1998). ESL/EFL teaching: Principles for success. 
Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Fu, D. (1995). My trouble is my English: Asian students and the American dream. 

Portsmouth, NH: Boyton/Cook/Heinemann. 

Fullerton, A., & Leckie, G. J. (2002). Information literacy and higher education. In A. 
Kent (Ed.), Encyclopedia of library and information science (Vol. 70, Supplement 33, 
pp. 190-206). New York: Marcel Dekker. 

Furlong, K., & Roberts, F. D. (1998). If you teach it, will they learn? Computers in 
Libraries, 1(5), 22-26. Retrieved October 20, 2001, from Academic Search Elite 
database. 

Galbraith, M. W. (Ed.) (1990). Adult learning methods: A guide for effective instruction. 
Malabar, FL: Robert E. Krieger. 

Gardner, H. (1993). Multiple intelligences: The theory in practice. New York: Basic 
Books. 

Gardner, H. (1999). Intelligence reframed: Multiple intelligences for the 21st century. 
New York: Basic Books. 




115 



International Students and Libraries 106 

Gedeon, R. (2000). Accessing the right brain with bibliographic instruction. Research 

Strategies, 16(4), 259-269. 

Germain, C. A., Jacobson, T., & Kaczor, S. A. (2000). A comparison of the effectiveness 
of presentation formats for instruction: Teaching first-year students. College & 
Research Libraries, 62(1), 65-72. Retrieved October 3, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus 
database. 

Gos, M. W. (1996). Computer anxiety and computer experience: A new look at an old 
relationship. Clearing House, 69(5), 271-277. Retrieved March 18, 1999 from 
Academic Search Elite database. 

Gradowski, G., Snavely, L., & Dempsey, P. (1998). Designs for active learning: A 
sourcebook of classroom strategies for information education. Chicago: Association 
of College & Research Libraries. 

Graves, R. S. (2001, June 1). BI to international students [Message-id 

01JQ2Z946EHA9ANBU7@EMAIL1.BYU.EDU]. Message posted to BI-L electronic 
mailing list, archived at bi-l@listserv.byu.edu 

Grealy, D. S. (1998). Web-based learning: Electronic library resources and instruction. In 
Distance Learning ‘98: Proceedings; Nth Annual Conference on Distance Teaching 
& Learning: August 5-7, 1998, Marriott Madison West, Madison, Wisconsin (pp. 
133-137). Madison, WI: University of Wisconsin System. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED422853) 

Greenfield, L., Johnston, S., & Williams, K. (1986). Educating the world: Training 
library staff to communicate effectively with international students. The Journal of 
Academic Librarians hip, 12(4), 227-231. 



116 



International Students and Libraries 



107 



Greenfield, L. W. (1989). Training library staff to reach and teach international students. 
In T. B. Mensching (Ed.), Reaching and teaching diverse library groups (pp. 45-62). 
Ann Arbor, MI: Pierian Press. 

Gresham, K. (2001). Experiential learning theory, library instruction, and the electronic 
classroom. Colorado Libraries, 27(1), 19-22. Retrieved August 13, 2001, from 
WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Grimes, S. K. (1997). Underprepared community college students: Characteristics, 
persistence, and academic success. Community College Journal of Research and 
Practice, 27(1), 47-57. Retrieved March 24, 1999, from Academic Search Elite 
database. 

Hall, P. A. (1991). The role of affectivity in instructing people of color: Some 
implications for bibliographic instruction. Library Trends, 29(3), 316-326. 

Hancock, V. E. (1993). Information literacy for lifelong learning: ERIC Digest. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 358870). Retrieved November 1, 2001, 
from http :// www. ed.gov/databases/ERIC_Digests/ ed3 5 8 8 7 0 .html 

Hansen, E. J., & Stephens, J. A. (2000). The ethics of learner-centered education: 

Dynamics that impede the process. Change, 33[i.e., 227(5), 40-47. Retrieved October 
21, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Herro, S. J. (2000). Bibliographic instruction and critical thinking. Journal of Adolescent 
& Adult Literacy, 4(6), 554-559. Retrieved September 20, 2001, from Academic 
Search Elite database. 

Hoffman, I., & Popa, O. (1986). Library orientation and instruction for international 
students: The University of Califomia-Davis experience. RQ, 25(3), 356-360. 




117 



International Students and Libraries 108 

Holman, L. (2000). A comparison of computer-assisted instruction and classroom 

bibliographic instruction. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 40( 1), 53-60. 
Retrieved October 3, 2001, from ProQuest Research Library database. 

Hurren, P. (1993). Expanding the collaborative planning model to meet the needs of ESL 
students. Emergency Librarian, 20(5), 8-13. Retrieved February 27, 2001, from 
Academic Search Elite database. 

Iannuzzi, P., Mangrum, II, C. T., & Strichart, S. S. (1999). Teaching information literacy 
skills. Boston: Allyn and Bacon. 

Institute of International Education. (2001). Open Doors 2000. Retrieved January 12, 
2002, from http://researchl.iienetwork.org/ 

Institute of International Education. (2002). Opendoors on the web: Foreign student and 
total U. S. enrollment. Retrieved January 12, 2002, from 
http://www.opendoorsweb.org/200 1 %20Files/layout_l .htm 

Jacobson, F. F. (1988). Bibliographic instruction and international students. Illinois 
Libraries, 70, 628-633. 

Jacobson, T. E. & Williams, H. C. (Eds.). (2000). Teaching the new library to today’s 
users. New York: Neal-Schuman. 

Jensen, I. K. K., & Jensen, J. V. (1983). Cross cultural encounters: The newly arrived 
Asian student. College Student Journal, 17(A), 371-377. 

Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1995, November). Library anxiety: Characteristics of 
“at risk” college students. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Mid-South 
Educational Research Association Conference, Biloxi, MS. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED416896) 




113 



International Students and Libraries 



109 



Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1998). Perfectionism and library anxiety among 
graduate students. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 24(5), 365-373. Retrieved 
March 3, 1999, from Academic Search Elite database. 

Jiao, Q. G., & Onwuegbuzie, A. J. (1999, November). Library anxiety among 
international students. Paper presented at the annual meeting of the Mid-South 
Educational Research Association Conference, Point Clear, AL. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED457973) 

Jordan, R. R. (1997). English for academic purposes: A guide and resource book for 
teachers. Cambridge, England: Cambridge University Press. 

Kahne, M. J. (1976). Cultural differences: Whose troubles are we talking about? 
International Educational and Cultural Exchange, 11(4), 36-40. 

Kamhi-Stein, L. (1996). Making databases accessible to ESL students. CATESOL 
Journal, 9, 73-83. 

Kamhi-Stein, L. D., & Stein, A. P. (1999). Teaching information competency as a third 
language: A new model for library instruction. Reference & User Services Quarterly, 
38(2), 173-179. Retrieved March 6, 2001, from ProQuest Research Library database. 

Kaplan, R. B. (1983). Meeting the educational needs of other nations. In H. M. Jenkins & 
Associates (Eds.), Educating students from other nations (pp. 253-276). San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Kapoun, J. (1998). Teaching undergrads web evaluation: A guide for library instruction. 
C & RL News, 59(1), 522-523. Retrieved November 1, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus 
database. 




119 



p 



International Students and Libraries 1 10 

Kasper, L. F. (2000). The Internet and content-based college ESL instruction. In L. F. 

Kasper, et al. (Eds.), Content-based college ESL instruction: Reading, writing, and 
research (pp. 183-201). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Kathman, J. M., & Kathman, M. D. (1998). What difference does diversity make in 
managing student employees? College & Research Libraries, 59(4), 378-389. 

Keefer, J. (1993). The hungry rats syndrome. RQ, 32(3), 333-339. 

King, A. (1993). From sage on the stage to guide on the side. College Teaching, 41( 1), 
30-36. Retrieved September 6, 2001, from Academic Search Elite database. 

King, A. (1994). Inquiry as a tool in critical thinking. In Halpem and Associates, 
Changing college classrooms: New teaching and learning strategies for an 
increasingly complex world (pp. 13-28). San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

King, D., & Baker, B. (1987). Human aspects of library technology. In C. A. Mellon 
(Ed.), Bibliographic instruction: The second generation (pp. 85-108). Littleton, CO: 
Libraries Unlimited. 

Kinsella, K. (1996). Designing group work that supports and enhances diverse classroom 
work styles. TESOL Journal, 6(1), 24-30. 

Kinsella, K., & Sherak, K. (1998). Designing ESL classroom collaboration to 

accommodate diverse work styles. In J. Reid (Ed.), Understanding learning styles in 
the second language classroom (pp. 85-99). Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Kirk, T. G. (1999). Course-related bibliographic instruction in the 1990s [Electronic 
version]. RSR: Reference Services Review, 27(3), 235-241. 

Kissane, E. C., & Mollner, D. J. (1993). Critical thinking at the reference desk: Teaching 
students to manage technology. RQ, 32(4), 485-489. 



O 




120 



International Students and Libraries 



111 



Kline, L. S., & Rod, C. M. (1984). Library orientation programs for foreign students: A 
survey. RQ, 24(2), 210-216. 

Kloss, R. J. (1994). A nudge is best. College Teaching, 42(A), 151-159. Retrieved 
September 17, 2001, from Academic Search Elite database. 

Knowles, M. S. (1970). The modern practice of adult education: Andragogy versus 
pedagogy. New York: Association Press. 

Knowles, M. S. (1990). The adult learner: A neglected species (4th ed.). Houston, TX: 
Gulf Publishing. 

Kolb, D. A. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and 
development. Englewood Cliffs, NJ: Prentice-Hall. 

Korean Constituents Think Tank. (1990). Biola University Korean constituents: 
Background and recommendations. Unpublished manuscript, Biola University, 

La Mirada, CA. 

Kuhlthau, C. C. (1988). Developing a model of the library search process: Cognitive and 
affective aspects. RQ, 28(2), 232-242. 

Kuhlthau, C. C. (1993). Seeking meaning: A process approach to library and information 
services. Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Kumar, S. L., & Suresh, R. S. (2000). Strategies for providing effective reference service 
for international adult learners. The Reference Librarian, 69/70, 327-337. 

Lee, Y. (1991). Koreans in Japan and the United States. In M. A. Gibson & J. U. Ogbu 
(Eds.), Minority status and schooling: A comparative study of immigrant and 
involuntary minorities (pp. 131-167). New York: Garland. 




121 



International Students and Libraries 

Leki, N., & Carson, J. (1997). “Completely different worlds”: EAP and the writing 



112 



experiences of ESL students in university courses. TESOL Quarterly, 3/(1), 39-69. 

Li, S. D. (1998). Library services to students with diverse language and cultural 
backgrounds. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 24(2), 139-143. Retrieved 
February 17, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Lingenfelter, S. G., & Mayers, M. K. (1986). Ministering cross-culturally: An 
incarnational model for personal relationships. Grand Rapids, MI: Baker. 

Liu, M. (1995). Ethnicity and information seeking. In J. B. Whitlatch (Ed.), Library users 
and reference services (pp. 123-134). New York: Haworth Press. 

Liu, M., & Redfem, B. (1997). Information-seeking behavior of multicultural students: A 
case study at San Jose State University. College & Research Libraries, 55(4), 

348-354. 

Liu, Z. (1993). Difficulties and characteristics of students from developing countries in 
using American libraries. College & Research Libraries, 54(1), 25-31. 

Lorenzen, M. (2001). Active learning and library instruction. Illinois Libraries, 53(2), 19- 
24. Retrieved January 3, 2002, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Lucking, R., & Manning, M. L. (1996). Instruction for low-achieving young adolescents: 
Addressing the challenge of a generation imperiled. Preventing School Failure, 40(2), 
82-87. Retrieved March 25, 1999, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Macdonald, G., & Sarkodie-Mensah, E. (1988). ESL students and American libraries. 
College & Research Libraries, 49(4), 425-431. 




122 



International Students and Libraries 



113 



Mack, P. E., & Delicio, G. (2000). Assessing the use of information technology in the 
classroom. The Journal of Electronic Publishing, (5(1). Retrieved November 6, 2001, 
from http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/06-01/mack.html 

Marcoulides, G. A., Mayes, B. T., & Wiseman, R. L. (1995). Measuring computer 
anxiety in the work environment. Educational and Psychological Measurement, 

55(5), 804-810. Retrieved March 18, 1999, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Marcoulides, G. A., & Wang, X-B. (1990). A cross-cultural comparison of computer 
anxiety in college students. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 6(3), 
251-263. 

Mark, B. L., & Jacobson, T. E. (1995). Teaching anxious students skills for the electronic 
library. College Teaching, 43(1), 28-31. 

Masek, L. E. (2000). Advice for teaching hands-on computer classes to adult 

professionals. Computers in Libraries, 20(3), 32-36. Retrieved October 11, 2001, 
from Academic Search Elite database. 

McClanaghan, M. E. (2000). A strategy for helping students learn how to learn. 
Education, 120(3), 479-486. Retrieved October 19, 2001, from Academic Search 
Elite database. 

McClure, J. (2001). Developing language skills and learner autonomy in international 
postgraduates. ELT Journal, 55(2), 142-148. 

McDermott, I. E. (2000). Internet instruction: Spreading the web. Searcher, 8(7), 72-76. 
Retrieved November 7, 2001, from ProQuest Research Library database. 

McKay, E. (1999). Exploring the effect of graphical metaphors on the performance of 
learning computer programming concepts in adult learners: A pilot study. 




123 



International Students and Libraries 



114 



Educational Psychology, 19(4), 471-488. Retrieved July 31, 2001, from ProQuest 
Research Library database. 

McKeachie, W. J. (1994). Teaching tips: Strategies, research, and theory for college and 
university teachers (9th ed.). Lexington, MA: D. C. Heath. 

McKenzie, J. (2000). Scoring power points. From Now On, The Educational Technology 
Journal, 10( 1). Retrieved August 27, 2001, from 
http://emifyes.iserver.net/ffomnow/septOO/powerpoints.html 

McNeer, E. J. (1991). Learning theories and library instruction. The Journal of Academic 
Librarianship, 77(5), 294-298. Retrieved March 23, 1999, from Academic Search 
Elite database. 

Mech, T. F., & Brooks, C. I. (1997). Anxiety and confidence in using a library by college 
freshmen and seniors. Psychological Reports, 81(3), 929-930. 

Mellon, C. A. (1986). Library anxiety: A grounded theory and its development. College 
and Research Libraries, 47(2), 162-165. 

Mellon, C. A. (1989). Library anxiety and the non-traditional student. In T. B. Mensching 
(Ed.), Reaching and teaching diverse library groups (pp. 77-81). Ann Arbor, MI: 
Pierian Press. 

Mellon, C. A., & Pagles, K. E. (1987). Bibliographic instruction and learning theory. In 
C. A. Mellon (Ed.), Bibliographic instruction: The second generation (pp. 73-84). 
Littleton, CO: Libraries Unlimited. 

Mestenhauser, J. A. (1998). Portraits of an international curriculum: An uncommon 
multidimensional perspective. In J. A. Mestenhauser & B. J. Ellingboe (Eds.), 
Reforming the higher education curriculum (pp. 3-39). Phoenix, AZ: Oryx. 




International Students and Libraries 



115 



Meyer, L. M. (2000). Barriers to meaningful instruction for English learners. Theory into 
Practice, 39(4), 228-236. Retrieved January 4, 2002, from WilsonSelectPlus 
database. 

Meyers, C., & Jones, T. B. (1993). Promoting active learning: Strategies for the college 
classroom. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Moeckel, N., & Presnell, J. (1995). Recognizing, understanding, and responding: A 
program model of library instruction services for international students. The 
Reference Librarian, 51/52, 309-326. 

Moorhead, W. (1986). Ignorance was our excuse. C & RL News, 9, 585-587. 

Morain, G. G. (1987). Kinesics and cross-cultural understanding. In L. F. Luce, & E. C. 
Smith (Eds.), Toward internationalization (2nd ed., pp. 117-141). Cambridge, MA: 
Newbury House. 

Moran, J. J. (1991). Promoting cognitive development through adult education. 

Education, 112(2), 186-195. Retrieved July 30, 2001, from Academic Search Elite. 

Mori, S. (2000). Addressing the mental health concerns of international students. Journal 
of Counseling and Development: JCD, 78(2), 137-144. Retrieved February 14, 2002, 
from ProQuest Research Library database. 

Mosley, P. A. (1997). Assessing the comfort level impact and perceptual value of library 
tours. Research Strategies, 15(4), 261-270. 

Nahl, D. (1997). Information counseling inventory of affective and cognitive reactions 
while learning the Internet. Internet Reference Services Quarterly, 2(2-3), 11-33. 

Natowitz, A. (1995). International students in U. S. academic libraries: Recent concerns 
and trends. Research Strategies, 13(5), 4-16. 




125 



International Students and Libraries 



116 



Novak, J., & Robinson, G. L. (1998). “You tell us”: Indigenous students talk to a tertiary 
library. Australian Academic & Research Libraries, 29(1), 13-22. Retrieved March 3, 
2001, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

NTL Institute for Applied Behavioral Science, (n.d.). The learning pyramid. Bethel, ME. 
(Available from NTL Institute for Applied Behavioral Science, 1300 N. Lee Street, 
Suite 300, Alexandria, VA 22314) 

Oberman, C. (1991). Avoid the cereal syndrome; Or, critical thinking in the electronic 
environment. Library Trends, 29(3), 189-202. 

Ogbu, J. U. (1991). Immigrant and involuntary minorities in perspective. In M. A. Gibson 
& J. U. Ogbu (Eds.), Minority status and schooling: A comparative study of 
immigrant and involuntary minorities (pp. 3-33). New York: Garland. 

Onwuegbuzie, A. J., Bailey, P., & Daley, C. E. (2000). Cognitive, affective, personality, 
and demographic predictors of foreign language achievement. The Journal of 
Educational Research, 94(1), 3-15. Retrieved January 17, 2001, from 
WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Onwuegbuzie, A. J., & Jiao, Q. G. (1998). The relationship between library anxiety and 
learning styles among graduate students: Implications for library instruction. Library 
& Information Science Research, 20(3), 235-249. 

Oxford, R. K. (1997). Cooperative learning, collaborative learning, and interaction: Three 
communicative strands in the language classroom. Modern Language Journal, 81, 
443-456. Retrieved February 27, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 




128 



International Students and Libraries 



117 



Peck, S. S. (1992). International students and the research process. In S. M. Kaikai, & R. 
E. Kaikai (Eds.), Understanding the international student (pp. 89-105). New York: 
McGraw-Hill. 

Perry, W. G., Jr. (1998). Forms of ethical and intellectual development in the college 
years: A scheme. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Pick, H. L., Jr. (1998). Teaching about cognition and cognitive development: How to 
internationalize the topic. In J. A. Mestenhauser & B. J. Ellingboe (Eds.), Reforming 
the higher education curriculum (pp. 92-105). Phoenix, A Z: Oryx. 

Pinheiro, S. O. (2001). Perceptions versus preferences: Adult international students’ 
teaching-learning experiences in an American university. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Services No.ED452785). Retrieved February 18, 2002, from ERIC 
E* Subscribe database. 

Preston, B. (1992). Foreign students: Lost in the library? In S. M. Kaikai, & R. E. Kaikai 
(Eds.), Understanding the international student (pp. 106-1 1 8). New York: McGraw- 
Hill. 

Prorak, D., Gottschalk, T., & Pollastro, M. (1994). Teaching method and psychological 
type in bibliographic instruction: Effect on student learning and confidence. RQ, 
33(4), 484-495. 

Reid, J. (Ed.) (1998/ Understanding learning styles in the second language classroom. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice Hall. 

Reid, J., Vicioso, M. V. M., Gedeon, E., Takacs, K., & Korotkikh, Z. (1998). Teachers 
are perceptual learning style researchers. In J. Reid (Ed.), Understanding learning 




127 



International Students and Libraries 



118 



styles in the second language classroom (pp. 15-26). Upper Saddle River, NJ: 
Prentice Hall. 

Ren, W. (2000). Library instruction and college student self-efficacy in electronic 
information searching. The Journal of Academic Librarianship, 26(5), 323-328. 
Retrieved February 22, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Ricigliano, L. (2001 , June). After X comes Y: Teaching the next generation. A paper 
presented at the California Clearinghouse on Library Instruction-South workshop, 

San Diego, CA. Available online: http://library.ups.edu/public/webl.htm 

Riedinger, E. A. (1989, November/December). Ideas to meet the library needs of foreign 
students. NAFSA Newsletter, p. 1 7. 

Rosen, L. D., Sears, D. C., & Weil, M. M. (1993). Treating technophobia: A longitudinal 
evaluation of a computer phobia reduction program. Computers in Human Behavior, 
9(1), 27-50. 

Rosenthal, J. W. (2000). ESL students in the mainstream; Observations from content area 
faculty. In L. F. Kasper, et al. (Eds.), Content-based college ESL instruction (pp. 71- 
90). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Roth, L. (1999). Educating the cut-and-paste generation. Library Journal, 124( 18), 42- 
44. Retrieved March 3, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Ruelle, J. D. (2001, June 1). BI to international students [Message-id 

01JQ2ZAQPEFQ9ANFZQ@EMAIL1.BYU.EDU]. Message posted to BI-L 
electronic mailing list, archived at bi-l@listserv.byu.edu 




123 



International Students and Libraries 



119 



Russell, S. (2000). Teachers and librarians: Collaborative relationships: ERIC Digest. 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED444605). Retrieved September 14, 
2001 from ERIC database. 

Rutgers University Libraries. (1998). Library terminology: A guide for international 
students. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED433806) 

Sacks, P. (1996). Generation X goes to college: An eye-opening account of teaching in 
postmodern America. Chicago: Open Court. 

Sankaran, S. R., Sankaran, D., & Bui, T. X. (2000). Effect of student attitude to course 
format on learning performance: An empirical study in web vs. lecture instruction. 
Journal of Instructional Psychology, 27(1), 66-73. Retrieved August 29, 2001, from 
WilsonSelectPlus database. 

Seiden, P., Szymborski, K., & Norelli, B. (1997). Undergraduates in the digital library: 
Information seeking behavior in an heterogeneous environment. Retrieved November 
3, 2001, from http://www.ala.org/acrl/paperhtm/c26.html 

Shoffner, M. B., Jones, M., & Harmon, S. W. (2000). Implications of new and emerging 
technologies for learning and cognition. The Journal of Electronic Publishing, 6( 1). 
Retrieved November 6, 2001, from http://www.press.umich.edu/jep/06- 
01 /shoffner. html 

Skaalvik, E. M. (1997). Self-enhancing and self-defeating ego orientation: Relations with 
task and avoidance orientation, achievement, self-perceptions, and anxiety. Journal of 
Educational Psychology, 89( 1 ), 7 1 -8 1 . 

Smith, M. C., & Pourchot, T. (Eds.) (1998). Adult learning and development: 

Perspectives from educational psychology. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum. 




129 



International Students and Libraries 



120 



Sousa, D. A. (2001). How the brain learns: A classroom teacher’s guide (2nd ed.). 
Thousand Oaks, CA: Corwin Press. 

Stephens, M. D. (1994). Teaching methods for adults. In T. Husen & T. N. Postlethwaite 
(Eds.), International encyclopedia of education, Vol.10 (2nd ed., pp. 6198-6202). 
Exeter, England: Elsevier Science. 

Sternberg, R. J., & Spear-Swerling, L. (1996). Teaching for thinking. Washington, DC: 
American Psychological Association. 

Storti, C. (1999). Figuring foreigners out: A practical guide. Yarmouth, ME: 

Intercultural Press. 

Sullivan, P. N. (1996). Sociocultural influences on classroom interactional styles. TESOL 
Journal, 6(1), 32-34. 

Taraban, R., Rynearson, K., & Kerr, M. S. (2000). Metacognition and freshman academic 
performance. Journal of Developmental Education, 24{Y), 12-18. Retrieved August 
31, 2001, from Academic Search Elite database. 

Taylor, C., Jamieson, J., & Eignor, D. (2000). Trends in computer use among 
international students. TESOL Quarterly, 34(3), 575-585. 

Thomas, K., & Harrell, T. (1994). Counseling student sojourners: Revisiting the u-curve 
adjustment. In G. Althen (Ed.), Learning across cultures (Rev. ed., pp. 89-107). 
Washington, DC: NAPS A. 

Thompson, G. L. (2000). The real deal on bilingual education: Former language-minority 
students discuss effective and ineffective instructional practices. Educational 
Horizons, 78(2), 80-92. Retrieved November 13, 2000, from WilsonSelectPlus 
database. 




130 



International Students and Libraries 



121 



Thompson, L. C., & Williams, P. G. (1996). But I changed three words!: Plagiarism in 
the ESL classroom. Clearing House, 69(1), 27-30. Retrieved October 23, 1999, from 
Academic Search Elite database. 

Thompson, S. N. (1997, March). Teaching library research skills to ESL students. Paper 
presented at the annual meeting of the Teachers of English to Speakers of Other 
Languages, Orlando, FL. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED408831) 

Todman, J., & Lawrenson, H. (1992). Computer anxiety in primary school children and 
university students. British Educational Research Journal, 18{ 1), 63-73. Retrieved 
March 18, 1999, from Academic Search Elite database. 

Tricarico, M. A., Tholl, S. V., & O’Malley, E. (2001). Interactive online instruction for 
library research: The small academic library experience. The Journal of Academic 
Librarianship, 27(3), 220-223. Retrieved October 29, 2001, from WilsonSelectPlus 
database. 

Varner, C. H., & Schwartz, V. M., & George, J. (1996). Library instruction and 

technology in a general education “gateway” course: The student’s view. The Journal 
of Academic Librarianship, 22(5), 355-340. Retrieved February 27, 2001, from 
Academic Search Elite database. 

Vella, J. (2000). Taking learning to task: Creative strategies for teaching adults. San 
Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Vidmar, D. J. (1998). Affective change: Integrating pre-sessions in the students’ 
classroom prior to library instruction. RSR: Reference Services Review, 26(3-4), 
75-95. 




131 



International Students and Libraries 



122 



Wakiji, E., & Thomas, J. (1997). MTV to the rescue: Changing library attitudes through 
video. College & Research Libraries, 58(3), 211-216. 

Wan, T., Chapman, D. W., & Biggs, D. A. (1992). Academic stress of international 
students attending U. S. universities. Research in Higher Education, 33(5), 607-623. 

Wamken, P. N., & Young, V. L. (1991). Application of training principles and 

techniques for successful library instruction. Reference Services Review, 79(4), 91-96. 

Wayman, S. G. (1984). The international student in the academic library. The Journal of 
Academic Librarians hip, 9(6), 336-341. 

Zahner, J. E. (1993). Thoughts, feelings and actions: Integrating domains in library 

instruction. In Proceedings of selected research and development presentations at the 
15th Convention of the Association for Educational Communications and Technology 
Sponsored by the Research and Theory Division, January 13-17, 1993, New Orleans, 
Louisiana. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED362215) 

Zimmermann, S. (1995). Perceptions of intercultural communication competence and 
international student adaptation to an American campus. Communication Education, 
44(4), 321-336. Retrieved January 4, 2002, from ProQuest Research Library 
database. 




132 






U.S. Department of Education 

Office of Educational Research and Improvement (OERI) 
National Library of Education (NLE) 

Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) 

REPRODUCTION RELEASE 

(Specific Document) 

I. DOCUMENT IDENTIFICATION: 

Tltle SHuAeixte -tu. /twen 



Author(s): %e^\ 

Corporate Source: Publication Date: 

M& y ^ oo x 

II. REPRODUCTION RELEASE: 

In order to disseminate as widely as possible timely and significant materials of interest to the educational community, documents announced in the 
monthly abstract journal of the ERIC system, Resources in Education (RIE), are usually made available to users in microfiche, reproduced paper copy, 
and electronic media, and sold through the ERIC Document Reproduction Service (EDRS). Credit is given to the source of each document, and, if 
reproduction release is granted, one of the following notices is affixed to the document. 

If permission is granted to reproduce and disseminate the identified document, please CHECK ONE of the following three options and sign at the bottom 
of the page. 






Level 1 Level 2A Level 2B 



t 



t 




Check here for Level 1 release, permitting reproduction 
and dissemination in microfiche or other ERIC archival 
media (e.g., electronic) and paper copy. 



Check here for Level 2A release, permitting reproduction Check here for Level 2B release, permitting 

and dissemination in microfiche and in electronic media reproduction and dissemination in microfiche only 

for ERIC archival collection subscribers only 



Documents will be processed as Indicated provided reproduction quality permits. 

If permission to reproduce is granted, but no box is checked, documents will be processed at Level 1 . 



Sign 

here,-* 

please 



ERIC 



/ hemby grant to the Educational Resources Information Center (ERIC) nonexclusive permission to reproduce and disseminate this document 
as indicated above. Reproduction from the ERIC microfiche or electronic media by persons other than ERIC employees and its system 
contractors requires permission from the copyright holder. Exception is made for non-profit reproduction by libraries and other service agencies 
to satisfy information needs of educators in response to discrete inquiries. 



Signature: 






Organization/Address: pv i 



Printed Name/Position/Title: 






b£S3 



-Mail Address: 



f 



5-6653 

Date: ifl-s/v 



M|3o)oa- 



(over) 



III. DOCUMENT AVAILABILITY INFORMATION (FROM NON-ERIC SOURCE): 

If permission to reproduce is not granted to ERIC, or, if you wish ERIC to cite the availebility of the document from another source, please 
provide the following information regarding the availability of the document. (ERIC will not announce a document unless it is publicly 
available, and a dependable source can be specified. Contributors should also be aware that ERIC selection criteria are significantly more 
stringent for documents that cannot be made available through EDRS.) 



Publisher/Distributor: 


c 


Address: 




Price: 





IV. REFERRAL OF ERIC TO COPYRIGHT/REPRODUCTION RIGHTS HOLDER: 

If the right to grant this reproduction release is held by someone other than the addressee, please provide the appropriate name and 
address: 




V. WHERE TO SEND THIS FORM: 



Send this form to the following ERIC Clearinghouse: 



However, if solicited by the ERIC Facility, or if making an unsolicited contribution to ERIC, return this form (and the document being 
contributed) to: 

ERIC Processing and Reference Facility 
448 3 -A Forbes Boulevard 
Lanham, Maryland 20706 



ERIC 



: F-088 (Rev. 9/97) 

PREVIOUS VERSIONS OF THIS FORI'. 



Telephone: 301-552-4200 

Toll Free: 800-799-3742 

FAX: 301-552-4700 

e-mail: info@ericfac.piccard.csc.com 

WWW: http://ericfacility.org 



3SOLETE. 



