HOW CAN A TEACHER BEGIN TO HELP HER KINDERGARTEN STUDENTS GAIN 
“AUTHENTIC” CULTURAL UNDERSTANDINGS ABOUT NATIVE NORTH 
AMERICANS THROUGH CHILDREN'S LITERATURE? 



Margaret McNeil Pyterek 



Reading and Language Doctoral Program 



Submitted in partial fulfillment 
of the requirements of 
Doctor of Education 

in the Foster G. McGaw Graduate School 



National College of Education 
National-Louis University 

June, 2006 

Copyright 8 by Margaret M. Pyterek, 2006 
All Rights Reserved 



1 




Abstract 



The goals of this Action Research study were to understand how to create an 
anti-bias curriculum project focusing on Native North Americans and how to teach 
children to recognize stereotypes in children’s literature, while using The Project 
Approach (Helm & Katz, 2001) to do the formative curriculum development. The study 
weaves together three evolving story lines that were used to inform the teacher/ 
participant researcher’s growth: a.) the story of what was learned during the creation 
and enactment of this curriculum with the children; b.) the use of the discourse 
strategies (Daiute & Jones, 2003) to understand and to highlight the development of 
children, and c.) the way to identify, analyze, and use authentic literature for children. 
This month long research project involved 29 kindergarten children in two separate 
heterogeneous groups (morning and afternoon classes). The children in this study 
included special needs, English Language Learners, and a blend of ethnic, cultural, and 
religious backgrounds. Various methods of data collection and sources of data were 
used: children’s drawings, interviews (both individual and group), large group 
discussions, small focus groups, and teacher observations. An analytical framework 
was developed to differentiate culturally authentic, ambiguous, and inauthentic 
children’s literature based on expert researchers’ points of view. The major finding 
about the children was twofold: a.) when they became more critical of the Native 
American books, they showed less bias toward Native Americans as a cultural group; 
and b.) Daiute & Jones, (2003): “Discourse Strategies” (identifying, contextualizing, 
broadening, practicing, empathizing, universalizing, distancing, avoiding, and 



ii 




personalizing) were highly beneficial as an analytical lens to illuminate the students’ 
development and simultaneously inform curriculum development in the unit. The major 
finding about the educator revealed that when working as the teacher/ researcher using 
The Project Approach to teach, one could incorporate the children’s ideas into the 
construction of the unit, make more appropriate adjustments to that curriculum and thus 
become more engaged when teaching the unit as well as better able to assess the 
students’ learning progress. (Includes 12 tables, 21 figures, Children’s Literature 
Bibliography and Categorization Chart, and Curriculum Planning Matrix). 




Acknowledgments 



With sincere thanks to my dissertation committee who assisted me in the journey 
of my research and writing: Dr. Junko Yokota, my Advisor and Chair, Dr. Susan Jungck, 
Dr. Ruth Quiroa, and Dr. Anne Bennison; to my dear family who supported and 
encouraged me on this journey; to my school district mentor, Dr. Theresa Fournier, who 
inspired me to begin this journey; and finally to the memory of my father who always 
told me that education was the key to success. 



IV 




Table of Contents 



Chapter 1 Introduction 1 

Purpose of the Study 1 

Background of the Study 2 

Native American Literature 3 

Cultural Authenticity in Literature 6 

Cultural Transformations 9 

Professional Significance 10 

Overview of Methodology 11 

Definitions of Key Terms 14 

Chapter 2 Literature Review 17 

Modern Perspective of Ethnic Identity 17 

Multicultural Education 19 

Historical Perspective of Education 21 

Curricular Issues 29 

Racial and Ethnic Understandings 32 

Critical Race Theory 46 

Native American Perspective 52 

Critical Literacy 62 

Conclusion 74 

Chapter 3 Methodology 78 

Introduction 78 



Purpose 



79 




Research Questions 80 

Development of a Guide to Children’s Literature on 

Native North Americans 81 

Participants and Context 84 

Research Design 84 

Research Methods 89 

Illustrations 90 

Individual Interviews 91 

Focus Group Interviews 93 

Interview Questions 95 

Group Discussions 96 

Teacher Observation and Field Notes 96 

Theme Dramas 98 

Analysis 99 

Assessment of Research Quality 100 

Chapter 4 Presenting the Data 102 

Background 102 

Student Participants 103 

Data Collected through the Teaching Unit 104 

Illustrations 109 

Interviews Ill 

Large Group Discussions 1 1 4 

Teacher Observations 116 



VI 




Profiles: Selected Students 



117 



Katie 119 

Irv 122 

Glen 124 

Adam 127 

Sally 128 

Kelly 130 

Jacob 133 

Mark 134 

Student Summary 135 

Student Responses to Books 138 

Chapter Summary 142 

Chapter 5 Discussion 145 

Review of Questions 145 

Teacher Understandings 145 

The Project Approach 147 

Critical Race Theory 147 

Discourse Strategies 148 

Question 1 149 

Question II 158 

Question III 162 

Question IV 165 

Timing of the Unit 166 

vii 




Dramatic Implications 166 

Importance of Children’s Literature 171 

What I Learned about the Children 172 

Interpretation of Illustrations 172 

What I Learned through Interviewing 175 

Summary 177 

Chapter 6 Conclusion 178 

Central Question 179 

Study Results 179 

Limitations 182 

Implications for Teachers 183 

Relationship of Current Study to Previous Research 186 

My Learning as Teacher/Participant 187 

Suggestions for My Future Classroom 189 

References 193 

Bibliography of Children’s Literature 217 

Appendix A Curriculum Planning Matrix 233 

Appendix B Categorization of Native North American Children’s Literature 238 

Appendix C Permission Slip 



viii 



251 




List of Tables 



Table 1 Illustration and Interview Rubric 1 1 7 

Table 2 Focus Group and Discussion Rubric 1 1 8 

Table 3 Katie’s Illustration and Interview Rubric of Native American Unit 

November 2004 121 

Table 4 Katie’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 121 

Table 5 Irv’s Illustration and Interview Rubric of Native American Unit, 

November 2004 123 

Table 6 Irv’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 124 

Table 7 Glen’s Illustration and Interview Rubric of Native American Unit, 

November 2004 126 

Table 8 Glen’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 127 

Table 9 Sally’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 130 

Table 10 Kelly’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 132 

Table 11 Kelly’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 133 

Table 1 2 Illustration and Discussion Rubric Totals 137 



IX 




List of Figures 



Figure 1 Research Design and Methodology 86 

Figure 2 Curriculum Conceptual Framework 94 

Figure 3 Tim’s Illustrations 110 

Figure 4 Tina’s Illustrations 11 1 

Figure 5 Katie’s Illustrations 120 

Figure 6 Irv’s Illustrations 123 

Figure 7 Glen’s Illustrations 125 

Figure 8 Adam’s Illustrations 128 

Figure 9 Sally’s Early Illustrations 129 

Figure 10 Sally’s Last Illustration 129 

Figure 11 Kelly’s Illustrations 131 

Figure 12 Jacob’s Illustration 133 

Figure 13 Mark’s Illustrations 135 

Figure 14 Sally’s First Drawing 11/1/04 151 

Figure 15 Adam’s Picture of a Native American 11/1/04 151 

Figure 16 Maggie’s Picture of a Native American 1 1/1/04 152 

Figure 17 Katie’s Picture of a Native American and Buffalo 153 

Figure 18 Native American Powwow by Mark 11/12/04 154 

Figure 1 9 Paul’s Villager Illustration 1 1/04 156 

Figure 20 Kelly’s Illustration of a Native American 174 

Figure 21 Kelly’s Illustrations of a Council Meeting December 2004 174 



X 




Chapter 1 
Introduction 



It is in the shelter of each other that the people live. 

IRISH PROVERB 

Each time a person stands for an ideal, or acts to improve the lot of others, 
or strikes out against injustice, he or she sends a tiny ripple of hope. And 
crossing each other from a million different centers of energy and daring, 
those ripples build a current that can sweep down the mightiest walls of 
oppression and resistance. 

ROBERT KENNEDY, 1966 

Citing an old rabbinical commentary, former kindergarten teacher Vivian Gussin 
Paley wrote, “The moral universe rests upon the breath of school children” (Paley, 1999, 
p. 58). In her book, she wrote about the generosity of spirit children exhibited during 
ordinary daily events. The daily events were full of importance as one life touched 
another and began a chain reaction of caring deeds toward others (Miller, 2002). 

Children enter school open to new ideas but they have already formed their 
personalities. They have definite thoughts and feelings about what they like or do not 
like about other people. Prior knowledge and experiences from family and 
socioeconomic, religious, gender, racial factors have helped form each of these 
children’s views of people. Children’s attitudes are affected by cultural diversity, social 
justice, and caring issues. The literature used in classrooms should reflect these issues. 

Purpose of the Study 

In this study, I attempted to understand the attitudes that kindergarten students 
learn through children’s books. The key question of my research was: How can a 
teacher begin to help her kindergarten children gain “authentic” cultural understandings 
about Native North Americans through children’s literature? When I use the word 



l 




“authentic,” I am using both the original dictionary definition “reliable and valid 
understandings” (Webster, 1982, p. 49) and a contemporary cultural definition, “the 
realistic depictions of a people true to their culture” (Sims Bishop, 1 997, pp.1 6-1 7). As a 
result of my research, I became better equipped to develop curricular implications for 
teaching children about First Nations peoples or Native Americans and to reflect on how 
this knowledge influenced me as a teacher. 

In schools today, Native Americans are studied because they are an essential 
part of our American history. Native Americans have always furnished inspiration and 
characters for writers of American literature. We now celebrate the oral storytelling 
tradition influenced greatly by Native Americans. Their sacred attachment to the earth is 
ever present as we become more aware of our role in the care of today’s environment. 
Native Americans are an important part of our culturally democratic curriculum 
(Stensland, 1973). 

Background of the Study 

I first became interested in this topic in 2001 when I read and reviewed the book 
Waterlily (Deloria, 1988) for a book club. During my research on the author, I learned 
that she was a member of the Lakota (Sioux) tribe. Speaking all of the dialects of the 
Sioux tribe, Ella Deloria published her first paper on the ceremonies of Native 
Americans in 1928. The same year, she began working with anthropologist Frank Boas, 
which led to her interviews and collection of stories from the eiders in many tribes. 

Later, Deloria and Boas coauthored an article on Sioux linguistics. The Indian 
Achievement Award honored her work with the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Her 
informational texts on Native Americans continue to give scholars insight into the lives 



2 




of people of Indian, Native American descent or the First Nations as many wish to be 
called today (Deloria, 1998). 

Learning about Ella Cara Deloria led me to read many nonfiction books about 
Native Americans. As a child, I had learned only that Native Americans had resisted the 
westward expansion of Europeans. I had never been exposed to the First Nations point 
of view. Even the curriculum that I had been teaching to young children focused on the 
glorious day of Thanksgiving. Only through my research did I learn that the holiday is 
not one revered by Native Americans. What lessons had I and other teachers been 
presenting to students? What about the fictional picture books that I had read to my 
classes every November? Many discrepancies between historical and present day 
Native American life began to come into focus in my study. 

As an adult with a better understanding of Native Americans, I was troubled that 
today’s students could still have experiences similar to mine. Could I help children learn 
to discern the stereotypes that I had discovered when reading inauthentic books? 
Because I could find few studies on the teaching of Native American culture to young 
children, I became interested in developing my own curricular unit. This is the reason I 
chose to focus my research to help children to gain an understanding of Native North 
Americans using authentic children’s literature. 

Native American Literature 

Native American literature is an important part of multicultural literature. Many 
different ethnic groups are represented when one reads multicultural material. There are 
two definitions for multicultural literature: literary and pedagogical. The literary definition 
tells us that multicultural literature includes literary works explicitly about varied societies 



3 




(Cai, 2002). How many social groups should be included? “Multi” can mean that the 
works are only about people of color or it can mean all-inclusiveness where all literature 
is multicultural (Fishman, 1995, p. 79). The pedagogical definition tells us that the term 
includes a group of works used to make the mainstream culture more pluralistic. The 
prevailing opinion is that all-inclusiveness is the best way to view multicultural literature. 

There are three views on the definition of multicultural literature. The first gives 
the view that multiple + cultures = multiculturalism, which would include as many 
cultures as possible with no difference between dominant and non-dominant groups. 
The second view advises the reader to move away from a focus only on racial and 
ethnic issues in multicultural education (Cai, 2002). The third view, which I agree with, 
tells us that every human being is multicultural and all literature is multicultural 
(Fishman, 1995). 

When we view all literature as multicultural, we can form a multicultural 

perspective and ultimately, achieve diversity and equity in education. 

Multiculturalism involves diversity and inclusion, but more importantly, also 
involves power structure and struggle. Its goal is not just to understand, accept, 
and appreciate cultural differences, but also to ultimately transform the existing 
social order to ensure greater voice and authority to the marginalized cultures 
and to achieve social equality and justice among all cultures so that people of 
different cultural backgrounds can live happily together in a truly democratic 
world (Cai, 2002, p. 7). 

There is a definite need to focus on the non-dominant cultures in our society. For 
readers from the dominant culture, focusing on the “other” should eventually lead to a 
change in perspective. “To place pluralism at the core of education, we need more, not 
less, multicultural literature” (Cai, p. 16). When children are exposed to literature that 
does not have cultural authenticity, they are viewing stereotypes in those books. A 



4 




stereotype is “a pejorative term that denotes an oversimplified generalization that 
trivializes individual differences and complexities” (Cai, p. 69). The agenda of the 
individuals in the dominant culture has been served by the stereotypes created to 
influence popular understandings. Historically, the stereotypes of Native Americans as 
“noble savages” were created to justify displacing their people. 

Literature can be created to reflect a political agenda. We can often see that “the 
rise of multicultural literature is a political, rather than a literary, movement” (Cai, p. xiii). 
Books written today still carry the dominant culture’s viewpoint. Neil Waldman's 
Wounded Knee (2001), a white person’s historical material about the 1800s battle in 
South Dakota, gives the reader a different perspective than the Native American record 
of the massacre of innocent women, children, and elderly people. This stereotyping 
leads to political discrimination and persecution against Native Americans. 

The image of Native Americans through some children’s books, television 
programs, movies, comics, advertisements, games, and toys gives children a skewed 
perception of native peoples. In a 1975 study, The League of Women Voters found that 
the majority of children had misconceptions about Native Americans. A full 69% of the 
kindergarten students had a traditional image of American Indians dressed with 
feathers; and 43 % of them thought that an Indian lived the way they always did 
(Hirschfelder, Molin, & Wakim, 1999). Many of the fifth graders surveyed believed that 
Native Americans lived by hunting and dwelling in tipis. 

A more recent study showed how non-Native American children still had a 
distorted image. The interview responses were “They'd be wearing feathers,” “They'd 
have war paint on,” and “They'd be carrying a tomahawk” (McElmeel, 1993, p. 39). Not 



5 




only do non-native children have distorted images, the self-concept of native peoples is 
lowered and parents have a difficult time instilling positive information about the cultural 
heritage to their children (Cai, 2002). 

The demoralizing image of the Native American as a plaything denies them their 
dignity. Recent books, such as Ten Little Rabbits (Grossman, 1991) show cute little 
rabbits dressed up like Indians for children to count. The Indian in the Cupboard (Banks, 
1980) features a white boy’s plastic Indian figurine as a toy in his fantasy world. Would 
Native Americans be proud of these depictions in books? Do the simple, stylized artistic 
images in My Very First Mother Goose (Opie, 1 996) and Amazing Grace (Hoffman, 
1993) reflect real Native American life today? Or are the cute bunnies wearing 
headbands and selling blankets stereotypes? Is the lead character dressed as Hiawatha 
in a play without stereotype? “The continued publication and popularity of books 
stereotyping oppressed groups carry the unmistakable message that the tradition of 
prejudice and racism is deep-rooted in the collective conscious of the dominant culture 
and entrenched in the cultural industry of children’s literature” (Cai, 2002, p.73). There is 
a long history of stereotypes that sends socio-political messages. 

Cultural Authenticity in Literature 

Cultural authenticity is critically important when evaluating multicultural literature. 
Books should be rejected if the content and illustrations abuse a culture. Authors of 
multicultural literature are actually messengers but sometimes unknowingly impose their 
own beliefs and values in their works. A prime example is the Susan Jeffers book 
Brother Eagle, Sister Sky ( 1991). When I spoke with the author at the Halloran Reading 
Conference (June 1992), I found that she had honest intentions when she asked Plains 



6 




Indian children to pose for her illustrations. She said that she translated the words of 
Chief Seattle into a book she felt would be more understandable to children. 
Unfortunately, the book contained some errors. Chief Seattle’s tribe lived in the Pacific 
Northwest; his words were changed from their original environmental meaning, and in 
fact, were taken from a speech about pollution written in 1972 by a white screenwriter 
from Texas (P. J. Deloria, 1998). Chief Seattle never wore a Plains Chief headdress 
with many feathers as the book claimed. “Some multicultural books fail, not because the 
authors are unimaginative but because they have not acquired the culturally specific 
perspective” (Cai, 2002, p. 42). 

Insider writers, those who write about their own cultures, can also fail to avoid 
stereotypes when they misrepresent cultural facts. For example, Jamake Highwater’s 
book, Ceremony of Innocence (1 985), tells a story about the post-Wounded Knee world 
where the women characters are unable to cope with life on any level. Although this 
native author has been questioned as to his true cultural background, he has been 
regarded highly in the past for his work (Slapin & Seale, 1992). 

Those outside of the culture can achieve culturally true results by not only relying 
on imagination but also drawing on direct or indirect experiences of reality in the lives of 
the characters. Specific experiences related to each tribe and not general “Indian” facts 
or ideas are essential. One such outsider, Paul Goble, has earned the respect of Native 
Americans because his series of Iktomi tales (Goble, 1988a, 1988b, 1989, 1991a, 
1991b) or stories, such as Her Seven Brothers (Goble, 1988), were researched while he 
lived in the western United States. Paul Goble’s perspective is that of the Native 
American whose tales he is telling. His stories entertain and instruct about Native 



7 




American culture at the same time. 



According to educators, children’s literature is evaluated by two functions: its 
entertainment value and its instructional content. Books should contribute in a positive 
way so that children can learn to understand and appreciate the cultures of others. A 
book can have great literary value and also be culturally correct but not appropriate to 
use with children who do not have the depth of understanding in their evaluation. That 
is, books need to be developmental^ appropriate or else they can have harmful effects 
on the young reader. 

Literature containing negative images and experiences can, however, give the 
reader a positive appreciation of other cultures, such as in The Heart of a Chief 
(Bruchac, 1998). Negative characters in this insider book do give the child reader a 
realistic picture of Native American life (Cai, 2002). Yet many other outsider books do 
have cultural inaccuracies and stereotypes from a dominant culture’s point of view. As 
part of the popular “Dear America” series, My Heart Is on the Ground: The Diary of 
Nannie Little Rose, A Sioux Girl (Rinaldi, 1999), received high commendation from 
major review journals. But Oyate, the highly respected Native American organization 
panned this book because it gives the dominant white viewpoint about the Carlisle 
Indian Industrial School. In the 1800s, children were forced to attend schools far away 
from their own families and many children died at these schools. Yet the book talks 
about the need to civilize the natives and help them to be like the white man (Cai, 
2002). This story is not culturally correct and would repel a Native American reader. 
From the Native American historical perspective, the children’s experiences in the 
schools were quite different from the white historical perspective. 




Cultural Transformations 



Even in basal textbooks, hegemonic ideologies of the dominant class frame the 
way historical and cultural material is written. In schools, as in other institutions, 
these ideologies hide behind the following forms: the claim of the dominant 
classes that their interests stand for everyone's interests; the claim that conflict is 
only occurring outside of the political realm; and the claim that forms of beliefs, 
attitudes, values and practices of the dominant group are universal and natural 
(Giroux, 1981, p. 24). 

When sociopolitical critics expose the interests of the dominant culture, they might be 
accused of politicizing literature; actually, they are pointing out the political inequality 
and injustices in the text (Cai, 2002). 

Culture can be the mediation between a society and its institutions, such as 
schools, but it may become a way for power to be used unequally to produce other 
meanings and practices in the interest of the dominant group. Culture then can be 
defined as antagonistic relationships that are a part of a complex of socio-political 
institutions that enable yet limit human action (Giroux, 1981). People struggle to shape 
their own lives while being controlled by the social and political forces in their 
environment. How can children be taught to recognize these inequities and make an 
impact on the system of power relations? 

In cultural practices, Cole refers to “the dual process of shaping and being 
shaped through culture” (1996, p. 103). These cultural practices are not neutral because 
the shaping includes values about what is natural and morally right (Miller & Goodnow, 
1995). Participants are transformed when they enact these practices. The word 
transformation here describes the process by which cultural practices and activities, 
including social and cultural norms and expectations, are changed by people as they 
develop new learning (Guberman, Rahm, & Menk, 1998). Learning about non-dominant 



9 




cultures through multicultural literature can enable the transformation of children as they 
remove cultural barriers to step into the world of “the other” successfully. 

One culture is separated from another by three kinds of borders: physical, 
cultural, and inner (Cai, 2002). Physical borders are physical and/or geographical. 
Moving into a new country to learn about other cultures is a physical process. If one 
learns to appreciate cultural differences such as those in others’ history, belief system, 
traditions, values, and experiences, a cultural border has been crossed. The inner 
border can be the most difficult to change. Our minds can contain negative feelings 
such as fear, bias, or prejudice that keep new understandings of the cultures of other 
people on the other side of the inner border. Not only do adults need to cross these 
borders, we need to teach children to broaden their own visions and outlook as they 
grow to be a part of a pluralistic world. 

In the past, people of the non-dominant cultures were required to dissolve into 
the mainstream culture. Native Americans in the 1800s were forced to learn about the 
dominant white culture as shown in the book, Indian School: Teaching the White Man's 
Way (Cooper, 1999). Non-dominant children from minority cultures are still alienated by 
our educational system. Educators believe that we need to move from our mainstream 
culture so that we can help children find the multi-cultural bridge of acceptance and 
respectfulness. In this way we can find the shared human universal (Cai, 2002). 
Professional Significance 

When researching the topic of Native North Americans, I was unable to find 
authentic unit plans for elementary school. The children’s literature found in past units 
included authentic as well as inauthentic books but no evaluation materials to help the 



10 




teacher choose wisely. The Barnabas and Anabel Kindersley/UNICEF book (1997), 
Children Just Like Me: Celebrations, does not have any information about Native 
Americans. Kids’ Multicultural Art Book: Art & Craft Experiences from around the World 
(1993) by Alexandra M. Terzian, features multiple art activities that were used in the 
past. Many books have unit lessons which include simple art activities, food festival 
ideas, and costume pictures showing Native Americans as they lived in the 1800s. In a 
few cases, I found discussion of the teacher’s role in planning and implementing 
lessons, but the personal reflections of teachers and students were not highlighted. I 
wanted to know why the lessons worked and which books would be the most valuable 
for teaching those lessons about Native Americans. I believe that my study will give 
teachers an insider viewpoint of the process of creating a unit with an annotated 
bibliography of appropriate unbiased books for the early elementary age child. 

Throughout this study, I will discuss my reflexive role in the reading of Native 
North American children’s literature, during the teaching of that literature, and in the 
data analysis of the interviews and the illustrations made by the children. The 
possibilities for curricular changes will be demonstrated by data presented in this paper. 
It is my hope that the results of my research can inform other education professionals 
about the importance of teaching unbiased viewpoints for all multicultural literature, and 
how to go about it. 

Overview of Methodology 

This Action Research study focuses on the phenomenological worldview 
question: How can a teacher begin to help her kindergarten students begin to gain 
authentic understandings of Native North Americans through children’s literature? I 



li 




attempted to understand the children’s experiences from their own points of view, the 
emic perspective. This case study of my kindergarten classroom includes empirical data 
from my students. As Action Research, the framework for the development of the 
curricular social studies unit on Native Americans was planned ahead of the teaching 
but the implementation transpired during the teaching. Through the collection of 
documentary evidence, I assessed the children’s attitudes about Native Americans 
through their responses during interviews and discussions, by their illustrations of First 
Nations people, and during our study of culturally authentic, ambiguous, and non- 
authentic children’s literature. At the same time, I also broadened my own 
understanding of the kindergarteners’ conceptual growth and learned how to facilitate 
this growth as I noted my own teacher/participant reflections during the unit. 

Critical Race Theory was an important component in the conceptual context of 
my research. Critical theory of race blends the practical and curricular social science. 
The practical philosophy looks at the ethical and political life (praxis) with social action 
to be undertaken as a result. Helping children to begin to see the historical struggles 
and modern day expectations of the indigenous people in a dominantly controlled white 
society develops powerful concepts. Relating these new ideas to the literature written by 
the insiders and outsiders of the culture assisted the children in their development of 
anti-bias attitudes. My specific research questions for this study were: What can I learn 
about using literature to influence how children begin to develop perceptions of others? 
What can I learn about teaching children to discern bias in Native American children’s 
literature? What can I learn about helping children develop attitudes about people who 
are not present and culturally different from themselves? What can I learn about 



12 




creating an anti-bias curricular unit to incorporate an understanding of other people as 
reflected by their literature? 

As teacher/participant/observer, I taught my regular kindergarten students at a K- 
3 elementary school of 300 students in a suburb of a large metropolitan city in the 
United States. (The permission slip for student participation is reproduced in Appendix 
C. For purposes of confidentiality, the school has been given the name Glen School.) 
The research participants were heterogeneously mixed based on ability, age, and 
gender in two half-day classes of approximately 15-20 students each. The unit was 
taught in November, 2004 in a developmental^ appropriate Project Approach 
curriculum format. Several tape-recorded interviews of individuals, small groups, and 
large groups were collected during the unit. Drawings depicting Native Americans were 
created by the children. Gesell’s (1974) child development evaluation work and the 
Goodenough-Harris (1963) Draw-a-Person Test served as sources for developmental 
analysis of the children’s illustrations. I observed and took field notes of the children 
taking part in art and drama activities. Although the unit was planned, the daily lessons 
were continually developed and adapted depending on the input of the students. I 
taught children to look for stereotypes in the illustrations, factual information, and 
fictional representation of the literature. I tried to enable the children to gain a sensitive 
awareness of Native Americans through their literature. 

In carrying out the research design, I conducted this curriculum development 
project to not only assess what I was learning as I developed an anti-bias unit focusing 
on Native North Americans, but also to help the children reflect on their own progress in 
recognizing the similarities and accepting the differences of people who live in our rich 



13 




cultural society. The data collected in this Action Research case study of my classroom 
related what I was seeing as a teacher of the unit and what I was learning about the 
children’s attitudes on the theoretical topic of race. I attempted to create a valid unit of 
study to help students discern stereotypes about Native North American literature. 
Definitions of Key Terms 

Following is a list of terms important to the study. Each term is followed by a 
discussion of the ways in which the term is used. In some cases, examples are provided 
as well. 

Accuracy, when the text and illustrations correctly present information about 
Native Americans. In an informational text on the modern Native American child, the 
dress would not differ from any other American child at school or play, e.g., jeans, shirt, 
skirt or dress worn without fancy ornamentation (Reese, 2001). 

Ambiguous : refers to books that are not authentic but not completely inauthentic 
on several levels: content (not specifically denoting a tribal group) or image (not 
illustrating cultural values). 

Authentic : refers to the realistic depictions of characters and cultures with regard 
to physical appearance, behavior, attitudes, values, language, and beliefs that are true 
to their cultures. Authenticity is considered in an entire work (Sims Bishop, 1997). 

Culturally specific: refers to books focusing on a specific tribe (e.g., 
Lakota/Ojibway) instead of a general name such as Native American or Indian (Reese, 
2001 ). 

First Nations peoples: refers to the native peoples who first inhabited North 
America before the advent of the Europeans. It is the term preferred in Canada and has 



14 




recently become more widely used in the United States. Of course, tribes prefer to be 
called by their own names whenever possible (Hirschfelder et al., 1999). 

Hegemony, refers to the process in society whereby a fundamental class 
exercises ideological control over related classes through its intellectual and moral 
leadership. It also refers to the relationship between the dominant and dominated 
classes. Europeans used control over the resources of indigenous people when the 
Native American lands were seized. The white European view became dominant and 
limits were placed on any opposition to educate the children of the dominated Native 
Americans or to convert the people to Christianity (Giroux, 1 981 ). 

Inauthentic : refers to books that violate the integrity of a culture. 

Multicultural literature: consists of the literary and pedagogical definitions. The 
literary definition refers to literary works that are about other cultures inside of the main 
cultural dynamics. The pedagogical definition refers to a group of works used to change 
the monopoly of the mainstream culture and make the curriculum pluralistic (Cai, 2002, 
pp. 3-5). 

Native North American: refers to the indigenous cultural groups of North America. 
In the past, the terms American Indian or Native American had been used. I prefer to 
add the word North to the title to differentiate it from the Central and South American 
portion of our continent. 

Psychological constructivism: a view which “focuses on the ways in which 
meaning is created within the individual mind, and how that shared meaning is 
developed within the group process” (Richardson, 2003, p. 1624). 

Representation of Native American: refers to an illustration of an object, animal 



15 




or person depicted as Native American (Reese, 2001). 

Stereotype : denotes an oversimplified generalization that demeans individual 
differences and complexities. Usually a pejorative term, an example would be 
characterizing a Native American as always having red skin and speaking with a short 
“Ugh!” 



16 




Chapter 2 
Literature Review 

We want to let others know that we are still alive as a nation, that we have not been 

killed off. Regardless of the hard times we have gone through, we still have our ways, 
our knowledge, our wisdom, and our elders. 

CECELIA FIRE THUNDER, LAKOTA NATION, 2001 

How can a teacher begin to help students gain a multicultural understanding of 
authentic children's literature? How can a curriculum be written to encourage children to 
evaluate literature with an anti-bias viewpoint? In this chapter, I discuss the modern 
perspective about why teaching about cultural differences is important, how multicultural 
literature promotes global identification, the historical perspective in education, 
curricular issues influenced by racial stereotypes, racial and ethnic understandings, the 
development and importance of Critical Race Theory, ethnographic studies of Native 
American teaching, and the need for critical literacy in social justice issues. Educators 
believe that young children benefit from being taught a culturally democratic curriculum. 
A constructivist curriculum helps children to build meanings that reflect the diverse 
cultures of American society. I believe that teachers need to look at literature that 
reflects the heritage of a people and be aware of the message books can send to 
children. 

Modern Perspective of Ethnic Identity 

In Other People's Children (1995) Lisa Delpit asks, “How can we lessen the 
‘modern prejudice’ that pervades our society, alienating and disempowering large 
segments of our population?” (p. 124). If adults worry about the events of war, 
economics, and politics, then what about our children? “It has become increasingly 



17 




difficult to maintain classrooms as self-contained magical worlds - places filled with 

Harry Potter fantasies, suspended in time, and isolated from the harshness of that other 

world outside. Children need our strength and support” (Miller, 2002, p.746). 

In 1989, the United Nations formally adopted the UN Convention on the Rights of 
the Child, an agreement consisting of 54 articles that define what every child 
needs. Countries that ratify the convention promise to strive to furnish the basics 
of food, water, and shelter. They also pledge to provide all children, boys and 
girls equally, with an education and health care; to protect them from wars, 
exploitation and abuse; and to guarantee their right to a name, a nationality, and 
family. 

Thirteen years after its introduction, the Convention on the Rights of the 
Child is the most widely accepted convention in the history of the United Nations. 
A remarkable 191 of 193 member countries have ratified the agreement. Which 
two have not? Somalia. And the UNITED STATES (Burke, 2002). 

If the world understands the rights of the child and is striving to create a better life 

for every child, why hasn’t the United States publicly acknowledged its agreement? Of 

course, political matters focused on the document’s wording or the financial 

responsibilities required by signatories may be the cause. Could the United States 

government disagree with the premise of Article One, that all humans are born free and 

equal in dignity and rights? 

The focus is on the individual. One does not ask how he should treat human 
beings in order to have a well-ordered society. Rather we ask how to organize 
society to ensure the development and well being of the people. This has been 
fundamental to the UN’s approach to human rights and economic development 
for the past fifty years (Robinson, 2003). 

Multicultural education is one way to insure that the human needs of children are being 
met. 



Literacy is at the top of the policy agenda of the United States (Au, 2000). Does 
the government directly confront the deep inequalities that exist in schools? Our leaders 
would benefit from a deep commitment to social justice and equal access to resources 



18 




for children. The key elements of multicultural education are ethnicity or national origin, 
social class, primary language, gender, religion, age, geographic region, urban- 
suburban rural setting, and exceptionality. “Three of these cultural variables - ethnicity, 
social class, and primary language - are consistently related to schools’ difficulties in 
serving students well and bringing them to high levels of literacy” (Au, 2000, p. 835). 

The “students of diverse backgrounds” account for about 35% of the total enrollment in 
pre-K through Grade 12. Many of these children grow up in poverty. “A gap between the 
literacy achievement of students of diverse background and students of mainstream 
backgrounds has long been recognized” (Au, 2000, p. 835). 

Every child comes to school with a conscious or unconscious ethnic identity. 
Educators believe that this identification must be recognized and respected by the 
teacher and become the basis for classroom learning activities. Differences must be 
acknowledged rather than ignored. Once children have addressed their own ethnic 
identifications, they are ready to develop family, local, and finally, national identification. 
The national identity of the individuals requires their understanding and commitment to 
democratic ideas such as human dignity, justice, and equality. Here the focus is on 
becoming effective members of a democratic society. An individual’s strong national 
identification is essential to his/her development of a global identity (Banks & Banks, 
2001). With a global identification, children can become better citizens of the world. 

Multicultural Education 

Multicultural literature is one important way to develop global identification. 
Although one could say that the early movement began as far back as the 1880s when 
George Washington Williams wrote his history of African Americans, the multicultural 



19 




education movement came to the forefront in the 1950s. It was designed to help African 
Americans and other ethnic groups become part of America’s melting pot. “Their goals 
were primarily assimilationist through the reduction of prejudice” (Ladson-Billings & 

Tate, 1 995, p. 61 ). The civil rights unrest over desegregation of the 1 960s also brought 
the desire to offer black studies at the university level. Gender and other ethnic minority 
studies soon followed. Multicultural literature for younger children began to flourish in 
the last two decades. Nieto (1992) placed multicultural education in a sociopolitical 
context when she said that multicultural education should be basic education for all 
children. A curriculum needs to challenge and reject racism and other forms of cultural 
discrimination and affirm pluralism. This change should become part of the curriculum 
and instructional strategies. The interaction between teacher and students becomes a 
praxis as the basis of a social change by continuing to foster social justice. 

Today the term multiculturalism is used interchangeably with diversity in schools 
(Ladson-Billings & Tate, 1995). Components of a multicultural curriculum include ethnic, 
minority and women’s studies; bilingual education and English as an additional 
language; cultural and global awareness; human relations and conflict resolution; and 
special education. 

The U.S. National Educational Goals (1995) proclaim that excellence and equity 
are necessary in student achievement. The excellence depends on the child using 
higher-level thinking skills in relation to understanding text; equity looks at the 
improvement in the achievement of students of diverse backgrounds compared to the 
level of the typically developing child. There has been a great consensus among United 
States policymakers about the need to narrow this achievement gap. There has been 



20 




no agreement on the way to narrow the gap. According to Au (2000), “Groups on the far 
right of the political spectrum attempted in the 1990s to dismantle affirmative action 
programs and to promote a meritocratic concept of equity, without regard to issues of 
cultural bias and community power” (p. 836). These groups argued that educational 
resources should be concentrated on those most able to contribute to society in the 
future. These are identified as the students who are from the higher socioeconomic 
income levels. In this view, equity and excellence are seen as competing goals. 
Policymakers often ignore the low achievement of students of diverse backgrounds. 

This trend moves us away from an equal, democratic view of education. 

History is the study of all people but the central problem is the way teachers have 
traditionally chosen to incorporate diverse people and their perspectives in the 
curriculum. Teachers can make them adjuncts to the main story rather than as a central 
part of our country’s story (Pettis-Renwick, as cited in Darling-Hammond, French, & 
Garcia-Lopez, 2002). In a country which believes in equal rights and the opportunity for 
each of its citizens to improve our conditions, teachers can be encouraged to try to help 
all students achieve academically, socially, and politically. 

Historical Perspective of Education 

John Dewey (1859-1952) wanted a meaningful education for all, where students 
were connected to nature, learning habits from the social group, being moved into the 
larger society, and being motivated to “learn by doing.” He believed that all students 
should be allowed to get the education they deserved. This progressive idea was 
democratic because all students would have an equal voice. Dewey’s ideas on 
education in a diverse society built on the uniqueness of each ethnic group and the 



21 




connections between the groups. He believed that each educated individual is a social 
individual and that society is a union of those people. He believed that one should 
experience the perspectives of another and by that connection, to develop 
understanding and appreciation for that person’s experience and understanding of the 
world (Darling-Hammond, 2002). 

Dewey went on to say that a society’s multicultural membership must have 
individuals who have an equable opportunity to receive help and to give help to others 
(as cited in Reed & Johnson, 2000). If one is isolated, life becomes a formal institution. 
Dewey believed that “A democracy is more than a form of government; it is primarily a 
mode of associated living, of conjoint communicated experience” (p. 104). 

As our nation has become more diverse, education has in many ways remained 
the same. There is a need to repair social fabric by looking at education as democratic. 
Educators believe that there is a need to provide social dialogue and an understanding 
of diverse points of view. “Most schools, however, are poor places in which to learn 
democracy. They often illustrate authoritarian and coercive forms of social control and 
social stratification both across schools and across tracks within schools” (Darling- 
Hammond, 1997, p. 30). Tracking and assessment plans that leave out consideration 
for minorities provide a separate and unequal educational experience. Public 
education’s mission was to develop an intelligent populace, as Thomas Jefferson 
understood: “...popular intelligence coupled with democratic decision making provides 
the best protection against tyranny” (p. 31 ). All people need to be able to debate and 
decide between ideas, understand the common good, and to make judgments that 
move democratic ideals ahead (Darling-Hammond, 1997). Children will then grow up to 



22 




be able to manage complex social systems. 

Darling-Hammond (1997) goes on to say that the process of change is definitely 
constructivist, i.e., knowledge is co-created by teachers and students in the classrooms. 
Each school community struggles with new ideas to develop the deep understanding 
demanded by major changes in practice. Since we have many more ethnic and cultural 
groups represented in our school populations, schools adapting will offer optimal 
learning experiences. In order to be successful, teachers can embrace all the changes 
in our society. 

The process of change requires adults in schools to examine their own 
viewpoints. Fullan (1994) has observed that teachers must work to achieve greater 
clarity and coherence in their own minds. Building a system of schools to educate 
contemporary society invites teachers to teach for understanding and to teach for 
diversity while learning constructively together as professionals. (Darling-Hammond, 
1997). 

Teaching for diversity does encourage cultural responsiveness. Cultural 
responsiveness was found to be important in the Farr research studies (1991). Students 
of diverse backgrounds often did not do well in school because of a mismatching 
between home and school culture. If lessons were conducted in a manner responsive to 
home culture, learning opportunities were improved. Ladson-Billings (1994) found that 
teachers who were outsiders to a culture could learn to teach in a culturally responsive 
manner, if they accepted the home language, interacted with high expectations, saw 
that storytelling and question answering are different for different cultures and helped 
students learn from peers. The following seven recommendations were found to help 



23 




literacy learning: 

1 . Establish ownership of literacy as the overarching goal of the language arts 
curriculum. 

2. Recognize the importance of students’ home languages and promote literacy. 

3. Increase the use of multicultural literature in classrooms. 

4. Promote cultural responsiveness in classroom management and teachers’ 
interactions with students. 

5. Make stronger links to the community. 

6. Provide students with authentic literacy activities and instruction in specific 
skills. 

7. Use forms of assessment that reduces bias and more accurately reflect 
students’ literacy achievement (Au, 2000, p. 839). 

Schools should have “active in-depth learning, authentic performance, attention 
to student, development, appreciation for diversity, collaborative learning, collective 
school perspective, structures for caring, support for democratic learning, and 
connections to family and community” (Darling-Hammond, 1997, p. 32). When “the 
individual learner is the central focus-the star of the lesson... then the lessons have an 
outstanding chance of helping children grow intellectually and emotionally” (Hackett, 
2001 , p.1). How can teachers motivate the learner? Alfie Kohn says that the “three 
components of motivation are collaboration, content, and choice” (1993, p. 198). 
Children like to feel a part of the planning and process of learning. Children have lives 
outside of school and come with their own perspectives, points of view, and ways of 
making meaning. Using “constructivist” teaching based on the work of Dewey and 
Piaget, Kohn says: “People learn by actively constructing knowledge, weighing new 
information against their previous understanding, thinking about and working through 
discrepancies (on their own and with others), and coming to a new understanding” (p. 
219). 



Cornell West has written about his vision of an ideally educated individual “...his 



24 




prophetic thinker, is one who lives in and understands building bridges in varied worlds” 
(Reed & Johnson, 2000, p. 173). Educators can help children bridge from their insider 
knowledge to an understanding of the outsider world. West was influenced by Dewey, 
who believed that humans need to work with society to improve it. Cornell West also 
tells us his second component of prophetic thought: the need for human connections. 
Students need the human touch rather than an abstract study of humankind. When 
students really get to know their classmates and engage in personal investigations 
about past happenings and present crises and dilemmas they learn what choices 
people have or are making in their day-to-day lives. They become more likely to make 
intelligent choices. When teachers and students create a bond with each other, the 
learning possibilities are limitless. 

Nel Noddings has looked at the importance of caring relationships for teaching 
and learning (Reed & Johnson, 2000). Teachers can be the caregivers in the 
classroom, not just presenters of a reformed curriculum. Noddings continues to say that 
“our current disciplined and standards-based approach is failing” (2000, p. 245). 

Children will always learn at different levels no matter how well the teacher 
presents the subject matter. Noddings has an alternative vision, one based on the 
domains of caring “...for self; for intimate others; for associates and distant others; for 
non-human life, for the human-made environment of objects and instruments; and for 
ideas” (Noddings, as cited in Reed & Johnson, 2000, p. 246). When children learn about 
what they are interested in, they will grow into adults who care about other people and 
the world. 

What about justice in relation to caring in life? Kenneth Strike (1999) says that 



25 




justice aims at a fair society where people are respected as equals and where there are 
mutually agreeable conditions of cooperation. Justice is universalizing where good 
reasons can be generalized to all similar cases. Universality does not reject the caring 
idea but it makes it universal. It requires detachment, objectivity, and consistency. 

Caring requires empathy and connection. Moral pluralism must also be considered 
because one requires a balance between moral complexity and moral conflict. Teachers 
can help children see the viewpoint of each person. 

“Responsive teachers are authentic in their relationships with children. They 
express their feelings and needs to children so that children can see that all humans 
have feelings and needs” (National Association for the Education of Young Children, 
2001, p.1). In a responsive care giving environment, everyone shares the control. The 
teacher creates a partnership with the child. In this way, the teacher has created a 
moral purpose for teaching. According to Fullan, “It is time to reintroduce moral purpose 
explicitly into the institutional objectives of teacher education and teaching” (Fullan, as 
cited in Efron, 2001 , p. 20). Together with the class, teachers can establish a code of 
ethics based on culturally diverse, socially just, and caring issues. With “connected 
knowing”, where “the knower is attached to the known” (Elbow, as cited in Bishop, 1998, 
p. 203), there is common understanding where the concerns, interests, and agendas of 
the teacher become those of the children. Helping children to let go of the focus on the 
self allows a mode of consciousness which addresses the fundamental reordering of 
understandings between the self and the other and ultimately, the world (Bishop, 1998). 

Paulo Freire (1921-1997) spoke of Brazilian peasants in his “pedagogy of the 
oppressed” when he helped them see that they were makers of culture and that they 



26 




could transform their own reality (Freire, 1992). Children can also be taught that their 
own world is not fixed and unchanging, that it can be transformed. Freire believed that 
only through communication could human life hold meaning. His praxis is a continuing 
process of critical reflection and action that is more than good practice or action based 
on reflection (Freire, 1992). This creative action has at its core a commitment to human 
well-being, the search for truth, and respect for others. “A continual interplay between 
thought and action involves interpretation, understanding, and application” (Cadiero- 
Kaplan, 2002, p. 379). One's culture does not remain the same as a person goes 
through life. Cultures are not static. We speak of “cultures” in the plural because society 
has dominant and secondary cultures. There are powerful determinations in a class- 
based society that structure different cultural experiences along class lines (Giroux, 
1981). 

“The essence of the cultural and of cultural forms in our capitalist society is their 
contribution towards the creative, uncertain and tense social reproduction of distinctive 
kinds of relationships” (Willis, 1977, p. 172). The basic fabric of the culture consists of 
varieties of symbolic systems such as language, physical interaction, attitudes, 
responses, action, and behaviors. Individual identity is formed by cultural learnings from 
the environmental family with their traditions. The cultural practice of the social group in 
turn supports the culture. One's identity provides “the framework and basis for decisions 
and choices in life. ..it is in the passage through the cultural level that aspects of the real 
structural relationships of society are transformed into conceptual relationships and 
back again” (Willis, 1977, p. 174). 

In the last decade, theorists such as Bourdieu, Bernstein, and Apple have 



27 




attempted to delineate how the educational field embodies and reproduces forms of 
cultural capital shown to be legitimate by the dominant society. Bourdieu (1977) has 
shown how the school institutionalizes the curriculum, modes of knowing, speaking, 
style, manners, and learning that reflect the culture of the dominant classes. Bernstein 
(1996) says that the political nature of schooling can be seen in the principles that 
structure the message systems as part of the content of knowledge. Apple (1995) points 
to the power of a dominant class to influence the production of technical knowledge 
needed to accumulate capital and to gain justifiable power in a society. When teachers 
develop educational practices in curriculum preparation that use the experiences of 
students themselves, then children can discover how they give meaning to the world 
and how such meaning can be used reflectively (Giroux, 1981). 

Giroux (1981) addresses another theme in Freire’s work Theory of Knowledge. 
Freire believes that people should be able to find their own meanings and self- 
determine their own abilities to perform a critical reading of that reality so that they can 
act on it (p. 130). “Knowledge is seen as an active force that is used by the learner to 
make sense of his ‘life-world’” (p. 131). Within Freire's model, knowledge is more than a 
social construct; it also represents the basis for social action. He wanted educators to 
discover and rediscover ways to help the learner view knowledge as problematic. 
Knowledge can create problems. Children can learn to find new knowledge but also 
reflect on the process of thinking itself. 

Questions that teach students how specific structures of thought are both used 
and embodied in particular types of world views, ideologies, and experiences 
must be translated into viable pedagogical practices. Because it is then that 
students will be able to use knowledge as part of a self-determining process that 
helps them to distinguish false from true knowledge claims (Giroux, 1981, pp. 
131-132). 



28 




Teachers can remember Freire’s model when preparing curricular materials moving the 
child from self to world knowledge. 

The idea that humankind is willing and has the ability to build on and transcend 
their lived worlds is a belief that philosopher, Maxine Greene, has proposed (Reed & 
Johnson, 2000). “Freedom means the overcoming of obstacles or barriers that one 
encounters that impede or obstruct our struggle to define ourselves and fulfill our 
potential” (p. 125). Education has an important role, according to Greene, in the social 
order: to empower children to reach beyond themselves. The educator has the job of 
promoting freedom for each individual. “...The ‘walls’ or obstacles that we encounter are 
human constructs subject to mediation or removal” (p. 125). Liberty helps to create a 
domain where free choices are made in social or political terms. 

Curricular Issues 

Teachers can become aware of their own culture and its role in their lives. They 

can then help their students become culturally competent. 

They understand the need to study the student because they believe there is 
something there worth learning. They know that students now have the academic 
and cultural wherewithal to succeed in school without losing their identities are 
better prepared to be of service to others; in a democracy, this commitment to 
the public good is paramount (Ladson-Billings, 2001a, p.6). 

People in historically oppressed groups don’t want to lose their identity in the 
mainstream... all groups facing discrimination share in the desire to end the 
oppression they face. The challenge for schools and for society is teaching 
children to respect each group while ending the injustices against them (Henkin, 
1998, p. 18) 

“Prejudice is only one way of dealing with differences. Instead, we can learn to 
respect differences, to see them as a source of strength in our lives and society, even 
celebrate them. In place of prejudice, we can teach acceptance and understanding” 



29 




(Stern-LaRosa & Hofheimer-Bettmann, 2000, p. 7). Although we have made mistakes in 

the past, “anti-racist education gives us an opportunity to try again” (Lee, 1994, p. 22). 

Cornell West continues to admonish us to track hypocrisy and be self-critical so that we 

can be open to ideas different from our own. And without hope, he says, all the 

prophetic thought is meaningless. He goes on to say “the notion that history is 

incomplete, that the world is unfinished, that the future is open-ended that what we think 

and what we do can make a difference” (Reed & Johnson, 2000, p. 174). 

John Dewey supported the idea in 1904 that “all students be allowed 

(encouraged) to bring in prior knowledge, the past experiences, and their own stories to 

the class-rooms” (Delpit, 1995, p, 124). Teaching and learning is an interactive process. 

But what if these teachers have their own prejudices? 

We say that all children can learn but few of us really believe it. Many teachers- 
black, white, and “other” - harbor unexamined prejudices about people from 
ethnic groups different from their own. This is partly because teachers have been 
so conditioned by society’s negative stereotypes of certain ethnic groups, and 
partly because they are never given the opportunity to learn to value the 
experiences of other groups (Delpit, 1995, p. 179). 

Teachers benefit from learning to move the European perspective to one side and 

making room for other cultural perspectives that must be included in the curriculum. The 

perspective of multicultural or anti-racist education is a point of view that looks at all 

people who have been left out of the curriculum (Lee, 1994). This perspective allows us 

to study power relationships and equality. 

Many educators believe that teachers are struggling all the time to “shift their 

focus from teaching techniques to help develop classroom learning relationships — 

allow(ing) students to use knowledge in ways that transform their thinking, promote their 

development, and over time help them to participate in and benefit from society’s 



30 




multiple cultures” (Oakes & Upton, 1999, p. 192). Teachers can create an anti-bias 
curriculum including caring objectives to meet the diverse unique needs of their 
students. A pro-active curriculum assumes that bias exists in the world, is flexible and 
affirms all individuals, their families, their culture, and experiences. A pro-active 
curriculum encourages us to be vigilant about what we do and say or not say and invites 
different cultural perspectives to enter into every discussion, activity, task, and event. 
Finally, a curriculum is needed that challenges any form of prejudice, stereotyping, bias, 
or discrimination occurring in school (Early Learning Resource Unit, 1997). 

“Children must learn how to navigate and challenge the contradictions and 
injustices of their world” (Ramsey, 1998, p. 3). Teachers realize that children need to 
develop a strong identity, a sense of solidarity with all people, the ability to become 
critical thinkers and problem solvers. Children need the academic skills to gain access 
to knowledge in society and the power to make a difference. The driving forces in their 
lives should not be wealthy privilege and personal power (Ramsey, 1998). Children from 
all backgrounds enjoy developing satisfying social relationships and ways to integrate 
their perceptions of new information. “All developmental phases and individual traits 
become meaningful only in the context of the child's social life. They learn how to 
express their emerging needs and skills to fit the values and expectations of their group” 
(p. 15). 

Bronfenbrenner (1979, 1 986) has created a framework for analyzing a child’s 
developmental context in a formation of four concentric circles: 

• the microsystems of the family, school, and neighborhood; 

• the mesosystems which include the relationships between elements in the 
microsystem ; 

• the exosystems which are institutions that have power to affect the child's life 



31 




where he does not participate, including parent workplaces and systems of 
social support; and 

• the macrosystems which include cultural values, the ideology of the social 
group, and social attitudes (Bronfenbrenner,1986, as cited in Ramsey, 1998). 

Racial and Ethnic Understandings 

Through school experiences, U.S. children are exposed to ethnic groups with 
whom they have not interacted as closely in any other social situation. Family 
members may not be ethnically diverse and neither may their neighborhood or 
church. Up until school age, most U.S. children, regardless of ethnicity, have had 
only brief encounters with members of an ethnic group other than their own” 
(Andereck, 1992, p. 4). 

But how do early racial attitudes develop in young children? 

Researcher Phyllis A. Katz conducted a study (1997) in which six-month-old 
infants were shown several pictures of African Americans and then were shown pictures 
of Caucasian Americans. The babies looked at the latter picture for a much longer time, 
suggesting they were aware of differences. The study also included assessments of 
several infants viewing many pictures of white Americans first and then showing them a 
picture of an African American. The babies looked at the later picture for a longer time, 
showing again that they were aware of the difference. The final study included 100 
white and 100 African American infants. Dr. Katz concluded that infants as young as six 
months old can recognize racial cues, even before they develop language skills 
(Burnette, 1997 as cited in Reese, 2001). 

Fishbein, from the University of Cincinnati, says, “From infancy human beings 
are predisposed to recognize differences.” Fie says that “the ability to discern difference 
served ancient societies by helping them keep their guard up against outsiders who 
might hurt or kill them” (Reese, 2001 , p. 50). When children enter pre-school (ages 
three to four), they are self-aware but not developmentally ready to recognize what the 



32 




ethnic differences are (Reese, 2001). “Children between the ages of 3 and 8 move from 
seeing the world in concrete and static terms to being able to engage in abstract 
speculations and to recognize causal relationships and events outside of their 
immediate realm of experience” (Ramsey, 1998, p. 21). Derman-Sparks noted that 
children become aware of gender, race, ethnicity, and disabilities sometime between 
the ages of two and five. They become sensitive to the biases associated with these 
groups and often base understanding of differences based on skin color or other 
distinctive physical characteristics (Derman-Sparks, as cited in Gollnick & Chinn, 1998). 

Young children organize in large, concrete categories such as color but not 
nationality. Their groupings are so rigid that if two groups are different, they resist 
seeing the similarities. Ramsey (1998) tells about a study where she interviewed 
children. One white preschooler looked at pictures of both African American and 
Chinese American children and described the former as “a little Chinese” and the latter 
as “a lot Chinese.” She was able to decide about people who looked like her (whites) 
but could not make any further distinctions even when different physical features had 
been pointed out. Teachers often hear the term “colorblind,” the ability of individuals to 
ignore racial differences. All ages of people recognize color and no one, child or adult, is 
“blind” to these differences. 

Social cognition is the awareness of how other people and groups know, feel, 
and behave. “Interpersonal and intergroup understanding, respect, and solidarity require 
an ability to understand others’ perspectives” (Ramsey, 1998, p. 22). Young children 
interpret events in their own ways so that Piaget’s term, egocentric, should not be 
confused with self-centered. Preschoolers ask questions about skin color and why it is 



33 




permanent. When a child sees a photo of another child with her family, he will probably 
focus on a recent incident about himself with his family. This egocentrism allows the 
child to feel empathy toward others but also limits the child's ability to view some 
information objectively or from multiple points of view (Ramsey, 1 998). White children 
then can empathize with the emotions of the people in the photo of a Native American 
family but will have a difficult time understanding how a Native American might view 
them. By ages six to eight, children will be able to differentiate their own perspectives 
from others’ viewpoints. They will begin to wonder about biracial children and ask 
explicit questions about unequal treatment of races in the media. Instead of confusing 
skin color differences with color transformations that they observe, such as sun tanning, 
this age group understands that race is an irrevocable characteristic (Ramsey, 1998). 

Angela Neal-Barnett (2001), a researcher from Kent State University, says that 
there are three ways parents socialize their children on racial differences. First, parents 
directly talk about racism and help their children identify and feel comfortable about their 
own racial identity. Secondly, parents view racism as a small part of socialization and 
will discuss it when their children raise the idea. Third, parents can ignore racial issues 
and guide the children to focus on personal qualities of individuals. This is the most 
problematic for children's stress levels. African American children whose parents chose 
to ignore race had the highest levels of anxiety in their social interactions regardless of 
the race of the people involved (Neal-Barrett, Contreras, & Kerns, 2001). 

McKnown and Weinstein (2003) conducted two studies looking at the 
development and consequences of stereotype consciousness in middle childhood. The 
studies included an ethnically diverse sample of 202 children ages six to ten. Study one 



34 




revealed that during this age span, children’s ability to infer an individual’s stereotype 
increases dramatically. Children’s awareness of broadly held stereotypes also increases 
with age, and children from academically stigmatized ethnic groups (African Americans 
and Latinos) are at all ages more likely to be aware of these stereotypes than children 
from academically non-stigmatized ethnic groups (whites and Asians). Study two again 
revealed that many children from the stigmatized ethnic groups were aware of broadly 
held stereotypes. 

People of European American heritage do not identify themselves by race. 

Levine, McClaren, and Sleeter (1994) state that "white is an invisible norm that sets 
standards for everyone's experience.” Whites progress through stages to unlearn a 
false sense of universality and superiority. Stage 1 is the contact stage where 
individuals act naive about their own role in maintaining unequal privilege. Stage 2 is 
called disintegration where the uncomfortable, guilty feelings occur and individuals are 
in a state of equilibrium, aware of racism. Stage 3 is known as reintegration where 
individuals retreat, ignore, and are silent about racism. Stage 4 is the pseudo- 
independent questioning stage where people ask for information but act the same. 

Stage 5 is the immersion/emersion category where people challenge social inequities. 
Stage 6 is autonomy where the sense of whiteness occurs and the person is active in 
antiracist movements. Individuals can recycle stages or stay permanently in one stage 
(Levine, McClaren, & Sleeter, 1994). 

Nonwhites or the involuntary minorities, such as the Native Americans, who 
continue to suffer discrimination in housing, employment, and education, must learn to 
overcome a false sense of inferiority. A disproportionate number of these minorities are 



35 




unemployed, homeless, or incarcerated. William Cross (1991) has written about five 
stages of what he calls nigrescence, the stages nondominant minorities experience in 
their lives. Stage 1 is pre-encounter where individuals accept the dominant negative 
view of their group and deny membership in marginalized groups. Stage 2 is called 
encounter where reality comes to light with a racist event or contact with peers causes 
disillusionment and anger. Stage 3 is immersion/emersion where the individual is 
immersed into a group and rejects symbols of white dominance. A positive racial identity 
is formed. Stage 4 is called internalization, where less anti-white attitudes are seen and 
the individual develops a healthy and stable racial identity. In Stage 5, internalization, 
the individual has developed a strong personal identity and vows to change society. 
Again, shifts between stages can take place (Cross, as cited in Ramsey, 1998). 

Another type of minority, bi-racial individuals, also experiences stages of growth 
into positive self-views. Kich (1992) has described the stages as a movement from the 
differentness and dissonance of questioning who they are to the struggle for acceptance 
(during the teen years) where they develop conflicts in loyalties and may reject one 
racial identity. Finally, self-acceptance and assertion of the interracial identity forms in 
the late teens where the individual learns to assert his/her rights (Kich, as cited in 
Ramsey, 1998). 

We can see that children’s racial identity development varies across groups and 
historical periods. White children rarely express a wish to be black but nondominant 
minority children desire to be white. Hispanic author Richard Rodriquez described his 
efforts as a child to “shave off” his dark skin with his father's razor (Rodriguez, 1981). 
The example of conflicting values in a group such as preference of African Americans 



36 




with lighter skin tones in their own communities creates confusion in children's minds. 
With these pressures of focus on the attributes of the white majority, some ethnic 
children deny their own heritage, which results in identity confusion (Ramsey, 1998). 

Some children develop stereotypes of other racial groups. Many white children 
have stronger images of African Americans and have trouble remembering stories that 
do not match their stereotypes compared to peers who had more flexible classification 
systems. Ramsey (1998) gives the example of a child in her preschool class of three- 
year-olds. A Native American in native dress from the Algonquin tribe came to share 
songs and stories with the children. All went well until she mentioned that the visitor was 
an “Indian.” Then some of the children shrieked with fright and refused to listen 
anymore. Their pre-conceived notions about warlike historical figures from the media 
changed a pleasurable experience into a chaotic situation. Fortunately, after age seven, 
this prejudice declines and children can differentiate individual characteristics of people 
from the group stereotype. Children can become close friends with other children from 
other racial groups even though they may have negative attitudes toward that racial 
group. Whether children become more or less biased depends on their own racial 
environment, the values they are learning in school, and whether on not their 
stereotypes are challenged. 

A number of theorists have presented a summary of the stages of development 
of ethnic and racial attitudes. Goodman (1964) presented three states of ethnic 
development: ethnic awareness, ages three to four; ethnic orientation, ages four to 
eight; and attitude crystallization, ages eight to ten. Goodman looked at ethnic rather 
than racial concepts or attitudes (Goodman, as cited in Andereck, 1992). Porter (1971) 



37 




found that children develop attitudes much earlier when race is the focus. His three 
states were (a) awareness of color differences by age three; (b) racial attitudes by age 
four; and (c) strong preferences with reasons by age five (Porter, as cited in Andereck, 
1992). 

Other empirical studies have found similar results, but indicated that racial 
attitudes toward skin color develop much earlier than do attitudes about ethnic groups. 
Katz (1976) said that children observe cues between ages zero and three and that by 
four, have formed rudimentary concepts. They begin to develop conceptual 
differentiation and recognize the unchanging nature of cues. By ages five to seven, 
children are able to consolidate group concepts and increase their perceptual and 
cognitive abilities. Attitudes are held firm between eight and ten years of age (Katz, as 
cited in Andereck, 1992). Aboud (1977) provided a general sequential theory 
development of ethnic socialization without ages: unawareness of ethnic affiliation, 
awareness of groups leading to social comparison, awareness of group affiliation, and 
curiosity about other groups. Racial groups can be identified at much earlier ages 
(Aboud, as cited in Andereck, 1992). Age alone does not always predict when a child 
may form ethnic or racial ideas; “the extent of ethnic awareness and attitudes is 
dependent upon the group to which the child belongs” (Andereck, 1992, p. 14-15). Still, 
these studies show that children have well-developed ethnic and racial attitudes by 
kindergarten. These attitudes may change, but by age ten or fifth grade, they are firmly 
held. 

Race/ethnicity is not declining in importance in our country, a fact reflected in our 
schools. 



38 




Race is a concept which signifies and symbolizes social conflicts and interests by 
refining to different types of human bodies. Race plays a role in structuring and 
representing the social world. We define racial formation as the sociohistorical 
process by which racial categories are created, inhabited, transformed, and 
destroyed (Omi & Winant, 1996, p. 55). 

Sociologists Omi and Winant continue to say that racial formation is a social structure 
and a cultural representation. Children come to school from home environments where 
they hear and see the racial attitudes of their parents. Since the children in our schools 
now have not lived during World War II when we had Japanese-American concentration 
camps or during the 1950s and 1960s when the civil rights laws allowed racial 
desegregation in our schools; they are surprised that our nation has lacked freedom for 
all peoples. They carry biased attitudes to school and benefit from being allowed to 
experience a meaningful pro-active curriculum with enlightened ideas. 

Racism is a pervasive aspect of our country’s socialization. “It is virtually 
impossible to live in U. S. contemporary society and not be exposed to some aspect of 
the personal, cultural, and/or institutional manifestations of racism in our society” 

(Tatum, 1992, p. 312). We have also received misinformation about groups 
disadvantaged by racism. Prejudice is defined as a preconceived judgment based on 
limited information as a result of the various stereotypes we have been exposed to. 
These preconceived ideas can have positive associations but the effects are negative 
because they deny a person’s special individualism. Intergroup as well as intragroup 
relations can be affected. Persons of color and those who are white may have negative 
racial attitudes but it is only the whites who carry the social power “in the systematic 
cultural reinforcement and institutionalization of those racial prejudices” (p. 313). These 
prejudices are problematic because of the power differential between members of 



39 




groups. Racism develops when the belief in the superiority of one race above all others 
assures dominance. Discrimination results when the denial of privilege and rewards of 
society becomes reality for members of a group. 

As adults, we have a responsibility to identify and stop the cycle of oppression. 
More accurate information can help adjust behavior (Tatum, 1992) by pointing out the 
inter-relatedness of groups. We need to help students make connections between local, 
national, racial, cultural, and global identities (Gollnick & Chinn, 1998). 

Portes and Zhou (1993) studied the new second generation of immigrants and 
found that assimilation can be problematic. First generation immigrants in the past have 
tried to assimilate into American life by learning the language and adopting the culture 
of the environment. 

An emerging paradox in the study of today’s second generation is the peculiar 
forms that assimilation has adopted for its members... immigrant youths who 
remain firmly ensconced in their respective ethnic communities may, by virtue of 
this fact, have a better chance for educational and economic mobility through use 
of the material and social capital that their communities make available (Portes & 
Zhou, 1993, p. 599). 

These children have more chances for advancement and consider honoring their 
heritage as ways to add cultural richness to American life. Yet, when non-dominant 
children only learn the dominant cultural opinions about the superiority of white culture, 
they become less confident of their own heritage. In response, some immigrant groups 
have established their own schools to keep their ethnic heritage alive. Native American 
tribes now have tribal-controlled public schools in which traditional culture serves as the 
social and intellectual starting point (Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of 
Teaching, 1990). 

The interactions between members of an ethnic group and nonmembers may 



40 




easily be analyzed in a large social organization such as a school. The school 
setting is an important one for studying an ethnic group’s desires for maintaining 
its ethnicity. The school is often identified as one of the most important 
socializing agents of society, sometimes replacing the family and the church. 
When an ethnic group enrolls its children in the schools, it risks losing some of its 
socializing power (Andereck, 1992, p. 4). 

Ethnic groups are based on national origin, religion, and race. National origin 
reflects a historical community of people formed on common territory with similar 
economic lives, culture, and language. Ethnic identity is determined by living in a nation 
with ancestral ties of some cultural uniqueness of origin. Symbolic ethnicity is the 
nostalgic allegiance to heritage culture of the immigrant population (Gollnick & Chinn, 
1998). 



Theodorson and Theodorson (1969) determined that when looking at ethnic 
groups, one must make a distinction between three terms: assimilation, acculturation, 
and accommodation. 

Assimilation is the total absorption of one culture into another, so that the first no 
longer has defining characteristics Acculturation is the gradual movement of a 
group or individual toward assimilation, with assimilation being the final product. 
Accommodation refers to the process by which a group alters any behaviors or 
values that are strongly antagonistic to the dominant group in hopes of 
maintaining group cohesiveness. These changes are minimal and are not 
perceived as threatening to the group’s identity (pp. 17, 3). 

What then is an ethnic group, ethnic identity, or ethnicity? 

An “ethnic group” is a reference group invoked by people who share a common 
historical style (which may be only assumed), based on overt features and 
values, and who, through the process of interaction with others identify 
themselves as sharing that style. “Ethnic identity” is the sum total of feelings on 
the part of group members about those values, symbols, and common histories, 
identify them as a distinct group. “Ethnicity” is simply ethnic-based action (Royce, 
1982, p. 17-18). 

Modern-day ethnicity in the United States is cultural rather than biological. “Humans 
define ethnic boundaries and act upon these boundaries” (Andereck, 1992, p. 13). 



41 




“Ethnic socialization focuses on the development of an ethnic identity” (Rothenam & 
Phinney, 1987, p. 13). 

The racial and ethnic landscapes of many Western societies have been 

undergoing major changes in the late twentieth and early twenty-first centuries. “The 

1990 U.S. Census revealed that nearly one in every four Americans is of African, Asian, 

Latino, or Native American ancestry” (Omi & Winant, 1996, p. 474). “In the year 2000, 

one-third of the nation included African American, Latino, Asian American, and Native 

American minorities. By 2020, they will comprise 40% of the population and by 2050, 

50%! These demographic changes have influenced and will change the ways in which 

we understand concepts such as race and ethnic identity” (Song, 2003, p. 6). But ethnic 

identities are not gradually eroding, as some analysts had predicted. 

Whether in the case of the enduring ethnic identities of immigrant populations or 
the various nationalist movements which are motivated by strong feelings about 
a group’ ethnic distinctiveness, such as manifest by the Quebecois secessionist 
movement in Canada and the “ethnic cleansing” that occurred in the former 
Yugoslavia, there is much, varied evidence of the importance of what we call 
“ethnic identity” and “ethnicity” (Song, p. 7). 

In Economy and Society, Max Weber (1 968) predicted that ethnicity would 
decline in the modern world, which would be rationalized by human action and 
organization. The communal ethnic attachments were not expected to thrive in modern 
societies. Basing his theories on the experiences of white European immigrants to the 
United States, he believed that all people would gain their rights and become accepted 
into the greater society. In turn, this acceptance would contribute to the reduction of 
discrimination and prejudice against all new immigrant groups. “Many empirical studies 
now make clear that a straight-line theory of assimilation does not apply to the case of 
many non-White immigrants or ethnic minority groups in either the USA or Britain” 



42 




(Song, p. 8). Theories of immigration were criticized for treating immigrants as passive 
objects of the U.S. and not active people who could creatively adapt their own ethnic 
identities. We have seen that many immigrants after 1965 may achieve greater 
economic and social mobility through the retention of their immigrant community ties 
and cultures (Portes & Zhou, 1993). Ethnicity is still a central aspect of a minority 
peoples’ identity and a fundamental basis for divisions of most contemporary societies 
(Song, 2003). 

Ethnic uniqueness continues even when distinctive cultural practices associated 
with certain groups have declined. Armenians continue a strong sense of their heritage. 
Many White Americans of European heritage wish to claim an ethnic ancestry, such as 
Scottish or Italian that makes them feel special. Like ethnicity, race is a social construct 
without its own existence and race is a form of “imagined grouping.” People’s 
perceptions of other people’s physical markers determining race are subjective; racial 
groups have no real enduring meanings. Some groups, such as Jewish people, were 
once considered a race and now are looked on as an ethnic group. “The reification of 
ethnicity results from the belief that ethnic groups are somehow endowed with a given 
set of cultural values and practices - rather than conceiving of ethnicity as something 
which is continually in process, negotiated, renewed, and subject to a variety of social, 
economic, and political forces” (Steinberg, 1981). 

As Omi & Winant (1992) have argued, race, in addition to sex and age, is one of 
the first things that are noticed about someone. We cannot always separate race and 
ethnicity because ethnic identities are often informed and shaped by the ways in which 
they are racially categorized. Various analysts have argued that racialized minority 



43 




groups experience “racial assignment” (Cornell & Hartmann, 1998). In most white 
majority societies, minority groups have been put in racial categories according to the 
views of the white dominant group. With this use of symbolic power, ethnic minority 
groups are limited in their gaining desired ethnic identities (Waters, 1996). This power 
constructs and gives meanings to racial groups on the basis of recognized physical 
difference (Banton, 1997). 

The power structure is not necessarily based on numbers alone. For example, 
under South Africa’s apartheid regime, the South African government officially 
recognized four races: White, African, Colored, and Asian (Cornell & Hartmann 1998). 
This stratified order gave the white South Africans the privileged elite status while the 
Africans were the poorest, most disadvantaged group even though they held the 
numerical majority of population. 

Ethnic minority groups need to be and are active in re-creating and reinventing 
the meanings and practices associated with their groups. People may actively choose 
ways to assert their own identities and strategic ways to invoke their ethnicity. “Much 
theorizing on ethnic identity in the past has been problematic because of the emphasis 
upon lineage and one’s past and origins. Now new work on ethnic and racial identities is 
the insistence upon the present and the changeability of identity formations through 
time” (Song, 2003, p. 17). Various forms of exclusion and discrimination continue to be 
persistent in shaping ethnic minority people’s sense of their ethnic and racial identities. 

As a result of this exclusion and discrimination, cultural racism is emerging. Here, 
people marginalize or exclude ethnic minorities by using the idea of cultural difference 
rather than biological superiority or inferiority (Barker, 1 981 ). 



44 




Although ethnic minority people are subject to often denigrating experiences 
associated with racial categorization, racial assignment is actually key to 
understanding the formation and assertion of ethnic identity: racial meaning and 
discourses, in this sense, inform (though not exclusively) people’s 
understandings of their ethnic identities and of who they are more generally 
(Cornell & Hartmann, 1998). 

Minority people actively assert identities and the meanings of these identities 

publicly. These assertions are a matter of pride, survival, and resistance. Gilroy (2000a) 

sees the centrality of race in the oppositional identities, which emerge among 

subordinated minority populations. He understands that there is a temptation to cling to 

the notion of race and racial difference. He argues for the 

deliberate renunciation of “race” as a basis for belonging to one another and 
acting in concert. They (racialized groups) will have to be reassured that the 
dramatic gestures involved in turning against racial observance can be 
accomplished without violating the precious forms of solidarity and community 
that have been created by their protracted subordination along racial lines 
(pp. 12-13). 

It is difficult to see in the near future a “planetary humanism” (Gilroy, 2000a) in 

which ideas of racial or ethnic difference are not central to people’s thinking. We need to 

acknowledge the existence of ethnic affiliation as a starting point. 

A recognition of the multiplicity of ethnic affiliations and assertions is the starting 
point for a realistic commitment to inter-ethnic alliance and cooperation, because 
to recognize the existence of various ethnic and racial identities and voices is to 
take on board the whole, complex array of people and agendas in contemporary 
multiethnic societies (Song, 2003, p. 146). 

“...Politics of difference is centrally concerned with cultural authenticity. Cultures 
do not survive unless their beliefs, values, and practices are ‘loved’ in the lives of the 
individuals who bear them. ..they should embrace the identity framed by their culture as 
their own; they should seek to live in accordance with the precepts and traditions of that 
cultural identity” (Evans, 2003, p. 69). There is no better place to begin this recognition 



45 




of cultural authenticity than in schools. When we examine the issue of race, we can see 
how children can be influenced through the books written by authors experiencing life in 
North America and how teachers can be informed of the theory for their research in 
curriculum revision. 



Critical Race Theory 

Meaningful change in society requires universal social consciousness. 

GOLLNICK & CHINN, 1998, p. 21 

A curriculum that incorporates only the knowledge, values, experiences, and 
perspectives of mainstream powerful groups marginalizes the experiences of 
students of color and low-income students. Such a curriculum will not foster an 
overarching American identity because students will view it as one that has been 
created and constructed by outsiders, people who do not know or understand 
their experiences. Educators should try to create a curriculum that will be 
perceived by all students as being in the broad public interest (Banks, 1999, 

P-15). 

Critical race theory is based in the established fields of anthropology, sociology, 
history, philosophy, and politics (Critical Race Theory Resource Guide, 2004). It is 
linked to the development of African American thought in the post-civil rights era of the 
1960s. The struggles of this period centered around justice, liberation, and economic 
empowerment with academic and social activist goals. The movement was a response 
to the retrenching of civil rights gains and the changing social discussions in politics 
(Tate, 1997, p. 199). Princeton University Professor Cornell West gives this definition of 
Critical Race Theory. 

Critical Race Theory is an intellectual movement that is both particular to our post 
modern and conservative times and part of a long tradition of human resistance 
and liberation. On the one hand, the movement highlights a creative-and tension- 
ridden fusion of theoretical self-reflection, formal innovation, radical politics, 
existential evaluation, reconstructive experimentation, and vocational anguish. 

But like all bold attempts to reinterpret and remake the world to reveal silenced 
suffering and to relieve social misery, Critical Race Theorists put forward novel 
reading of a hidden past that disclose the flagrant shortcomings of the 



46 




treacherous present in the light of unrealized - though not unrealizable- 
possibilities for human freedom and equality (Harvard University, 1999). 

Looking at the social inequity in our country, we can see that school inequity is 

based on three central propositions: race continues to be significant in our country; the 

U.S. society is based on property rights; and the intersection of race and property 

creates a tool by which we can understand these social and school inequities (Ladson- 

Billings & Tate, 1995). 

In the 1970s, Derrick Bell and Alan Freeman were deeply concerned with the 
slow progress of racial reform because laws of the 1960s were being eroded. Before 
teaching at Harvard, Bell had served as the executive director of the NAACP branch 
where he had begun designing ways to change existing laws. Bell has been considered 
the most influential source of critical thought on traditional civil rights. He employed 
three arguments in his look at racial patterns in American law: Constitutional 
contradiction, the interest convergence principle, and the price of racial remedies. He 
argued that the framers of the Constitution chose the rewards of property over justice. 
He noted that whites promote racial advancement for blacks only when they also 
promote white self-interest for interest convergence. Finally, on racial remedies, Bell 
said that whites would not support civil rights policies that may threaten white social 
status (University of Texas Education Department, 2004). 

Some noteworthy contributors to the Critical Race Theory discourse from the 
1980s to the present are Richard Delgado and Kimberle Crenshaw. Delgado maintained 
his view of racial reality that is socially constructed where persons of color form a 
different frame of reference. In order to understand their perspective, the minority voice 
must be heard (Delgado, as cited in University of Texas Education Department, 2004). 



47 




Crenshaw argued that there is little difference between conservative and liberal 
discussion on race-related law and policy (1998). She identified two properties in anti- 
discrimination law: expansive and restrictive property laws. The latter show equality as a 
process while the former stresses equality as outcome. She argued that the failure of 
restrictive property cases to correct the past racial injustices perpetuated the status quo 
(Crenshaw, as cited in the University of Texas Education Department, 2004). She 
continued her work in the 1 990s by looking at the application of race in educational 
policies and found that the restrictive interpretation of anti-discrimination laws also 
inhibited African Americans. 

Thus the civil rights laws have limits in our country. In the area of education, 
theories and belief systems rely on racial characterizations and stereotypes about 
people of color to help support ideology and political action. Some past research, called 
the inferiority paradigm, was built on the belief that people of color are biologically and 
genetically inferior to whites. Even today, IQ studies are still apparent in education 
research involving ethnic minorities. This paradigm states that white middle-class 
Americans serve as the standard against which other groups are compared; that the 
instruments used to measure the differences are universally applied to all groups; and 
that variance factors such as social class, gender, cultural orientation and proficiency in 
English, can be extraneous and are ignored at times (Tate, 1997). 

Even after the landmark 1954 civil rights decision in the case of Brown v. Board 
of Education of Topeka, Kansas, students of color experience segregation. Thurgood 
Marshall and the NAACP legal defense team did their best to win the case but there 
were shortcomings in their strategy. Although African Americans represent twelve per 



48 




cent of the national population, they are the majority in twenty-one of the twenty-two 

largest (urban) school districts (Ladson-Billings & Tate, 1995). Instead of providing more 

opportunities, school desegregation has caused whites to move from their old 

neighborhoods; less school busing has led to highly segregated classrooms; and fewer 

African American teachers and administrators have been integrated into white schools. 

Gloria Ladson-Billings and William Tate first brought Critical Race Theory to the 

attention of educational leaders. They believed that the theory had great potential as a 

lens through which educational practices and policies can be investigated (Ladson- 

Billings & Tate, 1999). Critical race theorists in education believe in social justice and 

know of the pervasiveness of race and racism for students of color. As a powerful social 

construct, racism is deeply ingrained in our educational system. Storytelling from the 

point of view of “the other” has brought critical race theorists into conversations with 

postmodern, poststructural, feminine, and postcolonial researchers. Critical race 

analysis is also viewed with other forms of subordination such as gender and class 

discrimination (Solozano & Yosso, 2002). 

Race consciousness is a modern idea, as Omi and Winant point out. 

When European explorers in the New World “discovered” people who looked 
different than themselves, these “natives” challenged then existing conceptions 
of the origins of the human species, and raised disturbing questions as to 
whether all could be considered in the same “family” of man (Omi & Winant, 
1992). 

Religious debates began giving the Europeans cause to wonder if these new natives 
were really human beings with souls that could be saved. Scholars in the eighteenth 
and nineteenth used the classification scheme of living organisms developed by 
Linnaeus in Systeme Naturae, to identify and rank variations of humankind (Omi & 



49 




Winant, 1992). Race then was decided to be a biological concept. In 1839, Dr. Samuel 

Morton studied cranial capacity and published Crania Americana, or, A Comparative 

View of the Skulls of Various Aboriginal Nations of North & South America. He found 

that non-white indigenous people had a smaller brain capacity than white Europeans. In 

the early 1900s Max Weber (1921) refuted biological explanations for racial conflict and 

said that social and political factors caused conflict. Cultural anthropologist Frank Boas 

dismissed this scientific racism by rejecting any connection between race and culture or 

the continuum of “higher” and “lower” cultural groups. 

The American Anthropological Association (1998) released a statement on race. 

They noted that people have been conditioned to “viewing human races a natural and 

separate division with the human species based on visible physical differences.” Human 

beings are not biologically distinct groups. 

Evidence from the analysis of genetics (e.g. DNA) indicates that most physical 
variation, about 94%, lies within so-called racial groups. Conventional geographic 
“racial” groups differ from one another only in about 6% of their genes. This 
means that there is greater variation within “racial” groups than between them 
(American Anthropological Association, 1998, p. XX). 

Neighboring groups overlap their genes because differing groups interbreed. Our 

continued sharing of genetics maintains a single species of humankind (1998). 

Even today, there are attempts to base racial classification on shared gene pools. 

Arthur Jensen (2001) wrote an essay arguing that hereditary factors mold intelligence 

and revived the “nature” verses “nurture” dispute. Yet “within the contemporary social 

science literature, race is assumed to be a variable which is shaped by broader societal 

forces” (Omi & Winant, 1992, p. 160). 

“White people externalize race” (Flagg, as cited in Bender & Braveman 1995, p. 



50 




34). When whites speak of race, they speak about people of color. They do not think of 
themselves as racially different. So whites would not describe themselves in racial 
terms because being white is the racial norm to them. Omi & Winant (1992) have said 
that an effort must be made to understand race as “an unstable and ‘decentered’ 
complex of social meanings constantly being transformed by political struggle...” (p. 
165). 

Whites have maintained the privileged position in our country. The oppressed 
groups needed to learn the culture and history of the dominant group. Values have been 
determined by culture so that a conception of what is desirable and important to us or 
the group influences prestige, status, pride, and loyalty (Gollnick & Chinn, 1998). Our 
culture imposes order and meaning of our experiences in accepted, patterned ways of 
behavior. This enables us to live together as a society and predicts how others will 
behave in that society. Our race, gender, and class determines how privileged we are. 
Dominant groups, such as whites, do not easily share power. They may use strategies 
to divide and conquer others. The goal should be integration of cultural groups with 
equality and the possibility of maintaining ethnic identities while participating in the 
macro-culture (Gollnick & Chinn, 1998). Two distinct groups can function separately 
without requiring assimilation. Native Americans within the U.S. come closest to cultural 
pluralism because most have distinct political, economic, and educational systems. 
However, their economic, political, and educational systems do not match those of the 
majority. 

The intersection of race and property as a central construct in the understanding 
of Critical Race Theory definitely pertains to the experience of the Native Americans. 



51 




They were not treated as equal citizens in the formation of the new nation. The 
settlement and seizure of their lands forced the Native Americans into isolation and 
caused the inequities they experience today. Possession, and in particular, property, is 
part of the cultural practice of whites. Whites claimed the rights of disposition, rights to 
use and enjoy the privileges of whiteness, the status and reputation rights, and the 
absolute right to exclude (Harris, as cited in Ladson-Billings, 1995). Cultural borders are 
put up as political social constructs to maintain differences in rights and conditions. The 
goal for education is to offer concrete guideline for practice for teachers ready to cross 
those borders and make a difference. Schools have a role in the context of an unequal 
society and in the ongoing problematizing of the theoretical borders of indigenous 
education (McDonald, 2003). 

Native American Perspective 

To my friends in Indian Country: We have looked over the horizon and what lies 
before us is a universe of possibilities. 

ASTRONAUT JOHN HERRINGTON 
Endeavor 2002 

The indigenous people of the Western Hemisphere never called themselves by a 
single term nor understood themselves collectively. There were, by modern estimates, 
at least two thousand cultures who practiced a multiplicity of customs and lifestyles, 
held an enormous variety of values and beliefs, spoke numerous languages, and did not 
understand themselves as a single people, if they knew about each other. “To the 
extent 

that this conception denies or misrepresents the social, linguistic, cultural, and other 
differences among the peoples so labeled, it lapses into stereotype” (Berkhofer, 1978, 
p. 3). The term “Indian” is the stereotypical phrase first used by Columbus. 



52 




Traditionally, native parents, clan members, or elders taught children cultural 
values, tribal history, and religious beliefs in order to live a balanced life. The most 
durable social unit was the family. By exposing the children to life-cycle rituals and 
ceremonial events, the parents helped contribute to the knowledge and understanding 
of the next generations (Hirschfelder & Singer, 1992). Many times, stories were the way 
to teach the rituals and history of the people. Native American children listened and 
observed their parents and the elders of the tribal group. The child was a spectator and 
participant in all types of family and community activities. 

Learning through observation was found in studies on Navajo children (Cazden & 
John, 1971 ; Deyhle & Swisher, 1989), Pueblo children (Suina & Smolkin, 1994), Eskimo 
children (Briggs, 1970), Yup'ik Eskimo children (Bennett deMarrais et al., 1992), and 
Kwakuitl children (Philion & Galloway, 1969; Rohner, 1965). Children had visually acute 
perceptual skills and could organize observations and form concepts from them. Suina 
& Smolkin's study (1994) showed that Native Navajo children best acquired a great deal 
of information through observation rather than verbalization. The young children were 
respected as independent thinkers at an early age. Youth were viewed as adults and 
parents did not intrude into their lives. Parents and children today continue to have an 
egalitarian relationship (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997). 

In the late 1800s, the United States government supported an educational 
experiment that it hoped would change the traditions and customs of Native Americans. 
Special boarding schools were created throughout the country with the purpose of 
“civilizing” the Indian youth. The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) administrated the 
programs. By 1928, the government saw a bright future ahead for Indian Service 



53 




education (Szasz, 1 999). Thousands of the children were sent far away from their 
homes to live at the school and learn white culture (The Library of Congress, 2004). 
Children were often physically dragged out of their homes against their parents’ will. 
Since the schools were far from the children's homes, families were separated for most 
of the year so that the schools could erase the tribal cultures and replace them with 
dominant cultural values. Children were even punished for using their own native 
languages. 

For half of the day, the boarding school teachers taught academic subjects 
including English and U.S. history. For the other half of the day, boys learned 
blacksmithing, harness making, and carpentry while girls worked at sewing, cooking, 
canning, and laundry chores. They all learned how to farm. Students were sent to live 
with white families to help with farm chores and to learn white, Christian values for the 
purpose of assimilation into white society. The students were allowed to write home but 
had to keep their letters cheerful without mentioning homesickness, which was 
prevalent (Hirschfelder & Singer, 1992). 

Although from 1920-1940, there was criticism of the boarding schools from the 
Red Cross investigators, educators, physicians, and Indian parents, Congress resisted 
closing the schools. When the federal budget planners shifted from boarding schools to 
local public schools in the 1950s, the children were allowed to attend public schools 
near their own homes. Public school educators still tried to assimilate the students but in 
the 1960s, when public opinion became more accepting of cultural pluralism, Congress 
authorized funds for Native American education and cultural programs. By 1970, critics 
of the Indian Bureau charged that Indian education had not improved during the past 



54 




four decades. There were more children in schools but the quality of their education had 
not improved {The Kennedy Report of 1969, as cited in Szasz, 1999). Until 1970, the 
federal bureaucracy was accountable to Congress and the Bureau of the Budget rather 
than to the Native Americans. After that time, many tribes contracted with the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs to manage their own schools and local school boards with federal funds 
and to develop culturally based curricula. The government closed all of the off- 
reservation boarding schools except for two which still remain open today. The majority 
of Native American students attend the public schools and are able to use culturally 
sensitive textbooks and curricula. (Hirschfelder & Singer, 1992). Now, the No Child Left 
Behind Act with new restrictions and budget cuts has eliminated or threatened some 
local initiatives. 

Educators have found the peaceful settlement of Europeans among Native 
American peoples highlighted in early textbooks and children’s literature. The books 
have concentrated on events in a way that implied that difficulties evolved from the 
Native Americans’ “primitive warlike ways.” Thus, the discussion of Indian lifestyles was 
oversimplified and contrasted with the lives of the European settlers to suggest that the 
European move onto Native American property was unavoidable. The Native American 
history was viewed as precultural so that the “noble savage” in literature became a 
stereotype of a person who could not survive within the white man's more “civilized” 
culture (May, 1995). 

Fortunately, recent scholars such as Arnold Krupat (Buell, 2000), have noted the 
rich representations of literature of Native Americans through their oral stories that 
adhere to the preservation patterns in tribal cultures. They do not hold the same 



55 




patterns as literature from the European and American canon because of the 
storytelling tradition. Performed, rather than simply told, the stories are given at clan 
gatherings, danced out and re-enacted during ritual celebrations. These stories capture 
the cultural beliefs and traditions of various tribes. Early white settlers could not 
understand the Native American languages and so did not value the stories. Europeans 
believed that civilized people preserved their stories in written forms and so defined the 
Native stories as “primitive.” Yet looking at Native American artifacts dispels such faulty 
logic. The artwork and ritual objects were rich in traditions and beliefs. For example, 

Hopi and Papago baskets hold symbols reflecting their deity legends. The Kachina dolls 
also represent cultural heroes and legends. Carved and painted Indian masks of various 
Southwest and Northwest Indian tribes worn by those who participated in spiritual 
ceremonies are icons derived from cultural stories (May, 1995). Native Americans have 
a rich cultural heritage. 

Since 1988, researchers McCarty and Dick (2003) have collaborated at Rough 
Rock community in the heart of the Navajo (Dine) Nation in northeastern Arizona. As an 
insider, Galena Dick has taught at the community school for 35 years, directing the pre- 
K-6 bilingual-bicultural educational program. Teresa McCarthy, as an outsider, is a non- 
Indian educator and cultural anthropologist who has worked at Rough Rock since 1980 
as an ethnographer, curriculum developer, and consultant to the school. They have 
created a long-term collaborative research study implementing a curriculum grounded in 
local text and lives with the help of teachers, students, parents, and community elders. 
Their work has been guided by four goals: to look at minoritized student school 
experiences, to study the acquisition of first and second languages as a reciprocal, 



56 




interdependent process, to use principles of social justice in participatory Action 
Research, and to use a language-as-resource approach. They wanted to see if heritage 
language instruction was effective for children who were dominant in English but also 
were losing their native language. Their research cycle included looking at or gathering 
data; thinking or reflecting, analyzing and theorizing about the data; and acting or 
planning, reporting, implementing, evaluating, and disseminating what was learned. 
They began with the assumption that the Navajo language was a tremendous 
intellectual, social, cultural, and scientific resource to its people (McCarty & Dick, 2003). 

“Rough Rock rose to international prominence in 1966 as the first school to have 
a locally elected, all-Indian governing board, and the first school to teach in and through 
the Native language” (McCarty & Dick, 2003, p. 104). Of the 600 students in a pre-K 
through grade 12 school, most speak English as their main language. When the 
researchers began their work in 1980, Navajo was the majority language. This shift in 
the children’s heritage language has resulted in 50% of the children being only 
“reasonably proficient” in the heritage language. However, students tend to speak a 
Native variety of English and are labeled “limited English proficient.” The multicultural 
connection was a reenvisioning of the curriculum to embrace the lives and the stories of 
the children and their families. “The development of multicultural curricula is thus both a 
critique of colonial education and a proactive, pro-Navajo bridge to English and the 
wider world” (McCarty & Dick, 2003, p. 105). 

In the fall of 1993, personnel from the Hawa’ii-based Kamehameha Early 
Education Program (KEEP) came to the school to see if the reading strategies they had 
developed for Native Hawaiian students would work with children from another culture 



57 




(Vogt, Jordan, & Tharp, 1993). At the time, Rough Rock had a phonics-driven basic 
skills program used to stabilize their highly volatile curriculum. KEEP became the core 
curriculum using cultural compatibility with instructional content and participant 
structures to local language and culture. It took several years for the teachers to see 
improvements in the children’s English language development. The standardized 
assessment piece was also reevaluated. As the process continued, teachers validated 
their own power to effect curricular change. Teachers began to develop new strategies 
for observing, recording, and assessing students’ capabilities in the two languages with 
holistic writing checklists and portfolio assessment. The teachers’ ownership over the 
curriculum change became the platform from which the researchers launched a new 
bilingual, bicultural, biliteracy curriculum (McCarty & Dick, 2003). 

One other important result of the researchers’ study was the developing concept 
of reading and writing as integrated processes rather than as products from the 
application of decontextualized skills. Since the first Native American curriculum 
development center was established in Rough Rock in 1967, there has been a long 
history of producing Navajo language materials. The educators there developed a small 
collection of children’s Navajo storybooks. “Funds of knowledge” (McCarty & Dick, 

2003) were co-constructed from the cultural and linguistic materials of the children and 
adults in the community. These socially meaningful interactions helped provide the 
success of the program. The intertextual history of the collective community became 
part of the classroom oral language legacy. The multicultural literature included and 
created was part of a complete reenvisioning, reforming, and restructuring process of 
the school (McCarty & Dick, 2003). 



58 




Locally developed assessments and district-required standardized test results 
during the longitudinal study showed that the students became made gains on both 
measures of achievement. The teachers sustained opportunities to conduct classroom 
research and to understand the discourse patterns in their school even better than in 
previous years. The teachers themselves learned that literacy learning is the 
construction of meaning rather than a mechanical accumulation of skills. Unfortunately, 
the recent federal governmental mandates are threatening to dismantle much of the 
changes bilingual teachers were able to create (McCarty & Dick, 2003). 

Other school districts throughout the United States have created exemplary 
programs in technology such as the Hualapai School in Peach Springs, Arizona 
(National Indian Education Association Annual Conference Report, 1990). During the 
1981-2 school year, the Native Education Program in Manhattan began serving 360 K- 
12 children throughout New York City. Materials and curriculum development on the 
Shinnecock, Mohawk, and Cherokee tribes was included. The teaching staff was given 
workshops and conferences to upgrade their knowledge and the parents showed an 
active and continuing commitment to the program. Since that time, more school 
programs have been successfully implemented in the city (Lehman, 1983). 

Unfortunately, the courts have applied pressure on local school districts (e.g., 
Minneapolis) to reduce the concentration of minority children, including Native 
Americans. Proponents say that having the children in a separate school or a high 
concentration of Native American children in a limited number of schools best meets the 
educational needs of these children. They say that public school fails to meet the needs 
of traditions, values, culture, and language. The parents cannot influence board 



59 




elections and the school curriculum addressing Indian culture and history is lacking, 
thus perpetuating stereotypes. Opponents advocate an integrated school system, 
saying that students attain higher levels of achievement and then are prepared to 
function in a multi-racial society. They say that states cannot discriminate to favor 
Native Americans through these separate schools without violating equal protection 
standards. The proponents counter that Congress has a special constitutional 
relationship with Native Americans to enable states to establish separate schools to 
benefit Indians (Larson, 1990). 

Many of the educational trends of Canada in regard to Native peoples are 
parallel to those in the United States. There are, however, some linguistic and cultural 
influences which make Canadian education different from that in the U.S. Canada is 
officially a bilingual country with English and French having equal status under the 
constitution. Another difference concerns the Canadian policy of multiculturalism. 
Cultural heritage is an important, mandated part of the Canadian education system. The 
government funds all projects intended to promote interest and pride in the variety of 
cultures which make up the Canadian mosaic, such as the instruction in heritage 
languages by public school boards which received funding from the ministries of 
education. The First Nations people have seen great positive changes in the education 
of its young people in recent years (Labercane & McEachern, 2004). Missionaries also 
opened schools in the 1880s to educate the indigenous people. For example, 
Qu’Appelle Industrial School was established in southern Saskatchewan. Ignoring the 
government’s policy of English-only education, Father Hugonard, the director, taught his 
students written Cree and wrote a Cree-English primer. This school and other similar 



60 




schools closed in the 1920s. 



Historically, the Native American children were deeply affected by attending 
these boarding schools. Children are influenced by the social culture of school. The 
concept of culture is abstract and children are not consciously aware of their own or 
other's culture (Ramsey, 1998). Children have a vague sense of geographic, regional, 
or national differences. Their cultural expectations are developed at an early age. They 
easily notice and remember concrete cultural differences. Carter and Patterson (1982) 
say that by ages eight to nine, children have a sense of cultural relativity or the ability to 
see conventions as unique to a particular culture. 

Kindergarteners can be tolerant of different social conventions and have the 
capacity to see other cultural perspectives. They recognize that their culture is one of 
many but can simultaneously acquire bias against unfamiliar groups. Doyle (1982) did a 
study of Canadian classrooms divided between two ethnolinguistic groups. He found 
that the children played less actively with dissimilar partners and did not develop 
common repertoires so that their play is less engaging and action-oriented. Children 
selected familiar and similar playmates more often and thus lost opportunities for shared 
play with dissimilar children. The majority culture of the classroom was the most 
popular. As Gloria Anzaldua has said about the contradiction and conflict in cultural 
production in her work, La Conciencia de la Mestiza/Towards a New Consciousness 
(1997), “Awareness of our situation must come before inner changes, which in turn 
come before changes in society. Nothing happens in the ‘real’ world unless it first 
happens in the images in our heads” (p. 555). 

In summary, local knowledge, in tandem with Native language and customs, can 



61 




have a strong impact on schooling. Teachers have become empowered by educating 
themselves about Native peoples; learning styles, customs, language, and stories are 
honored as part of their tradition. Strong grounding in culture and language enhances 
achievement for young Native children. For those students who are not well grounded in 
their heritage and language, cultural integration in the curriculum is very important. 
“Current statistics indicate that there are more than 400,000 American Indian and 
Alaska Natives in kindergarten through Grade 12. Of that number more than 40,000 or 
about 10% are in 187 schools funded by the BIA (Bureau Of Indian Affairs)” (Deyhle & 
Swisher, 1997, p. 182). Off-reservation and urban community educators, because of the 
multi-tribal nature of the families, must involve teachers, parents, and elders in 
improving education for children. Government mandates can be positive, as in 
Canada’s curricular revisions, or negative as in the No Child Left Behind requirements 
for testing in the United States. The role of researchers, whether insiders or outsiders, is 
vitally important for Native American education (Deyhle & Swisher, 1997). 

Critical Literacy 

Between me and other world there is ever an unasked question: unasked by 
some through feelings of delicacy; by others through the difficulty of rightly 
framing it. All, nevertheless, flutter round it. They approach me in a half-hesitant 
sort of way, eye me curiously or compassionately, and then, instead of saying 
directly, How does it feel to be a problem?... 

W.E.B. DUBOIS 

“Double-Consciousness and the Veil” from 
The Souls of Black Folk , 1 903. 

In his autobiography, African American statesman and reformer Frederick 
Douglass told about his life as a slave and his struggles to learn to read and write. In 
those times, black people could be killed for trying to become literate. He said that his 
most successful strategy when he was young was to become friends with white boys 



62 




and ask them to help him learn to read. 

When I was sent on errands, I always took my book with me, and by doing one 
part of my errand quickly, I found time to get a lesson before my return. I used 
also to carry bread with me... This bread I used to bestow upon the hungry little 
urchins, who, in return, would give me that more valuable bread of knowledge 
(Douglass, 1997, pp. 51-52). 

As Douglass became literate, he began to read books about slavery and decided on his 
role to help emancipate American slaves. “Society, then, was a major key in both the 
suppression and in the subsequent acquisition of literacy for Douglass, and literacy, in 
turn, became an important instrument for him in the transformation of society” 
(Armstrong, 2003, p. 97). 

Educators believe that teachers must not isolate literacy from its social context. 
Words are developed in relation to complex social factors. Each word is a product of a 
long path of history between people from different social settings. Even in a dictionary, 
the meaning, pronunciation and spelling of words have been transformed over time 
because of social factors. It is beneficial for people need to be in direct contact to make 
those changes over time. Children are more likely to develop emergent literacy skills 
through close friendships rather than through distant peer relationships because they 
are constantly recreating their language in play situations. When children begin to read 
and write, they must call upon context and use decision-making skills to make 
meaningful interpretations of the written word. These words have social power. A 
wonderful linguistic experience in a rich, social milieu has been created (Armstrong, 
2003). An entire field of critical literacy has emerged in the past few years based on the 
work of Paulo Freire, a field which encourages dialogue and reflection about what it 
means to be literate and what it is like to experience different kinds of texts, how those 



63 




texts reflect societal values, and how the texts can transform society (Freire, 1992). 

Over the past three decades, educational text has been enriched by multicultural 
themes and alternate lifestyle works. 

Critical literacy challenges the status quo in an effort to discover alternative paths 
for oneself and social development. “This kind of literacy connects the political and 
personal, the public and the private, the global and the local, the economic and the 
pedagogical, for rethinking our lives and for promoting justice in the place of inequity” 
(Shor, 2003, p. 1). Literacy is understood as social action through language use 
develop-ing inside a larger culture; critical literacy is “learning to read and write as part 
of the process of becoming conscious of one’s experience as historically constructed 
within specific power relations” (Anderson & Irvine, 1993, p. 82). 

We must be critical thinkers when looking at literacy. What are the qualities of a 
critical thinker? First, we must be independent thinkers knowing when we first 
comprehend someone else’s thinking, we are passive. It is not until new ideas are 
tested and evaluated or newly created that we engage in critical thinking. A critical 
thinker must know that the information is the starting point and not the end point. We 
must form our own ideas, values, and beliefs. Critical thinking begins with questions and 
problems to be solved. 

Freire (1992) says that we must replace traditional education “banking” systems 
where deposits are made in the minds of children. Children learn best when they 
identify genuine problems in their own experiences and investigate solutions. John 
Dewey (Darling-Hammond, 2002) has suggested that critical thinking begins with the 
student’s engagement with a problem. These problems stimulate curiosity and 



64 




encourage thinking. Critical thinking seeks reasoned arguments as students work to 
demonstrate why their solutions are logical and practical. By creating arguments, critical 
thinkers challenge the authority of texts. They use reason to make complex decisions 
about actions or values of their ideas. Thus, critical thinking is social thinking; critical 
thinkers work in the community of others and are engaged in tasks bigger than the self. 
Teachers of critical thinking are bringing learning inside the classroom closer together 
with life beyond the classroom. 

Critical thinking benefits from critical literacy’s sociocultural awareness 
(Patterson, 2002). Critical literacy means looking at the meaning within texts by 
considering the purpose for the text and the author’s motives; by questioning the text 
construction; by enlisting the power of language, and by emphasizing the multiple 
interpretations of texts. To recognize what the author is saying in the text, the reader 
must begin to label the structure and features of text and identify literal-level and stated 
information with that text. Next the reader begins to analyze by applying reasoning while 
closely reading the text. The text is further evaluated by questioning, critiquing, and 
taking apart a given text. Looking at many texts, the child can begin to generalize within 
the text, connect one text with another or with prior knowledge and apply the information 
to new ideas. This synthesizing leads to the judging stage, where the child can reach a 
summarized conclusion about the value of a text. Of course, the teacher is guiding the 
student through this process. The child must understand his or her own current thinking 
in the reading process and develop a perspective in this metacognitive approach. The 
child may begin to write or orally present findings to others in the classroom or in 
preparation for social action outside of the school setting. At each stage of this process, 



65 




critical listening is very important both for the teacher and the students in the classroom 
(Patterson, 2002). 

This cycle of learning activities in the classroom, with the immersion in the 
text(s), prediction, deconstruction, reconstruction, and taking of social action, depends a 
great deal on teacher-student interaction. Vygotsky’s (1978) “zone of proximal 
development” (ZPD) takes effect here where the child interacts with the teacher and is 
allowed to achieve things not possible when acting on his or her own. The relationship 
of the teacher pulls the child forward in a dynamic similar to the way Dewey understood 
curriculum that began from student experience and was structured forward into 
organized reflective knowledge that teachers have. One difference between Vygotsky’s 
view of ZPD and critical literacy is that as an activity, critical literacy reconstructs and 
develops all members of the class including the teachers who are pulled forward as well 
as the students, whereas Vygotsky usually focused on only individual student 
development. Also, critical literacy invited the democratic relations in class to move in 
action to the outside of the class whereas Vygotsky did not use power relations as the 
social context for learning (Vygotsky, as cited in Shor, 2003). 

“Learning as a mediational tool is a central component of learning” (Vygotsky, 
1978). Critical literacy learning assumes that language is not a neutral tool. It is a tool 
with power — social, cultural, and ideological — that is reconstructed by daily interactions 
(Rogers, 2002). Freebody and Luke (1997) call for a new model of reading education, 
one that 

...shifts our classroom focus to the particular tests, discourses, and practices to 
which students have access and to the different kinds of social activities and 
cultural action that instruction can shape, encourage and yield. To circle back to 
our claims about social epistemology, teaching and learning to read is about 



66 




teaching and learning standpoints, cultural expectations, norms of social actions 
and consequences (p. 208). 

According to Freebody and Luke, schools have been fairly successful at supporting 
children as code breakers (knowing alphabetic principles) and as text participants (using 
knowledge sources to make sense of text). They continue to explain that we have not 
been as successful at supporting children as text users (i.e., knowing how to use 
particular texts in certain social contexts) or at supporting children as text analysts (i.e., 
knowing how to ask questions about text) (Freebody & Luke, as cited in Vasquez, 

2000 ). 

What constitutes critical literacy within the literature? The stance taken in terms 
of critical literacy depends on the kinds of questions asked. There are commonalities of 
critical literacy such as coming from text; literacy can be a social practice and discourse. 
Thus, text and literacy as social practices are highlighted within critical literacy (Larson, 
as cited in Green & Abt-Perkins, 2003). There is a duality about literacy. “Literacy can 
be seen as a double-edged sword in that it can be enlightening or liberating but also 
may be restrictive or dominating” (Edelsky, 1999). Literacy can limit students. When 
textbooks portray a mainstream view of the world and when traditional worksheets are 
used, literacy is not liberating. Such curricula tend to maintain rather than improve 
groups. 

Being able to construct new meaning from text may be empowering but many 
other channels of misinformation may lead to exploitation of certain groups (Freebody & 
Luke, 1992). Freire (1992) believes that literacy empowers people only when it causes 
them to be active questioners of the social reality around them. Literacy can be a double 
bind: “Having it doesn’t guarantee anything, but not having it systematically excludes 



67 




one from cultural and economic power” (Luke, 1992-3, p. 21). Moreover, the term 
empowerment is often misused. “We do not gain access to the power bases of society 
just because we can read and write (Green, 1991, p. 16). Lisa Delpit (1991) 
distinguishes individual and social aspects of power in relation to literacy. She 
distinguishes between personal literacy (for one’s own entertainment) and power code 
literacy (literacy that gives access to the world beyond us). Students need the 
opportunity to engage in meaningful uses of literacy in ways that relate to their interests 
and needs (Delpit, as cited in Green & Abt-Perkins, 2003). 

Rosenblatt’s (1978) work has demonstrated the importance of focusing on 
socially contextualized events and on helping individuals discover the satisfaction of 
texts. When the text includes the kinds of experiences students have with a broad range 
of materials, it is easy to see the relation of reader response theories to critical literacy 
(Rosenblatt, as cited in Alvermann et al., 1999). 

How do children view literature of differing culture, race, gender, and socio- 
economic background? Louise Rosenblatt tells us that the meaning arrived at in reading 
or speaking exists in the transaction between the reader and the text. Reading is an 
action or an experience. In this meaning, the text is not just a physical object but also 
the opportunity for action for the reader (Cai, 2002). The author is an important part of 
the equation. The author’s voice conveys attitudes, values, and assumptions that shape 
the reader’s mind. The actual writer creates in his or her work an implied author who 
represents the perspective of the culture portrayed and is then identified with a reader 
from that culture. That is why an “outsider” author like Paul Goble can authentically write 
about Native American culture. Since the time he lived in the West with Native 



68 




Americans, he has had a long relationship with that culture (Cai, 2002). Reader 
response theory shifts the focus from the book to the reader but the author is still an 
integral part of the equation. 

The teacher provides collaboration time with other students for the sharing of that 
reading or thought. Vygotsky has told us how speech is important in the organization of 
higher psychological functions. Children act and speak to achieve their goals. The 
choice process, which is natural in animals, is transformed into a higher-level thinking 
process for children. Language becomes a personal and profoundly social human 
process (Vygotsky, 1978). Barnes (1987) continues this analysis in From 
Communication to Curriculum. His purpose was to illustrate how children use speech in 
the course of learning. After reading a piece of literature about a differing group, 
children learn to discuss the meaning of what they have read. They view the illustrations 
that accompany the text. This communicative sharing influences learning and in this 
way, students continually remake knowledge for themselves. 

Barnes (1987) encourages teachers to support Freire’s viewpoints when working 
with children. Freire states, 

To exist, humanly, is to name the world, to change it. Once named, the world 
in its turn reappears to the namers as a problem and require of them a new 
naming... But while to say the true work-which is work, which is praxis - is to 
transform the world, saying that word is not the privilege of some few men, but 
the right of every man. Consequently, no one can say a true word alone-nor can 
he say it for another, in a prescriptive act, which robs others of their words 
(Freire, as cited in Bleich, 1988, p. 158). 

Sumara (1998) tells us of the transformation of memories that children have or 
can bring to the text that they are reading. Reading is so important to the restructuring 
and reconditioning of the reader’s identity. The teacher must not only allow but also 



69 




encourage the child to bring prior memories, experiences, and cultural outlook to the 

text, to the discussion, to the development of the class in the school. 

I have come to believe that creating commonplace locations for interpretation of 
the shared reading literary fictions moves beyond the need to help students learn 
to read interpretively. . . It provides a site for the interpretation of the readers’ ever- 
shifting identities. As readers identify with and interpret the experience of 
characters, they 

learn to re-identify and reinterpret themselves (Sumara, 1998, p. 209). 

Thus, students need to become aware of others and create a culture of understanding 
for themselves. 

Educators believe that the literature that children are presented with should 
reflect a multicultural viewpoint. In fact, literature is just one component of the 
multicultural movement. “Multicultural education is essentially a reform effort intended 
not only to combat intolerance and foster a sense of inclusion, but to fundamentally 
change education and society” (Cai & Sims Bishop, 2003, p. 58). “Because it uses 
critical pedagogy as its underlying philosophy and focuses on knowledge, reflection, 
and action (praxis) as the basis for social change, multicultural education furthers the 
democratic principles of social justice” (Nieto, as cited in Cai & Sims Bishop, p. 208). 
Multicultural literature offers insight into the beliefs and traditions of a cultural group. 

The reader needs to understand the differences in experiences of cultural groups in the 
U.S. and people from other countries and understand similarities across cultures. Books 
can be “window” books where the reader looks beyond his/her own experience to 
another culture through a window or “sliding glass door” books where the movement of 
the reader goes to the outside world with the possibility of interactions (Bishop, 1990). 
Teachers can help students move to the outside world. 

Critical literacy can disrupt the commonplace, interrogate multiple viewpoints, 



70 




focus on sociopolitical issues, and take action to promote social justice. From this 
dimension, critical literacy is seen as a way to problematize all subjects of study and 
understand existing knowledge historically; as a way to interrogate text by asking 
questions; as a regular part of the curriculum including the influence of popular culture; 
as a way of developing the language of critique and hope; and as a way to study 
language to analyze how it can shape identity, construct discourse, and support or 
change the status quo (Lewison, Flint, & Siuys, 2002). We must help children to imagine 
standing in the shoes of others and to understand the experience and texts from our 
own and others’ points of view. Looking at multiple perspectives, using multiple voices 
when examining texts, seeking out the voices of those who have not been heard, 
examining competing narratives, and making those differences we see visible can be 
very powerful. “Teaching is not a neutral form of social practice” (Lewiston et al, 2002, 
p. 383). 

Teachers can help students step outside of their personal worlds to see how 
political and power systems work. Language can be used to exercise power to enhance 
our lives. Even those people from non-dominant groups can gain access to dominant 
forms of language without lowering their own languages and cultures. Children can be 
challenged to redefine cultural borders and to cross those borders. 

In South Africa, the Truth and Reconciliation Commission used the sociocultural 
theory of language to understand and manage the relationship between language and 
power. During the days of apartheid, power was a negative force which dominated a 
group of people. When listening to the narratives of the victims or perpetrators of 
violence, the commission tried to achieve the shared goal of critical literacy: equity and 



71 




social justice (Janks, 2000, p. 176-178). In Powell, Cantrell, and Adams’ (2001) 
research on “Saving Black Mountain,” students in two Appalachian regions learned that 
they could convince political leaders to stop the company that mined Black Mountain. 
They did this through reading, writing, and oral language activities. They learned that 
literacy could make a difference. 

A critical literacy curriculum needs to be lived. It arises from the social and 
political conditions that unfold in communities in which we live. As such it cannot 
be traditionally taught. In other words, as teachers we need to incorporate a 
critical perspective in to our everyday lives in order to find ways to help children 
understand the social and political issues around them (Vasquez, 2003, 

P-1)- 

In Bahktin’s view, the self is actualized through the construction of dialogic 
relationships and it is through this building that we learn to really participate in our 
communities. Literacy is social and cultural action. We need to use social justice and 
equity issues as framed from this critical literacy perspective to create social action 
(Bahktin, as cited in Vasquez, 2003). Critical literacy empowers students to actively 
become part of our democracy, thus moving literacy beyond text to social action. 
“Literacy is a way to begin to talk about racialization, the disenfranchised, and the 
disempowered” (Nieto, 2003, afterword in Green & Abt-Perkins, p. 202). 

Teachers can make these choices. “Transformation demands an extraordinary 
amount of time and commitment, but that teachers can make a difference if they are 
willing to make that commitment” (Delpit, 1995, p. 159). Being aware of cultural 
differences is important but teachers also must be willing to study the communication 
styles of students and their parents from backgrounds different from the teacher’s own. 
Deborah Tannen, in her book Gender & Discourse (1994), says that a speaker’s roles 
are not given but are created in interaction. No language meaning occurs unless it is 



72 




framed or contextualized. She goes on to say that cultural differences are not limited to 
country of origin and native language but also at subcultural levels such as male and 
female gender differences in communication. Our conversational styles are influenced 
by family communicative habits and that has much to do with the formation of ethnic 
stereotypes (Tannen, 1994). 

Delpit (1995) relates her own experiences with students from Papua, New 
Guinea and Alaska. Speaking and learning styles are different and teachers needed to 
adapt to those differences. Teachers also can prepare children to understand the 
“codes of power” and to be able to retain their heritage language but also “be able to 
use the skills of accurate decoding and conventional writing to bring power and social 
advantage to their literacy” (Oakes & Upton, 1999, p. 159). 

In his theory of child development, Vygotsky (1978) postulates that children 
cannot learn in a vacuum and need the social interaction of school to learn. He has 
looked deeply at social interaction and children’s participation in authentic cultural 
activities that are necessary for learning to occur. The children’s mental processes are 
adaptive. They lead to the knowledge and skills necessary for success. His social 
cultural theory notes that there is a wide variation in cognitive capabilities among human 
beings. 

Shirley Brice Heath (1 983), in her research as ethnographer of communication 
focusing on child language, has shown us how two culturally different communities 
learned to use language in their homes and communities. “The language socialization 
process in all its complexity is more powerful than such single-factor explanations in 
accounting for academic success” (Heath, 1983, p. 344). The factors she speaks of are 



73 




differences in formal structure of language and the amount of parent-child interaction 
when parents are preparing their children for school. She goes on to tell us that the 
ways with words transmitted across generations and cleverly embedded in other cultural 
patterns will take time to change. All the same, multicultural education addresses the 
commonalities of us all (Gorski, 2003a). 

Conclusion 

Banks and Banks (2001) say that a mainstream-centric curriculum has negative 
consequences for mainstream students because it reinforces a false sense of 
superiority, gives them false ideas about their relationships with other racial and ethnic 
groups, denies then the chance to benefit from another frame of reference and does not 
allow them to view their own culture from other cultures' perspectives. The perspective 
of multicultural or an anti-racist education looks at all people who have been left out of 
the curriculum (Lee, 1994). This perspective allows us to study power relationships and 
equality. 

How does a teacher implement a multi-cultural perspective? Change happens 
slowly because of resistance in schools. Banks & Banks (2001) have labeled four levels 
of integration of multi-cultural content. First, for the contributions approach, people may 
change a few expressions of culture in the school such as making welcome signs in 
several languages. 

This is a great place to start but many schools may end here with food and 
clothing festivals, which only highlight the differences cultures face. We need to 
transform the entire curriculum. Whose perspective is being heard and whose is being 
ignored? Who is getting equal access to the knowledge in the school? For the additive 



74 




approach, teachers may develop units of study on Native Americans or people of an 
African country but if that unit remains separate from the rest of the curriculum, cultural 
diversity is not really being included in the curriculum (Lee, 1994). 

Bank & Banks continue with the transformation approach, which means that 
moving to the next stage of structural change which can be when the new unit has been 
integrated into existing units. “The structure of the curriculum is changed to enable 
students to view concepts, issues, events, and themes from the perspectives of diverse 
ethnic and cultural groups” (Banks & Banks, 2001 , p. 229). The center of the curriculum 
needs to be changed. Instead of teaching about only Western civilization, the teacher 
can add African, Chinese, and Indian history so that the curriculum reflects civilization. 
Educators benefit from asking themselves questions about what they are doing and why 
they are doing it. “Whose interest is it in that we study what we study? Why is it that 
certain kinds of knowledge get hidden?” (Lee, 1994, p. 20). What children’s literature 
are we including to represent other cultural groups? 

Finally, Banks & Banks (2001) have named the social action approach, where we 
may reach the social change stage when students can use curriculum knowledge found 
in the literature and discussions to help make changes outside of the school to take 
action on social issues. Maybe students notice that because of a fire, a family needs 
new clothing and household items, and they organize to help raise money. Possibly the 
city has condemned a building that has historical significance and the students research 
the value of the structure and write to newspapers and politicians about saving the 
building. Teachers can help children move from the curriculum of the mainstream with 
the study of heroes and holidays to integration and structural reform, leading to 



75 




awareness and social action. 



The ultimate goals for using multicultural literature in the curriculum are to 
challenge the dominant ideologies, affirm the values and experiences of 
historically under-represented cultures, foster acceptance and appreciation of 
cultural diversity, develop sensitivity to social inequalities, and encourage 
transformation of the self and society (Cai, 2002, p. 134). 

Multicultural education can inform and empower the students. Children can benefit from 

developing personal and social exploration and reflection about literature rather than 

using literature only as a source of information. Information is vital in understanding 

others but the most valuable function is the empowerment factor. Just studying the 

holidays and celebrations does not empower the students. The best literature helps 

children think about issues that they may face in the future. Children in the primary 

grades are at a crucial age in developing anti-bias attitudes and beginning to 

understand social justice issues. They can attempt a critical approach when interpreting 

racial, gender, class, and other cultural differences in literature (Cai, 2002). 

I believe that our responsibility as teachers must also include culturally 

responsive pedagogy, which allows us to look at students’ backgrounds as assets 

rather than deficits that students should use in their learning. Teachers of all 

backgrounds should develop the necessary skills to teach all diverse students 

effectively (Nieto, 2003). Multicultural education speaks to the future of all children. 

In this chapter, I focused on the modern perspective on cultural differences, how 

multicultural literature promotes global identification, and the historical perspective of 

education and its relationship to today's schools. The need for critical literacy in 

teaching social justice issues, ethnographic studies in Native American teaching, and 

curricular issues influenced by racial stereotypes has also been highlighted in the 



76 




Critical Race Theory discussion. As I prepare my constructivist curriculum for teaching 
my Kindergarten children about authentic Native North American literature, I will be 
cognizant of Critical Race Theory as it applies to Native Americans and the need to 
emphasize social justice issues. The next chapter on methodology will give insight into 
the process of a developmental^ appropriate curriculum planning and the collection of 
culturally authentic, culturally ambiguous, and culturally inauthentic books on First 
Nations peoples for the unit. The classroom participatory Action Research unit, with 
methods of data collection and evaluation procedures, will be explained for the actual 
school setting. 



77 




Chapter 3 
Methodology 

Research methods that are reflexive. ..in the sense that they engage 
participants in a collaborative process of social transformation in which 
they learn from, and change the way they engage in, the process of 
transformation. Research conducted from this perspective adopts an 
“emancipatory” view of the point and purpose of the research, in which 
coparticipants attempt to remake and improve their own practice to 
overcome distortions, incoherence, contradictions, and injustices. It adopts 
a "first person" perspective in which people construct the research process 
as a way of collaborating in the process of transforming their practices, their 
understanding of their practices, and the situations in which they practice. 

STEPHEN KEMMIS & ROBIN McTAGGART 
from Strategies of Qualitative Inquiry (2003, p. 355) 



Introduction 

This chapter describes an Action Research case study, in which I was the 
teacher/researcher, developing an anti-bias curriculum. To focus on the creation of a 
new curriculum on Native Americans, I asked the question: How can I, as the teacher, 
help my kindergarten students begin to gain “authentic” cultural understandings of 
Native North Americans through children’s literature? I wanted to understand the 
children's experience of learning from their own point of view, the emic perspective. I 
used the Daiute & Jones (2003) Discourse Strategies to provide an analytical lens for 
my research. My Project Approach curriculum plan, based on the work of Heim & Katz 
(2001 ), evolved and took shape as the study progressed with empirical data collected in 
my classroom. The framework of the developmental^ appropriate curricular social 
studies unit on Native Americans was planned in advance and adapted during the unit 
implementation. 

In the sections that follow, I review the research questions that guided this 
inquiry, describe the methods I used to collect and analyze the data, and assess the 



78 




credibility, transferability, dependability, and confirmability of the study. My focus was 
the content of curriculum and quality of research. 

Purpose 

Four major goals of this study included (a) gaining an understanding of the 
processes involved in creating an anti-bias curriculum project on Native North 
Americans for my kindergarten classes; (b) learning how to teach children to recognize 
stereotypes in children's literature; (c) learning how to use a project approach for 
formative curriculum development; and (d) developing and assessing children’s 
attitudes about Native Americans using the study of culturally authentic, culturally 
ambiguous, and culturally inauthentic “First Peoples” children’s literature. As the 
teacher/researcher, I developed, assessed, and improved the unit leading to 
implications for the development of these processes for other kindergarten units. I 
wanted the children to understand social justice issues related to their reading of 
appropriate children's literature and to enable them to recognize and choose anti-bias 
books for future reading. 

When choosing the categories for evaluating the literature, I used the term 
“culturally authentic” to denote books which affirm the integrity of the culture portrayed. 
Cai (2002) states that “cultural authenticity is the basic criterion for evaluating 
multicultural literature... no matter now imaginative and how well written a story is, it 
should be rejected if it seriously violates the integrity of a culture.” “Culturally 
inauthentic” books would be those which did violate that integrity. There was no term 
which I found in my research to label books which were questionable in that they were 
void of specifics, had mixed images, and did not comfortably fit into one of the other 



79 




categories. I am using the term “culturally ambiguous” which was recommended by Dr. 
Susan Jungck (personal communication, February 17, 2006), to differentiate the books 
that were not authentic but not completely inauthentic on several levels: content (not 
specifically denoting a tribal group) or image (not illustrating cultural values). 

In this chapter, I will give examples of fiction and informational picture books that 
I used to help children see some of these culturally authentic, culturally ambiguous, and 
culturally inauthentic images. I created a collection of books on Native Americans as 
part of the curriculum project. Developing a curriculum framework was a process of 
continual self-criticism and self-renewal. My own attitudes have changed during my 
twenty-five year teaching career from the use of silly, demeaning songs such as “Ten 
Little Indians” and art projects like those where children made identical feather 
headdresses, to my own study of Native American literature, historic events, 
contemporary social issues, and authentic crafts. I have developed these new ideas 
into the use of theme dramas on life in a historical Indian village balanced with films, 
discussions, and visits from Native Americans. Now constructivist theory, where 
individuals create their own understandings based on prior and new learning, guides 
my teaching practice. 

Research Questions 

My central research question for this study was: How can I, as a teacher, help my 
kindergarten students begin to gain “authentic” cultural understandings of Native North 
Americans through children’s literature? Several other questions arose during the 
course of my study: 

• What can I learn about using literature to influence how children begin to 
develop perceptions of “others,” such as Native American people? 



80 




• What can I learn about teaching children to discern bias in Native American 
children’s literature? 

• What can I learn about helping children develop attitudes about people who 
are not present and culturally different from themselves? 

• What can I learn about creating an anti-bias curricular unit to incorporate an 
understanding of the “other” as reflected by culturally authentic literature? 

Development of a Guide to Children’s Literature on Native North Americans 

Before I began to develop a curricular unit on Native Americans, I researched 
critical literacy and Critical Race Theory to find information on possible influences that 
literature could have on children. I found that literacy is a way to begin to talk about 
racialization, the disenfranchised, and the disempowered (Nieto, 2003). A focus on 
literature through the lens of racial and ethnic discourse offers a way to introduce and 
probe social issues. Since racial stereotypes play a powerful role in a child's 
interpretation of the world, educators have a social responsibility about how information 
is presented to students. “The only way to eliminate the Native American stereotypes in 
our culture is to teach all children to value and respect Native Americans. The Native 
American books that teachers introduce to young children play a key role in the 
development of cultural attitudes” (Yagjian, 2000, p. 3). 

Prior to the implementation of specific unit plans, I created a fairly comprehensive 
list of Native North American literature for the classroom. The problem was not in finding 
Native American books, but rather, finding those that are culturally and historically 
accurate in the portrayal of Native Americans (Yagjian, 2000). Many Native American 
sources were consulted to create this list, including the Oyate Native Organization 
website (2004), the Smithsonian Institution’s Anthropology Outreach Office website 
(Caldwell-Wood & Mitten, 2004); A Guide to Canadian Children's Books (Baker & 
Setterington, 2003); American Indian Stereotypes in the World of Children (Hirschfelder, 



81 




Molin, & Wakim, 1999); Guidelines for Selecting Bias-Free Textbooks and Storybooks 
(The Council on Interracial Books for Children, 1973); A Broken Flute: The Native 
Experience in Books for Children (Slapin & Seale 2005); Through Indian Eyes: The 
Native Experience in Books for Children (Slapin & Seale, 1 992); and Native Americans 
in Children's Literature (Stott, 1995), among other titles. 

Through content analysis, I classified some of the books as “culturally authentic” 
literature, as these had recommended culturally specific content knowledge about and 
authentic images of Native North Americans. I also identified lists of “culturally 
ambiguous” books (Jungck, 2006), the term I now use for the idea of questionable 
books that, with teacher assistance, may help students begin to perceive the 
accuracies/ inaccuracies in the information or illustrations. Finally, there were “culturally 
inauthentic” books, to be avoided because of stereotypical biases of racial, gender, 
ethnic, or other cultural falsifications. In preparation for my teaching unit in November 
2004, I collected a great quantity of books in all categories to begin discussions with the 
children. Appendix B also provides a categorization of these books with source 
information. 

An example of a “culturally authentic” picture storybook is Star Boy (Goble, 

1983). Slapin and Seale, specialists in Native American children’s literature, reviewed 
the book. 

This is Goble’s retelling of the story of how the Sun Dance was given to the 
Blackfeet people. The Sun Dance is a sacred time shared by many of the Plains 
Nations. It is a beautifully illustrated book, which is written by Paul Goble, an 
outsider who has done his research. It is a good book to introduce non-Native 
children to a special spiritual concept that is central to the lives to many Native 
Americans (Slapin & Seale, 1992, p. 163). 

An example of authentic non-fiction is The People Shall Continue (Ortiz, 1988). This text 



82 




was positively reviewed on Oyate, a Native American website. 

This is the single best overall view of Native history for young children. It is 
simple yet meaningful and understandable of the history and hope for the future 
(Oyate, 2004). 

An example of a “culturally ambiguous” fiction book is The Legend of the Bluebonnet 

(dePaola, 1983). Slapin and Seale provided this review: 

When there is a great drought, the Commanche people look to the Great Spirits 
to provide rain. A young orphan, She-Who-ls-Alone, gives up her most beloved 
doll and as a result, bluebonnet flowers bloom where the ashes of her doll landed 
and rain has provided their beauty in the land we call Texas. This is an emotional 
story and the illustrations are typically Tomie’s artistic style. The story does have 
flaws because a child would not be living alone in a tribe after losing her parents 
and most of the characters have the same facial features apart from the little girl. 
The author/illustrator does show respect for the Commanche and if a teacher 
points out the flaws, the children can still enjoy the book (Slapin & Seale, 1992, 
pp. 150-151). 

An example of a “culturally inauthentic” picture storybook is Ten Little Rabbits (1991) by 

Virginia Grossman. The review by Oyate (2004) was quite negative: 

This is a beautifully illustrated book with rabbits dressed as Native Americans. 
The tribal blankets are accurately portrayed and described at the end of the book 
BUT Native Americans do not like to be portrayed as animals. All the tribes would 
not be circled together around a fire no matter how cute it seems. The author, 
Virginia Grossman, and illustrator, Sylvia Long, should have done better research 
because they give a true example of what mistakes 'outsiders' can make even if 
they had good intentions (Oyate, 2004). 

An example of a culturally inauthentic non-fiction text is Indian School: Teaching the 
White Man’s Way (Cooper, 1999) by Michael L. Cooper. Oyate (2004) notes the 
following about this book: 

The time when our country had Indian Boarding schools was racist because 
children were taken from their families and tribal nations and put into a foreign 
world that tried to change their “heathen” ways. By taking away the children, the 
U.S. government was able to take away and maintain control of the Indian land 
base. The research is poor and even the illustrations are inaccurate and 
mismatched. Because of the photos andideas justifying the dehumanization of a 
people, children could believe that the facts in this book are true. It is amazing 



83 




that this book was written in 1999 (Oyate, 2004). 

Participants and Context 

For this Action Research project, I collected data on my learning as a 
teacher/researcher and on the children’s learning through a developmental project. This 
was documented through my own reflective journal including my observations and 
reflections on the children’s lessons, individual interviews, the children’s own 
illustrations, focus discussion groups, large group discussions, and theme drama 
experiences. 

This research project included 29 kindergarten children in two separate 
heterogeneous groups (morning and afternoon classes). The K-3 school, called Glen 
School in this study, has 300 students and is located in a suburb within a large 
metropolitan area in the Midwest of the United States. This suburban city of 35,000 
people is a community of upper-middle class and lower income families. The children in 
this study included some with special needs (three children in the morning and one in 
the afternoon class), some English Language Learners (two morning and four afternoon 
students), and a blend of racial, cultural, and religious backgrounds. 

Research Design 

I used an Action Research design as the way to investigate my professional 
development as a teacher and the means of improving student learning (Figure 1). 
Therefore, I systematically reflected on my own work and made curricular and 
procedural changes in my practice. “Undertaken by practitioners, Action Research 
involves looking at one’s own practice, or situation involving children’s development, 
behavior, social interactions, learning difficulties, family involvement, or learning 



84 




environments...” (Borgia & Schuler, 1996, p. 1). Garner (1996) defines Action Research 
more specifically as a systematic, reflective, collaborative process that examines a 
situation for the purpose of planning, implementing, and evaluating change. 

The concept of Action Research can be traced back to the early work of John 
Dewey in the 1920s and school psychologist, Kurt Lewin, in the 1940s. One of the first 
governmental action researchers, John Collier, was the executive secretary of the 
American Indian Defense Association formed in the 1920s and then served as U.S. 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs under Franklin Roosevelt from 1933-1945. Later, he and 
his wife established a progressive school. His concerns with both education and the 
community were key elements for his work as head of the Bureau of Indian Affairs. 
Collier sponsored education based on local culture and language. A form of Action 
Research was carried out in Native American communities. He focused his work on the 
needs of the community with a nondirective role for consultants. He is not always 
mentioned in relation to Action Research, but his work did allow the direct link to social 
action for improvement of the lives of Native Americans (Noffke, 1997). 

Educator Stephen Corey and other researchers at Teachers College of Columbia 
University introduced the term “Action Research" to education in 1949. The focus was 
and is today on the expansion of the teacher’s role as inquirer about teaching and 
learning through classroom research. Such research is designed, conducted, and 
implemented by teachers to improve their own teaching, class curriculum development, 
and reflective instruction. Kemmis & McTaggart (1988) stated that Action Research is 
not just a “method “or a “procedure” but something that gives us a series of 
commitments to observe and problematize as we conduct social inquiry. Lewin 



85 




ACTION RESEARCH 
PLAN 

Meg Pyterek 



Table of Action Research based 
on the work of Kolb (1984), Carr 
& Kemm is (1 986) , Robertson 
(2000), & Banks (2001). Project 
Approach idea based on the 
work of Helm & Katz (2001 ). 



PHASE III 
Finished Focus 
Groups. 

CYCLE 7 

Finished interviews. 
CULMINATING EVENT 
Drama concluded! 



Final plan at V 
this time! 1 




CYCLE 8 


PHASE 1 


Reviewed 


Day 1 : Made 


Project Web & 


class web; 


assessed 


created 1st illustrations 


what was 


CYCLE 1 


learned & 


Began KWL Chart & 


achievement of 
Goals! i 

1 reflected. 1 


Audit Trail. 



Acted on Revised Plan: 
Shared reading of 
inf ormational books, 
discussion. 

CYCLE 2 LESSONS 
KWL Chart, Audit Trail; 
Children reflected on own 
learning; I took field notes. 



Revised Plan: continued 
Focus Group Interviews. 
CYCLE 6 LESSONS 
Indicated what was 
learned: KWL Chart & 
Audit Trail. Discussed 
inauthentic books &toys, 
identified new questions, 
repeated representation: 
continued drama, students 
illustrated climax. 

I continued Field Notes. 



Acted on Revised Plan: 
continue Focus Group 
Interviews. 

CYCLE 5 LESSONS 
Art projects for Audit Trail 
& drama; charted "in" & 
"out" authors. I Observ ed 
& Reflected. 



PHASE II 
Individual Interviews about 
illustrations; Discussions of 
authentic, ambiguous, & 
inauthentic nonfiction. 
INVESTIGATED 
How did native v illages look? 
Prepared for theme drama, 
created room setting. 
CYCLE 3 LESSONS Began 
Author Study of Bruchac & Goble. 
I observ ed & reflected. 



Revised Plan: Did not begin Focus 
Groups as planned. Needed time to 
fshare books. Discussed fiction stories 
in Week II. CYCLE 4 LESSONS 
Represented learnings; began theme 
drama action. Students drew pictures of 
jobs; did 2nd interview sessions. 



Figure 1. Research design and methodology. 



86 



(1952) described Action Research as a spiral of steps, each of which is composed of a 
circle of planning, action, and fact-finding about the result of the action. The teacher 
examines an idea and a plan emerges. The second step is the implementation of the 
plan, and the third step is reflection and revision of the overall plan. 

Stringer (1996) tells us that as researchers, teachers need to develop and move 
through the three phases of Action Research : (a) look where an idea is built and 
information is gathered; (b) think where interpreting and explaining is done about what 
participants have been doing and what problems have occurred; (c) act where issues 
and problems are resolved. Outcomes of activities and ideas will result in further 
actions. Within the process of Action Research, data collection, analysis, action, 
decision-making, implementation, and change often takes place concurrently 
(Gummesson, 1991). Involvement in Action Research includes commitment, 
collaboration, concern, consideration, and change. 

Since Action Research takes time, my planned one-month curriculum study did 
not simply begin and end during the month of November 2004. Rather, it took time to 
create a framework, locate materials, analyze the books found and categorize them, 
implement lesson plans, revise the curricular study with the children’s input, observe the 
results, and then revise the curriculum again. During the implementation phase, the 
children and I became immersed in books, drama, art activities, discussions, and 
interviews, and finally reflected on the data collected during this unit of study. This 
process involved collaboration in which the students and I were an integral part of a 
cyclical process of sharing. The interpretive nature of the research meant that we 
developed a concern for a community of “critical friends” (Borgia & Schuler, 1996). As 



87 




“critical friends,” the children and I evaluated the curriculum and our learning through 
literature discussions, unit planning, and the development of the theme dramas. My aim 
was to develop trust as the school year progressed. As my reflective skills developed, 
my reflections became more challenging and focused. I made critical assessments of 
my own teaching, increased my understandings, and developed implications for the 
next phases in the process. Proactive change was an ongoing part of this 
developmental life cycle of the curriculum. As the classroom practice changed and 
children’s experiences were expanded, I anticipated improvement in learning. This 
Action Research provided me with the opportunity to gain knowledge and skill in 
research methods and helped me become more aware of possibilities for change in 
other areas of the school curriculum (Johnson, 1993). 

In the Action Research Plan of Research Methodology (Figure 1), I utilized The 
Project Approach (Helm & Katz, 2001) format to plan activities for the children. During 
the unit phases, lessons were taught in the cycles. Specifically, we began an 
anticipatory web with questions that we wanted to investigate and the current concepts 
and understandings that we already had. Then during the course of the unit, for 
example, I asked the students to create illustrations at the beginning of the project, 
during the activities supporting the theme drama (Heathcote & Bolton, 1995), and at the 
end of the unit. 

As the unit progressed into Phase II, new cycles of lessons, including a more 
detailed anticipatory web about Native Americans, a K-W-L chart of what the children 
already Knew, Wanted to learn about the topic, and what they Learned (Ogle, 1986), 
and the sharing of authentic informational books were the focusing activities. As the 



88 




children moved into the cycle of investigation, they examined artifacts from local 
museums about the Plains Indians, and read fictional and informational literature. As the 
Action Research cycles continued into Phase III, we represented what was learned 
through writing, drawing, construction, music, and dramatic play (Helm & Katz, 2001). If 
one of the lessons in a cycle did not work for the unit study, then it was adapted for 
future planning. This was the case during the second week of the unit when the focus 
groups did not begin as planned. I decided that the children did not have enough 
exposure to the vast literature to be able to make informed interview responses. I taped 
discussions with the children and my field notes documented this information. 

Research Methods 

In this Action Research project, I used many methods of data collection and sources of 
data. My sources included: 

• Illustrations created by the children, at five different intervals during the 
progression of the unit. 

• Interviews, both individual and group. 

• Large group discussions which were taped and transcribed verbatim 
during the unit. 

• Small Focus groups on the topic of children’s literature, composed of five 
students each, were taped and transcribed. These transcriptions were 
later coded to reveal growth patterns and attitudinal change. 

• Teacher observations and field notes, taken throughout the unit. 

As the unit progressed, I introduced the concept of the theme drama (Heathcote 
& Bolton, 1 995), in which, as a vehicle for learning, the children created a story 



89 




sequence including characters, setting, plot, climax, and coda based on their knowledge 
of Native Americans. The data collected from this experience included various individual 
illustrations during the process of the unit. 

Illustrations 

The children’s illustrations provided data about preconceived attitudes prior to the 
unit, attitudinal changes during the process of the unit, at the end of the unit, and a few 
months after the unit was taught. The rationale was to see if there were any changes in 
the perceptual growth of each child. The children documented how they viewed a Native 
American from “long ago” or “now” in the first picture. The teacher prompt was: “Draw a 
picture of a Native American.” These pictures were analyzed to assess the ability of 
each child to depict his/her individual knowledge about Native Americans. The children 
were later asked to draw pictures of their occupations in the native village. They were 
asked: “Who is your character in the drama?” “How old are you and what is your 
occupation?” As a group, the children also documented the course of the unit in their 
own journals and on the Audit T rail Mural (Harste, Short, & Burke, 1 988) for the class. 
The Audit Trail Mural included a time line through words and pictures or photos of the 
development of the unit. The children created this mural as they progressed through the 
experiences of the unit. They documented the story sequence for the theme drama 
climax. Finally, each child made two drawings of what a Native American looked like 
“long ago” or “now” at the end of the unit and again three months after the unit was 
completed. 

The data were again analyzed according to the Discourse Strategies of Daiute 
and Jones (2003) with some developmental^ appropriate adaptations. The illustrations 



90 




were analyzed using a framework that was developed specifically for the purpose of 
viewing children’s pictorial depictions of Native North Americans. It was largely based 
on the work of Dr. Anne Bennison (2004) who has collected and analyzed many such 
illustrations. When I met with her in February 2004, she shared her collection of early 
childhood illustrations and gave insight on the appropriate prompts for children when 
they were asked to create drawings of Native Americans. I learned to ask simple, 
unbiased questions, such as: “Draw a picture of a Native American.” I did not want to 
influence the child’s depiction in his/her illustration. The analytical framework was also 
influenced by the expertise of Bonny Meyer, school psychologist in a local suburban 
school district, who offered experience using the evaluative work of Gesell (1946, 1974) 
and The-Draw-A-Person Test (Goodenough & Harris, 1963). This nonverbal measure 
estimates the developmental status in children from 5-17 years of age. 

Individual Interviews 

During the unit, I conducted taped individual interviews with the children. I 
wanted to examine each student’s analysis of his/her own illustrations. Since the 
interviews took place at different times throughout the unit study, I was able to 
document each child’s growth during the learning process. From this information, I 
selected eight students of differing maturation and ability levels to become a small focus 
group for one intensive analytical strategy. 

The interviews were conducted at the beginning of the unit. I asked each child to 
describe his or her drawing of a Native American. During the second week of the unit, I 
asked the children to draw their own occupations in the theme drama; the interview 
included the child’s description of that picture. At the climatic point of the theme drama, I 



91 




asked the children to draw their versions of what would happen next. The interview 
documented their response. At the end of the unit (December 2004) and again in the 
Spring of 2005, I asked the students to again draw a picture of a Native American. The 
final interviews focused on the children’s descriptions of those two illustrations. These 
individual interviews did not have predetermined time limits; they generally ranged from 
ten to fifteen minutes in length. The interviews and illustrations were used to interpret 
information on the attitudes of the children. 

As part of my analytic framework, I researched the nine Discourse Strategies on 
the topic of race and ethnicity based on the work of Daiute & Jones (2003): identifying, 
where children name explicit attributes like Blacks, Indians, prejudice; contextualizing, 
when children mention ideas and causes of racism or prejudice without labeling them as 
injustices; broadening, where the children use synonyms such as “outsider” to show 
their awareness of differences; practicing, where students use language associated with 
a particular group rather than merely naming the group; empathizing, when children 
articulate the psychosocial consequences of differences or discrimination; 
universalizing, where they generalize beyond the issues of difference to broaden human 
values (e.g., ‘"We are all the same.”); distancing, when students resist the masking of 
racial and ethnic discriminations in generalizations by emphasizing differences (e.g., 
“Words can't hurt you.”); avoiding, when students never discuss race, ethnicity, or 
discrimination; and personalizing, connecting the experience to their own lives (“It 
happened to me.”). For the purpose of my study, I am eliminating the use of the 
category of “practicing” because Native American language use will not be applicable. 

A visual representation of the framework is given in Figure 2. My goals were to help 



92 




children personalize, universalize, and empathize their feelings, broaden their 
knowledge when discussing race and ethnicity, and become engaged through action 
performance in the formation of a curricular project. 

Focus Group Interviews 

As one basic tool for data collection, focus group interviews allow researchers to 
interview more than one person at a time. The interviewer can view how groups of 
people “think about and organize perceptions of their cultural world” (LeCompte & 
Schensul, 1999, p. xv). In my study, the focus groups each contained five children, 
chosen to balance quiet and talkative students, with a combination of higher and lower 
cognitive ability levels. These interviews took place from the mid-point to the end of the 
Native American unit of study. I wanted to discuss the literature with children after they 
had a chance to learn about the authors and some information related to authentic, 
ambiguous, and inauthentic books, both fiction and nonfiction. The interviews were 
tape-recorded and lasted approximately ten minutes. They were later transcribed 
verbatim for analysis. 

When I talked to the focus groups, I used questions that I had written based on 
the materials of Slapin & Seale (1992, 2005), The Children’s Museum of Boston (2003), 
and writings from multicultural authors such as Joseph Bruchac, Floyd Cooper, Yumi 
Heo, Patricia Polacco, and Gary Soto. These authors had written a list of questions 
which they used when analyzing of multicultural literature. To interview the children, I 
used a standardized, open-ended format (Creswell, 1998). Qualitative researchers ask 
open-ended questions encouraging the interviewees to explain their perspectives of 
topics and “listen for special language and other clues that reveal meaning structures 



93 





Figure 2. Curriculum conceptual framework. 



94 



used to understand their worlds” (Hatch, 2002, p. 23). Interviewers enter the interview 
settings with questions in mind but allow more questions to generate during the 
interview. Such questions minimize the obligation of predetermined responses while 
gathering the data. The children were permitted to take whatever direction they wished 
in their answers and to use any words they desired in order to represent what they 
wanted to say (Patton, 1990). However, if their responses were not complete or off 
target, the areas to be probed were identified following each question. Probes were 
used only if necessary to focus students on the topic. 

The questions, as listed below, and their sequence, were determined in advance 
for my study, and all interviewees were asked these questions to allow for a comparison 
of similarities and differences in responses. Data was transcribed and organized at the 
individual and group level which facilitated analysis. The attitudinal questions were 
aimed at understanding the opinions of the children as to their experiences and 
thoughts. 

Interview questions. 

Fiction 

1) Describe the illustrations of Native Americans in this book (i.e., non-token 
facial characteristics, color of skin, and dress of characters). 

2) Tell me how the words the author uses in this book make you think and 
feel about Native Americans (i.e., for identifying, broadening, and 
empathizing words). 

Informational 

1 ) In what ways did the author talk about separate tribes in this book? (i.e., 
names and characteristics of tribes: practicing, identifying.) 

2) Tell me about the ways the author showed the reader historical ideas or 
events, (i.e., examples in illustrations and text that contextualize and 
broaden viewpoints.) 



95 




3) In what ways do you think the author treated Native Americans 
respectfully? (i.e., broadening and empathizing ideas.) 

Fiction & Nonfiction 

1) How do you know that the author is an “insider” writer? (Identifying) 

2) How do you know that the author is an “outsider” author? (Identifying) 

3) . Why do you think that a Native American would like or dislike this book? 

(Probe for personalizing through contextualizing, broadening, and 
universalizing terns and ideas.) 

Group Discussions 

Discussions with entire class groups took place throughout the unit study. 

Various topics were proposed for those discussions, such as author studies with a focus 
on “insider” and “outsider” writers and illustrators. We also discussed authentic, 
ambiguous, and inauthentic books, movies, and toys as well as The Project Approach 
web, audit trail data, the theme drama plot, and historical and current day lives of Native 
Americans. 

These discussions were tape-recorded for later analysis using the Daiute and 
Jones (2003) Discourse Strategies as previously mentioned. Whole group and 
individual discussion data were evaluated for cognitive and attitudinal growth using the 
recordings and transcribed notes. Since I was concentrating on the knowledge, skills, 
and disposition of the students during this process, my questions attempted to elicit the 
way the children were learning. I also looked at the ways in which I was learning as a 
teacher. A culminating event, the drama presentation, ended the unit. There was also a 
discussion review of the project to assess student and teacher achievement of the unit 
goals. 

Teacher Observation and Field Notes 

My daily journals contained field notes of my own learning process during the 



96 




creation and teaching of the unit. During the entire unit experience, I observed and took 
field notes of the children as they participated in all of the activities. I informed my own 
knowledge, learning through action, with three story lines evolving in tandem: (a) the 
story of what I learned about creating and enacting this new curriculum in my classroom 
with my children; (b) the role and function of “racial and ethnic discourse” and what I 
learned about the Discourse Strategies throughout the phases of the unit; and (c) what I 
developed and learned about optimizing the research methodology in order to illuminate 
and understand these processes. 

During this study of my own learning, there were critical incidents which allowed 
me to stand back and examine my beliefs about my teaching. I searched for these by 
reading scholarly literature, observing the students, conducting the interviews, or seeing 
my own learning differently. In a Kindergarten Committee Meeting, educator Dr. Judy 
Helm (October 2001) expressed the idea of a teacher being “on the ceiling” and “on the 
floor” at the same time. My role was to plan the framework and develop the curriculum 
as I also looked “top down” as we implemented and collected data. I took down copious 
descriptions in my teacher journal notes, and I categorized and reflected on the 
meaning of what I was seeing. From the purposive sampling, I also analyzed the data 
from the “bottom up,” building formative theory of what I was learning. I thought about 
context and how it affected my judgments and my interpretation on those judgments as 
an ongoing narrative. Since all my values and beliefs, as well as those of the children 
are culturally determined, I needed to bracket my own judgment and make an 
opportunity to open my work to inspection (Newman, 2000). My own journal informed 
me of my growth as a researcher and co-creator of a curricular unit. 



97 




Theme Dramas 



During the theme drama (Heathcote & Bolton, 1995), the children created a story 
sequence of plot, characters, and setting which, as a vehicle for learning, was not 
shown to an outside audience (Wagner, 1976). The children in each of my classes 
created an imaginary environment as part of The Project Approach. This 
developmental^ appropriate activity provided the children with opportunities to invent 
and create. The goals were to encourage flexibility, problem-solving, and 
communication. The theme drama was a natural way for the children to express their 
learning. 

When preparing a curriculum, teachers can plan systematic instruction for 
acquiring skills or they can utilize project work to provide the children with opportunities 
to apply skills, address proficiencies, and stress intrinsic motivation. Children can be 
encouraged to determine what to work on and can be accepted as experts about their 
own needs (Katz, 1994). I wanted to develop a framework for my social studies unit on 
Native Americans that was engaging and contributed to the children’s intellectual 
development. It needed to be integrated with content and skills and also to incorporate 
formal and informal learning techniques. I wanted it to focus on topics that were relevant 
to Native Americans but also related to the goals of the children’s education. In this way, 
the unit could provide chances for children to take control of their learning which allowed 
them to try, and if they failed, to develop persistence in seeking solutions. When the unit 
framework was consistent with the age level of the kindergarten child and included rich 
authentic literature that occurred in the context of a caring community with opportunities 
for parents to participate, the children would benefit from learning. Finally, with an 



98 




assessment plan including clear observation and data collection goals, the state 
standards could be included (Helm & Katz, 2001 ). The addition of the theme drama to 
The Project Approach framework provided an optimal learning situation. 

Analysis 

Using the Curricular Conceptual Framework (Figure 2), I focused my research 
through the lens of racial and ethnic discourse. I used the Discourse Strategies of 
Daiute and Jones (2003) as my analytic framework: identifying, contextualizing, 
broadening, empathizing, universalizing, distancing, avoiding, and personalizing. (As 
mentioned previously, the practicing topic was excluded from my research study.) The 
twenty-day plan Curriculum Planning Matrix (Table A1 in Appendix A) guided my 
research as I looked for evidence of the use of Discourse Strategies in the children’s 
illustrations, my observations, individual interviews, small focus groups, and larger 
discussion groups. For the empathizing strategy under illustrations, I researched 
whether the children had depicted images that reflect the psychosocial consequences of 
discrimination. I probed each child about his/her personal feelings and about the Native 
American’s feelings depicted in the drawings. I assessed the use of various Discourse 
Strategies as the lessons were taught each day. 

Coding the data “involves organizing data into categories related to the 
framework and questions guiding the research so that they can be used to support 
analysis and interpretation” (LeCompte & Schensul, 1999, p. 45). The data collected 
was organized so patterns and structures began to form. LeCompte & Schensul (1999) 
call this formalized process of analysis (applying codes deductively) “top down.” When 
inductively theorizing, it is considered “bottom up.” Developing this reflexivity, I took on 



99 




the roles of producer, critic and user of educational theory (Riding, Sowell, Levy, 1995). 

Assessment of Research Quality 

To develop credibility, I relied on my research interpretation, robust curriculum 
development, and confidence in qualitative work. To plan this unit, I used multiple 
sources of data, and did long-term formative work developing and revising the 
curriculum. Member checks with the students were used as I interpreted the Discourse 
Strategies. I analyzed the interview transcriptions and the children’s illustrations over 
the course of the six-week unit period. My sample was a purposive one (Schwandt, 
2001); I studied eight of the students intensively, looking for their use of Discourse 
Strategies throughout the unit. 

As I studied the transcriptions and illustrations, I tried various codes to help me 
sort the data. I found that if I color coded each of the Discourse Strategies for the 
selected eight students, I could see their development. Some data needed to be 
recoded from the general class transcriptions where I was looking for whole group 
rather than individual progress. I was responsive to the content of the unit and to the 
children and made changes to the curriculum as the unit progressed (Hatch, 2002). 

This made my research more credible. 

Since I was part of the setting as the teacher, I knew that at times I 
unintentionally shared my view of certain authors during group discussions. I found that 
I prodded some quieter children more for responses during the focus group interviews. I 
did not always ask the same questions in the same ways for those interviews even 
though it had been my intention to do so. My notes sometimes were open-ended and 
incomplete and moved between description, interpretation, and the detailing of the voice 



100 




of the children as well as my own voice. Yet, I was as responsive as possible in my 
classroom setting. I used the procedure of triangulation to establish validity. Looking at 
the data from different vantage points, I was able to develop credible meanings within 
the curricular unit (Schwandt, 2001). 

Certain assumptions must be made in my research. Since attitude development 
and change is a long process and this unit took place for only six weeks, I could not 
measure the children’s attitude changes about Native Americans over a long range. I 
have produced a unit that does not fully represent all of the authentic children’s books 
on the topic. I do believe that my qualitative research was a credible, transferable, 
dependable, and confirmable way to formatively develop the unit teaching process. I 
know that there will be the need to continue to research this topic at my grade level. 

If one is committed to a critically democratic and emancipatory curriculum, then 
the ideas which children develop from the literature and activities in the lessons should 
reflect and validate who they are and what they believe in (McCarty & Dick, 2003). If I 
have encouraged the children to look at their own biases about Native North Americans, 
then that is a positive outcome of the curriculum. I collected a great deal of interview 
data and informative illustrative drawings on the children’s multicultural understandings. 

I am honestly informing the reader of my growth as a researcher and co-creator with the 
children of a curricular unit. 



101 




Chapter 4 

Presenting the Data 



I picked this book, Navajo Long Walk (Bruchac, 2002), because a lot of 
the pictures are sad. It is sad to think about people long ago made to walk 
so far away from their homes cause someone else took their homes. 

COLLEEN (age 5) Focus Group Interview, Nov. 2004 

This chapter describes the results of an Action Research case study of one 
classroom where I, as the teacher/researcher, formulated an anti-bias curriculum. The 
main question was: How can I, as the teacher, help my kindergarten students begin to 
gain “authentic” cultural understandings of Native North Americans through children’s 
literature? Using The Project Approach, based on the work of Helm & Katz (2001), my 
Native American social studies curriculum took shape as the study progressed. Five 
important components of my conceptual framework guided my study: Critical Race 
Theory, Action Research, Discourse Strategies, The Project Approach, and Native 
American Literature. I observed, took field notes, and collected illustrations and 
interview data from individual and groups of children as they participated in all of the 
unit activities. 

There are three story lines evolving in tandem in this chapter, showing my growth 
as a teacher/participant: the story of what I learned during the creation and enactment 
of this curriculum with the children; the role and function of the Discourse Strategies to 
highlight the racial and ethnic discourse of the children and me; and what I learned 
about research methodology as I tried to illuminate and understand these processes. 

Background 

In November and December of 2004, I undertook an Action Research case study 
of my kindergarten classroom. The classroom used for the unit was a typical 



102 




kindergarten environment. The dimensions of the main part of the room were 
approximately 30 x 50 feet with an adjoining coat and cubby room of 12 x 12 ft. The 
room was equipped with bathrooms and sink, so water was available for dramatic 
activities. Furniture such as a piano, large tables, shelving units, play corner, and toy 
areas were in sight. Even though a Plains Native American teepee was erected, the 
lakes and gardens were made of paper; we mainly used our imaginations to create the 
physical environment of the Native American unit. 

Many of the props were authentic Native American materials from various tribes 
which I had collected in my travels throughout the U.S. Rather than make inauthentic 
paper masks, necklaces, or headdresses, which would have been considered 
demeaning by the various tribes, our study of non-fiction books allowed us to again use 
our imaginations to create real images. 

Student/Participants 

Eight students were chosen from my 29 kindergarten students for comprehensive 
and focused study. They were part of my classes during the 2004-5 school year. These 
children were chosen because they reflected a wide range of academic abilities, 
developmental levels, and learning styles. All names have been changed to protect 
confidentiality. 

There were 3 girls and 5 boys in my focused analysis; 4 students from each of 
my two kindergarten classes. Katie, Irv, Glen, and Adam were from the morning class. 
Kelly, Sally, Jacob, and Mark were from the afternoon class. Katie, Glen, Adam, and 
Sally were high academic achievers. They were able to read much of the literature 
presented in the unit. Irv and Kelly were average learners, while Mark was a lower 



103 




achiever in all subject areas. They were non-readers at the time of the unit. Jacob was a 
high achiever who could read but he did not enter school until January and did not take 
part in the original unit study. Later information collected included his illustrations and 
interviews in January. He was included because, as an outlier/non-participant, it was 
interesting to see the stereotypes in his drawings and listen to his undeveloped 
comments in the final interviews. 

Katie, Irv, Glen, Adam, and Sally were older and developmental^ more mature 
than their classmates, Kelly and Jacob. Mark was one of the oldest children in the 
classes but did not have any pre-school experience and remained developmental^ 
below his peers in behavior and motivation. 

It was interesting to note the cultural learning styles or ways of learning for these 
individual students. Of the original seven sample participants, Katie, Irv, Glen, and Sally 
had good or flexible perceptions of Native Americans at the beginning and throughout 
the unit’s progress. Kelly had an average developmental level. She made progress in 
her viewpoints as the unit proceeded. Adam and Mark’s interviews were especially hard 
to analyze because many of the answers were silly and not focused on topic. However, 
their illustrations showed real reflection and growth. 

Data Collected through the Teaching Unit 

When planning my unit, I created the Curriculum Planning Matrix (Table A1 in 
Appendix A) to complete the study of Native North Americans. A sample of one week’s 
unit plan is shown in Table A1 of Appendix A. This matrix was an overall guide of unit 
lessons, Discourse Strategies of Daiute and Jones (2003) — identifying, contextualizing, 
broadening, empathizing, universalizing, distancing, avoiding, personalizing— and 



104 




methods of data collection. Although always flexible, depending on the time constraints 
or teachable moments of the day, the matrix helped me keep the focus on my goals 
when planning teaching and collecting research data. I did worry about letting go of my 
control of the lesson planning as the unit proceeded. Could the children and I work 
together to create a Project Approach experience where everyone was learning? 

Each day included multiple integrated activities. Day Eight (Week Two), for 
example, was planned this way: continue reading fiction and non-fiction books about the 
historical lives of Native Americans; view photographs/illustrations and read the picture 
headings to the children; discuss their reactions; role-play discriminatory problems in 
the classroom (e.g., What do you say when you want to join the group? How do you 
feel?) Even though I worked to incorporate all curricular skill materials from math, 
reading, and science into the social studies matrix, the class sessions were not long 
enough to complete the shared story, book discussion, and role-play scenarios as listed 
above. One day’s activities would progress into the next day, so that extra days were 
added to the unit. The children were able to help determine the next day’s activities by 
their interest as evidenced by their questions, what books they chose to be read aloud, 
and drama ideas. We all agreed that we did not have enough time to explore every 
idea, read every book, or spend extended time on the theme drama. 

In this chapter, I will discuss the results of how the children became engaged 
through action performance in the formation of the curricular project. Individual, focus 
group, and large group interviews are included, as are the children’s individual 
illustrations focusing on their perceptions of Native Americans before, during the 
dramas, and after the unit. I wrote a journal of field notes reflecting my observations 



105 




of the children and the details of the teaching unit. Various reading strategies were 
used to focus the children’s learning: 

• K-W-L Chart (Ogle, 1 986) that was augmented as the unit progressed. 

• An Audit T rail Mural (Harste, et al. 1 988) was created as a visual 
representation of the sequence of unit events. 

• A web that was used to expand the brainstormed ideas of the children at the 
beginning of the unit and again as a summary assessment in the children’s 
own words. 

• A theme drama for each class that was a vehicle for learning about Native 
North Americans. 

• Journals for the children to write and draw their reflections of the unit. 

As I worked with the children on the unit experiences as teacher on the “ground” level, I 
was also working as researcher on the “ceiling” level. At the “ground” level, I was in the 
present moment teaching, listening, or interviewing. My mind was at the “ceiling” level 
when I was overseeing the entire unit each day. I was observing how the children used 
the Discourse Strategies (Daiute & Jones, 2003). 

I had many overarching questions in my mind as I started the unit. Which 
strategies would the children use? I wanted to see what I was doing during the 
curriculum unit to spur the use of these strategies. Was there an instructional rhythm to 
the unit of study? When did the intensity of learning take place? What caused this 
intensity? What were the themes that helped change the instructional strategies? Were 
the children growing because of the exposure to the literature? As I asked myself these 
questions and continued to form more ideas, I was responding to how the curriculum 



106 




informed me of the affective strategies. 

In my teacher notes, I made assumptions about the Discourse Strategies that 
would be used by the children as the unit progressed. For example, when I looked again 
at Day Eight (Week Two) of my curriculum matrix, I believed that the children would use 
broadening and personalizing strategies as they discussed Native American books. 
Actually they contextualized, empathized, universalized, and created some distance 
when discussing the books as well as personalizing and broadening their experiences. 

Theme dramas were also a data source for my observations. On Day Sixteen, 
when the children were continuing to enact the theme drama conflict, I asked them to 
draw how the conflicts would be resolved. I had planned that they would identify and 
broaden, yet also distance themselves and avoid creating pictures revealing race or 
discrimination. However, only a few children identified with the experience by naming 
explicit attributes for Native Americans or broadened with the use of synonyms to show 
awareness of differences. Most children personalized the experience and empathized 
with the Native Americans in the drama. 

Many of the art projects that I had originally planned were not appropriate 
because I was still guilty of cultural insensitivity. I no longer included headdresses or 
masks in my plans yet I had planned to make totem poles, dream catchers, and power 
shields in my classroom. I realized that I would be perpetuating stereotypes by having 
the children make simple objects that were sacred and by simplifying the objects; I 
would be taking away from their sacredness (Jones & Moomaw, 2002). For example, 
when children created dream catchers out of paper plates in earlier Native American 
units, the activity demeaned the special relationship between a child and his/her parent 



107 




as this is a personal object that a parent gives to his child to erase bad dreams. What 
could I artistically create now in this unit with the children that would be true to Native 
North American heritage? Fortunately, at the same time as my unit, the 51 st Native 
American Pow Wow took place at the University of Illinois at Chicago campus. While 
there, I was able to find an excellent Native American bookseller from Wisconsin who 
had art, math, and new literature that I could use in the classroom. These items were 
written by Native American Ojibwe. The Good Path (Peacock & Wisuri, 2002) gave art 
activities that honored Ojibwe traditions. The Smithsonian Institution (2004) also had 
printed a magazine focusing on the authentic dolls in their collection, with inserts on 
each of the native doll makers. I also discovered a math book with native stories to help 
the children solve the given problems. Once I introduced these items to the children, I 
felt that I had materials that I was proud to use in my teaching. 

My main data sources for my research were the focus group and individual 
interviews conducted throughout the unit. Most of the children identified, personalized, 
contextualized, distanced themselves from, or universalized about the Discourse 
Strategies. Only Jacob, who newly entered school on January 6 th and did not participate 
in the first four weeks of the unit, chose to avoid the issues by never discussing race, 
ethnicity, or discrimination. His drawing of a Native American showed an angry, red- 
skinned native holding a weapon, in contrast to the other children’s pictures of Indians 
nowadays wearing regular clothes over a variety of skin colors. He did not talk to his 
classmates about the unit and created his own illustration without viewing the other 
children’s drawings. 



108 




Illustrations 



The children were asked to create drawings throughout the unit. Initially they 
were each asked to draw an Indian or Native American. I took dictation from each child 
about the drawings. My dictation was written on the back of each document. After the 
drama began, I asked individual children to draw a picture of the role or occupation they 
took in the Native American village. Individual interviews were conducted and the 
children told me about their drawings. Near the climax of the drama, I asked the children 
to draw what they thought would happen at the end of the crisis to conclude the play. 
These were again discussed individually, and again, I took notes on their comments. At 
the end of the unit, I again asked the children to draw an Indian or Native American. In 
January, I asked the children to draw a self-portrait so that I could compare their own 
drawings to the ones they created on a Native American. Finally, in May, I asked the 
children to draw another picture of a Native American so that I could see if there were 
any changes from the previous pictures. 

One afternoon student, Tim, began by drawing two sad-faced Indians. One is 
lying down and the other is standing with a spear. The dictation reads: “This is a tree. 
The Native American has a spear to kill the buffalo because he is hungry. He is sad 
because the buffalo got away on his four legs.” Certainly this was a traditional viewpoint 
of past Native Americans. By the time we were nearing the end of the drama in Week 
Five, his picture was of a peaceful circle and his comment was “They were thinking that 
they would let her in, join their village.” He is speaking of the woman who lost her home 
and wanted to join the village in the afternoon class drama. In his final illustration, Tim 



109 




has created a game from long ago where the boys are playing lacrosse. The two 
players are brothers and even if the older boy is winning, it will not bother the younger 
brother. “The sun is out in the picture and the sky is blue,” he says. His idea about 
Native Americans has changed from a violent beginning to a peaceful ending in his unit 
illustrations (Figure 3). 




Tim’s First Illustration 11/1/04 Tim’s Second Illustration 11/12/04 Tim’s Third Illustration 12/1/04 

Figure 3. Tim’s illustrations. 

It was interesting to see the growth of the children as they created their drawings 
throughout the unit. Some children, such as Tina, wanted to draw her Native American 
in a swimsuit outfit throughout the unit. Her label for the first illustration was, “I don’t 
really know what she is doing. She is going on a walk.” She dressed her Native 
American in a traditional costume as a “leader” when she was describing the drama 
occupation. At the end of the unit, she had drawn her person again in a swim suit yet 
the outfit had native designs on it. I did notice that the skin color changed from a yellow 
tone to a peach color for the end of the unit. In our discussions, Tina had many ideas 
about “insider” and “outsider” books, authentic texts with real facts, and well-told stories, 
but in her drawings, Tina stayed at the beach. 



no 




Tina’s First Illustration 11/1/04 Tina’s Second Illustration 11/12/04 Tina’s Third Illustration 12/1/04 

Figure 4. Tina’s illustrations. 

Not all children showed growth in their illustrations in this five-week unit. The final 
illustrations that the children created in May reflected the learning that they portrayed in 
the ending illustration during Week Five. Tim created a native boy of long ago who was 
cooperating with his peers. Tina had drawn a native girl at the beach in today’s world. 
The tone of most of the final drawings was peaceful and reflected current situations. 

The children had learned that Native Americans live now in their world. They have the 
same feelings and enjoy doing many of the same activities in family life. 

Interviews 

When I talked to the focus groups or individuals, I used nine questions that were 
based on the materials of Slapin and Seale (2005, 1992), The Children’s Museum of 
Boston (2003), and questions created by multicultural authors such as Joseph Bruchac, 
Floyd Cooper, Yumi Fleo, Patricia Polacco, and Gary Soto. Three of the questions were 
for informational books exclusively: “Tell me about the ways the author showed the 
reader historical ideas or events”; “In what ways did the author talk about separate 
tribes in this book?” The fictional book questions were “Describe the illustrations of 



ill 



Native Americans in this book”; “Tell me how the words the author used in this book 
make you think and feel about Native Americans.” Usually, my last question was: “Why 
do you think that a Native American would like or dislike this book?” 

In the focus groups of five children, I let the individuals talk about the books that 
they had chosen from a large assortment of books that I had provided. The members of 
each of the groups would ask each other questions as the discussion proceeded. In the 
first discussion with the afternoon class, Adam picked The Girl Who Loved Wild Horses 
by Paul Goble because he said that he liked the sacred dogs (horses) in the story. Tom 
said that he also chose a book by Paul Goble, The Legend of the Indian Paintbrush 
because he liked the picture of the sunset at the back of the book. Mark picked another 
book by Paul Goble and said that he didn’t know why he picked it but maybe it was the 
cover that he liked. In these beginning discussions, most of the children could not 
articulate why they chose certain books but the illustrations appealed to them. Most of 
the original choices were fiction titles and it was more difficult for the children to choose 
a book from the non-fiction category. 

At the end of the unit, children often chose informational titles. One child in a 
different afternoon focus group picked a book about totem poles and showed the group 
the photos to explain how the pole was created. George chose a book about the 
Comanche tribe. He found a map to explain where the tribe lived in the United States. 
George knew that many of the photos were from long ago because they were in black 
and white. Other children added comments freely, deciding that Native Americans 
would like this real book. It was easier for the children to answer my questions about the 
books than in previous conversations; in fact, sometimes they posed the questions 



112 




themselves. For example, in one of the final focus groups, Margaret said “Look how the 
author gave us information on that Native American tribe. Other authors and readers 
would respect his writing.” 

As I talked to the children, I reflected on my role as the teacher. The hardest part 
of the interview was the wait time. When a child was silent for a few seconds, I taught 
the other children not to interrupt but to wait until the child had something to say. Some 
children are slower to process questions. I tried to choose a couple of very verbal 
children to work with quieter students in the group of five. During Week Four, a morning 
focus group had each picked out a fiction and non-fiction title. We started discussing the 
informational books. Allie eagerly picked out a book about the Cayuga tribe. I asked her 
why she had chosen that book. A minute went by and she had no answer. I asked if 
there were drawn illustrations or photos. She answered that she saw buffaloes in the 
book. I asked if the author used true ideas to make this book. She didn’t know. I then 
asked if the author was telling the truth about the tribe. She was not sure. No one in the 
group was answering because they were still looking at their own books. Sue 
volunteered to talk about the book by Tomie dePaola, The Legend of the Bluebonnet. 
Another child said that he thought we were talking about non-fiction books. He went on 
to point out that Sue’s fiction book was a story without real pictures, while Allie’s book 
had true facts because the author had real photos of buffalos, dress, and teepees. 

Often when I would wait and not put in my comments to clarify ideas in the discussion, 
other students would have processed the ideas and offered assistance to our total 
group understanding. This was a difficult process for me as I always wanted to jump in 
with that clarifying comment and had to learn to wait for a response. 



113 




When I asked a question and no one in the group answered, I waited the 
appropriate minute and then rephrased the same question in another way. For example, 
“How do you know that this is an ‘insider’ author?” I probed to help the child remember 
the chart we had created on “insider” authors and wonder if the author of the book we 
were discussing was on the original list. When I asked my final question: “Why do you 
think that a Native American would like or dislike this book?” I searched for 
personalizing discourse ideas so that the children could connect the book’s written 
experiences to their own lives. In this way, I tried to stimulate and support the child’s 
development. 

Helping the children to connect their new learning with prior experiences was 
very important when reading a new story to the class. The probing questions before the 
story was read aloud always centered on what we knew about the book when we 
looked at the illustrations, heard the title, or skimmed through the pages. Children 
seemed to be more motivated to hear the story when I tried to create a transactional 
bond with the book and I found that I was guiding the reading process more effectively 
this way. 

Large Group Discussions 

When listening to the interviews of the children during discussions at the 
beginning of the unit, I heard a lot of my voice and few comments from the children. I 
was leading and answering my own questions. When we discussed the web of the unit, 
children were able to add simple ideas of what we could be studying about Native 
Americans in the project. Some of these ideas were incorrect, such as the thought that 
Native Americans still rode horses in the West and chased buffalo. “At night they go 



114 




home to their triangular teepees.” As the unit progressed, I heard my voice less and less 
because I was trying to listen and scaffold their knowledge. The children had much 
more to say. Especially when we were involved in the drama, the children became the 
characters and could express how it felt to live in the village. The children could relate 
how they saw that people really lost their homes in Florida in the Fall hurricane of 2004, 
just as we lost our homes in the Native American village. The emotional level was high 
as we discussed what occurred in our morning drama each day. There was a fear of the 
wolf character, yet the children did not want to kill him. They created a sleep medicine to 
give him so that he could be moved to a place further away from the village in the 
morning drama. When I kept my voice out of the action, I could hear the children make 
mental connections from their own prior knowledge. 

When we were concluding the unit and had a discussion on toys, I brought in 
stereotypical cowboy and Indian figures. They noticed that they all had guns, there were 
no women portrayed, and their faces had mean expressions. Glen mentioned, “They 
are also not wearing warm enough clothing. Not all Indians had the kind of one feather 
head dress either.” The children had made the leap from imaginary to factual. 

When we went to the chart to add our ideas to the class web, the children had 
created individual cards with true facts about Native Americans. Some cards were 
written and some had illustrations. Katie said, “They killed buffalo for keeping warm, and 
they killed buffalo only for food.” Matt said that, “Indians made pictures on the wall.” We 
discussed petroglyphs and why natives drew the stories on cave walls. Bob made 
different types of illustrations about native homes. Fie talked about warm places and 
traveling Indians with teepees and cold places with warmer houses like today’s igloos or 



115 




wood houses. The discussion became a teachable moment with children taking note of 
Native American symbols such as the owl standing for death and feathers of birds being 
revered in the people’s own costumes for ceremonies. My voice was silent for the most 
part with only an occasional comment to clarify more loudly for taping what had been 
said by the students. The children were engaged with their new learning! 

Teacher Observations 

Throughout the unit, I kept a notebook in which I wrote down my field notes or 
observations of the children. Sometimes I was able to write notes immediately after a 
discussion or interview. At other times, I had to wait until I had a break in the day, or 
even until the evening to jot down and reflect upon my thoughts. I found that I would 
forget important ideas by waiting, but on some days there was little time to document 
my ideas. Many times an idea would be triggered the next day by a word or action of a 
child and I could jot down that important connecting thought. 

My notes show that I was aware of the children’s growth through their interviews, 
illustrations, and discussions as noted previously. As I reread my notes and listened to 
the tapes each night, I could see individual and group growth. What I could not see 
while I was teaching were the changes I was making. I started as the center leader of 
the unit. The children waited for me to give them the information on the authors and to 
read the stories we enjoyed each day. As I observed the children, I saw them sharing 
and talking about books with each other and taking the lead in discussions. As the 
children took over the teaching, I stepped back and listened. I was always there to guide 
the appropriate behavior and to watch the clock for specials’ (Art, Music, P.E.) time or to 
prepare for dismissal. I noticed that we were always late leaving each day. The children 



116 




and I had a difficult time stopping the discussions and the drama. They were ready to 
begin immediately the next day when we had a new story to share, a new author to 
learn about, or another part of the drama to become engaged in. 

Profiles: Selected Students 

In this section I present specific details on the eight highlighted students. Two 
rubrics have been created to show the children’s use of Discourse Strategies (Daiute & 
Jones, 2003) in the unit. The Illustration and Interview Rubric (Table 1) and the Focus 
Group and Discussion Rubric (Table 2) show Weeks 1-5 of the study. Illustrations and 
interviews were grouped together because individual interviews were conducted after 
each of the illustrations created. The focus group and discussions were grouped 
together because I gained similar types of information from the small focus group and 
large discussion groups. 

Table 1 



Illustration and Interview Rubric of Native American Unit, November 2004 



Names 






Discourse strategies (week #s) 






Identify 


Contextualize 


Broaden 


Empathize 


Universalize 


Distance Avoid 


Personalize 


Katie 


1 


1 




2 


2,3,5 


1 


1,3, 4, 5 


Irv 


3 


1,2,4 


1 






1,2 


3 


Glen 


1 


1 


1,3 




4,5 


1,2, 4, 5 


3,4 


Adam 




2 


1 




1 


2 


1,3, 4, 5 


Sally 


1,3, 4, 5 


2 


4 


4 


1,2, 3, 4 


2 


1,3, 4, 5 


Kelly 


1,3,4 


1 


1,4,5 


4 


2, 3, 4, 5 


1 , 


3,5 


Jacob 




5 








5 5 




Mark 


4 


1,2,3 




4 


4,5 


1, 2,3 


4,5 


Notes. 


See Table 2 













117 





Table 2 



Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit, November 2004 









Discourse strategies (week #s) 








Names 


Identify 


Contextualize 


Broaden 


Empathize 


Universalize 


Distance 


Avoid 


Personalize 


Katie 


1,4 


1 


1,2,4 


5 


1,2, 3, 4, 5 






1,2,4 


Irv 


1,4,5 


1,2 


1,2,4 


2,4 


1,2,4 


2 




1,4 


Glen 


3 




1,3 




1,2, 3, 4 


2 




1,3 


Adam 


1,4,5 




2 




1 






2 


Sally 


3 


1,4 


1,3,4 




1,2, 3, 4 






3,4 


Kelly 

Jacob 


1 


1,4 


4 




3 




4 


1,2 


















Mark 


3,4 


1,2,4 


3,4 


3,4 


2,3,4 


1 


1,2 


3 



Notes. Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 

Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 

Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 

Reviewing the Focus Group and Discussion Rubric first in general terms, one 
can see that Jacob was eliminated from this rubric because he did not participate in 
discussions based on his January 2005 school entry. The other students identified, 
personalized, contextualized, broadened, and universalized their knowledge of Native 
Americans. Fewer students empathized or articulated on the psychological meaning of 
discrimination in the books we read. Three students, Irv, Glen, and Mark, distanced 
themselves from the meaning of racial and ethnic discriminations at the beginning of the 
unit. Kelly and Mark avoided the issues by never discussing racial discrimination either 



118 






at the beginning or end of the unit. What was happening in the unit to cause this to 
occur? When did each of the eight students begin to use each of the Discourse 
Strategies ? Why did they use one strategy and not another? I needed to look at each 
child separately to see when and how often they each used a strategy. Then I totaled 
the results of the Illustration and Discussion Rubric checkmarks to see which strategies 
were used most frequently. I believed that this data would help me discern general 
themes in the unit that were changed by instructional strategies. This would be a 
starting point for the creation of an even stronger Native American unit in the future. 

Looking at each of the eight children as they developed their knowledge and 
insights during the illustration and interview sessions and in the smaller focus group and 
larger group discussions gave me rich data. The first four students that I discuss were 
part of the morning kindergarten class. 

Katie: Katie was a high achiever academically. She was also a quiet individual 
and did not risk commenting either through her drawings or verbal conversation until the 
last three weeks of the unit. Katie began to universalize and personalize her ideas 
heavily in Weeks Three to Five, as evidenced in her drawings and interviews. She 
began to add more information to discussions where she broadened, universalized, and 
personalized those reflections. For example, when we had a discussion about 
stereotyped toys in Week Five, Katie noted no women Native American figures were 
portrayed. She was personalizing during the discussion. She also remembered that they 
killed buffalo for keeping warm and they killed buffalo for food. She was universalizing 
her thoughts as she summarized learning from the unit. 

In the beginning discussions, Katie only commented that the books were about 



119 




Native Americans. In her first drawing of a Native American, she drew a Native 
American just starting to shoot the buffalo. The buffalo was mad and ready to charge. 
She could not tell me anything more about the drawing. By the middle of the unit, Katie 
drew a girl nowadays saying, “She is smiling because she was happy because she got 
food, drink for her people. She was happy because she got colorful designs on her 
clothes and then her family was happy for because she had enough money for more 
clothes.” Katie made great progress in her ability to risk speaking about Native 
Americans who live now and moved from creating her original stereotypical image of 
Indians killing buffalo (Figure 5). Tables 3 and 4 summarize Katie’s Discourse 
Strategies. 




Katie’s Illustration 11/1/04 Katie’s Illustration 11/12/04 

Figure 5. Katie’s illustrations. 



120 




Table 3 



Katie’s Illustration and Interview Rubric of Native American Unit, November 2004 



Discourse strategies 



Week 


Identify 


Contextualize 


Broaden Empathize 


Universalize 


Distance Avoid 


Personalize 


1 


X 


X 






X 


X 


2 






X 


X 






3 








X 




X 


4 












X 


5 








X 




X 



Notes. Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 

Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 

Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 



Table 4 

Katie’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 



Discourse strategies 



Week 


Identify 


Contextualize 


Broaden Empathize 


Universalize Distance Avoid 


Personalize 


1 


X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


2 






X 


X 


X 


3 








X 




4 


X 




X 


X 


X 


5 






X 


X 





Notes. Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 

Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 

Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 



121 




Irv: Irv was an older and more mature member of the class with average 
academic abilities, and he made steady growth throughout the unit. Looking at the 
Discourse Strategies on the Illustration and Interview Rubric (Table 1 ), Irv 
contextualized and broadened his views early in the unit. He did not identify or 
personalize the experiences until Week Three. Once he became the warrior chief in the 
theme drama, as depicted in his illustration from Week Two, Irv was motivated to add 
more ideas to discussions. Irv was able to pick out a book about the Wapanau Indians 
during the discussions about non-fiction books during Week Four. He noted that the 
book was about times of long ago and he found a photo of Native Americans carving. 
The photos were in black and white and the dress of the natives were of an earlier time 
in the U.S. Irv said that Native Americans wear regular clothes now like he does, so that 
was also a reason he thought it was a historical book. He was personalizing his 
experience with the book. Another time, I had a large group discussion with the morning 
class about a selection of Native American books. Each child picked out a book from 
the display. Irv had strong opinions about Ten Little Rabbits (1991) by Grossman. He 
personalized that if he was a Native American, he would not like a book where he was 
dressed up as a rabbit. 

In his first drawing, Irv said that a buffalo is coming and the boy doesn’t know that 
the buffalo will get him with his horns. The beginning picture shows danger and 
violence. Since the boy has no arms; it shows a lack of control (Meyer, 2004). In the 
second illustration at the end of the unit, Irv has drawn a Native American dancing at a 
Pow Wow. The picture is less violent and the arms denote that he is in control at a 
current event. Irv’s concepts about Native Americans had changed (Figure 6). He could 



122 




identify, empathize, universalize, and personalize in his drawing portrayals. 
Tables 5 and 6 summarize Irv’s Discourse Strategies. 




First Drawing 1 1/1/04 End of Unit Drawing 12/10/04 

Figure 6. Irv’s illustrations. 

Table 5 

Irv’s Illustration and Interview Rubric of Native American Unit, November 2004 



Discourse strategies 



Week Identify Contextualize Broaden Empathize Universalize Distance Avoid Personalize 

1 XX XX 

2 X X X 

3 X X X 

4 X 

5 X XX X 



Notes. Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 

Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 

Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 



123 



Table 6 



Irv’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 



Discourse strategies 



Week 


Identify 


Contextualize 


Broaden 


Empathize 


Universalize 


Distance Avoid Personalize 


1 


X 


X 


X 




X 


X 


2 




X 


X 


X 


X 


X 


3 














4 


X 




X 


X 


X 


X 


5 


X 













Notes. Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 

Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 

Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 



Glen: Glen was an eager participant in the unit from the first day. As another 
high-achieving student, he showed his intense motivation to be a major character in the 
theme drama, his illustrations were detailed with complete descriptions, and his 
contributions to discussions were vital to the group’s understanding of the unit. The 
Illustration and Interview Rubric (Table 1 ), evidences that Glen identified, 
contextualized, broadened, and distanced himself in Week One. 

Glen’s first drawing shows that his Native American is going to his tipi. When he 
gave his verbal description of his completed illustration of a Native American during 
Week two, he said that after the native in his picture kills the buffalo, he is going to eat it 
(Figure 7). He said that they will also get the skin to use as a jacket. 



124 





Glen’s Drawing 11/01/04 Glen’s Drawing 11/12/04 

Figure 7. Glen’s illustrations. 



Later, during the discussion of non-fiction books, Glen broadened his views 
about Native Americans. He chose a book about the Seneca tribe, and indicated that it 
was a true book because it had real artifacts including the house they used to live in. 
During Week Three, Glen listened to the discussion of Audrey Osofsky’s book, The 
Dream Catcher (1 992). When he saw the illustration showing the moonlight shining on 
the baby’s face, he asked, “Why is there so much color?” I explained that the sun has 
just set and the colors of the sunset were reflected in the illustrations. He wondered why 
there would be so much light and dark green and decided it might be because they 
were in the forest. Glen made that connection because he had been in the woods too, 
and even though he was not a Native American, he had seen the same colors. Glen 
had broadened his understanding because of his awareness of the likenesses and 
differences of people, and he personalized his experience into the story’s illustrations. 

Glen chose the part of the wolf in the theme drama. It is difficult for a child to take 
on an animal part because it can lead the student to go out of character quickly 



125 



depending on audience reaction. However, Glen was able to stay in character 
throughout the drama. He spent much time hiding while the villagers decided what to do 
about this menacing animal terrorizing their town. His illustration and description of the 
climax of the drama stayed true to his motivated role; he said that the villagers gave the 
wolf medicine in food away from the village to make him die. I noticed that Glen did not 
participate in the large discussion groups at the end of the unit because he was the 
silent wolf character. Tables 7 and 8 summarize Glen’s Discourse Strategies. Note that 
in Table 8, there are no check marks for discussion during Week Five. 



Table 7 

Glen’s Illustration and Interview Rubric of Native American Unit, November 2004 



Discourse strategies 



Week 


Identify 


Contextualize 


Broaden Empathize 


Universalize 


Distance Avoid 


Personalize 


1 


X 


X 


X 




X 




2 










X 




3 






X 


X 




X 


4 








X 


X 


X 


5 








X 


X 





Notes. Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 

Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 

Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 



126 




Table 8 



Glen’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 



Discourse strategies 



Week 


Identify 


Contextualize 


Broaden 


Empathize 


Universalize 


Distance Avoid 


Personalize 


1 






X 




X 




X 


2 








X 


X 


X 




3 


X 




X 




X 




X 


4 






X 


X 


X 






5 

















Notes. Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 

Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 

Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 

In the Focus Group and Discussion Rubric (Table 8), we can see that Glen was 
able to universalize and personalize early in the unit. In the final discussion, Glen noted 
that Alice Dalgliesh’s book, The Thanksgiving Story ( 1954) was written by an “outsider” 
because an “insider” author would never allow pictures drawn of Native Americans not 
wearing shirts in cold November. He said that his mother made him dress warmly in the 
winter for Thanksgiving. He was personalizing and comparing his own experience to the 
lives of real Native Americans. 

Adam: Adam was a high achiever, yet he took longer to respond to visual and 
individual interview cues than he did in the larger focus and discussion groups. Adam 
was a perfectionist and loved to share ideas with the group; however, when he had to 
create a drawing or written document, it took him a long time to create a product that he 
was happy with. Adam identified with the topic immediately during the first week. In a 



127 




discussion of his focus group during the Week One of the unit, Adam commented that 
the non-fiction books are real because there are real things on the pages. He labeled 
his drawing “A Long Time Ago,” even though he said that it was a Native American 
eating a cookie from a long time ago (Figure 8). The figure was wearing no clothing. 




Adam’s Drawing 11/1/04 Adam’s Drawing 12/1/04 

Figure 8. Adam’s illustrations. 

In the drama, Adam said only that he wanted to be a leader. By the time we 
reached the climax in Week Five, Adam was ready to personalize his drawings. “The 
fox is going to eat the medicine and steak to make him sleep more. We will take him 
into the woods. He is gone!” At the end of the unit, his drawing of a Native American 
showed a figure in contemporary dress eating a hot dog. He wrote that the boy was 
eating nowadays or long ago. Adam added many details to our final discussion in May 
about Native American books. He was able to put himself ( personalizing ) into the 
discussion by relating how he knew which books Native Americans would like even 
though he was an “outsider.” 

Sally: Sally, who was a quiet high achiever, was able to identify, universalize, and 
personalize during the first week of the unit. Her first drawing of a Native American 



128 



showed a girl in contemporary dress enjoying flowers outside. This same image 
continued when she drew herself as an artist, her occupation in the theme drama. When 
Sally drew her image of the final council meeting where the tribe discussed the new 
woman in their village, all of the tribal members were wearing contemporary clothing 
(Figure 9). 




Sally’s Illustration 11/1/04 Sally in Drama 11/12/04 Sally in Drama Climax 11/22/04 

Figure 9. Sally’s early illustrations. 

For her last picture of a Native American in January of 2005, Sally created a girl 
who was dancing for a contemporary Pow Wow (Figure 10). 




Sally’s Pow Wow Picture 1/5/05 



Figure 10. Sally’s last illustration. 



129 



During the Week Four of the unit, Sally’s focus group discussed the book, Native 
Americans (Jeunesse, Fuhr, & Sautai, 1994). She was able to understand that the book 
was supposed to be about Native Americans yet noted that the author included a 
section on cowboys as settlers of the west. She wondered why the cowboys’ story was 
in a book about Native Americans; and she was able to generalize beyond the 
differences of Native Americans to broaden the value of their historic story. Her ability to 
identify, broaden, universalize, and personalize continued throughout the unit during 
discussions. Table 9 summarizes Sally’s Discourse Strategies in the focus group and in 
the large discussion group. 

Table 9 

Sally’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 



Discourse strategies 



Week 


Identify 


Contextualize 


Broaden 


Empathize Universalize 


Distance Avoid Personalize 


1 




X 


X 


X 




2 








X 




3 


X 




X 


X 


X 


4 




X 


X 


X 


X 


5 













Notes. Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 

Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 

Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 



Kelly: Kelly was an average learner who was extremely creative when drawing 
and verbalizing the descriptions in individual sessions, but quieter about her views 



130 




during focus or large group discussions. When comparing the Illustration/Interview 
Rubric with the Discussion Rubric, I could see that she could identify, broaden, and 
universalize early in the unit as an illustrator. Her first picture of long ago showed a 
woman, “who was in her house who was going to kill some stuff like mean animals.” 
“Some might be good or bad,” she said. Her second picture depicted a child now 
walking in the sun. In fact, she chose to be a one-year old child character in the theme 
drama. Her illustration of the final council meeting was a representation of our class 
teepee and carpet (including the alphabet letters on the rug). “Here are the counselors,” 
she said. “They said she (the woman) could stay. They are going on a field trip...” 
(Figure 11). Kelly had personalized the meeting into a camp experience from her life. 




Kelly’s First Drawing 11/1/04 





Kelly’s Drawing 11/12/04 




Kelly’s Drama Drawing 12/5/04 



Figure 1 1. Kelly’s illustrations. 

Kelly was able to show the Discourse Strategies of identification and 
universalization more completely through illustration than discussion due to her strength 
in drawing and her quiet nature (Tables 1 0 and 1 1 ). Kelly’s comments did not become 
highlighted in the larger group until the Week Four of the unit. When her voice was clear 
as she expressed her views in the theme drama, there was more of a sense of 
broadening and contextualizing in her comments. For example, Kelly discussed the 



131 



woman who was an outsider to the village and she talked about the problems of having 
a newcomer in their village. She tried to make her classmates aware of the problems 
but did not label her views as biased. She thought the newcomer was a nice person but 
stated, “I think we should move her to another village.” By the time Kelly drew her last 
drama illustration (12/5/04) in this view of our classroom ABC rug where the council 
meeting was held, she was convinced to let the woman stay in their village. Kelly had 
empathized and universalized with the woman and accepted the decision of the group. 
She had moved to a communal model. 

Table 10 

Kelly’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 



Week 








Discourse strategies 






Identify 


Contextualize 


Broaden 


Empathize 


Universalize 


Distance 


Avoid Personalize 


1 


X 


X 


X 






X 




2 










X 






3 


X 








X 




X 


4 


X 




X 


X 


X 






5 






X 




X 




X 



Notes. Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 

Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 

Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 



132 




Table 1 1 



Kelly’s Focus Group and Discussion Rubric of Native American Unit 



Discourse strategies 

Week Identify Contextualize Broaden Empathize Universalize Distance Avoid Personalize 

1 X X X 

2 X 



3 X 

4 X X X 



5 



Jacob : Jacob has been mentioned previously as the new student who entered 
our class in January. Figure 12 is Jacob’s drawing of a present-day, yellow-faced Native 
American in traditional dress with a bow and arrow. He could contextualize, but chose to 
distance and avoid issues in his illustration and discussion. He did not have the benefit 
of the information about Native Americans from the unit. 




Jacob’s Drawing of a Native American 1/5/05 
Figure 12. Jacob’s illustration. 



133 



In the final discussion in May, Jacob looked at Native American books that he 
had not seen before. When Allen talked about the stereotypes of Brother Eagle, Sister 
Sky (Jeffers, 1991), Jacob disagreed, stating that he thought that the book had great 
pictures. Allen explained that the author did not do her homework and that the book was 
about a tribe that was not depicted in the illustrations. The class explained that the 
drawings were of the Plains Indians while the words were supposed to be those of Chief 
Seattle, who was from a Northwest tribe. Jacob was somewhat confused by the 
information, while the group was confident in their knowledge. 

Mark: Mark was a lower-performing learner who did not take the unit seriously 
during the beginning weeks. His first drawing of a Native American showed a man using 
a gun (Figure 13). Mark also noted in the interview that he liked the music that was 
playing in the room. His drawings demonstrated that he could contextualize yet also 
distance himself from the unit. He wanted to be a warrior for the drama, and did not 
participate fully as he simply watched as his classmates inspected the damage in the 
village. Only when the lost woman entered the village, did I see Mark begin to 
personalize the meaning of being an outsider. Mark had been an outsider for most of 
the first semester in kindergarten. He had not attended school before and had moved 
from the Eastern region of the U.S. In addition, his twin brother was separated from him 
in the other afternoon kindergarten class. 



134 





Mark’s First Illustration 11/1/04 Mark’s Drama Occupation 11/12/04 End of Drama Picture 

12/1/04 

Figure 13. Mark’s illustrations 

During discussions, Mark did identify, contextualize, broaden, empathize, 
universalize, as well as personalize the information he was learning. Mark chose books 
by Paul Goble because he liked the humor in the Iktomi stories. He did not have a great 
deal to say in group discussions but when I talked to him about the books he chose to 
read during Free Choice Time, Mark indicated that he liked the pictures and thought that 
Native Americans would like the stories about this silly character. During other times 
during the school day, Mark created behavior difficulties with his short attention span 
and movement around the room when we were working. However, during the time we 
participated in the Native American unit, Mark was quietly attentive and focused and he 
was invested in what he was learning. 

Student Summary 

To summarize the data from these eight students, I compared the information 
from the Illustration and Interview Rubric (Table 1) to that of the Focus Group and 
Discussion Rubric (Table 2) to see how the children used the Discourse Strategies 



135 



throughout the Native American unit. Both the Illustration and the Discussion Rubrics 
evidenced that the children’s views were scattered, as they used many different ideas 
about Native Americans in Week One. By Weeks Four and Five, the discussions 
showed that children used identification, broadening, universalizing, and personalizing 
for what they had learned. These were also the most prevalent Discourse Strategies 
used by the children throughout the unit. By Week Five, the children’s illustrations 
portrayed universalization and personalization of their ideas. As a general observation, 
the illustrations that the children created did not cover avoidance, distance, and 
empathy. More emphasis continued to be on personalization and universalization of the 
ideas. The children had found similarities and connections to their own lives. 

As a way to understand when and why the children began to use the strategies 
during the unit, I created Illustration and Discussion Rubric Totals (Table 12) to total all 
of the children’s individual checkmarks. 



136 




Table 12 



Illustration and Discussion Rubric Totals 



Discourse strategies 



Names 


Identify Contextualize Broaden 


Empathize 


Universalize 


Distance 


Avoid 


Personalize 


Katie 


3 


2 


3 


2 


8 


1 


0 


7 


Irv 


4 


5 


4 


3 


4 


3 


0 


4 


Glen 


2 


1 


5 


2 


7 


5 


0 


4 


Adam 


3 


1 


3 


0 


2 


1 


0 


5 


Sally 


5 


3 


4 


1 


8 


1 


0 


6 


Kelly 


4 


3 


4 


1 


5 


1 


1 


4 


Jacob 


0 


1 


0 


0 


0 


1 


1 


0 


Mark 


3 


6 


2 


3 


5 


4 


2 


3 


Totals 


24 

Notes. 


22 25 12 39 17 4 

Identify = Naming specific attributes (e.g., Indians) 

Contextualize = Mentioning causes of racism w/o label as injustices 
Broaden = Use of terms like “outsider” to show awareness of differences 


33 



Empathize = Articulation of discrimination 

Universalize = Generalize beyond difference to broaden values 

Distance = Resisting masking of discrimination 

Avoid = Never discussing race, ethnicity, or discrimination 

Personalize ^Connecting the experience to own lives 

I found that the children were able to universalize and broaden sooner in 
discussions than was evidenced in the illustration rubric. The group dynamics during 
larger discussions and focus groups may have had an influence on the children’s 
attitudes about Native Americans. It took longer for the students to broaden and 
universalize individually. Developmental^, the 5- and 6-year-old child focuses on the 
“me” and takes longer to understand an awareness of differences and then be able to 



137 




generalize beyond those differences to broaden values as in universalization. 
Empathizing did not necessarily lead to universalizing again because of the 
developmental differences in the children’s abilities to articulate in discussions. There 
was some distancing at the beginning of the unit when students were unsure of how to 
react to the new material. The children who did personalize early by Weeks One and 
Two were solidly connecting the lives of Native Americans to their own lives. In 
conclusion, these eight children had the most check marks in the universalize and 
personalize categories. They learned to identify and broaden second, contextualized 
next, and used little avoidance or empathy and even less distance when using the 
Discourse Strategies. 

What was happening in the unit to cause the children to identify, universalize, 
and personalize early in the curriculum? I believe that the use of non-fiction literature at 
the beginning of the unit in Week One was a determining factor in the children’s growth. 
As the unit progressed, adding the fictional literature helped the students continue to 
universalize and personalize what they had learned about Native Americans long ago 
and nowadays. This conclusion led me to carefully consider the planning that went into 
the book selections. 

Student Responses to Books 

Selecting the literature for the unit was an integral part of the planning. 

Looking at the criteria for evaluating educational materials, researchers have found that 
the appropriateness and quality of materials used in the classroom depend on the 
knowledge, understanding, and sensitivity of the classroom teacher (Harvey, Harjo, & 
Jackson 1990). A wide variety of educational materials about Native Americans was 



138 




available in the form of books, curriculum guides, films, videos, posters, and games. As 
a discriminating consumer, I critically reviewed materials using probing questions so 
that children were able to detect inaccuracy, bias, and ultimately authenticity. 

I had to face the problems that many teachers encounter: authorship, 
perspective, and historical bias, cultural accuracy and voice, methods of inclusion, and 
assumptions. I needed to read the citations, find the research notes and dates, and read 
each book carefully to find any inaccuracies. Reading Littlefield’s book, Children of the 
Indian Boarding School (2001) gave me a clearer understanding of the factual data that 
I had researched in historical texts on the boarding schools of the 1800s. The captions 
were correctly matched to the pictures in the text. On the other hand, Cooper’s 
inauthentic book, Indian School: Teaching the White Man’s Way (1999) was written with 
a white European viewpoint; the author’s contention was that although painful to 
families of the era, it was beneficial in the end to educate the Indian children in the 
European way. I wanted to have books which represented authentic, ambiguous, and 
inauthentic literature so that the children could learn to discern the differences and be 
aware of the stereotypes that could be in their literature. 

Culturally authentic books were those with recommended content about and 
authentic images of Native North Americans. I backed up my own judgment by 
researching respected “insider” authors and Native American group websites to 
determine each of the book’s qualities. The Oyate website, The Smithsonian Museum 
website, Stott (1995), and Slapin and Seale (1992) were often consulted first when I 
needed an analytic review. The chart of books in Appendix B lists the sources for 
evaluation. Ambiguous books were not culturally specific yet with teacher assistance, 



139 




students could see the accuracies or inaccuracies in the text or illustrations. Culturally 
inauthentic books were to be avoided because of stereotypical biases of racial, gender, 
ethnic, or other cultural falsifications. I classified the inauthentic books into categories, 
such as loaded words, non-history, token illustrations, and use of mixed cultures. As I 
charted the information, I saw that I would need columns for “insider” or “outsider” 
authors so that I could see if authors outside the Native American culture could write 
authentic literature. If many cases, if the authors had done their homework and 
documented current research on the topics, their works were accepted as authentic. 
Examples of books in this category would be The Seminole (Brooks, 1989), Arctic Son 
(George, 1997), or Discovery of the Americas (Maestro, 1991). 

In Chapter 3, I discussed six books used in the unit. These were popular titles for 
the children, with five leading our class discussions to a deeper level. The storyteller Te 
Ata’s book Baby Rattlesnake (Moroney, 1989) was often discussed by the children. 
They loved the storyline and the illustrations which brought the character of the baby 
snake to life. Bruce Hucko’s book, A Rainbow at Night: The World in Words and 
Pictures by Navajo Children (1996) is my favorite Native American book because of the 
actual children’s illustrations based on their stories. Each author’s photograph is printed 
with the art work on each page. 

Many children liked to discuss Lise Erdrich’s poetry book, Bears Make Rock 
Soup (2002). They were amazed by the author’s lyrical words and the unique 
illustrations of bears frolicking on the pages of the book. The illustrations of Brian 
Deines for Canadian author Jan Waboose’s story, Sky Sisters (2000), were often 
discussed because the children were interested in the Northern lights. I found the 



140 




characters were true to the developmental age of the girls portrayed and their facial 
expressions were enlightening. We had heated discussions about the illustrations of 
Simon Ortiz’s book The People Shall Continue (1994). Many children liked the story but 
not the bright primary-colored pictures. They felt that historical books should have older 
looking pictures with softer colors like light brown, pink, light blues and greens. The bold 
colors denoted modern art in the children’s minds. It was one of the simplest books that 
I could find to tell the story of how the Native American people came to our country, and 
is highly respected by Native American experts in the field. 

Finally, Grandchildren of the Lakota (1999) by LaVera Rose was a favorite 
because it was the true story of contemporary Native Americans. I also like the book 
because it told a story of the Lakota people in a way that the young child could 
understand. The children liked to personalize about how well they could ride a horse or 
be part of a ceremony. When we had a final discussion about Native American books in 
May, many children said that they liked reading a book about children their own age. 
This was one of the first books the students picked out to illustrate that Native 
Americans would like in literature: books about real people today. 

There were approximately 180 books available for browsing in the classroom 
reading center during this unit. I did not read every book to the children nor did we 
research for information in each reference. The children had the opportunity to choose 
any two books (one fiction, one non-fiction) for the focus group discussion interviews. 
They tended to choose the fiction books that we had already read, although they also 
chose a variety of informational books to discuss. I feel that free exploration of books 
was very important to the development of the unit. Students could look at books which 



141 




they could not read yet and find a great deal of information that we could discuss. We 
created a chart of “insider” and “outsider” authors after we had read a number of the 
books. I asked the focus group question “How do you know that the author is an ‘insider’ 
or ‘outsider’ writer?” I had chosen many books written by the same author and many 
native and nonnative selections so that the children could see the variety or works 
portrayed in Native American literature. 

My book list is ever changing and some of the titles may not be used again 
because they may not be available in the local libraries. New books will be added as I 
research newly published American and Canadian titles. I will continue to include the 
best books, according to expert opinion, which give the children a rich, authentic view of 
Native North Americans. I will also include those books which I would never recommend 
for purchase or which are out-of-print because they were poorly accepted by the Native 
American community. As I learn more about Native American books, I will add more 
“ambiguous” titles to my collection. 

Chapter Summary 

There were three story lines evolving in tandem showing my growth as a 
teacher/participant: the story of what I learned during the creation and enactment of this 
curriculum with the children; the role and function of the Discourse Strategies to 
highlight the racial and ethnic discourse of the children and me; and what I learned 
about research methodology as I tried to illuminate and understand these processes. 

What did I learn about the creation and enactment of this unit? I found that I 
needed to prepare by learning about all of the literature about Native Americans that 
was available to the children. I needed the children’s input to help me plan what was of 



142 




interest to them as part of The Project Approach. The creation of this unit took much 
more time to prepare and introduce than units I had taught previously. The time needed 
to progress through the unit was also longer than anticipated. I needed to respond to 
the input of the children as they created illustrations, discussed important ideas, and 
participated in interviews. There was an instructional rhythm that was prevalent 
especially in the fourth week of the unit. By that time, we were well into the theme 
dramas in each class so that we were applying the learning to an enactment of the 
world of Native Americans. We had read most of the non-fiction and many of the fiction 
books written by “insider” and “outsider” authors. We had learned the differences in 
these authors’ writing styles. The children were exposed to authentic, ambiguous, and 
inauthentic literature as they were learning to evaluate the books. I found that I needed 
the children’s assistance in the creation and development of this unit. 

The role and function of the Discourse Strategies highlighting the racial and 
ethnic discourse of the children and me became increasingly apparent as the unit 
progressed. I needed a framework which would enable me to focus my attention on how 
the children were learning. Were their attitudes changing? Was this a result of the 
experiences with the Native American literature? I studied the energy of the children 
which was reflected by the use of the identifying, universalizing, and personalizing 
Discourse Strategies by the fourth week of the unit. The role and function of the 
Discourse Strategies became so apparent as I coded the data on the children’s 
illustrations and interviews. This was the way I could see their changes in attitude, 
however slight, as the unit progressed. The racial and ethnic discourse was developing 
in my own mind as the children were learning. Their interactions with the children’s 



143 




literature helped create new learning. 

What did I learn about research methodology as I tried to understand these 
processes? The Action Research methodology, with my role as teacher/researcher, 
came alive as I developed the dual role during this unit. Without the researcher’s role in 
this process, I would not be able to document what the children and I did to develop our 
learning. Each piece of the unit — illustrating, interviews, discussion, webbing, 
dramatizing, and sharing literature — came together to create a whole. The children and I 
learned to reflect on our growth which in turn caused a cycle of new growth as the unit 
progressed. 

Now that I have presented the data that I collected and have reflected on how the 
students learned, I am ready to think more about my growth and my role as the 
teacher/researcher. In the next chapter, I will present what the children taught me that 
helped develop my understanding of the teaching and learning process. The analysis of 
what I gleaned from the curricular unit to help understand how the children learned and 
how this knowledge influenced me will be discussed. After presenting my story as 
teacher educator and discussing the questions that have guided my research in Chapter 
5, I will summarize my study results and make recommendations for other educators as 
well as ponder implications for future research in Chapter 6. 



144 




Chapter 5 
Discussion 



When did my role as teacher change? What was the week, the day, the 
time, the moment when I became the follower and students became the 
leaders of curriculum? Was it during the group discussions as we shared 
Native American literature? Was it during the interviews where we analyzed 
books? Was it during the drama when I took on the role as an outsider to 
the village and the students in the tribal council decided my fate? Whenever 
it happened, we were all in the moment, equal participants in a journey of 
learning. 



MEG PYTEREK, Field Notes, Week Three, 11/04 
Review of Questions 

My central research question was: How can I, as a teacher, help my kindergarten 
students begin to gain “authentic” cultural understandings of Native North Americans 
through children’s literature? Several questions stemmed from the central one. This 
chapter is organized chronologically in terms of the four research questions posed 
previously: 

• What did I learn about using literature to influence how children begin to 
develop perceptions of “others,” such as Native American people? 

• What did I learn about teaching children to discern bias in Native American 
children’s literature? 

• What did I learn about helping children develop attitudes about people who 
are not present and culturally different from themselves? 

• What did I learn about creating an anti-bias curricular unit to incorporate an 
understanding of the “other” as reflected by authentic literature? 

Teacher Understandings 

What did I learn as a teacher? What influence will my Action Research project 
have for other teachers? What will future Native American units look like in my 
classroom? What books will I keep in the unit and what new ones will I add? What 



145 




purpose did this unit serve? As a teacher/participant, I learned how to create a Project 
Approach unit with child input. I learned to look at children through a new lens, to study 
them through observation and interviews, and to evaluate children’s learning using the 
framework of the Discourse Strategies. The importance of teacher as researcher was 
apparent from the initial planning to the last interview. As a result of this study, I can 
share my experience with other teachers. I can provide data that give examples of 
assessment objectives for evaluating children’s progress. I can show the ways that I 
analyzed children’s drawing, conducted the interviews, and created performance 
objectives for evaluation. I can relate the high motivation levels in all aspects of the unit 
to the children’s involvement in the creation of their own learning. 

Knowing the materials was a vital step to help prepare me for teaching the unit. I 
felt better prepared since I was an outsider to the Native American culture. Gathering 
the books beforehand and analyzing their value (or lack thereof) was an important step 
before introducing them to the children. Once I laid the framework for evaluating the 
books with the students, we could study every book for stereotypes and depth of 
meaning for understanding Native Americans. I could see the children’s awareness in 
understanding as time progressed in the school year. They were using the questions we 
had framed together to find stereotypes in other ethnic learning materials. If my unit had 
been taught in the typical way in which Indians were studied only on Thanksgiving Day 
with preparation for a feast, colonial costumes, and a Pow Wow ceremony and dance, 
there would not have been rich learning. I made changes in my lessons based on the 
students’ evaluations. The unit will look different every year with each new class of 
children. New books will be added, new materials on Native Americans will be 



146 




researched, new plans for authentic visitors and field trips will be made. However, the 
essential framework of the Action Research project will remain the same. 

The Project Approach provided me with the curricular framework for the in- depth 
investigation of Native North Americans. I wanted to find answers for my research which 
focused on the children’s questions. The children determined what to work on and they 
were accepted as experts about their own needs (Katz, 1994). The framework that I 
developed for my social studies unit on Native Americans was engaging and, I believe, 
contributed to the children’s intellectual development. I focused on topics that were 
relevant to Native Americans with chances for the children to take control of their 
learning. If lessons did not work, then we strived to develop better lessons. 

As I developed the framework for the project, I considered the best practices for 
the five- and six-year-old child. I believe that all learning includes the four learning 
goals: knowledge, skills, dispositions, and feelings. I based the unit on the children’s 
continued interests and socio-emotional needs. The subject areas were integrated; for 
example, an art lesson on beads included counting for our math goal. We wrote in our 
journals and made pictures of our occupations in the Native American village for our 
theme dramas. The children discovered their own attitudes as part of the dramatic 
situation (Bontempo & lannone, 1988). They used play situations as a vehicle for 
learning. Thus I strived for a balance between the child-centered and content-centered 
curriculum (NAEYC, 1995, 2001). 

Critical Race Theory. In addition to using The Project Approach as part of my 
Action Research, I have been influenced by Critical Race Theory, Discourse Strategies, 
and Native American Literature as important components of my conceptual framework. 



147 




Critical Race Theory was one way to look at how concepts are understood by children. 
At this age, their conceptions of cultural and ethnic issues are just forming. Therefore, I 
worked diligently to bring up sensitive issues of differences and similarities. One activity 
we completed, before using multicultural crayons or clay, was to look at each of our 
hand colors. No one had “white” or “black” skin; we could have ivory, peach, burnt 
sienna, chocolate, tan and many other shades of skin color. The children learned that 
people cannot really be classified by the one color of their skin because there is no one 
color. With the incorporation of multicultural teaching into the early childhood curriculum, 
I tried to help the children to develop critical thinking. I knew that they had made the 
transition when they looked at literature and commented on the various appropriate skin 
colors of people in authentic books. In contrast, their comments about the red and white 
pictures of native people in inauthentic books were forceful, “How could someone print 
this book?” they asked. I saw the development of critical learners through their analysis 
of textual illustrations. 

Discourse Strategies : What did the children say or do that helped me to learn 
from the experience of teaching them? Looking again at the Discourse Strategies 
(Daiute & Jones, 2003), most of the children universalized and learned to generalize 
beyond the differences to broaden their own values. I learned that the children could 
also personalize the experience of the drama to their own prior experience. Why did 
they use one strategy and not another? What were the general themes in the unit that 
were changed by the instructional strategies? In the following section, I will attempt to 
answer these questions as I look at the unit chronologically based on the four research 
questions. 



148 




Studying the discourse data, I found that the children universalized and 
personalized the most, identified and broadened second, contextualized next, and did 
not use avoidance, empathy, or distance strategies very often. Why did this happen and 
how did it affect the outcome of the unit? At the beginning of the unit, I used the KWL 
strategy and asked the students about “What they Knew” about Native Americans. 
Children of this age always like to be asked to contribute and their attention was 
focused on their own prior knowledge. Using this strategy throughout the unit helped the 
children continue to tell “What they Wanted to know” and finally, at the end of the unit, 
“What they had Learned” (Ogle, 1986). This information gave insight into their prior 
knowledge, ways to analyze what I should emphasize in the curriculum planning based 
on their interests, and finally, information on their perception of Native Americans. 

Question I 

What did I learn about using approximately 180 children's books to influence how 
children develop perceptions of others, such as Native American people? At least six 
months before I began planning the curriculum for the unit, I read many Native 
American books. At first I chose the most highly recommended books by insider 
authors. Then I decided to look at the books I already had been teaching with for years, 
and to research the school and public library shelves for books. I found many 
stereotypical books with degrading images and stilted text. Even the outdated nonfiction 
books became interesting because I realized that I was now able to see the problems 
these books raised. I knew that I could present valid information to our school librarian 
so that she would remove the books from the shelves but that process would not work 
for the public library or the book store. I wondered: “Why not let the children learn to 



149 




evaluate the books?” They would be the ones choosing the books for themselves. Why 
couldn’t they learn to be discerning readers? With this idea in mind, I studied each 
book’s content and then created the “Categorization of Native North American 
Literature” to label the books as authentic, ambiguous and inauthentic, using the 
information from experts in the field of Native American literature. Once I had a large 
selection of books, I was then able to plan the curricular lessons using the books for 
shared story time or group discussions. I wondered how the literature would change the 
children’s attitudes as well as their knowledge. 

During the first week, I introduced the non-fiction books which gave the children a 
background into the history and the present-day lives of Native North Americans. Most 
children identified with the children in these informational books. They lived the pain of 
“the long walk” (Bruchac, 2002) and could feel the loneliness at “the boarding schools” 
(Littlefield, 2001). Their identity ideas showed up in their illustrations, in their 
discussions, or both. This is what I expected to happen. As children of this age focus on 
themselves, they would need to identify with Native Americans first. Most of the eight 
children selected for this study contextualized in discussions except Sally and Adam, 
who were very quiet in class. In their illustrations (Figures 14 and 15), they were able to 
show ideas of racism without actually being able to label them as injustices. 



150 









Figure 14. Sally’s first drawing 11/1/04 Figure 15. Adam’s picture of a Native 



In illustrations, all of the children contextualized in their drawings except for 
Adam. He had a picture that was not seriously visualizing the topic (Figure 15). This 
could have been more personality motivated than content-oriented. Maggie, in contrast, 
drew a present day girl making clothes for the winter (Figure 1 6). She said that Native 
Americans could be poor and needed clothing. By Week Two, Adam had begun to 
mention ideas of injustice in discussions. The remainder of the class was focused on 
the injustices raised by the nonfiction books. In my field notes, I wrote about my 
expectation that the informational books would directly affect illustrations and 
discussions. 



American 



11/1/04 



151 



N/OUJ 





Figure 16. Maggie’s picture of a Native American 11/1/04 

Sally and Glen did not use distance as one of their strategies while the other 
children did. The group discussions focused on the unbelievability of what happened to 
Native Americans. It was understandable that some of the children could not connect 
with the historical facts. It was safer to distance themselves. In my teacher notes, I 
reminded myself of the need to paraphrase concepts from informational books so that it 
would be understandable at their level. Once the children started to ask questions, I was 
able to find out what was on their minds. I decided to show a Reading Rainbow video 
( Gift of the Sacred Dog, Goble, 1 985) earlier than planned so that they could relate 
literature, historical events, and present day times. I felt that I needed to adjust the 
pacing of my teaching to fit their needs. 

Looking at the entire group, I observed that the classes changed in their 
acceptance of Native Americans as individuals. When the unit began, the children were 
asked to draw pictures of Native Americans. Many of these pictures showed aggressive 



152 



Indians holding guns and killing other people or animals, such as the buffalo. There was 
a blurring of the concepts of contemporary life and life long ago. Figure 17, a picture 
drawn by Katie on November 1 , 2004 shows an example of this beginning viewpoint. 
Katie explained, “The Native American is just starting to shoot the buffalo. The buffalo is 
getting ready to charge.” 



Ts: I 

Figure 17. Katie’s picture of a Native American and buffalo. 

During the unit, there were many lessons planned to help introduce the students 
to learning about modern Native American children. They viewed non-fiction Reading 
Rainbow videos on tribal ceremonies, schools nowadays, and reservation life. I read 
many non-fiction books, such as Grandchildren of the Lakota (Rose, 1999). My goal 
was to help the children understand that Native American children today live lives 
similar to their own. I was also trying to teach the children that all people are the same 
even though they have different cultures and traditions. The students learned that a 
Native American child could come to our school and fit right into our lives in midwestern 
U.S. They would wear the same types of modern clothes, play the same sports, and 
watch many of the same movies as other elementary students would enjoy. 

The children's concepts had already changed by Day Eight of the unit. 




153 




Figure 18. Native American Powwow by Mark 11/12/04 

As the month progressed with opportunities to discuss fiction and nonfiction 
books, group discussions changed from beginning comments like those made by Mark 
about his picture (Figure 18) of a Native American Pow Wow, “He will be killing a rhino 
and a buffalo.” I became more comfortable during discussions at this point and shifted 
by role as discussion leader to that of listener who prompted the children when needed. 

I read the Disney story of Pocahontas during the Week Four of the unit the 
children had small group discussions for a number of days about whether Native 
Americans would like the Disney movie version of her life. After a long group dialogue 
about the Disney book, in which I presented real facts that the Disney book had 
distorted, most children felt that Native Americans would be embarrassed by the movie. 
Cynthia mentioned that Native Americans would not like the movie or the Disney book. 
“Why couldn’t they make a pretend movie about someone else instead of Pocahontas ?” 
The children also noted more differences in the literature they discussed in the 
last week of the unit. When Irv was discussing Tomie dePaola’s book, The Legend of 
the Indian Paintbrush (1988), he thought that Tomie was an insider author because he 
had done his homework. He felt that Native Americans would like his work because “He 



154 



was telling the truth.” He had researched about the setting and story and then made it 
his own. The children compared this book to Fire Race (London, 1993) by London. Irv 
noted that he liked the book because he liked bees, but he didn't think Native Americans 
would like the book because the animals were acting like people. He had come to 
understand that Native Americans like to be portrayed as people. 

As a teacher, I listened to the children's discussions and fielded their questions. 
They asked about the types of homes a Native American could choose to live in 
according to climate and historical traditions and about the Native American ceremonies 
or holidays which they celebrated in addition to the U.S. holiday observances. I found 
that I needed to find more informational books to answer their questions. I did not have 
all the answers and wanted to learn more myself. The many tribal groups had different 
traditions to honor. The search for information was fascinating and I documented that 
the children and I both grew as learners. 

In the following paragraphs, examples will be provided to demonstrate how the 
children broadened, empathized, universalized, and personalized their perceptions 
about the cultural appropriateness of the books and found the universal similarities of 
Native American people to their own lives. 

For example, by the second week of the unit, all eight students were able to 
universalize and personalize. I asked myself what I had done in the unit to help the 
children to use these discourses. During this week we brainstormed ideas for our theme 
drama in each class. The morning class chose to feature life in a Native American 
village of “long ago,” which had experienced the destruction of a terrible wind storm. 

The children envisioned a mean, hungry wolf, stalking the people, who were also 



155 




hungry, as they tried to rebuild their village. During the same time period, the class 
listened to a read aloud of Joseph Bruchac’s book, Navaho Long Walk (2002). The 
morning class was enthralled with Shonto Begay’s illustrations in this text, because the 
line drawings revealed such sad expressions. In the midst of these activities, Paul drew 
an illustration (Figure 19) of his person in the drama, and noted that the boy was 
collecting food so that Native Americans wouldn’t starve since the people couldn’t find 
food near or far from the village. “This happened long ago,” Paul said, “but it could also 
happen today.” Here Paul was identifying and universalizing with the plight of starving 
people. 




Figure 19. Paul’s villager illustration 1 1/04 

By engaging in the theme drama, Paul also began to personalize or connect the 
experience to his own life. He brought in an article from a magazine showing poor 
people from the Sudan in Africa which he wanted to share with his classmates. He had 
been watching the news at home and saw newspaper articles on the homeless, and so 
he connected “long ago” with today’s world. Thus the introduction of the theme drama 



156 



early in the unit was beneficial to the children’s understanding and growth and I knew 
that I would use theme drama again in my social studies curriculum. 

Most of the children were broadening by Week Three with their vocabulary 
developing significantly as the unit progressed. Students were learning many new 
words from the literature as evidenced in Tina’s comments during her Focus Group 
discussion. She chose to discuss The Flute Player { Lacapa, 1990) and when I asked 
her why she picked this book, she said that she liked instruments because she plays the 
piano. Tina continued, “It is a sad story because the girl didn’t have any food and she 
was just concentrating on getting the leaf in the water every day (so that her friend 
would have a message from her in the river).” Tina used words like “concentrating” and 
“instruments” which had not been part of her vocabulary earlier in the year. Tina usually 
said that a person was “thinking” or playing a “horn” or “violin.” She began to use words 
from her favorite book to describe objects or ideas. 

Week Three in the curriculum included many fictional stories with rich vocabulary 
while we were also continuing to read informational books about Native North 
Americans. Looking at the curriculum, I could see that much of the “meat” of the unit 
was being covered during this week: the drama was in full swing, we were discussing 
most of the literature, we watched our Second Reading Rainbow video, and some 
children shared their experiences at the 51 st Annual Native American Pow Wow in 
Chicago (November 2004). The children and I were comfortable with the materials and 
the discussions. The eight focal students were universalizing for the most part during 
the week. I didn’t think that the children would be able to generalize by the middle of the 
unit. I took note in my journal of the importance of having these multiple approaches to 



157 




teaching social studies: literature, videos, drama, and discussions. 

Question II 

What did I learn about helping children to discern bias in Native North American 
Literature? During every week of the unit, I made a special point of reading or 
discussing informational books with the children. When I presented the historical Indian 
boarding schools of the 1800s and early 1900s, I showed them factual illustrations of 
actual children. They saw how happy the children looked with their families and how 
they changed in attitude and dress once they were taken to the new schools. Then I 
read the informational text that was factual from an unbiased viewpoint. I would follow 
with incorrect text that gave the European point of view (e.g. Indian schools were good 
for the native children). The children were amazed that different authors could have 
such varying words on the same topic. After that discussion, the students actually put 
on a new lens when they studied the pictures and asked for me to read the words in 
nonfiction works. I was very surprised yet proud to see that the children were identifying 
and personalizing as they read or heard new stories. 

It became apparent that the students began detecting the stereotypes in the 
illustrations in the focal picture books. The children could see red or brown skinned 
people with few clothes for the Native Americans while the “white” people had various 
colorful attractive clothes. They could hear the demeaning words, “How” and “Ugh” in 
Bill Martin’s book, The Brave Little Indian ” (1951) and were embarrassed that an author 
had written that way. Comparing this book to the words and illustrations in Mornings on 
the Lake (Waboose, 1997) gave the children a clear example of inauthentic versus 
authentic literature. 



158 




I found that as the children became more critical of their Native North American 



books, they tended to show less bias toward Native Americans as a cultural group. For 
example, one interesting discussion during Week Three of the unit was stimulated by 
The Navaho Long Walk (Bruchac, 2002). The child who picked the book did so because 
she felt that the pictures were sad. Another child said that he could see the emotions of 
the people in their faces. A lengthy discussion followed about the true story in Native 
American history. In fact, as the unit progressed, group discussions became longer 
because of the added insights the children had from previous interactions with literature 
in the unit. They were making a lot of intertextual connections and this created strong 
scaffolding to help move the children forward. 

I could see that as we had these discussions, Glen, one of the eight focal 
students, became a leader in his understanding of bias in literature. He carried his ideas 
home with him and his mother reported that his sister was researching the Crow tribe 
for her Native American unit at the library. She was flipping through one of the books 
and saw a picture of an adult and two children and immediately stated that they weren’t 
members of the tribe because they were not dressed in their tribal wear. Glen 
interjected, “Native Americans dress just like us. If they are having celebrations, they 
might put on their other clothes.” He went on to say, “You can’t tell if someone is Native 
American just by their clothes!” 

By Day Six in the unit, we were discussing Plains Indian villages and creating a 
language experience story. The children in both classes voted to have the setting from 
long ago. On our language experience chart, we wrote the following questions: “What 
would the people look like?” “Who would they be?” "What would their jobs be?” “How 



159 




would a typical day be spent in the village?” I presented informational books on how 
native villages looked and what the people did in the Plains tribes. 

During activity time at the Reading Center, various children chose to share books 
about the forced marches of people from one part of the country to another. They also 
found illustrations in books about the Indian boarding schools. The children compared a 
large map of the U.S. to a map of native tribes to pinpoint where groups of native had 
moved in the past. They were intrigued with how the native children would feel being 
moved to a new place where they knew no one. 

The rhythm of Week Four showed a high energy level where each of the eight 
students were either broadening, empathizing, or universalizing and many were doing 
all three. What was happening during this week to cause this spark of energy? We were 
at the climax of each of the theme dramas. In the morning class, the children were 
deciding whether to kill the wolf or convince it to move from the exterior area of their 
new village. In the afternoon class, the tribal members were deciding whether to allow a 
strange homeless woman to become a member of their village. Various children 
researched informational literature to discover how wolves actually lived in the wild and 
how tribal councils made important decisions in time past. My teacher journal describes 
how the children were consulting literature more and more not only for the drama but 
also as a result of group discussions: “I will have to take another trip to the public library 
tonight because the children wanted to see more pictures of Plains Indian villages from 
the 1700s and 1800s. They wanted to know if the native people planted their crops in 
rows or not, and wondered what the inside of the tipis looked like” (November 23, 2004). 
I believe that the literature made the difference in the energy level. The more the 



160 




children learned, the more they sought knowledge about Native North Americans. 
Because of vacation periods and conferences in November, our unit moved into 
December. The original four-week plan expanded into five weeks because the children 
wanted to conclude the dramas and read or look at all of the books in our classroom. 

During the Week Five, the dramas ended in a satisfactory manner for both 
groups. In the morning class, the pretend wolf was given medicine and carried to 
another part of the forest. The homeless woman was allowed to live in the village. The 
sense of humanity was evident in the care the children exhibited for animals and people 
in their final decisions. I believe that the rich literature, both fiction and nonfiction, 
contributed to their growth. 

Was the drama helping to further their understanding of Native Americans? 
Would they be able to transfer that response to literature? During the discussion of 
nonfiction and fiction literature, the children in both classes had created dramas as part 
of The Project Approach focus of this unit. The afternoon class developed a drama 
about losing their village to a storm and flood and the appearance of the newcomer 
mentioned previously. The children used the information they gained through focus 
group discussions of nonfiction books to form an authentic council for discussing the 
issue of allowing a newcomer to share their lives or to send her away. One student, 
Kelly, wanted her to be sent on to another village. The tribal members voted to offer the 
woman a place in their village. The students universalized their ideas by going beyond 
the issues of difference to find similarities with her. Kelly agreed to go along with the 
majority vote. Her classmates reasoned with her on this decision. The children also 
used the plot ideas from many fiction Native American stories, such as The Flute Player 



161 




(Lacapa, 1990), to help them gain insight into acceptance of others. The literature was 
helping them to make connections. 

For discussions and focus groups, the students used identity, broadening, 
universalization, and personalization with less emphasis on avoidance and empathy. 
The children named more attributes (e.g. similar present day clothing, typical homes, 
sports), were aware of differences, and found similarities and connections with Native 
Americans through their literature. When they read books about contemporary Native 
Americans, the students understood the universal feelings the indigenous people had 
for their families, homes, schools, and lives. As I analyzed my field notes, I found myself 
saying, “Now that we have read so much rich authentic literature, the children are 
making connections to their own lives” (December 3, 2004). As the weeks went by, I 
was able to see that the classes were taking responsibility for listening, searching out 
information, and leading discussions on the literature we were reading. I learned to let 
the children’s interpretation of the materials guide the growth process. When they asked 
questions about the types of homes Native Americans lived in as we researched the 
setting for our drama, I found more books on the topic. When they asked questions 
about the native schools, I had my own homework to do to prepare for the next day’s 
lesson. I needed to relinquish my role as teacher and learn to be a guide and a 
supporter in their acquisition of knowledge. 

Question III 

What did I learn about helping children develop attitudes about people who are 
not present and who are culturally different from themselves? We have no Native 
American children in our school that I am aware of, though our school population does 



162 




represent many different cultures. The children have already formed conceptual 
conceptualizations and attitudes by the time they enter Kindergarten. How did I help 
them expand their knowledge of people’s similarities and differences? 

At the beginning of the unit, I asked the children to create a web to brainstorm 
and develop ideas as suggested for The Project Approach (Helm & Katz, 2001). The 
web the children created was simple with categories such as food, homes, and 
ceremonies. The final web was detailed with different homes listed, types of drawings 
found on stones, and food grown in different parts of the country. I asked the children to 
draw some factual information as the unit was concluding in a picture and word format 
to add to the web. The depth of response about the petroglyphs, for example, was 
detailed. Matt mentioned that they made pictures on stone walls because they liked the 
colors; Katie said that they liked designs which they made on their tipis, clothes, and 
other art work; Adam noted that they wanted to tell stories. In addition, some of the 
petroglyphs included images of birds and Glen added that they used feathers in their 
drawings and clothes because they honored birds and wanted to look like birds. He 
continued, “Even today, the Pow Wows have Native Americans dressed as birds for 
their costumes.” The simple responses from the beginning of the unit of “I don’t know” 
and “Maybe” became insightful ideas about wall paintings and feathers. No grunts, bird 
sounds, or hand-to-mouth expressions were used during our final discussions. Native 
Americans were honored and respected in illustrations and during discussions. 

I learned that visual, auditory, and kinesthetic documentation was needed for the 
children to recognize their own growth. Kindergarteners are extremely visual 
developmental^. The charts, mural, photos, and illustrations were consulted constantly. 



163 




As the children discussed and created their own drawings, I needed to be reminded of 
how far we had come as a group of learners. 

The children listened to the tapes of their own discussions, which helped them 
focus on their previous discussions. This was important because listening for specific 
ideas expressed by their peers lessened any visual distractions. I also listened to the 
children’s voices over and over as I needed to hear again what each child or groups of 
children were saying to gain the true meaning of discussions. Without this 
reinforcement, I sometimes missed a comment previously given when I was visually 
distracted by a moving child or adult entering our classroom. Not only were the visual 
and auditory learning techniques important for teaching to the learning style strengths of 
the students, the children needed the kinesthetic movement. Developmental ly 
Appropriate Practice dictates that children of this age need to move frequently to 
maintain attention (NAEYC, 2001). As the teacher, I also needed the change of pace 
that the activities in the unit provided. A teacher needs changing stimulation to meet her 
own learning style as well as that of the student! 

Finally, it was important for me to see that the children would take on the roles of 
others, different from themselves, in the drama. This, I felt, would affect their attitudes 
about the characters because they were “living as” Native Americans. As a result, I now 
look for ways in which I can offer chances to provide “out of context” experiences for the 
children to learn and compare to their own lives. Probing, questioning, and analyzing 
benefited the entire curriculum and enhanced my scope of teaching strategies. 



164 




Question IV 



What did I learn about creating an anti-bias curricular unit to incorporate an 
understanding of the “other” as reflected by authentic literature? Teacher observation 
was the key to the development of the unit with the children, as this served as formative 
assessment which subsequently led to curricular and instructional changes. Such 
changes and /or adaptations to the unit were based on student input, time constraints, 
and a reworking of many lessons. The Project Approach is developed by student 
interest and benefits from reflection and evaluation. It is a dynamic process 
“characterized by continuous change, activity, or progress” (Helm & Katz, 2001). 
Throughout this study, I was striving to improve my teaching in the investigative and 
representational processes in which the children were engaging. Looking at The Project 
Approach as engaged learning required me to use the following evaluation questions as 
I analyzed the project work (Helm & Katz, 2001): 

• Did children take responsibility for their own work or activity? 

• Were children absorbed and engrossed in their work? 

• Were children becoming strategic learners? 

• Were the children becoming increasingly collaborative? 

• Were the tasks in the projects challenging and integrative? 

• Did I use the children’s work in the project to assess their learning? 

• Did I, as the teacher, facilitate and guide the children’s work? 

• What did I learn as a teacher from the data I collected? 

Now I will answer these questions as I evaluate the creation of my anti-bias curricular 
unit on Native Americans as reflected in their authentic literature. 



165 




Timing of the Unit 

The unit expanded from the originally planned four weeks to five because the 
focus groups, theme drama, and final illustration required additional time to complete. 
When reviewing my field notes and listening to the tapes of the group discussions at the 
beginning of the unit, I found that the children generally had little to say about Native 
American literature. As the curriculum progressed through Week Three, the children 
became more verbal discussing insider and outsider authors, Native American toys, and 
informational as well as fictional stories. By the end of the unit, most of the children 
were expressing opinions on the Native American literature. It was important for me, as 
the teacher for assessment purposes, to see the children’s verbal growth over the 
course of the unit. 

Dramatic Implications 

The children became very responsible for their learning especially during the 
drama. Each day they prepared the setting either by bringing out authentic props or by 
verbally reviewing what had happened previously in our drama. The students were 
focused and motivated to carry on the plot of the story. The children gave each other 
turns in acting out a scene or let everyone share ideas on what could happen as they 
moved toward the climax of the story. Thus the students “discovered their own attitudes 
from within the dramatic situation” (Bontempo & lannone, 1988). As the children 
became more critical of the books, they became less biased about Native Americans. At 
the beginning of the unit, the children set up a village and discussed how a Native 
American would live in that situation. They stereotyped how all the people would live in 
tipis and be very poor with few warm clothes or ample food. They projected a natural 



166 




disaster and the use of armed weapons to solve problems. For example, in the morning 
class: Katie said, “A mean, evil wolf will enter the village because of an earthquake.” 
Clark continued, “We’ll shoot him with a laser gun.” At the end of the drama, Adam said, 
“He (the wolf) is going to eat the medicine and it will make him sleepy. We will take him 
to the woods. We will be safe.” Holly continued, “But if he wakes up, I will take a run for 
it!” The morning class wanted to have a wolf character that was bothering the villagers. 
The students found a satisfactory way to remove him from the area without killing him. 
The result was more realistic than the ideas the children had at the beginning of the 
unit. They were totally absorbed in the dramatic experience and collaboratively found a 
solution. I could see that the theme drama was a powerful way to teach the children. 
They were “living” the experience which was a great vehicle of learning and one I vowed 
to use frequently in the future. 

The Project Approach resulted in engaged learning as evidenced in the large 
group drama discussion in the afternoon class. It was the final day of the theme drama 
and the children were “in” their respective roles as they gathered for their council group. 
At this climatic moment, the tribal leaders were deciding if the woman from another 
village tribe could be allowed to join their tribe. The woman’s home had been destroyed 
and her family lost when a tornado and flood ravaged her village. I played the role of the 
woman character in the drama. At the beginning of the discussion, two of the children 
wanted to send her north to another village. They were avoiding the issue. They did not 
want to discuss the discrimination of a homeless person. Bob spoke up to say, “I think 
we should keep her in our village.” Other children repeated the chanted words. A girl 
who was distancing herself from the group said, “She can find another home. We live 



167 




here now, finders keepers!” The leaders decided to put the decision to a vote and the 
woman was allowed to join their tribe. Since I was the woman character, I was glad that 
the majority empathized with me. I did wonder if I should have put myself in the drama 
as the character of the woman. The discussion might have proceeded differently and or 
the outcome could have changed if another adult or child had taken on the role. 
However, I believe that many of the children entered a new story world for a short while 
during this drama and accepted me as an anonymous individual rather that solely as 
their teacher. Through analysis of this activity I realized that it may be helpful to ask 
another person to take on such a sensitive role in future dramas. 

In the Action Research curriculum, the children and I became “critical friends” 
(Borgia & Schuler, 1996). We evaluated our unit during the discussion of the literature, 
unit planning, and development of the theme drama. My reflective practice as the 
teacher/researcher/participant was vital to the process. The Discourse Strategies were 
important for me to help make formative assessments of the children. I could see when 
and where they were changing in their attitudes toward Native Americans through the 
use of the literature. I was able to pinpoint the lessons where children were learning, 
whether it was a certain book which aided a discussion point, a movie which illustrated 
a tribal group living today, or an illustration which impacted a focus group. I had the 
individual artifacts in the form of illustrations and interviews to give me data on each 
child’s growth. 

I also learned that it was important to complete the language arts strategies that I 
had begun at the beginning and in the middle the unit. The children drew illustrations 
and labeled their learning through the class Web, completed the K-W-L chart (Ogle, 



168 




1986), and added original drawings, artifacts, and photos to the Audit Trail (Harste et 
al., 1988). I left these large posters and bulletin board areas up until the winter break so 
that the children could continue to revisit their curricular unit and other students in our 
school could see the documentation of our learning. I could see the pride that the 
children had in their own accomplishments. I knew that I would use The Project 
Approach again including the drama experience, illustrative reflection drawing ideas, 
language arts strategies, discussions, and the many examples of authentic, ambiguous, 
and inauthentic books. 

I wanted to invite a Native American speaker into the classroom so that the 
children could see how contemporary people fit into our society with more similarities 
than differences. The many tribal members that I met at the Native American Pow Wow, 
Humanities Festival, or even the man, who spoke each year to Glen School’s second 
graders, primarily stressed the costumes, food, and festival concept that I wanted to 
avoid. Our new art teacher was very interested in my unit and asked me many 
questions about how I taught the children about Native Americans as I was preparing 
the 2005 environment in my classroom. It was then that she revealed to me that she 
and her husband had Native American heritage. In fact, her husband’s grandmother had 
lived on a Cherokee reservation. She was the person that I had been seeking to come 
and share her heritage with my children. 

When she came into the classroom this year, the children were very surprised 
that she was Native American because she wore regular clothes. She explained that 
she did not live in a tipi, had never lived on a reservation, had never been forced to 
attend a boarding school, and did not always attend festivals for Native Americans. She 



169 




and her husband were proud of their heritage which she clearly communicated this fact 
to the children this school year (2005). Of course, the children had an immature concept 
of time and history about boarding schools and tipis, but their questions, which revealed 
their knowledge about Native Americans, surprised our visitor. She was the perfect 
person to communicate the integration of Native American people into mainstream 
American life. 

In applying the concepts of engaged learning to the project in this unit, I learned 
that the children began to take responsibility for their own activities. They could take 
charge of learning experiences, such as the drama, and explain to me what they wanted 
to do in the village on a particular day. They were definitely absorbed in their work to the 
point that they did not want to leave the room for “specials” such as computer class 
because it interrupted their book discussions. My teacher field notes document this 
concentrated time-on-task. The children were also strategic learners because they were 
developing problem-solving skills during discussions, the drama, art projects, and 
artifact collection. I was surprised at their growing maturity as I had not seen this type of 
growth, so early in the school year before. They could apply their learning by taking an 
idea of an occupation from one day and then completing the tasks of that job the next 
day. I could see that the children were collaborative in the drama and throughout the 
discussions. It was amazing to me that the children stretched their thinking as they 
asked questions, defined problems, and took part in conversations. I was able to take 
the children’s work from the project to assess their learning. The artifacts were created 
to show their knowledge. Both individual and group progress was documented by 
illustration and interview as well as in my notes. I felt like a co-learner and co- 



170 




investigator with the children and together we created a rich environment of experiences 
and activities (Helm & Katz, 2001). 

Importance of Children’s Literature 

Opportunities were given to assess authentic, ambiguous, and inauthentic 
children’s literature through reading and discussion. “Are we going to read more than 
one story today?” “Did that author write any more books?” Questions like these were 
asked each day during the unit. When the children went to our school library, they 
checked most of the books by the authors we had studied. The eagerness to share 
books was evident as I looked around the room during Free Choice time: children were 
listening to stories, reading books in the tipi, consulting books as they created authentic 
crafts, and checking non-fiction text for ideas about crops for our pretend garden. Books 
were everywhere and they were being used and enjoyed. I had never imagined that 
literature could create such an atmosphere of learning. I remember Paul asking me as 
we concluded the unit, “You won’t put ail these books away or take them back to the 
library, will you?” We did keep the library books until winter break and my collection of 
Native American books remained available throughout the remainder of the school year. 

When the unit came to an end, we were all disappointed. I tried to transfer their 
learning about stereotypes in literature to new books that we read about the December 
holidays, African American heroes, Chinese New Year, and other units during the 
second semester. For example, when we studied books during the Chinese New Year 
Unit, the children were appalled to see the slanted eyes of the boys all looking alike in 
The Five Chinese Brothers (Bishop, 1938). “How could a library keep such a book on its 
shelves?” they wondered. They drafted a letter to a local public library asking for the 



171 




librarians to be careful about keeping “outdated” books with inaccurate photographs and 
drawings on the shelves. The children often remembered Native American authors such 
as Joseph Bruchac, Paul Goble, and Louise Erdrich and asked for a special bookshelf 
of Native American books in our classroom. The children’s learning continued 
throughout the school year. Their ideas of social justice became transformative as they 
could now view concepts from the point of view of the cultural, ethnic, and racial groups 
they were reading about (Banks & Banks, 2001). 

What I Learned about the Children 

In this chapter, I reviewed my four research questions. To answer these 
questions I analyzed my teacher/researcher field notes and the children’s illustrations 
and interviews. My major finding about the children was that when they became more 
critical of the Native American books, they showed less bias toward Native Americans 
as a cultural group. I had assumed the less mature children’s attitudes would be slower 
to change. However, the Discourse Strategies did not give a clear picture of this or 
show patterns of attitude change according to age. All children made some growth in 
discernment of bias. Their knowledge was illuminated because of the development of 
the Discourse Strategies (Daiute & Jones, 2003). 

Interpretation of Illustrations: The use of illustrations in this unit was important 
because the kindergarten child expresses themselves naturally through art. Art gives 
structure to experience. Hamil (1970) tells us that Art is the invention of symbolic form. 
Meaning is thus given to the environment for the artist and the viewer. By understanding 
the symbol, self-identity is formed. Thus symbolization is the vehicle for the interaction 
of the self and the environment. 



172 




Although a dated source, I believe that Hamil provides information that is 
universally true today. We use art symbols in our illustrations to show our prior 
knowledge and allow a window into our self-identity. Children begin their earliest 
drawing experiences with stories in their minds. A child, does not worry if the picture 
was good, rather the picture is great because it was his or her idea. When children write 
pictures into their words, they make those pictures the vehicle to tell what they mean. 
They have read those pictures to help themselves understand the ideas. (daSilva, 

2001 ). 

Art is transformative, you create from what you know and it makes you feel 
powerful. One can feel control over growth as a learner. (Gallas, 1994). When children 
begin with their own experiences, they become focused on their learning. Drawing gives 
ideas for writing, expands thinking, helps us hold onto the image, is a doorway to 
writing, and helps us focus on meaning (daSilva, 2001). When I asked the children to 
draw a Native American, I could see their thinking processes. I could assess their prior 
knowledge and their use of higher level thinking skills as the unit progressed because I 
had drawings from different stages of the unit experience. 

Figures 20 and 21 made by Kelly show her transformation between the initial 
drawing to the second created after the unit had concluded. In relationship to the first 
picture she said: “I am in my house... I am going to kill some stuff like mean animals...” 



173 




Prompt: Draw a Native American 
By Kelly 11/1/04 

if > / 




Figure 20. Kelly’s illustration of a 
Native American 




Figure 21. Kelly’s illustrations of a council 
meeting, December 2004 



After the unit she drew the tribal council meeting and said, “This is the tipi and 
the carpet. Two kids are sitting. Here are the counselors. They said that she (the 
woman) could stay (in their village).” Kelly took her idea of long ago and transformed it 
into the contemporary setting of our classroom. Kelly’s comments, demonstrated her 
leap of understanding about how a lonely a person would feel without a home: she had 
moved from a solitary to a communal attitude. She finally voted to include the woman in 
their village in the drama. 

As the teacher, I could see the slow yet amazing changes that the children were 
making from kindergarteners to group council members. Once the students had the 
mindset of Native Americans, I could step into their world and help them to experience 
the lives of people different yet similar to themselves. Their ideas helped me to move 
along the plot of the theme drama. It became the vehicle for learning about the 
indigenous people. The children’s illustrations helped to document this learning. 

In the process of creating this curriculum, the children identified their interests 
and clarified their knowledge through illustration. As artists, they built a context and 



174 




layers of drawings. They reconstructed their thinking in metaphoric ways that 
synthesized and expanded their understandings so that we ail could learn (Gallas, 

1994). My teacher journal reflected my own growing awareness of the children’s interest 
in drawing to document knowledge. 

What I Learned through Interviewing: During this curriculum study, I held 
individual, focus group (five children), and large group interview discussions. In these 
interviews, I inquired into the growth and understanding that the children acquired as a 
result of the unit. Students brought their own perceptions of Native Americans into the 
classroom and all of the prior knowledge of stories of the individuals blended together in 
this unit as we developed an understanding as a community in a collective way. I 
learned about the children through the various forms of interviewing and informal 
conversation. The triangulation of multiple perspectives including all of my data sources: 
teacher field notes, taped group discussions, focus group discussions, and informal 
discussions about project activities, helped me to relate what I learned as the unit 
progressed. The subject of the curriculum was contextualized so that the child’s 
experiences could be reflected in the shared narrative (Gallas, 1994). The children were 
writing or dictating what they had drawn either as a picture of a Native American, an 
expression of their individual occupation, or a perceived plot structure of the theme 
drama. One can see that the key to an interactive and expansive curriculum is 
constantly occurring in the process of artistic activity. (Gallas, 1994). Throughout our 
unit we created illustrations that authentically documented the children’s growth. 

We also contextualized language as we explored multiple children’s literature 
texts. Our discussions highlighted insider and outsider authors, bias in illustrations and 



175 




text, lack of research on the part of the author, and awareness of when the book was 
published. Our most heated discussions were those about popular movies based on 
history, such as Pocahontas, Chief Sitting Bull, Battle (or Massacre) at Little Big Horn. 

In addition, it was difficult to find fault with cultural authenticity in books with illustrations 
the children adored such as Ten Little Rabbits (Grossman, 1991) or Brother Eagle, 
Sister Sky (Jeffers, 1 991 ). I felt that these discussions were vital to the growth of the 
children. It was exciting for me to be involved in discussions involving such higher-level 
thinking. If I didn’t know that these were Kindergarten children, I would have guessed 
that the ideas came from much older children. 

The study of Native American literature was important because it called into 
question the ways in which we had constructed our values and forced us to again look 
at these values. Guided inquiry helped the children focus both on the content and the 
process of learning. The comprehension strategies of making connections, retelling, 
questioning, visualizing, and making inferences were evident throughout the unit. I 
found that instead of reading books as a form of tourism where we ate, danced, told 
exotic stories, and made token crafts, we could explore what was authentic, ambiguous, 
or inauthentic about the information or story line in the books so that instead of only 
reading stories to help the children see that “we are all the same,” we went beyond the 
idea of treating all people as human to looking at the history of oppression of Native 
American people (Goebel, 2004). I realized literature can serve as the basis of our 
growing understanding of Native Americans. I learned that providing a variety of books, 
whether biased or unbiased, created valuable learning opportunities for the children. 

I knew that works about Native Americans written long ago were written by white 



176 




Europeans and that the perspective of the Native American was not seen or heard. 
Before 1968, autobiographies were “told to” someone else so the experience and 
perspective of the writers was in question. Non-Native American authors may write 
entertaining books about Native Americans but it is only from their point of view of what 
they imagine life is like for them. The Native American voice and cultural accuracy could 
be found in many, although not in all, newer works. My choices as a teacher depended 
on what I brought to the classroom experience. Gallas (1994) has stated that when the 
boundaries of teaching and research blur, the way we construct our practice depends 
on how we perceive our roles. I realized that my biases determined what I planned to 
teach in the unit, and that only by listening and observing the children, could I change 
curriculum according to their input. 

Summary 

In my five-week curricular unit, I taught a social studies integrated Project 
Approach focused on Native North Americans. I learned how to create and enact a 
curriculum with my children. I also was able to identify, analyze, and use authentic 
literature for children. As a result of my research, I developed curricular implications for 
teaching children about First Nations peoples or Native Americans. I now realize as an 
action researcher, I needed to look inside myself to understand what learning and 
values I brought to the study. In addition, the use of the Discourse Strategies was 
essential to illuminate what the children were learning. The next chapter will summarize 
the study results, examine the implications of its overall value, and give 
recommendations for further research. 



177 




Chapter 6 
Conclusion 



Naa-tok-kaam Moah-ksi-pik-s’iks 
It’ta-toh’kit’toh’pii’yoi, Nit’atoom moi-yii 

There were two redbirds, sitting on a hill 
One named Jack, the other named Jill 

C. BIRD, E. GRANT, J. SCHILDT, BLACKFEET TRIBE, 2005 

Passing down the stories. Native spiritual values live in stories, passed 
verbally from generations to generation, the stories preserve native 
culture, languages, and ways of explaining the universe. 

EMILY, HER MANY HORSES, NMAI, 2003 



Although the lives of the American Indian continue indefinitely, my curricular 
teaching unit on Native Americans ended after five weeks in December, 2004. Thus, the 
study of authentic, ambiguous, and inauthentic Native American books was completed, 
as were the theme dramas. Finally, the materials were packed up, and the class setting 
was changed to one of a winter scene. 

The goals of this Action Research study were to understand how to create an 
anti-bias curriculum project focusing on Native North Americans and how to teach 
children to recognize stereotypes in children’s literature, as well as using The Project 
Approach (Helm & Katz, 2001) in the formative curriculum development. I also wanted 
to develop an understanding of Discourse Strategies (Daiute & Jones, 2003) to assess 
the children’s attitudes about Native Americans using the study of culturally authentic, 
ambiguous, and inauthentic First Peoples children’s literature. If they could understand 
social justice issues related to their reading of appropriate literature now, I hoped that 
they would be able to recognize and choose anti-bias books for future reading. 



178 




Central Question 



My central research question was: How can I, as a teacher, help my kindergarten 
students begin to gain “authentic” cultural understandings of Native North Americans 
through children’s literature? In this chapter I reflect on what I learned from the children 
that enhanced my understanding of this curricular unit. First I looked at the children’s 
changes in perceptions in weekly intervals during the five-week unit. Data from the 
interviews and children’s illustrations, focus group discussions, and the teacher 
observation field notes were the main sources I drew upon to answer my research 
questions. I looked for patterns and themes that developed as the unit progressed. I 
focused on eight children and followed their development by coding for their Discourse 
Strategies. I then aggregated the entire class of children and looked for evidence of 
change. 

Study Results 

My major finding about the children was twofold: (a) when they became more 
critical of the Native American books, they showed less bias toward Native Americans 
as a cultural group; and (b) the children’s knowledge was illuminated because of the 
development of the Discourse Strategies : identifying, contextualizing, broadening, 
practicing, empathizing, universalizing, distancing, avoiding, and personalizing (Daiute 
& Jones, 2003) in the unit. My major finding about myself as the teacher/researcher 
using The Project Approach to teach, was that by incorporating the children’s ideas into 
the construction of the unit, I felt more engaged when sharing books and participating in 
the drama, and was better able to assess their learning progress and make appropriate 
adjustments to the curriculum. 



179 




Why was the use of The Project Approach so developmentally appropriate for the 
kindergarten age child? There are two important responsibilities for schools because of 
the nature of children’s development and learning: (a) they must be able to provide 
meaningful contexts for children’s learning; and (b) they must offer rich experiences to 
compliment children’s prior knowledge. Focusing on learning isolated skills uses 
precious time that could be devoted to an interactive, integrated curriculum. Children 
may come to school with many opportunities to be read to at home, attend music or 
theater programs, and visits to museums, all of which are firsthand experiences that can 
be built upon later in school (NAEYC, 1995). Ignoring those home experiences can 
contribute to lost opportunities for growth at school. In my study, the five- and six-year- 
olds used their prior knowledge to make connections with new learning and to deepen 
their insights on children’s literature. 

I found that children learn best when a developmentally appropriate curriculum is 
based on their interests and socio-emotional needs. Education should help to create a 
disposition for learning (Katz, 1999). The Project Approach has become a significant 
way to strengthen the disposition of the children’s desire to investigate and also to apply 
knowledge and skills. (Fontinos & Aldridge, 2004). In our project work, the children 
developed questions, posed possibilities, sought solutions, and represented the process 
with artifacts and dramas that they had created. 

Teachers need to know how children learn and develop. “They must know how to 
plan and implement a developmentally appropriate curriculum that places greater 
emphasis on child-initiated, teacher-supported learning experiences... recognizing that 
children’s developmental timetables do not conform to the yearly calendar” (NAEYC, 



180 




1995, p. 7). Constructivist theory tells us that in learning or meaning making, children 
create their own new understandings on the basis of interaction between what they 
know before they enter the school and what they learn in the classroom. One goal then 
is to ask children to take some responsibility for their own learning (Richardson, 2003). 
The Project Approach is the perfect vehicle for the interaction of prior and new learning. 

As the teacher/researcher in this study, I gathered data to use for reflection about 
my own teaching, my questions, and my children’s learning. I used basic ethnographic 
research techniques suited to my unit. I took field notes, collected artifacts or samples of 
my students’ work, and used audio taping to document interviews and group 
discussions. The techniques became part of the classroom and were absorbed into the 
interactions between my students and me. As part of my central classroom practice 
during this unit, the process of data collection was not only used to assess the children’s 
learning, but also to evaluate my teaching. The children knew that I was documenting 
our work in the unit. They asked questions about the materials before I used them and 
became familiar with them as the unit progressed. They understood that I was studying 
what was going on in our class. They knew that what they were doing or saying about 
literature was important (Gallas, 1994). 

The Discourse Strategies (Daiute & Jones, 2003) helped me to organize the 
process of data collection. Using my teacher’s lens, I was able to see the emerging 
patterns in the children’s data. During the process of the curricular unit, I was not able to 
always answer my questions about the children’s or my learning. Sometimes, I didn’t 
even know what questions to ask. As I analyzed the data, I began a continuous cycle of 
reflection and questioning so that my relationship to the unit, the children, and the 



181 




process was always changing and becoming more focused. I conducted the research in 
response to both the children’s and my questions. 

Once patterns began to emerge for me as the teacher/researcher, I could move 
on to change my practice based on the new patterns and discern my unintended former 
biases about the children, my teaching, and the unit. There were differences in 
discussions and interviews with the many varied learning and attitude levels of the 
children I worked with so I could not generalize about the Discourse Strategies for the 
class as a whole. At the end however, I could make connections and see some general 
patterns (Gallas, 1994). As the subjective interpreter, I can only relate what I observed, 
transcribed, and analyzed on the part of the children and myself. The Discourse 
Strategies that I analyzed helped me to find the patterns in their learning and The 
Project Approach helped me provide a developmental framework for that learning. 

Limitations 

I believe that my study has transferability and credibility, yet there were limits to 
what I could do. It was apparent when I asked the children what they thought (member 
checks), it was hard for them as five year olds to always analyze and articulate in detail. 
I could have obtained more complex information with an older participant group. As the 
participant/observer, I taught, collected data, analyzed and interpreted the study all 
within the value system that I made explicit throughout this study. In collecting data, I 
was sensitive to the children’s developmental level and I stopped critical discussions of 
non-fiction material when some children asked questions that upset the more sensitive 
class members. I incorporated my own subjectivity in analyzing the data as I 
remembered my own experiences learning about Native Americans as a young person. 



182 




I may have had a greater exposure to biased television programs and stereotyped toys 
than the children in my classes. My perceptions of my own history and my political 
views about Native American history and treatment, explicit in this study, certainly 
influenced my understanding of what my students could learn. 

The main credibility of this study is the importance of this kind of curriculum for 
the youngest school children to learn through The Project Approach. As a systematic 
approach to change, this unit was constructivist for the children and me as the co- 
creators of a unit. 

Implications for Teachers 

Teachers are well-intentioned professionals with diverse obligations. The 
demands of administrators, parents, and curricular committees create an atmosphere of 
hurried learning so that sometimes there is limited time for instruction amidst the 
assessment, assemblies, and small daily interruptions. It is not easy to make changes 
but it is necessary, not only for curricular growth but also for the welfare of children. 
Children learn best when they are motivated, when their prior experiences are shared, 
and when room is made for teachers and children to develop curriculum together. As 
children convey their understanding about what they have learned, the teacher should 
be able to guide the curriculum in new directions to deepen the impact on the children’s 
learning. As teachers witness these changes, they should document what they see so 
that records can be made of the kinds of complex work children can move to when 
given the opportunity. 

The Project Approach, as applied in this Native American curriculum, can be 
used for any subject. The teacher can work from her assessment of the children’s 



183 




needs and abilities and differentiate their teaching and learning in developmental^ 
appropriate ways. A teacher can become one who is guiding learning instead of being 
the one who knows all the material. The teacher can be on the “ceiling,” observing as a 
researcher and on the “floor,” guiding the action of the classroom (Helm, 2001). There is 
no lack of control for what is happening in the classroom; the children can be in charge 
of their own learning and the teacher can be a cheerleader on the sidelines. The 
teacher/researcher’s body of knowledge can help mentor others who are seeking to 
create innovative classrooms. 

Paired with this new way to approach an integrated, research-based curriculum 
is the need for teachers to look at the materials they are using with the children. Many 
texts and trade books are outdated and/or biased in their ideas. It is up to the teachers 
to learn about new books by carefully evaluating their content. The question can then be 
asked: “How should a teacher select appropriate literature for the classroom?” A 
teacher should look for books reflecting universal humanity, differences in people, 
cross-cultural experiences, and historical perspectives keeping in mind the two selection 
criteria that are the most important in multicultural literature: cultural authenticity and 
literary excellence (Goebel, 2004). 

Identifying books or texts is not an easy task. Most teachers can recognize books 
that have stereotypes and prejudice, but it is harder to assess authenticity. Sims Bishop 
(1 994) asks us to remember the main criteria for evaluating multicultural literature: “ (1 ) 
that the book should contribute in a positive way to an understanding and appreciation 
of persons of color and their cultures, or (2) that the book should offer a positive vision 
of a diverse society and a multicultural world” (p. xv). Looking for an insider author is 



184 




important, but it does not always guarantee authenticity or literary excellence. In my 
case, I learned that some authors are not considered to be the ones that correctly share 
tribal beliefs. Who has the authority to judge? Should we only accept books by revered 
members of a tribe, such as Joseph Bruchac (Abenaki) or can an outsider like Paul 
Goble, who has spent many years researching his stories, be allowed to recreate 
northern Plains Indian stories? 

These are not easy questions to answer and debate rages on these issues 
among multicultural experts today. There are no sources of absolute authority and 
although one looks to Native American reviewers of books for insight, teachers should 
never give up their own professional judgment. “The last thing we need is an SRA 
(Standard Reading Assessment) approach to cultural studies” (Goebel, 2004). 

Literary excellence can be based on culturally specific ideas. The traditional 
stories that Native Americans tell do not always reflect chronological mainstream 
standards. Some trickster tales also have sexual references. Publishers know that the 
books they present to the marketplace must not deviate too much from what are 
considered by many parents and teachers as acceptable or “appropriate” values. 
Teachers must be aware of censorship issues and how texts are altered. They should 
always evaluate for cultural bias. By researching experts in the cultural field that they 
are planning to study, teachers can find appropriate books for their children. Teachers 
should remember that “a book can be of great literary value and culturally correct but 
inappropriate for use with children or immature readers who do not have the literary 
competence to understand it” (Cai, 2002, p. 88). 

In the end, teachers must represent the Native American culture and all cultures 



185 




in honest and respectful ways. Children will question the historical ideas in authentic 
literature because they may bring prior knowledge into the classroom. The teachers 
must have studied the Native experience in North America. They can begin to see that 
all repressed cultures share the need for authentic representation in literature. This 
process takes time, but the rewards are well worth the challenge. 

In this study I made specific suggestions for Native American books of authentic 
and literary excellence and have also listed those of ambiguous and inauthentic 
qualities (Appendix B). These recommendations are based on my sources of 
information. Ultimately, other teachers like me must make their own personal 
evaluations for what is appropriate in their classrooms. This is because the literature 
available is always growing and teachers know the children they are teaching and are 
the best judges of what their classes need. 

Relationship of Current Study to Previous Research 
As a teacher, I moved from using the popular educational publishers, such as 
Good Apple, Follett, or Curriculum Associates; major trade publishers, such as 
Scholastic and HarperCollins; to publications by professional organizations, such as 
National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC), Redleaf Press, 
National Council of the Teachers of English (NCTE), National Social Studies Council, 
and The International Reading Association (IRA). Smaller presses such as Honor 
Council, focusing specifically on the teaching of Native American literature, and anti- 
bias organizations (e.g., Southern Poverty Law Center and Rethinking Schools, Inc.) 
have rich information on appropriate curriculum formation. 

Two specific examples stand out when I remember looking at sources for 



186 




preparing the unit study. The Fulcrum series by Joseph Bruchac and Michael J. Caduto 
on Native Americans had wonderful stories to tell children and appropriate activities for 
the classroom. I used Keepers of the Earth (Caduto & Bruchac, 1997) for a number of 
the science activities. The Longwood Division of Allyn and Bacon has usually been 
reliable for authentically researched material. I was disappointed when I read Learning 
in Living Color: Using Literature to Incorporate Multicultural Education in to the Primary 
Curriculum (Valdez, 1999). The lessons were sparse, oversimplified, and not very 
appealing to students. The non-annotated bibliography included many inauthentic books 
about Native Americans, such as Brother Eagle, Sister Sky (Jeffers, 1991). The author 
covered too many ethnic areas and the research was not as complete as would be 
expected. Since much of the previous research on curriculum development about 
Native Americans was not developmentally appropriate, often contained biased ideas, 
and did not include a great deal of authentic literature, I knew there was an important 
place for my study. 

My Learning as Teacher/Participant 

Teaching using Action Research is quite different from traditional teaching. In the 
past, I read the teachers’ manuals and curriculum guides, found a few books to 
supplement the subject area, created lesson plans, practiced the material that I would 
be teaching the children, and then simply taught. For this unit, I needed to look inside 
myself to understand what learning and values I brought to the curricular study. I 
needed to study the history of the topic, find many books reflecting all viewpoints on the 
subject (both for my adult study and for student information), and learn as much as I 
could about current issues related to the topic. I knew that a unit as complex as Native 



187 




Americans would also be more difficult to teach. I did not have students or parents in my 
class as sources of information. Since I am an outsider to the culture, I needed to 
recognize my biases and strive to be open and as culturally sensitive as possible in my 
presentation of material. 

When we read books by and about Native North Americans, we expect the 
authors and illustrators to have done their research or homework. As a teacher, I 
needed to do my homework in preparation for teaching. I needed to know as much as I 
could about Native Americans so that I could look at the curricular material through a 
new lens. I introduced and developed a new unit for children by using my knowledge of 
The Project Approach in a developmental^ appropriate way. 

It is harder to provide the only framework for the unit and then allow the unit to 
develop with children’s input. For example, the Audit Trail Mural (Harste et al., 1988) 
was supposed to be a combined student/teacher effort, yet I did most of the posting of 
events with photographs and placement of children’s work. In the future, I will let the 
children draw directly on the mural and place Native Americans materials important to 
them on the mural. In addition, I was not able to find a Native American speaker until 
the unit was already completed. In the future, I plan to incorporate a guest 
contemporary speaker into the study, to allow the children to ask and focus their many 
questions. 

With their prior knowledge and experience, the students helped me for the most 
part create a learning environment rich with possibilities. I hadn’t realized that the 
kindergarten-age child could learn so much and be able to differentiate between 
authentic and inauthentic literature. I learned to follow rather than always lead. I learned 



188 




to keep the goal in mind while simultaneously letting the “teachable moment” grow and 
develop. Even now, upon completion of analysis on this unit of study, I will continue to 
teach in this new way. An action researcher must remember commitment, collaboration, 
concern, consideration, and change (Gummesson, 1991). I want to be open to new 
possibilities and learning. I want to change with the new information I have learned from 
the new literature I have read and with the new students I will meet in the future. 
Research is extremely important for appropriate teaching practice. I want to continue to 
wear both hats as teacher/participant and researcher. 

Suggestions for My Future Classroom 

As mentioned previously, I identified some research reflecting on cultural groups 
other than Native Americans. Looking at the topic of First Nations people and their 
literature, I found a few recent dissertations including the study Native Americans in 
picture books recommended for early childhood classrooms 1945-1999 (Reese, 2001 ). 

In general, however, from my observation of many elementary schools, I know that the 
study of “Indians” is generally relegated to a quick Thanksgiving celebration of food, 
crafts, and costume events. I highly encourage classroom teachers to take on the role 
of researchers and document the learning that proceeds from a Project Approach 
curriculum using authentic literature. 

The children I taught in 2004 are now in first grade classrooms where they are 
taught about Native Americans in traditional ways. When I asked three of these 
teachers if their students had expressed opinions about the literature or activities of their 
Thanksgiving units, they had varied responses. One teacher said that her students were 
more cognizant about calling Indians, Native Americans. The children mentioned that 



189 




the books that the teachers had chosen only had certain tribal groups represented. “The 
pictures do not show the way all different Native Americans look,” they said. When the 
children made headbands, one child said that not all Native American costumes look 
like the ones they were making. Another teacher said that the children had a greater 
familiarity with the vocabulary about Native Americans. She noted that the more diverse 
students noticed cultural differences in the tribal groups more than those children who 
were from white European backgrounds. Possibly, children had forgotten about the 
stereotypes that they had noticed in kindergarten or they could be recognizing bias in 
activities and books but not mentioning their thoughts aloud to the class. 

If teachers are not able to change their curriculums, another option might be 
talking to their school librarians about ordering authentic books for the library. Reading 
only authentic texts or comparing the unbiased books to those that have many 
stereotypes in historical facts, illustrations, or storyline details in one’s own classroom is 
strongly recommended. In fact, evaluating educational materials is always important. It 
is crucial to look at the authorship, perspective, historical bias, cultural accuracy and 
voice, methods of inclusion, and assumptions of the authors. Finally, teachers who are 
researchers need to use the large field of multicultural books to document and teach. I 
believe that ethnic groups should be studied as part of the social studies curriculum in 
all school districts. Evaluating the children’s literature for all groups is long overdue. 

This study has broader implications than just a once a year study of Native 
Americans. The process of creating this unit allowed a process to develop where 
teacher and students learned to value a different culture. This cultural sensitivity is 
extremely important and my research shows how to keep it growing. The meaning- 



190 




making process is continuous and teachers need to nurture this growth. I have offered 
educators a plan for helping to develop cultural awareness and sensitivity through 
analysis of illustrations and interviews. Native Americans historically as a group have 
made changes as a community. Teachers today are individualized and work alone for 
the most part. What a tremendous shift in our educator culture we would have if we saw 
teachers working as a community. Each child in this unit moved from an individual to a 
communal learner. The children have learned to create learning and understand change 
with others, in a community of peers. A school culture of teachers collaborating on best 
practice using multicultural literature to broaden viewpoints would be optimal. 

Children learn best by doing as Dewey recommended years ago (Darling- 
Hammond, 2002). If teachers try implementing units of study in social studies as a 
process approach, then they are changing the way they co-create curriculum with 
children. As teachers, we are a community of learners. Can we move from individual 
curricular developers to communal learners? Can curricular change be a community 
decision rather than only by individual norms? This collaborative process can be such a 
powerful meaning-making activity. It should continue to be part of the children’s world of 
learning and the teachers’ staff development! 

In a recent Southern Poverty Center survey, it was found that people witnessed 
some form of bias in the past year (2005-6). The survey asked respondents to tell about 
tolerance and justice in America. Many people said that the United States is more 
tolerant than it was ten years ago. Amazingly, 70% of people said that they had seen an 
incident of everyday bigotry such as racial stereotyping or use of biased names for 
people of other races, gender, or sexual identity. “Of the more than 800 people who 



191 




answered, 90% believe that racial prejudice continues to be a derisive issue in the 
United States” (Southern Poverty Law Center, 2006). When is the best time to teach 
children about the many different people who populate our nation? Young children 
come to school with their own perceptions already formed. We should help broaden 
their outlooks with study of our diverse population. Educators should nurture meaning- 
making. 

What purpose did this unit serve? I believe that a teacher can help her children 
learn how to learn. We created a constructivist unit through the shared experience of 
“living” the story of Native Americans through drama, art, music, language arts, math, 
science, social studies, AND literature. This was not done through the five limited but 
traditional ways of study: food, flags, festivals, famous people, and fashion. The 
students and I stood in the footsteps of a people different from themselves in culture but 
the same in humanness. The Native American children’s literature we read was the key 
that unlocked our learning. 

How can a teacher help her kindergarten students begin to gain “authentic” 
cultural understandings about Native North Americans through children’s literature? She 
herself can grow as a learner, teacher, researcher, and human being. Only then can a 
teacher truly meet the needs of her students. 



192 




References 



Adamson, L.G. (1998). Literature connections to American history, K-6: Resources to 
enhance and entice. Englewood, Co: Libraries, Unlimited, Inc. 

Alvermann, D.E., Moon, J.S., & Hagood, M.C. (1999). Where we need to go in theory 
and research. In Alvermann, Moon, & Hagood, Popular culture in the classroom: 
Teaching and researching critical media literacy. IRA/NRC. Retrieved June 23, 
2003, from http://www.reading.org/store/content/book_245.html. 

American Anthropological Association Statement on “Race.” (1998). Retrieved October 
10, 2004, from http://www.aaanet.org/stmts/racepp.htm. 

Andereck, M.E. (1992). Ethnic awareness and the school. Newbury Park, CA: Sage 
Publications. 

Anderson, G.L. & Irvine, P. (1993). Informing critical literacy with ethnography. In C. 
Lankshear, & P.L. McLaren, (Eds.). Critical literacy: Politics, praxis, and the 
postmodern (pp. 81-104). Albany: NY: SUNY Press. 

Anthropology Outreach Office, Smithsonian Institution. (January 2004). A critical 

bibliography on North American Indians, for k-12. Retrieved January 25, 2004, 
from http://nmnhwww.si.edu/anthro/outreach/lndbibl/bibintro.html. 

Anzaldua, G. (1997). La conciencia de la mestiza/Towards a new consciousness. In J. 
O’Brien & P, Kollock. The production of reality {pp. 550-5). Thousand Oaks, CA.: 
Pine Forge Press. 

Apple, M. (1995). Education and power. New York: Routledge. 

Armstrong, T. (2003). The multiple intelligences of reading and writing. Alexandria, VA: 
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development. 



193 




Au, K. (2000). A multicultural perspective on policies for improving literacy achievement: 
Equity and excellence. In M.L. Kamil, P.B. Mosenthal, P.D. Pearson, & R. Barr 
(Eds.), Handbook of Reading Research: Volume III. (pp. 835-852). Mahwah, NJ: 
Lawrence Erlbaum. 

Baker, D. & Setterington, K. (2003). A guide to Canadian children's books. Toronto: 
McClelland & Stewart Ltd. 

Banks, J.A. (1999). An introduction to multicultural education. (2nd ed.). Boston: Allyn & 
Bacon. 

Banks, J. A. & Banks, C. A. M. (Eds.). (2001). Multicultural education: Issues & 
perspectives (4th ed.) New York: John Wiley & Sons. 

Banks, L.R. (1995). The Indian in the cupboard: Omri’s scrapbook. (Adapted by Krulik, 
N.E.). New York: Scholastic. 

Banton, M. (1997). Ethnic and racial consciousness. New York: Addison Wesley 
Longman. 

Barker, M. (1981). The new racism. London: Junction Books. 

Barnes, D. (1987). From communication to curriculum. New York: Viking Penguin. 

Bender, L. & Braveman, D. (1995). Power, privilege, and law: A civil rights reader. St. 
Paul, MN: West Publishing. 

Bennett deMarrais, K. (Ed.). (1998). Inside stories: Qualitative research reflections. 
Mahwah, NJ: Laurence Erlbaum. 

Bennison, Anne. (February 2004). Interview on Native North American children’s 
illustrations. Chicago, IL. 



194 




Berkhofer, R.F., Jr. (1978). The white man’s Indian. New York: Vantage Books. 

Bernstein, B. (1996). Pedagogy, symbolic control, and identity: Theory, research, 
critique. Lanham, MD: Rowman & Littlefield. 

Bishop, R. S. (1990). Mirrors, windows, and sliding glass doors. Collected perspectives: 
Choosing and using books for the classroom, 6 (3), ix-xi. 

Bishop, R. S. (1998). Freeing ourselves from neo-colonial domination in research: A 
Maori approach to creating knowledge. In International Journal of Qualitative 
Studies in Education, 11 (2), 199-219. 

Bleich, D. (1988). The double perspective: language, literacy & social relations. Urbana, 
IL: NCTE. 

Bontempo, B. & lannone, R. (March 1988). Creative drama: A special kind of learning. 
Teaching K-8, 3, 57-59. 

Borgia, E. & Schuler. D. (1996). Action research in early childhood education. Eric 
Digest. Retrieved May 1, 2004, from http://www.ericfacility.net/ 
ericdigests/ed401 047.html. 

Bourdieu, P. & Fortes, M. (Eds.). Outline of a theory of practice. Cambridge, England: 
Cambridge University Press. 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1979). The ecology of human development. Cambridge: Harvard 
College. 

Bronfenbrenner, U. (1 986). Ecology of the family as context for human development. 
Developmental Psychology, 22, 723-742. 

Bruner, J. (1990). Acts of meaning. Cambridge, Mass: Harvard University Press. 



195 




Buell, L. (2000). Postcolonial theory and the United States: Race, ethnicity, and 
literature. Biloxi, MS: University of Mississippi Press. 

Burke, L.T. (2002). Conventional wisdom: The rights of the child. Reading Today. 
Retrieved February 3, 2004, from 

http://www.reading.org/publications/rty/archives/ 03feb_reviews.html. 

Cadiero-Kaplan, K. (2002). Literacy ideologies: Critically engaging the language arts 
curriculum. Language Arts, 57(5), 372-381. 

Caduto, M.J. & Bruchac, J. (1997/ Keepers of the earth: Native American stories and 
environmental activities for children (3 rd ed.). Golden, CO: Fulcrum Publishing. 

Cai, M. (2002). Multicultural literature for children and young adults: Reflections on 
critical issues. Westport, CT: Greenwood Press. 

Cai, M. & Sims Bishop, R. (2003). Multicultural literature for children: Towards a 
clarification of the concept. In A. Willis et al. Multicultural issues in literacy 
research and practice (pp. 57-71). Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 

Caldwell-Wood, N. & Mitten, L.A. (1991). Selective bibliography and guide for ‘I’ is not 
for Indian: The portrayal of Native Americans in books for young people. Atlanta, 
GA: ALA/OLOS, Subcommittee for Library Services to American Indian People, 
American Indian Library Association. Retrieved January 25, 2004 from 
http://www.nativeculture.com/lisamitten/ailabib.htm. 

Carnegie Report (1990). Stanford, CA: Carnegie Foundation for the Advancement of 
Teaching. 

Carr, W. & Kemmis, S. (1986). Becoming critical: Education, knowledge and action 
research. Basingstoke: Falmer Press. 



196 




Carter, D.B., & Patterson, C.J. (1982). Sex roles as social conventions: The 

development of children's conceptions of sex-role stereotypes. Developmental 
Psychology, 18, 812-824. 

Cazden, C. & John, V. (1971). Learning in American Indian children. In M.L. Wax, S. D 
Diamond, & F. Gearing (Eds.). Anthropological perspectives on education (pp. 
253-257). New York: Basic Books. 

Cazden, C., John, V, & Hymes, D. (Eds.). (1972). Functions of language in the 
classroom. New York: Teacher’s College Press. 

Children’s Museum of Boston. (2003). Choosing multicultural children’s books. Boston, 
MA. 

Cole, M. (1996). Cultural psychology: A once and future discipline. Cambridge, MA: 
Harvard University Press. 

Cornell, S. & Hartmann, D. (1998). Ethnicity & race. Thousand Oaks, Ca: Pine Forge 
Press. 

Council on Interracial Books for Children. (1973). Guidelines for selecting bias-free 

textbooks and storybooks. New York: Council for Interracial Books for Children. 

Creswell, J. W. (1 998). Qualitative inquiry and research design: Choosing among five 
traditions. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Critical Race Theory Resource Guide. (2004). Retrieved May 1, 2004, from 
http://www.pages.drexel.edu/~jp49/. 

Cross, W.E. (1991). Shades of black. Philadelphia: Temple University Press. 



197 




Daiute, C. & Jones, H. (2003). Diversity discourses: Reading race and ethnicity in and 
around children's writing. In S. Green & D. Abt-Perkins (Eds.). Making Race 
Visible (pp. 178-200). New York: Teachers College Press. 

Darling-Hammond, L. (1997). The right to learn. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass 
Publishers. 

Darling-Hammond, L. (2002). Educating a profession for equitable practice. In L. 
Darling-Hammond, J. French, & S.P. Lopez (Eds.), J.A. Banks, (Series Ed.). 
Learning to teach for social justice. Multicultural Education Series (pp. 201-216). 
New York: Teachers College Press. 

Darling-Hammond, L., French, J., & Garcia-Lopez, S.P. (Eds.). (2002). Learning to 
teach for social justice. New York: Teachers College Press. 
daSilva, K.E. (October, 2001). Drawing on experience: Connection art and language. 
Primary Voices K-6, 10, (2), 2-8. 

Deloria, E. (1988). Waterlily. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. 

Deloria, E. (1998). Speaking of Indians. Lincoln, NE: University of Nebraska Press. 
Deloria, P.J. (1998). Playing Indian. New Haven, CT: Yale University Press. 

Delpit, L. (1995). Other people’s children. New York: The New Press. 

Denzin, N.K. & Lincoln, Y.S. (2003). Strategies of qualitative inquiry. Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 

Derman-Sparks, L. (1989). Anti-bias curriculum: Tools for empowering young children. 
Washington, DC: NAEYC. 



198 




Deyhie, D. & Swisher, K. (1997). Research in American Indian and Alaska Native 
Education: From Assimilation to Self-Determination. In M. W. Apple. (Ed.) 
Review of research in education, 22 (pp. 113-194). Washington, DC: American 
Educational Research Association. 

Douglass, F. (1997). Narrative of the life of Frederick Douglass. New York: Signet. 

Doyle, A. (1982). Friends, acquaintances, and stranger. In K.H. Rubin & J. S. Ross 

(Eds.). Peer relationships and social skills in childhood (pp. 229-252). New York: 
Springer-Verlag. 

Early Learning Resource Unit, South Africa. (1997). Shifting paradigms: using an anti- 
bias strategy to challenge oppression and assist transformation in the South 
African context. Cape Town: South Africa. 

Edelsky, C. (1999). Making justice our project: Teachers working toward critical whole 
language practice. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 

Efron, S. (2001). Beyond character education: democracy as a moral goal. Critical 
issues in teacher education, 20-28. 

Evans, M. (2003). Authenticity in the jargon of multiculturalism. In B. Haddock & P. 

Sutch. (Eds.). Multiculturalism, identity, and rights (p. 69). New York: Routledge 
Press. 

Farr, M. (1991). Dialects, culture, and teaching the English language arts. In J. Flood, 
J.M. Jensen, D. Lapp, & J.R. Squire. (Eds). Handbook of research on teaching 
the English language arts (pp. 365-371). New York: Macmillan. 



199 




Fishman, A.R. (1995). Finding ways in: Redefining multicultural literature. English 
Journal, 84 (6), 73-79. 

Fontinos, A. & Aldridge, J. (Summer 2004). Using the project approach to teach 

comprehension in 2nd grade. ACEI: Focus on Elementary, 16, (4). Olney, MD: 
Association for Childhood Education International. 

Freebody, P. & Luke, A. (1997). Shaping the social practice of reading. In S. Muspratt, 
S A. Luke, & P. Freebody. (Eds.), Constructing critical literacies, (pp. 185-225). 

Freire, P. (1992). Pedagogy of hope: Reliving pedagogy of the oppressed. New York, 
NY: Continuum. 

Fullan, M. (1994). Turning systemic thinking on its head. Paper prepared for the U.S. 
Department of Education. 

Gallas, K. (1994/ The languages of learning: How children talk, write, dance, draw, and 
sing their understanding of the world. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Garner, B. (May 1996). Using action research: Challenges and opportunities for the 
beginner. Paper presented at the Greater St. Louis Sixth Action Research 
Collaborative Conference, St. Louis, MO. In E. Borgia & D. Schuler. Action 
research in early childhood education. Eric Digest. Retrieved May 1 , 2004, from 
http://www.ericfacility.net /ericdigests/ ed401047.html. 

Gesell, A.L. (1946/1974). Child development: The child from 5 to 10. New York: Harper. 

Giese, P. (2004). Purposes and personal philosophy of Native American books. Native 
American Books. Retrieved January 27, 2004, from 
http://www.kstrom.net/isk /books/bookphil.html. 



200 




Gilroy, P. (2000a). Against race: imagining political culture beyond the color line. New 
York: Addison Wesley Longman. 

Gilroy, P. (2000b). Between camps. London: Penguin. 

Giroux, H. A. (1981). Ideology, culture, and the process of schooling. Philadelphia: 
Temple University Press. 

Goebel, B.A. (2004/ Reading Native American literature: A teacher’s guide. Urbana, IL 
National Council of Teachers of English. 

Golinick, D.M. & Chinn, P.C. (1998). Multicultural education in a pluralistic society. 
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall, Inc. 

Goodenough & Harris. (1963/ The draw-a-person test. New York: The Psychological 
Corp. 

Gorski, P. (2003). The challenge of defining a single “multicultural education.” McGraw- 
Hill. Retrieved June 23, 2003, from http://www.mhhe. com. socscience/ 
educatuib/multi/define.html. 

Gorski, P.A. (2003). Understanding curriculum transformation: A multicultural Q & A. 
New York: McGraw-Hill. Retrieved June 23, 2003, from 
http://www.mhhe.com/socscience/education/mult/curriculum/concept.html. 

Government of Saskatchewan. (2004). Social studies grade five heritage. Retrieved 
July 1, 2004 from http://www.sasked.gov.sk.ca/docs/elemsoc/g5u22ess.html. 

Green, P. (2001). Critical literacy revisited. From Fehring, H. & Green, P .Critical 
literacy: A collection of articles from the Australia Literacy Educators’ 
Association. Newark, DE: IRA. 



201 




Green, S. & Abt-Perkins, D. (Eds.) (2003). Making race visible. New York: Teachers 
College Press. 

Guberman, S.R., Rahm, J., & Menk, D.W. (1998). Transforming cultural practices: 

Illustrations from children's game play. Anthropology & Education Quarterly, 29 
(4), 419-445. 

Gummeson, E. (1991). Qualitative methods in management research. Newbury Park, 
CA: Sage Publications. 

Hackett, T.A. (May, 2001). Making the student the star. (Internet article). 

Newark, Delaware: International Reading Association. 

Hamil, T. (1970). Art and the search for identity. Retrieved January 8, 2005, from 
http ://www.tcrecord.org/PrintContent.asp?ContentlD=1 726. 

Harris, V.J. (Ed.). (1992). Teaching multicultural literature in grades k-8. Norwood, MA: 
Christopher-Gordon Publishers, Inc. 

Harris, V.J. (Ed.). (1997). Using multiethnic literature in the K-8 classroom. Norwood, 
MA: Christopher-Gordon Publishers. 

Harste, J., Short, C., Burke, C. (1988). Creating classrooms for authors: The reading 
writing connection. Portsmouth, NH: Heinmann. 

Harvey, K.D., Harjo, L.D., Jackson, J.K. (1990). Teaching about Native Americans. (84). 
Washington D.C.: National Council for Social Studies. 

Hatch, J. A. (2002). Doing qualitative research in education settings. Albany, New York: 
State University of New York. 



202 




Heath, S.B. (1983). Ways with words: language, life, and work in communities and 
classrooms. New York, NY: Cambridge University Press. 

Heathcote, D. & Bolton, G. (1995). Drama for Learning. Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Helbig, A.K. & Perkins, A.R. (1994). This land is our land. Westport, CT: Greenwood 
Press. 

Helbig, A.K. & Perkins, A.R. (2001). Many peoples, one land: A guide to new 

multicultural literature for children and young adults. Westport, CT: Greenwood 
Press. 

Helm, J.H., Beneke, S., & Steinheimer, K. (1998). Windows on learning: Documenting 
young children's work. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Helm, J. H. (October 29, 2001). Workshop on Institute Day for Northbrook District #27, 
Northbrook, Illinois. 

Helm, J.H. & Katz, L. (2001 ). Young investigators: The project approach in the early 
years. New York: Teachers College Press. 

Henkin, R. (1 998/ Who’s invited to share? Using literacy to teach for equity and social 
justice. Portsmouth, New Hampshire: Heinemann. 

Hirschfelder, A., Molin, P.F., & Wakim, Y. (1999). American Indian stereotypes in the 

world of children: A reader and bibliography. Lanham, MD: The Scarecrow Press. 

Hirschfelder, A., & Singer, J. (1992). Rising voices: Writings of young Native Americans. 
New York: Random House. 

Janks, H. (June 2000). Domination, access, diversity and design: A synthesis for critical 
literacy education. Educational Review, Vol. 52 (2), pp. 1-14. 



203 




Jeffers, S. (1993). Interview at Halloran Reading Conference. Elmhurst, IL: Elmhurst 
College. 

Jensen, A. & Miele, F. (2001). Intelligence, race, and genetics: Conversation with Arthur 
Jensen. Boulder, Co.: Westview Press. 

Johnson, B. (1993). Teacher-as-researcher. Eric Digest. Retrieved August 2004, from 
http://www.ericfacility.net/ericdigests/ed355205.html. 

Jones, G. W. & Moomaw, S. (2002) Lessons from turtle island : Native curriculum in 
early childhood classrooms. St. Paul, MN: Redleaf Press. 

Jungck, S. (February 2006) Personal communication. National-Louis University, 
Evanston, IL. 

Katz, L.C. (1994). The project approach. Eric Digest. Champaign, IL: University of 
Illinois. 

Katz, L.C. (1999). Another look at what young children should be learning. Eric Digest. 
Champaign, IL: University of Illinois. 

Katz, L. C. (1999). Curriculum disputes in early childhood education. Eric Digest. 
Champaign, IL: University of Illinois. 

Kaupp, P. A. et al. (2004). A critical bibliography on North American Indians, fork-12. 
Washington, D.C.: Anthropology Outreach Office, Smithsonian Institution. 
Retrieved April 19, 2004, from http://nmnhwww.si.edu/anthro/outreach 
Indbibl/bibliogr.html. 

Kemmis, S. & McTaggart, E. (Eds.). (1988). The action research planner. Victoria, BC: 
Deakin University. 



204 




Kich, G.K. (1992). The developmental process of asserting a biracial, bicultural identity. 
In M.P.P. Root (Ed.). Racially mixed people in America (pp. 304-317). Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage Publications. 

Kohn, A. (1993). Punished by rewards. Boston: Houghton Mifflin. 

Kolb, D. (1984). Experiential learning: Experience as the source of learning and 
development. Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey: Prentice-Hall. 

Kindersley, B. & Kindersley, A. (1997). Children just like me: Celebrations. UNICEF. 
London: Dorling Kindersley, Ltd. 

King, J. (2001). Dipconscious racism: Ideology, identity, and the malediction of 

teachers. In E. Cashmore & J. Jennings. (Eds.). Racism: Essential readings, (pp. 
296-7). London: Sage Publications. 

Labercane, G. & McEachern. (2004). Linguistic and cultural influences on Canadian 
education. Questia Library. Retrieved July 1 , 2004, from 
http://questia.com/PM. qstt?action=get Page&doclD=50000309300 
&keywords=%28%22north+. 

Ladson-Billings, G. (1994). The dreamkeepers: Successful teachers of African 
American children. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass, Inc. 

Ladson-Billings, G. & Tate, W. F. IV. (1995). Toward a critical race theory of education, 
Teachers College Record, 97 (1), New York: Teachers College, Columbia 
University. 

Ladson-Billings, G. (2001a). Teaching and cultural competence. (Internet article). 
Rethinking Schools, 15, 1-6. 



205 




Ladson-Billings, G. (2001 b). Crossing over to Canaan: The journey of new teachers in 
diverse classrooms. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Larson, J. (2003). Negotiating race in classroom research: Tensions and possibilities. In 
S. Green, & D. Abt-Perkins (Eds.). Making race visible. New York: Teacher’s 
College Press. 

Larson, L. (1990). Native American education separate or integrated? Eric Digest. 
Retrieved July 1, 2004, from http://www/ericfacility.net/teams/do?action=7. 

Lee, E. (1994). Taking multicultural, anti-racist education seriously. Rethinking our 
Classrooms: Teaching for equity and justice. Milwaukee, Wl: Rethinking of 
stereotype consciousness in middle childhood. Child development, 498-515. 

LeCompte, M.D. & Schensul, J.J. (1999). Analyzing & interpreting ethnographic data: 
Ethnographer’s Toolkit (5). Walnut Creek, CA: Altamira Press. Schools, Inc. 

Lehman, S. (1983). Native American Education Program, 1981-82. New York: NY: 
O.E.E. Evaluation Report. 

Levine, J., McClaren, & Sleeter. (March/April 1994). White like me: When privilege is 
written on your skin. MS., 22-24. 

Lewin, K. (1952). Field theory in social science. London: Tavistock.. 

Lewison, M., Flint, A.S., & Sluys, K.V. (May 2002). Taking on critical literacy: The 
journey of newcomers and novices. Language Arts, Vol. 79 (5), 382-392. 

The Library of Congress. (2004). Indian boarding schools: Civilizing the Native spirit. 
Retrieved July 1, 2004, from http://lcweb2.loc.gov/ammem/ndlpedu/lessons/ 

01 /indian/overview. html. 



206 




Lima, C.W. & J.A. (2001 ). A to zoo: Subject access to children’s picture books. 

Westport, CT: Bowker-Greenwood. 

Lind, B. B. (1996). Multicultural children’s literature. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co. 

Luke, A., & Freebody, P. (1999). Further notes on the four resources model. Retrieved 
on May 7, 2006, from http://www.readingonline.org/research/lukefreebody.html. 

Marantz, S. & K. (1994). Multicultural picture books: Art for understanding others. 
Worthington, OH: Linworth Publishing, Inc. 

May, J.P. (1995). Children’s literature and critical theory: Reading and writing for 
understanding. New York: Oxford University Press. 

McCarty, T. & Dick, G. (2003). Telling the people’s stories: literacy practices and 

processes in a Navajo community school. In A. I. Willis, G. E. Garcia, R. Barrera, 
& R. J. Harris (Eds.). Multicultural issues in literacy research and practice, 101- 
122 . 

McDonald, H. (2003). Exploring possibilities through critical race theory: Exemplary 

pedagogical practices for Indigenous students. Paper prepared for NZARE/AARE 
Joint Conference, 2003. Australia: James Cook University. 

McElmeel, S.L. (1993). McElmeel booknotes: Literature across the curriculum/Grades 
K-6. Portsmouth, NH: Teachers Ideas Press. 

McKnown, C. & Weinstein, R.S. (2003). The development & consequences of 

stereotype consciousness in middle childhood. Child development, 498-515. 

Meyer, B. (May 2004). Interview on psychological developmental analysis. Grove 
School, Northbrook, IL. 



207 




Miller, H.M. (May, 2002). Teaching and learning about cultural diversity: Hope. The 
Reading Teacher, Vol. 55, 746-747. 

Miller, P.J. & Goodnow, J.J. (1995). Cultural practices: Toward an integration of culture 
and development. In J.J. Goodnow, P.J. Miller, & F. Kessel, (Eds.). Cultural 
practices as contexts for development. New Directions for Child Development, 
67, 5-16. San Francisco: Jossey-Bass. 

Morton, S. (1 839). Crania Americana, or a comparative view of the skills of various 
aboriginal nations of North and South America. Retrieved May 7, 2006, from. 
http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Samuel_George_Morton. 

National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC). (November 1995). 
Responding to linguistic and cultural diversity: Recommendations for effective 
early childhood education. Washington, DC: NAEYC. Retrieved May 30, 2004, 
from http://www.naeyc.Org/about/position_s/pdf//psdiv98.pdf. 

National Association for the Education of Young Children (NAEYC). (Fall, 2001). 

Brochure on developmental^ appropriate practice. Washington, DC: National 
Association for the Education of Young Children. 

National Indian Education Association (NIEA). (October 15, 1990). Instructional 

Technology. INAR/NACIA Joint Issues Sessions. NIEA Annual 22 nd Conference. 
San Diego, CA Retrieved July 1 , 2004, from http: //www/e ricfacilty.net/ 
teams/View. do?action=7. 

Native American Books. (1996). Children K-3. Retrieved January 25, 2004, from 
http://www.kstrom.net/isk/books/children.html. 



208 




Neal-Barrett, A. M., Contreras, J.M., Kerns, K.A. (Eds.) (2001). Forging links: African 

American children clinical developmental perspectives (Praeger Series in Applied 
Psychology). Westport, CT: Praeger Publishers. 

Newman, J. M. (January 2000). Action research: A brief overview. Forum: Qualitative 
Social Research 1 (1). Retrieved May 1, 2004, from http ://qualitati ve- 
research.net/fqs-texte/1 -00/1 -00newman-e.htm. 

Nieto, S. (1992). Affirming diversity: The sociopolitical context of muiticuitural 
education. New York: Longman. 

Nieto, S. N. (December 2002/January 2003). Profoundly multicultural questions. 
Education Leadership, 60 (4), 6-10. 

Nieto, S. (2003). Afterword. In S. Green & D. Abt-Perkins (Eds.) Making race visible. 

New York: Teachers College Press. 

Noffke, S.E. (1997). Professional, personal, and political dimensions of action research. 
In M.W. Apple. Review of research in education, 22 ( pp. 305-343). Washington, 
DC: American Educational Research Association. 

Oakes, J. & Lipton, M. (1999). Teaching to change the world. Boston: McGraw-Hill. 

Ogle, D. (1986). KWL. In Ginsberg, M. B. & Wlodkowski, R.J. (2000). Creating highly 
motivational classrooms for all readers: A schoolwide approach to powerful 
teaching with diverse learners (p. 92). San Francisco, CA: Jossey-Boss. 

Omi, M. & Winant, H. (1992). Racial formations. In L. Bender & D. Braveman. (Eds.). 
Power, privileged, & law: a civil rights reader { pp. 159-1 69). St. Paul, MN: West 
Publishing Co. 



209 




Omi, M. & Winant, H. (1996) Contesting the meaning of racism post civil rights 

movement era. In Pedraza, S. & Rumbaut, R. (Eds.) Origins & Destinies (pp. 
470-80). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publications. 

Oyate Native Organization. (2004). Oyate Publications. Retrieved January 25, 2004, 
fro m http ://www. oyate . o rg/catalog/oyate Pu bs. htm I . 

Paley, V.G. (1999). The kindness of children. Cambridge: Harvard University Press. 

Patterson, J. P. (December 2002). At a “critical” juncture: Critical thinking, critical 
literacy, critical reading. A paper presented at the 2002 National Reading 
Conference Annual Meeting, Miami. Iowa City, IA: University of Iowa. 

Patton, M. Q. (1990). Qualitative research and evaluation methods. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage. 

Peacock, T. & Wisuri, M. (2002). The good path: Ojibwe learning and activity book for 
kids. Afton, MN: Afton Historical Society Press. 

Philion, W. E. (1 969). Indian children and the reading program: A model for direct 

observation and test-item analysis as a basis for guidance in the formation of a 
language arts program for Indian children. Retrieved March 21 , 2006, from 
www.amazon.com. 

Philion, W. E. & Galloway, C.E. (1969). Indian children and the reading program. 
Journal of Reading, 12, 553-560, 598-602. 

Pierce, K.M. (Ed.) et al. (1999). Adventuring with books: A booklist for pre-k - grade 6. 
Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 



210 




Portes, A. & Zhou, M. (1993). The new second generation segmented assimilation & its 
variants. In D. B. Grusky. (Ed.) Social stratification: Class, race, & gender in 
sociological perspective (pp. 597-607). Boulder, CO: Westview Press. 

Powell, R., Cantrell, S.C., & Adams, S. (May 2001). Saving Black Mountain: The 

promise of critical literacy in a multicultural democracy. The Reading Teacher, 
Vol. 54 { 8), 772-781. 

Pyterek, M. (2004). Unpublished study on the authenticity of Native American books for 
children. Evanston, IL: National-Louis University. 

Ramsey, P.G. (1 998). Teaching and learning in a diverse world: Multicultural education 
for young children. New York: Teacher’s College Press. 

Reed, R.F. & Johnson, T.W. (2000). Philosophical documents in education. New York: 
Addison-Wesley Longman. 

Reese, D. A. (2001). Native Americans in picture books recommended for early 

childhood classrooms 1945-1999 (Doctoral dissertation, University of Illinois at 
Urbana-Champaign). UMI Dissertation Services# 3030470. Ann Arbor, Ml: 
ProQuest, Bell & Howell Information & Learning Company. 

Richardson, V. (2003). Constructivist pedagogy. Teachers College Record Volume 105 
No. 9, 2003, p. 1623-1640. Retrieved June 7, 2005, from http://www.tcrecord.org 
ID Number: 11559. 

Riding, P., Sowell, S., & Levy, P. (April 1995). An action research approach to 

curriculum development. Information Research 1 (1). Retrieved May 1, 2004, 
from http://informationr.net/ir/1-1/paper2.html. 



211 




Robertson, J. (2000). The three R's of action research methodology: reciprocity, 

reflexivity, and reflection-on-reality. In Education Action Research 8 (2), 307-326. 

Robinson, M. (Winter 2003). On human rights. In Oxfam Exchange, 6-7. Boston: Oxfam 
America. 

Rodriquez, R. (1981). Hunger of memory: The education of Richard Rodriquez. Boston: 
Godine. 

Rogers, R. (2002). “That’s what you’re here for, you’re supposed to tell us”: Teaching 
and learning critical literacy. Adolescent & Adult Literacy, Vol. 45 (8), 772-787. 

Rohner, R.P. (1965). Factors influencing the academic performance of Kwakiutl children 
in Canada. Comparative Education Review, 9, 331-340. 

Rosenblatt, L. (1 978/1 994). The reader the text the poem: The transactional theory of 
the literary work. Carbondale: Southern Illinois University Press. 

Rothernam, M.J. & Phinney, J. (Eds.). (1987). Introduction: definition and perspectives 
in the study of children’s ethnic socialization. In Children’s ethnic socialization, 
pluralism, and development (pp. 10-28). Newbury Park, CA: Sage Publications. 

Royce, A.P. (1982). Ethnic identity. Strategies of diversity. Bloomington: Indiana 
University Press. 

Schwandt, T. (2001). Dictionary of qualitative inquiry. Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Shor, I. (2003). What is critical literacy? In Shor, I. Journal for Pedagogy, Pluralism & 
Practice. Retrieved June 23, 2003, from httpy/www/lesley.edu/ 
journals/jppp/4/shor.html. 

Sims Bishop, R. (1994). (Ed.). Kaleidoscope: A multicultural booklist for grades K-8. 
Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 



212 




Sims Bishop, R. (1997) Selecting literature for a multicultural curriculum. In V.J Harris 
(Ed.), Using Multiethnic Literature in the K-8 Classroom (pp. 1-20). Norwood, MA: 
Christopher-Gordon Publishers, Inc. 

Slapin, B. & Seale, D. (1992). Through Indian eyes: The native experience in books for 
children. (Third Edition). Philadelphia, PA: New Society Publishers. 

Slapin, B. & Seale, D. (2005). A broken flute: The native experience in books for 

children (Contemporary Native American communities). Berkeley, CA: Oyate. 

Smith, C.L. (December 2000/January 2001). Native now: Contemporary Indian stories. 
Book Links, 10 { 3). Chicago, IL: American Library Association. 

Smithsonian Institution. (2004). Native American dolls. Smithsonian in Your Classroom, 
1-26. 

Song, M. (2003). Choosing ethnic identity. Malden, MA: Blackwell Publishing Inc. 

Sorozano, D. & Yosso, T. (2002). Critical race methodology: counter-storytelling as 
an analytical framework. Qualitative Inquiry, 8 (1), 23-44. 

Southern Poverty Law Center. (March 2006). Survey says bias still divides nation. 

SPLC Report. 36 (1). 5. 

Steinberg, S. (1981). The ethnicity myth: Race, ethnicity, & class in America. NY: 
Antheneum. 

Stensland, A. (1973). Literature by and about the American Indian. Urbana, IL: National 
Council of Teachers of English. 

Stott, J.C. (1995). Native Americans in children's literature. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press. 

Stern-LaRosa, C. & Hofheimer-Bettmann. (2000). The anti-defamation league’s hate 
hurts: How children learn and unlearn prejudice. New York: Scholastic. 



213 




Strike, K. (1999). Justice, caring, and universality: in defense of moral pluralism. In Katz, 
Nodding, & Strike. Justice & caring: the search for common ground in education, 
21-37. Columbia University: Teachers College. 

Stringer, E. T. (1996). Action research: A handbook for practitioners. Newbury Park, CA: 
Sage. 

Suina, J., & Smolkin, L.B. (1994). From natal culture to school culture to dominant 

society culture: Supporting transitions for Pueblo Indian students. In P. Greenfield 
& R. Cocking (Eds.). Cross-cultural roots of minority child development (pp. 115- 
ISO). Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum. 

Sumara, Dennis J. (1998). Fictionalizing acts: reading and the making of identity. 

Theory into Practice. Ohio University Press, 37(3), 203-210. 

Swisher, K. & Deyhle, D. (1989). The styles of learning are different, but the teaching is 
just the same: Suggestions for teachers of American Indian youth. Journal of 
American Indian Education, 1-14. 

Szasz, M. C. (1999). Education and the American Indian: The road to self-determination 
since 1928. Albuquerque, NM: University of New Mexico. 

Tannen, D. (1994). Gender & discourse. Oxford, England: Oxford University Press. 

Tate, W.F. IV. (1997). Critical race theory and education: History, theory, and 

implications. In M.W. Apple (Ed.) Review of research in education, 22, 195-247. 
Washington, DC: American Educational Research Association. 

Tatum, B.D. (1992). Talking about race, learning about racism: The application of racial 
identity development theory in the classroom. In E. Cashmore & J. Jenning, 
(2001). Racism: essential readings. London: Sage Publications. 



214 




Temple, C., Martinez, M., Yokota, J., & Naylor, A. (2002). Children’s books in children’s 
hands (2 nd ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Terzian, A. (1 993). Kids’ multicultural art book: Art & craft experiences from around the 
world. Charlotte, VA: Williamson Publishing Co. 

Theodorson, G.A. & Theodorson, A.C. (1969). A modern dictionary of sociology. New 
York: Harper & Row. 

Trachtenberg, E. (2003/ The best children’s literature. Los Angeles, CA: Parent’s Guide 
Press. 

Trelease, J. (2001). The read-aloud handbook. New York: Penguin Books. 

University of Texas Education Department (May 1 , 2004). The history of critical race 
theory. Retrieved May 25, 2004, from http://www.edb.utexas.edu/ 
faculty/scheurich/proj7/crthistory.htm. 

Valdez, A. (1999). Learning in living color: Using literature to incorporate multicultural 
education in to the primary curriculum. Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Vasquez, V. (October 2000). Our way: Using the everyday to create a critical literacy 
curriculum. Primary Voices K-6, 9(2), 8-13. 

Vasquez, V. (January, 2003). Using everyday issues and everyday texts to negotiate 
critical literacies with young children. An Address presented to the Hawaii 
International Conference on Education, Honolulu, Hawaii. 

Vogt, L.A., Jordan, C., & Tharp, R. G. (1993). Explaining school failure, producing 

school success: Two cases. In E. Jacob & C Jordan (Eds.) Minority education: 
Anthropological perspectives (pp. 53-66). Norwood, NJ: Ablex. 

Vygotsky, L.S. (1966/1978). Mind in society. Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press. 



215 




Wagner, B.J. (1976). Drama as a learning medium. Washington, D.C.: National 
Education Association. 

Waters, M. (1996). Ethnic openness for whites only? In S. Pedraza, & R. Rumbaut 

(Eds.) Origins & Destinies (pp. 444-454). Belmont, CA: Wadsworth Publications. 
Weber, Max. (1921/1968). Economy and society. Berkeley: University of California 
Press. 

Webster’s New World Dictionary (1982). (2 nd ed.). In G. Carruth & E. Ehrlich (Eds.). 
Student Handbook: Including Webster’s new world dictionary (1 991 , Vol. 2). 
Nashville, TN: Southwestern Press. 

Willis, A., Garcia, G.E., Barrera, R., Harris, V.J. (Eds). ( 2003). Multicultural issues in 
literacy research and practice. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Willis, P.A. (1977). Learning to labor. Westmead, Farnborough, Hants., England: 
Saxon House. 

Yagjian, C. (Fall 2000). First encounters: Introducing Native Americans to young 

students through literature. Plymouth State College. Retrieved January 27, 2004, 
from http://www.campton.sau48.k12.nh.us/nayounglit.htm. 

Yokota, J. (Ed.). (2001). Kaleidoscope: A multicultural booklist for grades k-8. Urbana, 
IL: NCTE. 



216 




Bibliography of Children’s Literature 



Aliki. (1976). Corn is maize: The gift of the Indians. New York: HarperCollins. 

American Museum of Natural History (Eds.). (2000). Eyewitness books: North American 
Indian. New York: Alfred A. Knopf. 

Bains, R. (1985). Indians of the plains. (Illus. by M. Hannon). Mahwah, NJ: Troll 
Associates. 

Banks, L.R. (1995). The Indian in the cupboard: Omri’s scrapbook. (Illus. by N. Krulik). 
New York: Scholastic. 

Barth, E. (1975). Turkeys, pilgrims, and Indian corn: The story of the Thanksgiving 
symbols. (Illus. by U. Arndt). New York: Clarion. 

Baylor, B. (1976). Hawk, I’m your brother. (Illus. by P. Parnall). New York: Aladdin. 

Baylor, B. (1986). I’m in charge of celebrations. (Illus. by P. Parnall). New York: 

Aladdin. 

Beyer, E. C. (1962). The story of little-big. (Illus. by V. Guthrie). Chicago: Reilly & Lee 
Company. 

Borgenicht, D. (1993). Folktales of native Americans: A story-filled coloring book. 

(Illus. by H. I. Diggs). Philadelphia, PA: Running Book Press. 

Brooks, B. (1989). The Seminole. Vero Beach, FL: Rourke Publications, Inc. 

Bruchac, J. (1988, 1995). Gluskabe and the four wishes. (Illus. by C.N. Shrader). New 
York: Dutton. 

Bruchac, J. (1991). Native American stories. From Caduto, M.J. & Bruchac, J., Keepers 
of the Earth. (Illus. by J.K. Fadden). Golden, CO: Fulcrum. 



217 




Bruchac, J. (1993). The first strawberries. (Illus. by A. Vojtech). New York: Dial. 
Bruchac, J. (1994). A boy called slow. (Illus. by R. Baviera). New York: Penguin 
Putnam. 

Bruchac, J. (1 996). Between earth and sky: Legends of Native American sacred places. 

(Illus. by T. Locker). New York: Harcourt Brace. 

Bruchac, J. (1 997). Many nations: An alphabet of Native America. (Illus. by R.F. 
Goetzl). New York: Troll. 

Bruchac, J. (1998). Heart of a chief. New York: Dial. 

Bruchac, J. (2000). Crazy Horse’s vision. (Illus. by S.D. Nelson). New York: Lee & Low 
Books. 

Bruchac, J. (2000). Squanto’s journey: The story of the first Thanksgiving. (Illus. by G. 
Shed). San Diego, CA: Harcourt, Inc. 

Bruchac, J. (2002). Navajo long walk. (Illus. by S. Begay). Washington, DC: National 
Geographic Society. 

Bruchac, J. & London, J. (1992). Thirteen moons on a turtle’s back. (Illus. by T. Locker). 
New York: Scholastic. 

Bruchac, J. & Ross, G. (1995). The story of the milky way: A Cherokee tale. (Illus. by V. 
A. Stroud). New York: Dial. 

Bunting, E. (1997). Moonstick: The seasons of the Sioux. (Illus. by J. Sandford). New 
York: Harper Childrens. 

Caduto, M. J. & Bruchac, J. (1988, 1989, 1997). Keepers of the earth. Golden, CO: 
Fulcrum, Inc. 



218 




Carol, J. A. & Kear, D.J. (1993). A multicultural guide to thematic units for young 
children. (Illus. by D. Tom). Carthage, IL: Good Apple. 

Challenger, R.J. (1995). Eagle's reflection. Surrey, BC, Canada: Heritage House. 

Champayne, D. & Pare, M.A. (Eds.). (1995). Native north American chronology. New 
York: Gale Research Inc. 

Cherry, L. (1992). The river ran wild. Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace Javanovich. 

Clark, A.N. (1992). In my mother’s house. (Illus. by V. Herrera). New York: Puffin Books. 

Cohlene, T. (1990). Clamshell boy: A Makah legend. (Illus. by C. Reasoner). Vero 
Beach, FL: Watermill Press. 

Cohlene, T. (1990). Dancing drum: A Cherokee legend. (Illus. by C. Reasoner). Vero 
Beach, FL: Watermill Press. 

Cohlene, T. (1990). Ka-ha-si and the loon: An Eskimo legend. (Illus. by C. Reasoner). 
(Native American Legends Series). Vero Beach, FL: Watermill Press. 

Cohlene, T. (1990). Little Firefly: An Algonquian legend. (Illus. by C. Reasoner). Vero 
Beach, FL: Watermill Press. 

Cohlene, T. (1990). Quillworker: A Cheyenne legend. (Illus. by C. Reasoner). (Native 
American Legends Series). Vero Beach, FL: Watermill Press. 

Cohlene, T. (1990). Turquoise boy: A Navajo legend. (Illus. by C. Reasoner). Vero 
Beach, FL. Watermill Press. 

Cooper, M.L. (1999). Indian school: Teaching the white man’s way. New York: Clarion. 

Dalgliesh, A. (1954). The Thanksgiving story. (Illus. by H. Sewell). New York: Charles 
Scribner’s Sons. 

De Paola, T. (1983). The legend of the bluebonnet. New York: G.P. Putnam’s Son’s. 



219 




DePaola, T. (1988). The legend of the Indian paintbrush. New York: G.P. Putnam’s 
Sons. 

Department of Education, American Museum of Natural History. (1989/ Teachers' 
Guide: Eastern Woodlands and Plains Indians. New York: American 
Museum of American History. 

Disney, W. (1995). Disney Pocahontas sing-along. (Illus. by Walt Disney Feature 
Animations). Burbank, CA: Walt Disney Records. 

Dragonwagon, C. (1990). Home place. (Illus. by J. Pinkney). New York: Aladdin. 
Erdrich, L. (2002). Bears make rock soup. (Illus. by L. Fifield). San Francisco, CA: 
Children’s Book Press. 

Erdrich, L. (2002). The range eternal. (Illus. by S. Johnson & L. Fancher). New York: 
Hyperion Books. 

Eubank, P.R. (2002). Seaman’s journal: On the trail with Lewis & Clark. New York: 
Ideals Children’s Books. 

Fitzpatrick, M. (1998). The long march. Hillsboro, OR: Beyond Words Publishing. 

Fradin, D. B. (1992). A new true book series: The Shoshoni. (Incl. other Native 
AmericanTribal titles). Chicago: Children’s Press. 

Frederick, D.A. (2000). Beads. (Illus. by D.A. Fast Horse). Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace. 
Friskey, M. (1967). Indian two feet and his eagle feather. (Illus. by J. Hawkinson). 
Chicago: Children’s Press. 

Friskey, M. (1977). Indian two feet and the abc moose hunt. (Illus. by J. Hawkinson). 
Chicago: Children’s Press. 



220 




Gates, F. (1994). Owl eyes. (Illus. by Y. Miyake). New York: Lothrop, Lee, & Shepard 
Books. 

Geis, J. (1994). Where the buffalo roam. Nashville, TN: Ideals Children’s Books. 
George, J.C. (1997). Arctic son. (Illus. by W. Minor). New York: Hyperion Books. 
George, J.C. (1999). Snow bear. (Illus. by W. Minor). New York: Hyperion Books. 
Goble, P. (1 978). The girl who loved wild horses. New York: Bradbury Press. 

Goble, P. (1980). The gift of the sacred dog. New York: Macmillan. 

Goble, P. (1983). Star boy. Scarsdale, N.Y.: Bradbury Press. 

Goble, P. (1984). Buffalo woman. New York: Bradbury Press. 

Goble, P. (1 985). The great race of the birds and the animals. New York: Bradbury 
Press. 

Goble, P. (1988). Her seven brothers. New York: Bradbury Press. 

Goble, P. (1988). Iktomi and the boulder. New York: Franklin Watts, Inc. 

Goble, P. (1989). Iktomi and the berries. New York: Orchard Books. 

Goble, P. (1990). Dream wolf. New York: Bradbury Press. 

Goble, P. (1991). Iktomi and the ducks. New York: Orchard Books. 

Goble, P. (1991). Iktomi and the buffalo skull. New York: Orchard Books. 

Goble, P. (1994). Hau kola hello friend. (Photos by G. Perrin). New York: Richard C. 
Owen. 

Gorsline, M. & D. (1977J. North American Indians. New York: Random House. 
Greene, R. C. (2002). The first Thanksgiving day. (Illus. by S. Gaber). New York: 
Scholastic. 



221 




Grossman, V. (1991). Ten little rabbits. (Illus. by S. Long). San Francisco: Chronicle 
Books. 

Hakim, J. (1993, 1999). A history of us: The first Americans prehistory-1600. New York: 
Oxford University Press. 

Hankes, J.E. & Fast, G. R. (June 1999). Using Native American legends to teach 
mathematics. Omro, Wl: Honor Resource Center. 

Harvey, K. D. (1993). Indians of the great plains. Philadelphia, PA: Running Press. 

Haslam, A. & Parsons, A. (1995). Les peoples de I’arctique. (The people of the arctic). 
(Photos, by A. Phillips, et. al.). Paris: Rouge & Or. 

Highwater, J. (1985). Ceremony of innocence. New York: Harper. 

Hill, L. (2002). American Indians. (Fandex Family Field Guides). (Illus. from American 
Museums). New York: Workman Publishing Company. 

Hoffman, M. (1993). Amazing Grace. Boston: Candlewick Press. 

Honor Resource Center. (2000). Rethinking Thanksgiving: Alternatives to traditional 
teachings about Thanksgiving. Red Cliff Reservation, Wl: Honor. 

Hoyt-Goldsmith, D. (1990). Totem pole. (Illus. by L. Migdale). New York: Holiday House. 

Hucko, B. (1 996). A rainbow at night: The world in words and pictures by Navajo 
children. San Francisco, CA: Chronicle Books. 

Hughes, L. (1995). Bright eyes and the buffalo hunt. (Illus. by L. Migdale). Kansas City, 
Missouri: Landmark Editions, Inc. 

Jacobs, S. K. (1993). The boy who loved morning. (Illus. by M. Hays). Boston: Little, 
Brown and Company. 

Jeffers, S. (1991). Brother eagle, sister sky. New York: Dial Books. 



222 




Jeunesse, G., Fuhr, U., & Sautai, R. (1994). Native Americans. (Illus. by U. Fuhr & R. 
Sautai). New York: Scholastic. 

Johnson, T. (1994/ The rabbit and the coyote. (Illus. by T. DePaola). New York: 
Putnam & Grosset. 

Johnson, T. (Ed.). (2003). What the Native Americans wore. Philadelphia, PA: Mason 
Crest Publishers. 

Joosse, B. (1991). Mama, do you love me? { Illus. by B. Lavallee). San Francisco, CA: 
Chronicle Books. 

Kay, V. (2002). Broken feather. (Illus. by S. Alcorn). New York: C.P. Putnam’s Sons. 

Kerner, K. (1995, 2000). They taught you wrong: Raising cultural consciousness of 
stereotypes and misconceptions about Indians. Lynchburg, VA: O.L. and Carol 
Durham. 

Kerven, R. (1 992). Earth magic, sky magic: North American Indian tales. New York: 
Cambridge University Press. 

King, S. (1993). Shannon: An Ojibway dancer. (Photos by C. Whipple). Minneapolis, 
MN: Lerner Publications Company. 

Kroll, S. (1988). Oh, what a Thanksgiving! (Illus. by S.D. Schindler). New York: 
Scholastic. 

Kruse, G. M. & Horning, K. T. (1988, 1989, 1991). Multicultural literature for 

children and young adults. Madison, Wl: Cooperative Children’s Book Center. 

Kusugak, M.A. (1996). My Arctic 1,2,3. (Illus. by V. Krykorka). Toronto: Annick Press 
Ltd. 



223 




Lacapa, M. (1990). The flute player: An apache folktale. Flagstaff, AR: 

Northland Publishing. 

Lacapa, K. & Lacapa, M. (1994). Less than half, more than whole. Flagstaff, Arizona: 
Storytellers Publishing. 

Lassieur, A. (1998). Library of American Indian history: Before the storm, American 

Indians before the Europeans. (Illus. by D. Williams & P. Meschino). New York: 
Facts on File, Inc. 

Littlechild, G. (1993). This land is my land. Emeryville, CA: Children’s Book Press. 

Littlefield, H. (2001). Children of the Indian boarding school. (Photos). Minneapolis, MN: 
Carolrhoda Books. 

Lewin, T. (2003). Lost city: The discovery of Manchu Picchu. New York: Philomel 
Books. 

London, J. (1993). Fire Race: A karuk coyote tale. (Illus. by S. Long). San Francisco: 
Chronicle Books. 

London, J. (1995). Honey paw and lightfoot. (Illus. by J. Van Zyle). San Francisco, CA: 
Chronicle Books. 

London, J. (2002). Mustang canyon. (Illus. by D. San Souci). Cambridge, MA: 
Candlewick Press. 

Longfellow, H.W. (1983). Hiawatha. (Illus. by S. Jeffers). New York: Scholastic. 

Longfellow, FI.W. (1984). Hiawatha. (Illus by E. Le Cain). New York: Puffin Books. 

Lorenz, A. (2003). Journey to Indians: A boy’s visit to the great mound city. (Illus. by J. 
Schleh). New York: Harry N. Abrams, Inc. 

Lund, B. (1997). The Comanche Indians (Series). Mankato, MN: Capstone Press. 



224 




Maestro, B. (1991). The discovery of the Americas. (Illus. by G. Maestro). New York: 
Scholastic. 

Marrin, A. (2000). Sitting Bull and his world. New York: Dutton. 

Marshall, 1.(1 977). The red ochre people: How Newfoundland’s Beothuck Indians lived. 

(Illus. by M. Springett). Vancouver, J.J. Douglas Ltd.. 

Martin, B & B. (1951). The brave little Indian. (Illus. by C. Bisch). New York: Holt, 
Reinhart and Winston. 

Martin, B. & Archambault, J. (1990, 1987, 1966). Knots on a counting rope. (Illus. by T. 
Rand). New York: Henry Holt. 

Martin, R. (1992). The rough-faced girl. (Illus. by D. Shannon). New York: Scholastic. 
Mateo, M. A. Portraits of Native American Indians. Carthage, IL: Good Apple. 
McDermott, G. (1974). Arrow to the sun: A Pueblo Indian tale. New York: Puffin Books. 
McDermott, G. (1993). Raven : A trickster tale from the pacific northwest. New York: 
Scholastic. 

McGovern, A. (1973). The Pilgrim’s first Thanksgiving. (Illus. by J. Lasker). New York: 
Scholastic. 

McGovern, A. (1974). ...If you lived with the Sioux Indians. (Illus. by J.S. Drew). New 
York: Scholastic. 

McLellan, J. (1989). The birth of Nanabosho. (Illus. by J. Kirby). Toronto: Pemmican 
Publications Inc. 

Medearis, A. S. (1991). Dancing with the Indians. (Illus. by S. Byrd). New York: Holliday 
House. 



225 




Meiczinger, J. (1 989). How to draw Indian arts and crafts. Vero Beach, FL: Watermill 
Press. 

Milwaukee Public Museum. (1985). Souvenir Book. Milwaukee Public Museum. 

(Illus. by G. Puza). Milwaukee, Wl. 

Mine, J. M. (1993). Opossum and the great firemaker: A Mexican legend. New York: 
Troll. 

Morris, N. & T. (1984,). Featherboy and the buffalo. Morristown, NJ: Silver Burdett. 
Morris, N. & T. (1984,). Little bear and the white horse. Morristown, NJ: Silver Burdett. 
Morris, N. & T. (1984). Morning sun and the lost girl. Morristown, NJ: Silver Burdett. 
Morris, N. & T.(1984). Taku and the fishing canoe. Morristown, NJ: Silver Burdett. 
Munsch, R & Kusugak, M. (1997). A promise is a promise. (Illus. by M. Kusugak). 
Toronto: Annick Press. 

Murphy, C. M. (1998). Caribou girl. (Illus. by L. Russell). Niwot, CO: Roberts Rinehart 
Publishers. 

Newell, R. (2000). Story sticks. (Photos by R. Hutchings). Orlando, FL: Harcourt Brace. 
Norman, H. (1999/ Trickster and the fainting birds. (Illus. by T. Pohrt). San Diego: 
Gulliver Books. 

Obie, I. (1996). My first mother goose. Boston: Candlewick Press. 

Ortiz, S. (1977, 1988, 1994). The people shall continue. (1998, Illus. by S. Graves). San 
Francisco, CA: Children’s Book Press. 

Osofsky, A.( 1992). Dreamcatcher. (Illus. by E. Young). New York: Orchard Books. 
Peacock, T. & Wisuri, M. (2002). The good path: Ojibwe learning and activity book for 
kids. Afton, MN: Afton Historical Society Press. 



226 




Petra Press (1997). The Native Americans: Indians of the Northwest. (Photos by C. A. 

Branigan & D. Gorgos). Philadelphia, PA: Running Press Book Publishers. 

Petty, K. (1988). Plains Indians. (Illus. by M. Wilson). New York: Gloucester Press. 
Philip, N. (Ed.) (2000,). A braid of lives: Native American childhood. New York: Clarion. 
Polacco, P. (1988). Boat Ride with Lillian two blossom. New York: Philomel Books. 
Press, P. (2002). First reports series: The Cheyenne. Minneapolis, MN: Compass Point. 
Quasha, J. (2001 ). Pilgrims and Native Americans: Hands-on projects about life in early 
America. New York: PowerKids Press. 

Randall, F. (1959, 1963). American Indians. (Illus. by A. W. Randall, et. al.). Columbus, 
OH : Highlights for Children. 

Rappaport, D. (2002). We are the many: A picture book of American Indians. Boston: 
(Illus. by C. V. Wright & Y Hu). Harpercollins Publisher. 

Reid, M. J. (1 996). Myths and legends of the Haida Indians of the Northwest: The 
children of the raven. (Illus. by N. Conkle). Santa Barbara, CA: Bellerophon 
Books. 

Ridington, R & J. (1 978). People of the trail: How the northern forest Indians lived. 

(Illus. by I. Bateson). Vancouver: Douglas & McIntyre. 

Rinaldi, A. (1 999). My heart is on the ground: The diary of nannie little rose, A Sioux girl. 
New York: Scholastic. 

Robbins, R. (1980,). How the first rainbow was made. Oakland, CA: Parnassus Press. 
Robotham, T. (1994). Native Americans in early photographs. North Dighton, MA: 

World Publications Group. 



227 




Rohmer, H., Chow, O., & Vidaure, M. (1987). The invisible hunters. (Illus. by J. Sam). 

San Francisco: Children’s Book Press. 

Rose, L. (1999). Grandchildren of the Lakota. (Photos by C. Walsh Bellville). 
Minneapolis: Carolrhoda Books. 

Ross, G. (1995). How turtle's back was cracked. (Illus. by M. Jacob). New York: Dial. 
Rossman, D.A. (1988). Where legends live: A pictorial guide to Cherokee mythic places. 

(Illus. by N. Patterson). Cherokee, AC: Cherokee Publications. 

Sabuda, R. (1999). The blizzard’s robe. New York: Atheneum. 

San Souci, R. (1994/ Sootface: An Ojibwa Cinderella story. New York: Doubleday. 
Santella, A. (2003). Illinois native peoples. (Photos, by W. Perlstein). Chicago: 
Heinemann. 

Santiago, C. (1998). Home to medicine mountain. (Illus. by J. Lowry). San Francisco: 
Children’s Book Press. 

Sattler, H. R. (1993). The earliest Americans. New York: Clarion Books. 

Sauber, R. (1994). The first Thanksgiving: A golden pop-up book. New York: Western 
Publishing. 

Scholastic Inc. (1992). Native Americans theme digest. Scholastic Banners. 

Shermie, B. (1993). Mounds of earth and shell. (Native Dwellings Series). Montreal: 
Tundra Books. 

Sherrow, V. (1997). American Indian children of the past. Brookfield, CT: The 
Millbrook Press. 



228 




Smith, C.L. (2000). Jingle dancer. (Illus. by C.V Wright & Y Hu). New York: Morrow. 

(Screenplay by M. Mathison). 

Smith, C. L. (2002). Indian shoes. New York: Morrow. 

Smith-Baramzomo. M. & Bruce, T. (1994). Brown paper school US kids history: Book of 
the American Indians. Boston: Little, Brown and Company. 

Smithsonian Institution. (2004). Native American dolls. Smithsonian in Your Classroom, 
1-26. 

Sneve, V. D. H. (1989). Dancing teepees: Poems of American Indian youth. (Illus. by S. 
Gammel). New York: Holiday House. 

Sneve, V. D. H. (1995). The Iroquois: A first Americans book. (Illus. by R. Himler). New 
York: Holiday House. 

Sonneborn, L. (1999). The New York public library amazing Native American history: A 
book of answers for kids. New York: John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

Stroud, V. (1966). Path of quiet elk: A Native American alphabet book. New York: Dial. 
Stuart, G.S. (1974). Three little indians. (Illus. by L. S. Glanzman). Washington, DC: 
National Geographic Society. 

Swamp, J. (1995). Giving thanks: A Native American good morning message. New 
York: (Illus. by E. Printup, Jr.). Lee & Low Books. 

Taylor, C.J. (1990). How two-feathers was saved from loneliness. Montreal: Tundra 
Books. 

Tapahonso, L. & Schick, E. (1995). Navajo abc: A Dine alphabet book. (Illus. by E. 
Schick). New York: Aladdin. 

Tchin. (1997). Rabbit’s wish for snow. New York: Scholastic. 



229 




Te Ata. (1989). (Adapted: Moroney, L.). Baby rattlesnake. (Illus. by M. Reisberg). San 
Francisco, CA: Children’s Book Press. 

Thomas, D. H. & Pendleton, L (Eds.). (1995). Native Americans. (Illus. by H. Halliday 
et.al.). New York: Time-Life Books. 

Tunis, E. (1959). Indians. New York: Thomas Y. Crowell. 

Van Camp, R. (1997). A man called raven. (Illus. by G. Littlechild). San Francisco, CA: 
Children’s Book Press. 

Waboose, J.B. (1997). Morning on the lake. (Illus. by K. Reczuch). Toronto: Kids Can 
Press, Ltd. 

Waboose, J.B. (2000). Sky sisters. (Illus. by B. Deines). Toronto: Kids Can Press, Ltd. 
Waldman, C. (1994). Timelines of Native American history. (Illus. by M. Braun). New 
York: Prentice Hall. 

Waldman, N. (2001). Wounded Knee. New York: Atheneum. 

Waldman, S. (2003). We asked for nothing: The remarkable journey of Cabeza de 
Vaca. (Illus. by T. McNeely). New York: Mikaya Press. 

Wallace, M. (1999). The inuksuk book. Toronto: Maple Tree Press. 

Waters, K. (1996). Tapenum’s day: Wampanoag Indian boy in pilgrim times. (Illus. by R. 
Kendall). New York: Scholastic. 

Webb, D. The same sun was in the sky. (Illus. by W. Porter). Flagstaff, AR: Northland 
Publishing. 

Wheeler, B. (1986, 1995). Where did you get your moccasins? (Illus. by H. Bekkering). 
New York: Portage & Main. 



230 




Wheeler, M.J. (1983). First came the Indians. (Illus. by J. Houston). New York: 



Atheneum. 

White Deer of Autumn. (1983). Ceremony - in the circle of life. (Illus. by D. San Souci). 
Milwaukee, Wl: Raintree Publishers. 

Whitehead, P. (1985). Best Thanksgiving book. (Illus. by S.T. Hall). Mahwah, NJ: Troll 
Associates. 

Wilbur, C. K. Indian handicrafts. Old Saybrook, CT: The Globe Pequot Press. 

Wood, G. (1999). Science of early Americans. New York: Franklin Watts. 

Wood, T. (1992). A boy becomes a man at Wounded Knee. (Illus. by N. Numpa). New 
York: Walker. 

Zappler, G. (1996). Learn about Texas Indians. (Illus. by E.T.Ivy). Austin, TX: Texas 
Parks and Wildlife Department. 

Videos Used in the Native American Unit 

Discovery Channel School. (2001). Native Americans. New York: Discovery 
Communications, Inc. 

Lancit Media Productions. (1985). Gift of the sacred dog. Buffalo, NY & Nebraska: 
WNED TV & Great Plains National/Nebraska ETV. 

Lancit Media Productions. (1990). Knots on a counting rope. Buffalo, NY & Nebraska: 
WNED TV & Great Plains National/Nebraska ETV. 

Lancit Media Productions. (1991). Legend of the bluebonnet. Buffalo, NY & Nebraska: 
WNED TV & Great Plains National/Nebraska ETV. 

Schlessinger Media (Producer). (2003). Families around the world: My inuit family 
from Canada. New York: Library Video Co. 



231 




Music Used in the Native American Unit 
Intertribal Collection. (1996). Tribal voices: Music from Native Americans. (CD). 
Redway, CA: EarthBeat! 



232 




Appendix A 



Table A1. Curriculum planning matrix 



Daily Plan 


Activities 


Discourse Strategies 


Data Collection 


Day 1 


Drawings: ask children 
individually to draw an Indian or 
Native American. Ask each child 
to tell the teacher about the 
drawing. Write the dictation on 
the back of the illustrations. 


Look at Native American books to 
find vocabulary using Indian or 
Native American terms. Are different 
tribes represented in the text? Make 
a text (-) text and text (-) world 
connection. 


Identifying, contextualizing, 
broadening. 


Begin Illustrations 


Day 2 


Shared Reading: read authentic 
informational books about Native 
Americans to the entire class. 
Discuss the books using prior 
knowledge, text to text 
connections. Begin KWL chart. 


Audit trial: begin large mural of 
Project Approach experience with 
plot web of drama, photos & 
drawings of characters in the village 
and art projects. 


Identifying, contextualizing, 
broadening. 


Begin Observations 


Day 3 


Continue KWL chart. Complete 
anticipatory web with questions 
for investigation: What do we 
want to find out? Create class 
web of current concepts and 
understandings. 


Art project: practice picture symbols 
for personal creations and audit trail 
mural. 


Broadening, universalizing. 


Begin Discussions 


Day 4 


Shared Reading: read authentic 
fiction books on Native 
Americans. Begin author study of 
Joseph Bruchac and Paul Goble. 


Reading Rainbow movie: watch 
PBS, 30 minute show based on Paul 
Goble's book, The Great Race. 
Discuss the large Native American 
ceremony portrayed in the film. Use 
text (-) text references to relate to 
books read and drama. 


Contextualizing, broadening. 


Begin Focus Groups 



233 





Daily Plan 


Activities 


Discourse Strategies 


Data Collection 


Day 5 


Review Native American folk 
tales. Create a web of characters 
who are found in many tales. 
Discuss authors who write and 
tell folk tales. 


Write a language experience chart 
tale, recreate into a big book, and 
have the children illustrate! 


Universalizing, empathizing. 


Discourse Strategies based 
on the work of Daiute & Jones 
(2003). Project Approach 
based on the work of Helm & 
Katz (2001). 


Day 6 


Discuss Plains Indian Villages: 
what would they look like, who 
would the people be, what would 
their jobs be, and how would a 
typical day be spent in the 
village? Make a web of ideas. 


Look at Native American non-fiction 
books to research how native 
villages looked and what the people 
did in the villages. Draw pictures of 
various activities and add to the 
audit trail mural. 


Identifying, broadening. 


Illustrations, Observation, 
Focus Groups, and 
Discussions continue... 


Day 7 


Plan the theme drama: story 
sequence including problem 
ideas for the climax. Plan a map 
of the village. 


Ask each child to draw his/her own 
occupation in the village. Use 
probing questions to ask about how 
the characters feel about his/her 
jobs. Display these pictures on the 
audit trail mural. 


Identifying, universalizing, 
personalizing. 




Day 8 


Continue reading fiction & non- 
fiction books about the historical 
lives of Native Americans. View 
photographs/illustrations and 
read the picture headings to the 
children. Discuss their reactions. 


Role-play discriminatory problems in 
the classroom: What do you say 
when you want to join the group? 
How do you feel when you are 
excluded? How would you feel if 
someone came in and took over 
your home, ate your food, etc? 


Broadening, personalizing 





234 





Daily Plan 


Activities 


Discourse Strategies 


Data Collection 


Day 9 


Begin drama with children in their 
roles in the village. Create a 
garden and lake for fishing (art 
projects). Build the teepees. 


Read books about the difficulties of 
Native American lives in times past. 
Refer to U.S. map of tribal groups. 


Identifying, broadening 




Day 10 


Continue the drama with 
discussion and then portrayal of 
the hunt for buffalo. Enact the 
hunt and the ceremonial return 
with music. Listen to actual 
Native American CD's. 


Climax idea for drama: teacher 
takes on the role of a newcomer to 
the village who is not accepted by 
some of the people. Why is she 
discriminated against? How can she 
become accepted? How must the 
villagers change to accept her? 


Universalizing, empathizing 


Discourse Strategies based 
on the work of Daiute & Jones 
(2003). Project Approach 
based on the work of Helm & 
Katz (2001). 


Day 1 1 


Discuss through literature the 
issues of Native Americans 
today: such as legislative issues 
on land reparations, sport team 
names, reservation schools, etc. 


Continue enacting of theme drama 
conflict. Have the villagers solved 
the problem of the newcomer? 
Relate the drama to real life 
situations of discrimination in school. 


Broadening, empathizing, 
personalizing. 


Illustrations, Observations, 
Focus Groups, and 
Discussions continue... 


Day 12 


Work on audit trail mural to 
depict drama conflict visually. 
Research literature as needed to 
verify village setting. 


Have a group discussion about the 
audit trail. Review each section of 
the mural to find the creation of the 
unit, the documentation of the 
drama, the development of the KWL 
chart and the webs. 


Identifying, contextualizing, 
broadening, distancing. 





235 





Daily Plan 


Activities 


Discourse Strategies 


Data Collection 


Day 13 


Guided reading: in small focus 
groups, discuss historical 
discrimination of Native 
Americans. Relate discussions in 
a large group meeting to the lives 
of Native Americans today. 


Art project: using the writing 
symbols of Native Americans and 
pattern work, draw a story of the 
people in the village. Create drums 
with completed drawings. 


Universalizing, avoiding, 
personalizing. 




Day 14 


Shared Reading: read 
ambiguous and inauthentic 
fiction books on Native 
Americans. Probe why these 
books would not be liked by 
Native Americans. How can we 
find bias in the illustrations or 
text? 


Reading Rainbow movie: watch 
PBS, 30 minute show based on the 
book, "Knots on a Counting Rope." 
Point out the discrepancies using 
text (-) world connections. 


Universalizing, avoiding. 




Day 15 


Create a language experience 
chart of authentic, ambiguous, 
and inauthentic books that have 
been discussed so far in the unit. 
What are some questions we 
could ask authors/illustrators 
about the creation of those 
books? 


Using cards with the names of 
authors of Native American books: 
create a list of "outsider" and 
"insider" authors. Do "insiders" 
always write authentic books? How 
can "outsiders" write/illustrate 
authentic books? 


Identifying, broadening, 
universalizing, avoiding. 


Discourse Strategies based 
on the work of Daiute & Jones 
(2003). Project Approach 
based on the work of Helm & 
Katz (2001). 


Day 16 


Begin focus groups interviews. In 
the ten minute sessions, ask the 
children to pick out one fiction 
and one non-fiction book to 
discuss. Ask the interview 
questions. Tape record the 
sessions. 


Continue enacting of theme drama 
conflict. How have the villagers 
solved the problems they have 
faced? What future conflicts could 
occur? What life skills do Native 
Americans have that allow them to 
live creative, constructive lives? 


Identifying, broadening, 
distancing, avoiding. 


Begin Interviews. Continue 
Illustrations, Observations, 
Focus Groups, 
Discussions. 



236 





Daily Plan 



Activities 



Discourse Strategies 



Data Collection 



Day 17 


Continue focus interviews. Add 
ideas to language experience 
chart about authentic, 
ambiguous, inauthentic books. 
Review authors studied during 
the unit. 


Plan a center art activity where the 
children can choose Native 
American projects from four different 
areas: bead work, patterns, cooking, 
mural work. Share projects with 
classmates. 


Identifying, broadening, 
empathizing, universalizing. 


Day 18 


Continue focus interviews. Bring 
theme drama to a conclusion. 
Discuss what could happen to 
the village in the future. Ask the 
children to also draw responses 
in their journals. 


Debrief by reviewing project and 
assess learning. Review KWL chart 
and fill in the last section. How have 
their views changed? Have their 
views changed about Thanksgiving? 


Broadening, distancing, avoiding, 
personalizing. 


Day 19 


Continue focus interviews. Finish 
the audit trail mural. Reread the 
entire visual and discuss what 
the children liked the best about 
the unit, the least? 


Reading Rainbow movie: watch 
PBS, 30 minute show about the 
Navaho and Hopi tribes of New 
Mexico living today. Discuss the 
present day lives of Native 
Americans. 


Identifying, personalizing. 


Day 20 


Complete focus interviews. 
Dismantle the native village. 
Finish the unit journals. Ask the 
children to find a favorite Native 
American book and share it with 
the class. 


Ask the children to individually draw 
an Indian or Native American. Ask 
each child to tell the teacher about 
the drawing. Tape record the 
responses. 


Identifying, broadening, 
universalizing, avoiding, 
personalizing. 




Discourse Strategies based 
on the work of Daiute & Jones 
(2003). Project Approach 
based on the work of Helm & 
Katz (2001). 



237 


























Appendix B 



Table B1. Categorization of Native North American children’s literature 



Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

iiius. 


Mix 

Culture 








Aliki, Com is Maize 


X 




X 












X 


Kaupp, 2004 


Eyewitness: N. American 
Indian 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Bains, Indians of the Plains 








X 


X 


X 






X 


Kaupp, 2004 


Banks, Indian in the 
Cupboard 








X 


X 


X 






X 


Caldwell-Wood & Mitten '91 & 
Slapin & Seale, '92 


Barth, Turkeys, Pilgrims, 1. 
Corn 






X 




X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Baylor, Hawk, I'm your 
Brother 








X 


X 




X 




X 


Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Baylor, I'm in Charge of 
Celeb. 














X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Beyer, Story of Little-Big 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Borgenicht, Folktales of 
N.A. 






X 












X 


Slapin & Seale, '92; Trelease, '01 


Brooks, The Seminole 


X 


X 














X 


Slapin & Seale, '92 


Bruchac, Glushabe & 4 
Wishes 


X 


X 












X 




Oyate, 2004 


Bruchac & Caduto, N.A. 
Stories 


X 


X 












X 




Lind, 1996 


Bruchac & London, 13 
Moons 


X 


X 












X 




Helbig,Perkins'94;Trachtenberg'03 


Bruchac, The First 
Strawberries 


X 


X 












X 




Helbig, Perkins '94; Oyate, 2004 



238 



Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

lllus. 


Mix 

Culture 








Bruchac, A Boy Called Slow 


X 


X 












X 




Lind, 1996 


Bruchac & Ross, Milky Way 


X 


X 












X 




Marantz, 1994; Pyterek, 2004 


Bruchac, Between Earth & 
Sky 


X 


X 












X 




Temple, et al., '02 


Bruchac, Many Nations: 
Alpha. 


X 


X 












X 




Lima, 2001 


Bruchac, Crazy Horse's 
Vision 


X 


X 












X 




Oyate, '04; Slapin & Seale, '05 


Bruchac, Squanto’s Journey 


X 


X 












X 




Temple, et al. '02 


Bruchac, Navajo Long 
Walk. 


X 


X 












X 




Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Bunting, Moonstick: 
Seasons 








X 




X 






X 


Pierce, 1999;Slapin & Seale, 
2005 


Caduto/Bruchac, 

Keepers/Earth 


X 


X 












X 




Caldwell-Wood & Mitten, 1991 


Carol & Kear, Thematic 
Units 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Challenger, Eagle's 
Reflection 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Champayne/ Pare, N.A. 
Chron. 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Cherry, The River Ran Wild 






X 














Kaupp, 2004 


Clark, In My Mother's 
House 


X 










X 






X 


Stott, 1995 


Cohlene, Clamshell Boy 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Kaupp '04, Slapin & Seale’05 


Cohlene, Dancing Drum 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Kaupp ’04, Slapin & Seale'05 


Cohlene, Ka-ha-si & The 
Loon 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Kaupp ’04, Slapin & Seale'05 



239 



Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

lllus. 


Mix 

Culture 








Cohlene, Little Firefly 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Kaupp '04;Slapin & Seale, '05 


Cohlene, Quillworker 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Cohlene, Turquoise Boy 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Kaupp '04, Slapin & Seale’05 


Cooper, Indian School: 
Teach 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Oyate '04, Slapin & Seale '05 


Dagliesh, Thanksgiving 
Story 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Kaupp, 2004 


DePaola, Legend of 
Bluebonnet 


X 




X 








X 




X 


Lind, 1996; Oyate, 2004 


DePaola, Legend of Indian 
Paintbrush 


X 




X 








X 




X 


Helbig & Perkins'94;Oyate, 2004 


Teacher: Eastern 
Woodlands 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Disney, Pocahontas Sing- 
Along 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Hirschfelder '99 


Dragonwagon, Home Place 


X 


X 










X 


X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Erdich, Bears Make Rock 
Soup 


X 


X 












X 




Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Erdich, The Range Eternal 


X 


X 












X 




Oyate, '04; Slapin & Seale, '05 


Eubank, Seaman's Journal 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Fitzpatrick, The Long March 


X 


X 












X 




Helbig & Perkins, 2001 


Fradin, The Shoshoni 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Frederick, Beads 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Friskey, Indian Two Feet: 
Eagle 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Slapin & Seale'05, Hirschfelder 
et al., ‘99 



240 




Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

lllus. 


Mix 

Culture 








Friskey, Indian 2 Feet: 
Moose 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Gates, Owl Eyes 




X 










X 




X 


Helbig & Perkins, 2001 


Geis, Where the Buffalo 
Roam 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


George, Arctic Son 


X 


X 














X 


Pierce, 1999; Yokota, 2001 


George, Snow Bear 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Goble, Girl Who Loved 
Horses 


X 


X 














X 


Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Goble, Gift of Sacred Dog 


X 


X 














X 


Lind, 1996 


Goble, Star Boy 


X 


X 














X 


Stott, 1995 


Goble, Buffalo Woman 


X 


X 














X 


Lind, 1996; Giese, 1996 


Goble, Great Race of Birds 
& Animals 


X 


X 














X 


Lind, 1996 


Goble, Her Seven Brothers 


X 


X 














X 


Stott, 1995 


Goble, Iktomi & The 
Boulder 


X 


X 














X 


Giese, 2004 


Goble, Iktomi & The Berries 


X 


X 














X 


Giese, 2004 


Goble, Dream Wolf 


X 


X 














X 


Giese, 2004; Lind, 1996 


Goble, Iktomi and The 
Ducks 


X 


X 














X 


Giese, 2004 


Goble, Iktomi & Buffalo 
Skull 


X 


X 














X 


Giese, 2004 


Goble, Hau Kola Hello 
Friend 


X 


X 














X 


Oyate, 2004 



241 



Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

iiius. 


Mix 

Culture 








Gorsline, N. American 
Indians 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Greene, The 1st 
Thanksgiving 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Grossman, Ten Little 
Indians 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Hakim, First Americans to 
1600 


X 


X 














X 


Adamson, 1998 


Hankes & Fast, Using 
N. A/Math 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Harjo, The Good Luck Cat 


X 


X 














X 


Smith, 2000/2001 


Haslam & Parsons, 
Peoples/Arctic 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Hill, American Indians 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Honor, Rethinking 
Thanksgiving 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Hoyt-Goldsmith, Totem 
Pole 


X 


X 












X 




Lind '96; Kaupp '04 


Hucko, Rainbow at Night 


X 


X 














X 


Oyate, '04; Slapin & Seale, '05 


Hughes, Bright Eyes & 
Buffalo 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Jacobs, Boy Loved 
Morning. 


X 


X 














X 


Stott, 1995 


Jeffers, Brother Eagle 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Council. Interracial Bks 73 


Jeunesse, Fuhr, Sautai, 
North. Amehcans 


X 


X 
















Pyterek, 2004 


Johnson, The Rabbit & 
Coyote 


X 


X 














X 


Helbig&Perkins'OI ;Slapin&Seale'05 


Johnson, What N. Amer. 
Wore 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 



242 




Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

lllus. 


Mix 

Culture 








Joosse, Mama, Do you 
Love Me 










X 


X 


X 




X 


Lind, 1996; Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Kay, Broken Feather 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Kerner, They Taught You 
Wrong 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Kerven, Earth Magic 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


King, Shannon: An Ojibway 


X 


X 












X 




Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Kroll, Oh, What a 
Thanksgiving 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Krusagak, My Arctic 1,2, ,3 


X 


X 












X 




Oyate '04; Slapin & Seale '05 


Lacapa, Less Than Half, 
More 


X 


X 












X 




Oyate '04; Slapin & Seale '05 


Lacapa, The Flute Player 


X 


X 












X 




Kaupp '04;Slapin & Seale’05 


Lassieur, Before the Storm 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Littlechild, This Land is My 
L. 


X 


X 












X 




Lind, 1996; Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Littlefield, Children/Boarding 
Sc. 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Lewin, Lost City: Manchu P. 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


London, Fire Race: Karuk 
Tate 








X 


X 


X 






X 


Slapin & Seale, 2005 


London, Honey Paws & 
Light 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


London, Mustang Canyon 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Longfellow, Hiawatha 
(Jeffers) 








X 


X 




X 




X 


Stott, 1995 



243 




Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

lllus. 


Mix 

Culture 








Longfellow, Hiawatha 
(LeCain) 










X 


X 






X 


Stott, 1995; Lima, 2001 


Lorenz, Journey to Cahokia 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Lund, The Comanche 
Indians 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Maestro, Discovery of 
Amer. 


X 


X 














X 


Adamson, 1998 


Marshall, Red Ochre 
People 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Marrin, Sitting Bull 








X 


X 


X 






X 


Oyate, '04; Slapin & Seale, '05 


Martin, The Brave Little 
Indian 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Lima, 2001 


Martin, Knots on a Counting 
R. 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Kaupp, 2004 


Martin, The Rough-faced 
Girl 










X 


X 


X 




X 


Kaupp '04; Slapin & Seale, '05 


Mateo, Portraits of N. Amer. 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


McClellan, Birth of 
Nanabosho 


X 


X 












X 




Slapin & Seale, 2005 


McDermott, Arrow to the 
Sun 




X 




X 






X 




X 


Kaupp '04; Slapin & Seale'05 


McDermott, Raven 








X 




X 


X 




X 


Slapin & Seale, 2005 


McGovern, The First 
Thanks. 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


McGovern, If You 
Lived/Sioux 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Medearis, Dancing with 
Indians 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Meiczinger, How to Draw 
Ind. 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Slapin & Seale, 2005 



244 




Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

iiius. 


Mix 

Culture 








Milwaukee Public Museum 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Mine, Opossum & 
Firemaker 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Morris, Featherboy & 
Buffalo 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Morris, Little Bear & Horse 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Morris, Morninq Sun and 
Girl 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Morris, Taku & Fishing 
Canoe 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Munsch, Promise is a 
Promise 


X 


X 














X 


Oyate, 2004; Kaupp, 2004 


Murphy, Caribou Girl 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Newell, Story Sticks 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Norman, Trickster & 
Faint/birds 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Ortiz, The People Shall 
Continue 


X 


X 












X 




Caldwell-Wood & Mitten, 1991; 
Slapin & Seale, 2005 


Osofsky, Dreamcatcher 






X 


X 


X 








X 


Helbig&Perkins'94;Slapin&Seale'05 


Peacock & Wisuri, Good 
Path 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Petty, Plains Indians 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Philip, A Braid of 
Lives/Childhd 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Polacco, Lillian Two 
Blossom 






X 




X 


X 


X 




X 


Helbig&Perkins'94;Slapin&Seale'05 


Press, Native 
Americans/NW 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 



245 




Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

iiius. 


Mix 

Culture 








Press, The Cheyenne (First 
Rep) 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Quasha, Pilgrims & N. 
American 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Randall, American Indians 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Rappaport, We are the 
many... 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Reid, Haida Indians of NW 






X 












X 


Kaupp, 2004 


Ridington, People of the 
Trail 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Robbins, How Rainbow 
Made 


X 










X 






X 


Lind, 1996 


Robotham, N. Amer. Photos 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Rohmer, Invisible Hunters 


X 


X 














X 


Helbig & Perkins, 1994 


Rose, 

Grandchildren/LakotaX 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Ross, How Turtle's Back 


X 


X 














X 


Helbig & Perkins'01 ;Oyate'04 


Rossman, Where Legends 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Sabuda, Blizzard's Robe 






X 




X 




X 




X 


Temple, Martinez, Yokota '02 


San Souci, 
Sootface/Cinder.. 


X 


X 














X 


Helbig & Perkins '01 


Santelle, IL Native Peoples 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Santiago, Home to Med. Mt. 


X 


X 












X 




Helbig&Perkins'OI ;Slapin&Seale'05 


Sattler, Earliest Americans 








X 


X 


X 






X 


Adamson, 1998 



246 



Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

iiius. 


Mix 

Culture 








Scholastic, Scholastic 
Banner 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Shermie, B. Mounds of 
Earth 






X 










X 




Kaupp, 2004 


Sherrow, Amer. Indian/Past 


X 


X 














X 


Pierce, 1999 


Smith, Indian Shoes 


X 


X 












X 




Oyate, 2004 


Smith, Jingle Dancer 


X 


X 












X 




Oyate, 2004 


Smith-Baramzomo, US Kids 








X 


X 


X 






X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Smithsonian, N. Amer. Dolls 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Sneve, Dancing Teepees: 
Poems 


X 


X 












X 




ALA, 1991; Harris, 1992 


Sneve, The Iroquois 


X 


X 












X 




Slapin & Seale 1992 


Sonneborn, New York Lib. 
N.A. 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Stroud, Path of Quiet Elk 


X 


X 












X 




Nat. Amer. Bks. ’96; 
Slapin/Seale'05 


Stuart, Three Little Indians 








X 


X 


X 






X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Swamp, Giving Thanks 




X 


Words X 










X 




Trachtenberg '03;Slapin, 
Seale’05 


Taylor, How 2-Feathers 
Saved 


X 


X 












X 




Lind, 1996; Kaupp, 2004 


Tapahonso, Navaho ABC 


X 


X 




X 




X 


X 


X 




Native Amer. Bks., '96; Lima, '01 


Te Ata, Baby Rattlesnake 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Thomas & Pendleton, N. 
Amer. 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 



247 



Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

iiius. 


Mix 

Culture 








Tunis, Indians 








X 


X 


X 






X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Van Camp, A Man Called 
Raven 


X 


X 












X 




Pierce '99; Baker & 
Setterington'03 


Waboose, Morning on the 
Lake 


X 


X 












X 




Oyate, 2004;Slapin & Seale, 
2005 


Waboose, Sky Sisters 


X 


X 












X 




Oyate, 2004;Slapin & Seale, 
2005 


Waldman, Timelines of 
History 


X 


X 














X 


Goebel, 2004 


Waldman, Wounded Knee 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Oyate, '04; Slapin & Seale, '05 


Waldman, Cabeza de Vaca 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Wallace, The Insuksuk 
Book 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Waters, Tapemum's Day 




X 


X 












X 


Pierce, 1999; Yokota, 2001 


Webb, The Same Sun in 
Sky 






X 












X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Wheeler, Where 
Did/Moccasins? 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Wheeler, First Came 
Indians 


X 


X 














X 


Lind, 1996; Kaupp, '04 


White Deer of Autumn, 
Ceremo. 


X 


X 












X 




Pyterek, 2004 


Whitehead, Best 
Thanksgiving 








X 


X 


X 


X 




X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Wilbur, Indian Handicrafts 








X 


X 


X 






X 


Pyterek, 2004 



248 



Author, Title 


Culturally Authentic 


Ambig. 


Culturally Inauthentic 


In 


Out 


Source 




Accurate 

Text 


Accurate 

Drawings 


Void of 
Spec. 


Loaded 

Words 


NonHistory 


Token 

iiius. 


Mix 

Culture 








Wood, Science of Early 
Amer. 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 


Wood, A 

Boy/Man/Wounded K. 




X 




X 


X 




X 




X 


Lind '96; Slapin & Seale, '05 


Zappler, Learn/Texas 
Indians 


X 


X 














X 


Pyterek, 2004 



Key: White=fiction; Gray=non-fiction 
References: 

Adamson, L. G. (1 998). Literature connections to American history: K-6 resources to enhance and entice. Englewood, CO: Libraries, Unlimited, Inc. 
Caldwell-Wood, N. & Mitten, L.A. (1 991 ). Selective bibliography and guide for T is not for Indian: The portrayal of Native Americans in books for young people. 

Atlanta, GA: ALA/OLOS Subcommittee for Library Services to American Indian People, American Indian Library Association. Retrieved January 25, 2004, 
from http://www.nativeculture.com/lisamitten/ailabib.htm. 

Giese, P. (2004). Purposes and personal philosophy of Native American books. Native American Books. Retrieved January 27, 2004, from 
http:/ /www. kstrom. net/isk/books/bookphil. html. 

Helbig, A.K. & Perkins, A.R. (2001 ). Many peoples, one land: A guide to new multicultural literature for children and young adults. Westport, CT : Greenwood 
Press. 

Hirschfelder, A., Molin, P.F., & Wakim, Y. (1999). American Indian stereotypes in the world of children: A reader and bibliography. Lanham, MD: The Scarecrow 
Press. 

Kaupp, P. A. et al. (2004). A critical bibliography on North American Indians, fork-12. Washington, D.C.: Anthropology Outreach Office, Smithsonian Institution. 

Retrieved April 19, 2004, from http://nmnhwww.si.edu/anthro /outreach/lndbibl/bibliogr.html. 

Lima, C.W. & J.A. (2001 ). A to zoo: Subject access to children’s picture books. Westport, CT : Bowker-Greenwood. 



249 




Lind, B. B. (1 996). Multicultural children's literature: An annotated bibliography grades k-8. Jefferson, NC: McFarland & Co. 

Marantz, S. & K. (1994). Multicultural picture books: Art for understanding others. Worthington, OH: Linworth Publishing, Inc. 

Oyate Native Organization. (2004). Oyate Publications. Retrieved January 25, 2004, from http://www.oyate.org/catalog/oyatePubs.html. 

Pierce, K.M. (Ed.) et al. (1999). Adventuring with books: A booklist for pre-k - grade 6. Urbana, IL: National Council of Teachers of English. 

Pyterek, M. (2004). How can a teacher help her children begin to have a multicultural understanding of Native Americans through children’s literature? 
Unpublished manuscript, National-Louis University, Evanston, IL. 

Slapin, B. & Seale, D. (1992). Through Indian eyes: The native experience in books for children. (3 rd ed.). Philadelphia, PA: New Society Publishers. 

Slapin, B. & Seale, D. (2005). A broken flute: The native experience in books for children (Contemporary Native American communities). Berkeley, CA: Oyate. 
Stott, J.C. (1995). Native Americans in children's literature. Phoenix, AZ: Oryx Press. 

Temple, C., Martinez, M., Yokota, J., & Naylor, A. (2002). Children’s books in children's hands (2 nd ed.). Boston: Allyn & Bacon. 

Trachtenberg, E. (2003J. The best children’s literature. Los Angeles, CA: Parent’s Guide Press. 

Trelease, J. (2001). The read-atoud handbook. New York: Penguin Books. 



250 




Appendix C 



SOCIAL STUDIES UNIT PERMISSION SLIP 
Fall 2004 



Dear Parents: 

During the month of November, my Kindergarten classes will be studying Native 
Americans. They will be participating in social studies activities to learn about the 
historical as well as the present day lives of 'Native Peoples' in North America. I have 
prepared lessons using multicultural literature, drama activities, and project approach 
strategies in developmental^ appropriate ways. 

As part of research as the unit unfolds during the month, I will be observing, 
taking field notes, conducting audio interviews, giving surveys, and analyzing your 
children's drawings to discern their views on the culture of Native Americans. I will be 
doing this as part of my research for my doctoral dissertation at National-Louis 
University. This unit is one that is usually taught each year in Kindergarten. My wish is 
to augment the knowledge content of the unit to assist the children in learning to 
recognize stereotypes in children's literature. Many more resources will be used as a 
result and I believe the time we spend together will be enriched because of my 
research. 

Since all names used in reporting the information to my professors are changed, 
your child's individual name will not be publicized in any form. The privacy of your child's 
identity will never be compromised. The data that I collect will not be used in any formal 
school district progress report evaluation of your child. All children can benefit from the 
learning during this unit. No harm will come to your child in any way as a participant in 
this unit of study. Your child may withdraw from the research data collection at any time. 
The audio tapes, transcripts and field notes will only be viewed by my professors at 
National-Louis University. This information will remain under my protection at all times. I 
am asking your permission to use the data that I collect from your child for my paper 
now and for all possible educational publications in the future. 

As soon as I have compiled all of my data, I will be happy to share all the 
information I have about your child during this unit of study. If you have any questions, 
please call me at school. You may also contact my advisor at National-Louis, Dr. 

Yokota. Please fill out the section below and return the entire form to me as soon as 
possible. I will send you a copy of this consent document. Thank you in advance for 
assisting me in my research project. I know that we will have a wonderful experience 
during our Native American Unit. 



Sincerely, 



Meg Pyterek 

Kindergarten, Glen School 



251 



Kindergarten Permission Slip 

PLEASE FILL OUT THIS SECTION AND RETURN THE ENTIRE FORM TO YOUR 
CHILD'S TEACHER. A COPY OF THIS CONSENT FORM WILL BE GIVEN TO YOU! 



Mrs. Pyterek has my permission to collect observational, written, and interview data 

from my child, , and to use 

this data in publishing her findings of this research. I understand that no harm will come 
to my child and that I may withdraw my child from the research at any time during the 
Kindergarten Native American Unit of November 2004. 



Signed, 



Date: 



252 




