Nuances of Error: Considerations Relevant 
to African American Vernacular English 
and Learning to Read 

Catherine Compton-Lilly 
University of Wisconsin at Madison 


ABSTRACT 

This paper explores the presence of African American Vernacular English 
patterns in the reading of one child over a 20-week period. In this paper, I 
present insights from linguists about African American Vernacular English, list 
linguistic patterns characteristic of African American Vernacular English 
speakers, examine the relationship between the African American Vernacular 
English and learning to read, and examine the particular demands of book 
language. A case study of an African American Vernacular English speaking 
Reading Recovery student is then presented. This case study explores this 
student’s use of both African American Vernacular English patterns and the 
language of books. 


Literacy Teaching and Learning 
Volume 10, Number 1 


pages 43-58 



Literacy Teaching and Learning 
Volume 10, Number 1 


It was the third time during the lesson that I had corrected Marquise for 
reading the word was for were. The muscles in my neck tensed as I told him the 
word should be were in a voice carefully calibrated to mask my frustration. I 
breathed a sigh of relief as he read the word correctly for the remainder of the 
story. It was last spring and Marquise was nearing the end of his Reading 
Recovery series of lessons and reading fluently at Level 14. He was definitely 
going to successfully complete the program. Yet much to my frustration, 
Marquise continued to make what I considered to be careless errors. 

Why did this capable young reader continue to ignore the ends of words as 
he read despite many reminders from me? Marquise was obviously capable of 
doing this and would easily correct his errors when they were brought to his 
attention. It was during the following year that I would begin an exploration of 
African American Vernacular English that would help me to understand some 
of Marquise’s deviations from the written text and enable me to better align my 
teaching with Marquise’s development as a reader. 

My interest in the intersection between language variation and reading 
peaked earlier that winter when one of my Latina students, Gabby, read George 
the Porcupine (Scott, Foresman and Company, 1979), a story that is part of the 
assessment packet used to assess children at the end of Reading Recovery. It is a 
simple story about a man who pets a variety of animals that come to visit him. 
The quality of her reading on this text would be one of the variables we would 
consider in making the decision about whether Gabby’s Reading Recovery 
program should be discontinued. As many of us know, in this book Mr. Jay 
pets all the animals except for George, the porcupine. Mr. Jay does not pet 
George because of his “sharp, pointed quills.” The words pet, petted, or petting 
are used eight times in this 202-word text. Gabby pronounced pet as pit 
consistently throughout the book despite my correcting her early in the story. 
Later, I learned that it is very common for Spanish language speakers to use 
the short i sound in place of the short e (Helman, 2005). What does this pro¬ 
nunciation tell us about Gabby as a reader? How should I respond to this error? 
Should I respond to the error if the meaning of the story is not compromised? 

Discussions about language are often difficult. Language is something we 
routinely use to communicate but rarely reflect upon. The ways we talk are 
closely linked to our families and to the identities we assume. Furthermore, 
language is public; when we speak we reveal information about ourselves to 
others. It is important to consider that all ways of speaking are not equally val¬ 
ued in our society and these differences can become problematic in classrooms. 
Thus, the ways we talk about language can be controversial and warrant careful 
consideration. 

In this paper I use the term African American Vernacular English to refer 
to what many people would call African American dialect or Black dialect. 
While the term dialect is often used to describe African American patterns of 


44 



Nuances of Error 
Compton-Lilly 


speech, many ethnolinguists maintain that African American Vernacular 
English is not a dialect of English. Because languages are classified on the basis 
of the rules used for sound production, word pronunciation, and sentence 
grammar, African American Vernacular English is sometimes classified as a 
Niger-Congo language rather than as a form of English (Duncan, 1999). 

While the vocabulary of African American Vernacular English is English, many 
of its syntactical structures and pronunciation patterns reflect its Niger-Congo 
roots. In addition, the term dialect brings with it historical baggage that implies 
that dialectal ways of speaking are inferior to standard English. This is not the 
case. It is important to recognize the form of language I am discussing is not 
teenage slang or street language. African American Vernacular English has a 
long history of use and has been influenced by a range of linguistic and cultural 
factors related to enslavement, discrimination, and a long history of resilience 
and activism. 

Joan Wynne (2002) explains that teachers often do not know how to 
respond to the language diversity they encounter in their classrooms. As a 
European American teacher I do not speak African American Vernacular 
English. I speak a relatively standard form of English and have often wondered 
whether language variations affect children’s initial attempts with reading and 
how to support young readers who display linguistic differences. This interest 
has led me to read extensively within the field of linguistics and has revealed 
several insights about African American Vernacular English that are important 
for teachers. Primarily, teachers must make a distinction between reading 
difficulties and language differences and recognize that young readers bring the 
linguistic resources that they possess to texts. These linguistic resources will not 
always concur with the language of books. In this article I will review 
understandings about African American Vernacular English that have been 
documented by linguists, many of whom are speakers of African American 
Vernacular English. I will then list linguistic patterns characteristic of African 
American Vernacular English. Next, I will review research that examines the 
intersection between African American Vernacular English and learning to read 
and present considerations related to standard English and book language. 
Finally, I will present a case study of Lashanda, an African American Reading 
Recovery student. This case study examines Lashanda’s use of both African 
American linguistic patterns and the language of books over the course of her 
20 weeks in Reading Recovery. 

AFRICAN AMERICAN VERNACULAR ENGLISH 

In 1979, 11 African American students were diagnosed as being linguistically 
handicapped when they were assessed by a speech pathologist who failed to 
acknowledge the fact that their primary language was a vernacular form of 


45 



Literacy Teaching and Learning 
Volume 10, Number 1 


English. A judge ruled in favor of rhe students (Baugh, 1999) ruling that 
linguistic differences are not evidence of linguistic deficits. As John Baugh, a 
linguist at Stanford University explains, speaking divergent forms of English 
does not indicate pathology. African American Vernacular English is a viable, 
rule-governed language system. 

It is important to recognize that African American Vernacular English has 
“unique grammatical forms that serve important communicative functions” 
(Baugh, 1999, p. 6). For example, the word be is often used in African 
American Vernacular English to describe something as habitually occurring. 

For example, “He be late” implies that this person is habitually late (Duncan, 
1999). This habitual form of be has no corollary in standard English. Few 
people who speak only forms of standard English are aware that African 
American Vernacular English has communicative capabilities that do not exist 
in standard English. 

Unfortunately, many speakers of standard English continue to harbor 
negative attitudes and assumptions about people who do not consistently speak 
standard forms of English. As Baugh explains 

Many native speakers of standard English assume that 
nonstandard speakers are ignorant, lazy, and less capable intel¬ 
lectually. The common stereotype is that nonstandard English 
speakers, including many blacks, could speak “properly” if only 
they put forth sufficient effort. This view, while perhaps 
understandable, is woefully uninformed and simplistic. 

(Baugh, 1999, pp. 4-5) 

Schools tend to value a narrow range of linguistic resources denying many 
of the language abilities of children from linguistically diverse backgrounds. 

This tendency of schools to privilege particular forms of language creates 
challenges for teachers who work with young readers. We must be wary when 
speakers of nonstandard languages are described as language deficient; 
classrooms and schools rarely provide teachers with opportunities to learn about 
and appreciate the rich linguistic abilities that children bring to school. In the 
following quote, Marie Clay uses the term dialect to refer to language variations 
including those displayed by my African American students: 

A good teacher would not destroy this first language that 
children use so fluently. She would try to add to their speech a 
dialect for Standard English to be used in some oral situations 
and to open the world of books to them. She would leave 
them their first dialect for family and friends. This poses two 
real problems for the teacher. She must first establish commu¬ 
nication with the child despite the fact that she may speak a 
strange and unusual dialect. Beyond this, she must help the 


46 



Nuances of Error 
Compton-Lilly 


child to work in the new dialect, knowing that for most of his 
waking life he is going to live and speak among people who 
use his home dialect. (Clay, 1991, p. 71) 

Baugh makes the important point that African American Vernacular 
English is intimately tied to children’s personal and collective identities. 

Clay (1991) refers to a child’s nonstandard dialect as 

“. . . an intimate possession, understood by loved ones. It 
reflects their membership of a particular speech group and 
identifies them with that group. It is personal and valuable and 
not just an incorrect version of a standard dialect.” (p. 71) 

Lisa Delpit (1998) agrees: 

[Teachers] “. . . should recognize that the linguistic form a stu¬ 
dent brings to school is intimately connected with loved ones, 
community, and personal identity. To suggest that this form is 
‘wrong’ or even worse, ignorant, is to suggest that something is 
wrong with the student and his or her family.” (p. 19) 

Recently there has been a call for educators to learn more about language as 
a means to counteract the negative attitudes that often surround nonstandard 
language use (Adger, 1999, p. vi). This knowledge is critical to teachers who 
may be susceptible to making judgments about children based on mistaken 
notions about language differences that reveal their own negative attitudes 
about nonstandard forms of English. Thus, teachers often fail to help students 
develop an appreciation for their home language and to convey the validity and 
value of language varieties. It is crucial that teachers recognize and understand 
these differences as they work with young readers. 


Linguistic Patterns of African American 
Vernacular English 

In her work with the Los Angeles Unified School District, Norma LeMoine 
(1999) draws on the work of several linguists to identify linguistic features of 
African American Vernacular English that should be understood by teachers 
who work with African American students. It is crucial that teachers realize not 
all African American students will display these linguistic patterns; many 
African American students are speakers of standard English. 

• There are several English pronunciations that are unfamiliar to 
speakers of African American Vernacular English. The th sound is 
almost nonexistent in Niger-Congo languages. The substitution of 
dat for that is a typical pronunciation for many speakers of African 


47 



Literacy Teaching and Learning 
Volume 10, Number 1 


American Vernacular English. Likewise, the er found at the end of 
many English words is also unfamiliar and may often be pronounced 
as ah rather than er (i.e., brot hah rather than broth er). Another 
unfamiliar pronunciation involves the / sound when located in the 
middle of words; thus billion becomes b\$)yon. 

• The African languages that are the linguistic basis for African 
American Vernacular English tend to follow a consonant-vowel-con¬ 
sonant-vowel pattern; consonant clusters do not occur at the ends of 
words. Some speakers of African American Vernacular English tend 
to delete the final consonant when two consonants occur together; 
thus, left is pronounced as lef best as bes. 

• Niger-Congo languages do not use two unvoiced consonants, such as 
ed to denote past tense. Speakers of African American Vernacular 
English often delete the ed endings from words as they speak or read. 

• The possessive s is also absent in Niger-Congo languages; thus 
children who speak African American Vernacular English will often 
delete the apostrophe s when reading. “That’s Tymika’s pencil,” 
becomes “ That Tymika pencil.” 

• The final s is also deleted when indicating plural if used in 
conjunction with a number word. In Niger-Congo languages, 
redundancy is eliminated in the sentence “I found four cent.” 

• As Marquise’s reading illustrates, speakers of African American 
Vernacular English tend to regularize verb structures. This results in 
“I was”, “you were”, “he was” being translated into “I was,” “you 
was,” “he was.” 

• In addition, Labov (1972) reports that the s used for third person 
singular verbs is often deleted (i.e., looks becomes look, works become 
work). 

African American Vernacular English and Reading 

In a review of research studies that explore the effect speaking African American 
Vernacular English may have on learning to read, Washington and Craig (2001) 
explain studies that have attempted to explore this relationship have had very 
mixed results. While the ways African American Vernacular English affect 
reading remains unclear and more research is needed to begin to understand 
this relationship, researchers have suggested it is the attitudes of teachers about 
language differences that may be the most detrimental to children learning to 
read (Goodman & Buck, 1997; Labov, 1972): 

There is no reason to believe that any nonstandard vernacular 
is itself an obstacle to learning. The chief problem is ignorance 


48 



Nuances of Error 
Compton-Lilly 


of rhe language on the part of all concerned. (Labov, 1972, as 
quoted in LeMoine, 2001, p. 177) 

As my experiences with Marquise illustrate, I often experienced frustration 
when my students made what seemed like careless mistakes. In actuality, it was 
my own ignorance of the language variations of my students that left me 
confused and without an appropriate pedagogical response that would help my 
students to develop as readers. 

Within any given student population, a variety of language forms and 
languages will be brought to the classroom. As we listen closely to the language 
patterns of our students we begin to realize the question of whether a student’s 
attempt to read a word is correct depends on whether that attempt fits within 
the range of acceptable responses that we have personally and collectively 
constructed. What are the boundaries for that range of responses? What should 
our responses as teachers be when a child’s attempt matches his home language 
rather than the language in the book? When the child’s reading reflects his 
home language yet maintains the meaning of the story, should we be 
concerned? These are critical questions for those of us who teach students who 
bring linguistic diversity to our classrooms. 

Based on their work with miscue analysis, Goodman and Buck (1997) 
share some important points. First, in order for a child to orally read and 
understand a standard English text, that child must use the visual symbols on 
the page while making sense of the text by engaging the linguistic resources that 
he/she possesses, and then orally reading the text as written. This shift may 
require the deletion of an ed ending, substitution of a more culturally familiar 
word, or a shift away from standard pronunciation; however, accurate reading 
requires the child use the language of the book. 

It is easy to misinterpret and fail to appreciate the complex processing that 
diverse language speakers apply when reading. Knowledge of the language 
systems that children bring to classrooms is necessary so we can interpret 
children’s attempts at text correctly and respond to them in ways that support 
the child as a language learner without demeaning the language that he speaks. 

A second point made by Goodman and Buck (1997) focuses our attention 
on the fact that children are not consistent in their application of African 
American Vernacular English to their reading. A student may delete an ed at 
one point in a story and include it on the next page. It may be Mother Bear on 
page 4 and Mama Bear on page 6. Studies cited by Goodman and Buck 
indicate language variation in reading does not correspond to clearly 
identifiable patterns. Rather, most children switch between their home 
languages and the language of the texts readily and with fluency. 


49 



Literacy Teaching and Learning 
Volume 10, Number 1 


THE DEMANDS OF BOOK LANGUAGE 

Expecting African American Vernacular English speakers and other home 
language speakers to become competent speakers and readers of standard 
English reveals a systematic preference in our culture for standard forms of 
English. Standard English is not qualitatively or communicatively superior to 
African American Vernacular English. The dominance of standard English is a 
culturally constructed phenomenon intimately linked to the ways power is 
distributed in our society. Because the larger society expects people to be able to 
function in standard English and because the general public has not developed 
a respect and an appreciation for nonstandard forms of English, our obligation 
to our students must include helping them to be able to gain the linguistic 
resources that will allow them access to institutions of power within our society 
(Delpit, 1995; Rickford, 1999). 

One of the languages of power that all children must learn, including 
children who learned forms of standard English in their homes, is the language 
of books. Books often use literary forms of language that differ from the 
language patterns used in speech. Phrases like “Once upon a time. . . ,” “And 
when he came to the place where the wild things were. . . ,” (Sendak, 1963) or 
“In two straight lines they broke their bread. . .” (Bemelmans, 1958) are 
language patterns that are found in books but rarely occur in speech unless the 
speaker is telling a story. Marie Clay describes learning to “talk like a book”; our 
use of the language we speak differs from our use of language in written form. 
With or without a special dialect the children’s own speech habits must be 
modified so that he can produce sentences like those in texts. This is particu¬ 
larly true if the texts are rich in literary devices (Clay, 1991, p. 77). While all 
children’s spoken language differs from the language of books, our challenge is 
intensified when children bring with them language patterns that are 
significantly different from the language forms they experience in texts. 
Following, the case study of an African American Vernacular Language speaker 
will be presented. This case study illustrates how children expand upon their 
own language resources and incorporate new language forms as they learn 
to read. 


A CASE STUDY: LAS HAN DA 

Last year I had the pleasure of working with a remarkable young lady named 
Lashanda. Lashanda was an excited young reader who moved quickly through 
Reading Recovery. Reading Recovery is a short-term reading intervention that 
serves struggling first-grade students. In Reading Recovery, a teacher devotes 30 
minutes daily to each student. These sessions continue until the child’s reading 
abilities are commensurate with those of the other children in her class. 
Lashanda lives with her grandmother and her father who are both speakers of 


50 



Nuances of Error 
Compton-Lilly 


African American Vernacular English. An examination of Lashanda’s running 
records will reveal several instances where her home language has surfaced in 
her reading. 

In her sixth lesson, Lashanda substituted the word rain for falls. Here, she 
has not only changed the wording of the sentence but has deleted the s that is 
conventionally used for third person singular verbs. 


Text: Rain 
Level: 2 


V 

rain 

V 

V 

V 

It 

falls 

on 

my 

head. 


By Lesson 22, Lashanda continued to utilize African American Vernacular 
English, but often monitored and corrected her reading when she deviated from 
the text. 

Text: Ben’s Birthday Cake 
Level: 5 


V 

look/sc 

V 

V 

V 

V 

Mom 

looks 

at 

the 

birthday 

card. 


Two lessons later, we find Lashanda still working to match her reading with 
the text. 


Text: 

Level: 

Page: 


Page: 


Page: 


Hide and Seek 

5 

3 


V 

looks/look/sc 

V 

V 

V 

Dad 

looked 

in 

the 

box. 

4 

V 

looks/look/sc 

V 

V 

vv 

Dad 

looked 

in 

the 

chair. 

5 

V 

looks/look/sc 

V 

V 

V 

Dad 

looked 

in 

the 

tree. 


Lashanda is working hard to use the visual information on the page to match 
her reading to the text and she is successful. However, as we observe, this is an 
active process for Lashanda. Unlike speakers of standard English, Lashanda 


51 



Literacy Teaching and Learning 
Volume 10, Number 1 


cannot rely as much on her home language syntax to support her in this 
reading task. In fact, Lashanda has to actively suppress her home language 
syntax patterns in order to translate the ideas that she is reading into the 
language of books. 

Over the course of her lessons, other characteristics of African American 
Vernacular English were evident. In Lesson 77, we find Lashanda deleting the 
possessive s; she substitutes Duck for Duck’s. In Lesson 53, Lashanda regularizes 
the verb structure of the word was. 

Text: The Lion’s Tail 

Level: 9 


V 

V 

V 

V 

V 

V 

V 

was 

V 

V 

V 

You 

couldn’t 

find 

your 

tail 

because 

you 

were 

sitting 

on 

it. 


This happens again in Lessons 66 and 86. These miscues appear to be more 
difficult for Lashanda to monitor and she makes no attempt to self-correct. 

Text: Mr. Cricket Finds a Friend 
Level: 11 


V 

was 

V 

V 

walking 

V 

V 

They 

were 

too 

busy 

working 

to 

talk. 


Text: Stop That Rabbit 
Level: 12 


V 

V 

was 

bend 

V 

V 

The 

roses 

were 

bent 

and 

broken. 


After Lashanda read “Stop That Rabbit,” I chose this miscue as my teaching 
point. While my first inclination was to direct Lashanda’s attention to the 
ending letters of the word, I instead chose to read the sentence back to 
Lashanda and ask her if it sounded “like a book.” Lashanda immediately reread 
the sentence correctly. I then drew her attention to the final s and asked her to 
check her response to see if she was correct. We must remember that language 
interference miscues are not simply careless reading. These are times when 
children are applying their home language patterns to text rather than the 
language of books they are reading. Part of the process of learning to read is 
being able to hear, identify, and correct patterns of language that deviate from 
the types of language generally found in books. 

While still not consistently using book language, toward the end of 
Reading Recovery Lashanda was providing a more sophisticated translation. 


52 



Nuances of Error 
Compton-Lilly 


Text: 

Level: 

Page: 


Rosie at the Zoo 

13 

3 


V 

V 

V 

V 

We 

lifted 

Rosie 

up. 


Page: 


V 

/1/look/sc 

monkey/sc 

V 

V 

“I 

like 

monkeys,” 

said 

Rosie. 


4 


V 

V 

V 

V 

We 

lifted 

Rosie 

up. 


V 

lookeded/sc/look-ed/sc 

V 

V 

V 

She 

looked 

at 

the 

lion. 


V R7 

walkeding/sc 

V 

V 

V 

It 

walked 

up 

and 

down, 


Page: 


8 


VR 

V 

V 

V V 

The 

elephant 

looked 

at Rosie. 


The/sc 

lift 

V 

V 

It/tt/V 

It 

lifted 

up 

its 

trunk. 


Wish! 

WOOOSH! 

Lashanda readily corrected her reading on page 3 to match the language of 
the book. On page 4, Lashanda made an attempt at look that exaggerates the ed 
ending, a self-correction with the conventional It/, a second attempt in which 
she again exaggerates the Id/, and finally a return to the correct pronunciation. 
Because Lashanda cannot rely on her oral language patterns alone to monitor 
the syntax of her reading, she implements a complex series of attempts and 
checks before she confidently produces the correct reading. In the following 
line, Lashanda is again faced with another ed ending. This time she simultane- 


53 



Literacy Teaching and Learning 
Volume 10, Number 1 


ously applies both the ed ending and the ing ending and quickly 
self-corrects. On both of these occasions, Lashanda is searching for and 
exploring various pronunciations and successfully correcting her reading. As 
Marie Clay explains 

. . . the child who does not use such inflection rules in speech 
is not going to be able to anticipate them in print. . . Such 
learning is not a matter of memorization in the preschool 
years. It has been shown to be a process of learning rules for 
forming plurals, for forming verb tenses, for relating verb 
forms to the person who is speaking, and for applying 
appropriate pronouns (Clay, 1991, p. 74). 

Interestingly, however, on the last page Lashanda reads lift for lifted with no 
attempt at self-correction. The points made by Goodman and Buck (1997) 
apply well to Lashanda’s reading. Lashanda is faced with the task of translating 
between her home language, African American Vernacular English, and the 
language of the book. We can observe this occurring as she works through 
several of the grammatical features of the text. Although in many cases she is 
successful in reading the book language of the text, African American 
Vernacular English patterns continue to reappear in her reading even in later 
lessons when she has clearly exhibited the ability to monitor and self-correct her 
reading to conform with book language. Lashanda can readily switch between 
her home language and the language of books; however, there continue to be 
times when she is enjoying and engrossed in the story that her home language 
enters the text uncorrected. 

As with all readers, the ultimate goal for Lashanda is to construct meaning 
from texts and to experience reading as enjoyable and meaningful. 
Overcorrection of miscues that do not interfere with meaning and an 
over-emphasis on accuracy interferes with meaning construction and is 
counterproductive to helping children become accomplished readers. 

CONCLUSIONS 

I was very pleased with the progress Lashanda made with reading and recognize 
that during Reading Recovery she made substantial growth in both learning to 
read and in learning the language of books. When she continued to make 
language-based miscues in Lessons 77 and 86, I resisted the temptation to dwell 
on these miscues or to create drills that focus on was/were or ed endings. 
Lashanda is doing what we hope all good readers do—making sense of text and 
using the linguistic resources that she has available. It can be expected that with 
good teaching, strong language models, and an accepting attitude on the part 
of educators that Lashanda will continue to learn and utilize book language 


54 



Nuances of Error 
Compton-Lilly 


conventions as she progresses through school. To expect Lashanda to produce 
these consistently within a 20-week span during the intervention is unrealistic. 
Demonstration of her ability to regularly hear, identify, and address language 
variations in her reading is perhaps a more reasonable goal. 

It is important to realize that overcorrection of linguistic variations in oral 
reading actually increases the percentage of non-standard speech (Cazden, 

1999; LeMoine, 1999) used by students. When teachers respond negatively to 
African American Vernacular English patterns through constant correction and 
nonacceptance, the use of these linguistic features actually increases as a means 
of resistance to the school’s degradation of their home language (Delpit, 2002). 
Ironically, Delpit (1998) explains that teachers are more likely to correct 
reading miscues that are dialect-related even though these miscues rarely affect 
meaning. This tendency reflects a socially constructed mainstream assumption 
shared by many teachers about the superiority of standard English and a view 
of language variations as incorrect or inappropriate. These preferences for 
standard forms of English are extremely powerful forces in our society 
(Delpit, 2002). 

This brings us to the distinction that Clay clearly makes concerning 
running records. When analyzing running records it is essential that teachers 
pay attention to the qualitative analysis of the running record rather than just 
the quantitative score. When listening to a child like Lashanda read, we must 
be careful to consider the significance of the errors that the child has made. I 
would challenge all teachers to ask themselves the following questions: 

1. Does the miscue disrupt or significantly change meaning? 

2. Is the child sometimes/often able to self-correct miscues that reflect 
his home language patterns? 

3. If a child reads a particular word, inflection, or pronunciation in a 
way that reflects his home language, does he read that same 
construction in accordance with book language at another point in 
the story? 

4. Are miscues that reflect the child’s home language patterns becoming 
less common and are the child’s attempts moving closer to book 
language over time? 

The answers to these questions will help the teacher choose the correct response 
to these miscues and determine whether these miscues reflect difficulties with 
reading or they are merely situations in which the child utilized his/her 
extensive linguistic resources to make sense of text. 

However, this is not to say that Reading Recovery teachers or classroom 
teachers can abdicate their role in supporting children in learning the language 
of books. There are many things we can do to support children with language 


55 



Literacy Teaching and Learning 
Volume 10, Number 1 


differences. Clay (1991) recommends several modifications we can make in 
children’s instructional programs that will support children with language 
differences without demeaning the languages that they bring: 

• Children with language differences will benefit from many opportu¬ 
nities to participate in one-to-one conversations. Make an extra 
effort to speak informally with children. For example, Reading 
Recovery teachers can talk with children on the way to and from 
Reading Recovery lessons and before and after school. 

• Several times a day provide children with opportunities to talk with 
teachers and peers. 

• One of the best ways to provide a good language model is to 
regularly read interesting books to the children. Classroom teachers 
should read to children often and engage older students to read to 
younger students. Reading Recovery teachers should read with 
children during roaming. 

• Initially, when choosing books for children to read independently, 
choose books with simple, speech-like sentences; avoid complex, 
literary language until the child is comfortable reading simple 
book language. 

• Finally, allow children to write about familiar topics using their 
home language patterns. Children’s first stories often reflect their 
home language patterns. Value these stories and focus on the 
message. As Clay writes, “What the child can produce he can also 
anticipate” (Clay, 1991, p. 89). Opportunities for children to read 
their own texts that reflect their home language patterns provide 
children with opportunities to read fluently and comfortably. In later 
lessons, when children show evidence of being able to translate their 
reading and writing into book language, teachers can begin to move 
children toward using book language in their writing journals. 

Restating their message and asking them how it would sound in a 
book is often an effective means for helping children learn to manage 
the language of books. 

African American Vernacular English is a rich linguistic resource that 
many children bring to classrooms. It is extremely important that we 
demonstrate respect for this complex language, yet also help children to develop 
the linguistic resources that are valued in mainstream society. As teachers, we 
must build upon the language abilities that our students bring to classrooms 
while preparing them to participate in the larger community. 


56 



Nuances of Error 
Compton-Lilly 


REFERENCES 

Adger, C. T. (1999). Preface. In C. T. Adger, D. Chrisdan, & O. Taylor (Eds.), 
Making the connection: Language and academic achievement among African 
American students. McHenry, IL: Center for Applied Linguistics and Delta 
Systems Co., Inc. 

Baugh, J. (1999). Out of the mouths of slaves. Austin, TX: University of Texas 
Press. 

Bemelmans, L. (1958). Madeline. New York: Puffin Books. 

Cazden, C. (1999). The language of African American students in classroom 
discourse. In C. T. Adger, D. Christian, & O. Taylor (Eds.), Making the 
connection: Language and academic achievement among African American stu¬ 
dents. McHenry, IL: Center for Applied Linguistics and Delta Systems Co., 
Inc. 

Clay, M. (1991). Becoming literate: The construction of inner control. 

Portsmouth, NH: Heinemann. 

Delpit, L. (1995). Other people’s children: Cultural conflict in the classroom. New 
York: The New Press. 

Delpit, L. (1998). What should teachers do? Ebonics and culturally responsive 
instruction. In T. Perry & L. Delpit (Eds.), The real ebonies debate: Power, 
language and the education of African American children. Milwaukee, WI: 
Rethinking Schools. 

Delpit, L. (Ed.). (2002). The skin that we speak: Thoughts on language and 
culture in the classroom. New York: The New Press. 

Duncan, G. (1999). African American language in the classroom: Some political 
and pedagogical considerations. Rochester, NY: Rochester Teachers 
Association. 

Goodman, K., & Buck, C. (1997). Dialect barriers to reading comprehension 
revisited. The Reading Teacher, 50(6), 454-459. 

Helman, L. (2005). Using literacy assessment results to improve teaching for 
English-language learners. The Reading Teacher, 58(7), 668-677. 

Labov, W. (1972). Language in the inner city: Studies in the Black English 
vernacular. Philadelphia: University of Philadelphia Press. 

LeMoine, N. (1999). English for your success: A language development program 
for African American students. Maywood, NJ: Peoples Publishing Group. 

LeMoine, N. (2001). Language variation and literacy acquisition in African 
American students. In J. L. Harris, A. G. Kamhi, & K. E. Pollock (Eds.), 
Literacy in African American communities. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum 
Associates, Inc. 

Rickford, J. R. (1999). Language diversity and African American achievement 
in the education of African American students - An overview of the issues. 
In C. T. Adger, D. Christian, & O. Taylor (Eds.), Making the connection: 
Language and academic achievement among African American students. 
McHenry, IL: Center for Applied Linguistics and Delta Systems Co., Inc. 


57 



Literacy Teaching and Learning 
Volume 10, Number 1 


Scott, Foresman and Company (1979). George the porcupine. Glenview, IL: 
Scott, Foresman and Company. 

Sendak, M. (1963). Where the wild things are. New York: Harper Collins 
Publisher. 

Washington, J. A., & Craig, H. K. (2001). Reading performance and dialectical 
variation. In J. L. Harris, A. G. Kamhi, & K. E. Pollock (Eds.), Literacy in 
African American communities. Mahwah, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates. 
Wynne, J. (2002). We don’t talk right. You ask him. In L. Delpit & J. K. 

Dowdy (Eds.), The skin that we speak: Thoughts on language and culture in 
the classroom. New York: The New Press. 


58 




Reading Recovery®Council 

of North America 


Copyright Notice 

All publications from the Reading Recovery Council of North America are copyrighted. 
Permission to quote is granted for passages of fewer than 500 words. Quotations of 500 
words or more or reproductions of any portion of a table, figure, etc. require written 
permission from the Reading Recovery Council of North America. 

Permission to photocopy is granted for nonprofit, one-time classroom or library reserve 
use in educational institutions. Publications may not be copied and used for general 
distribution. Consent to photocopy does not extend to items identified as reprinted by 
permission of other publishers, nor to copying for general distribution, for advertising 
or promotion, or for resale, unless written permission is obtained from the Reading 
Recovery Council of North America. 

Address permission inquiries to: Executive Director 

Reading Recovery Council of North America 
400 West Wilson Bridge Road, Suite 250 
Worthington, Ohio 43085 



