ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing 
Resilience and School Success in 
American Indian and Alaska Native 
Students. ERIC Digest. 

ERIC Development Team 
www . eric . ed . gov 

Table of Contents 

If you're viewing this document online, you can click any of the topics below to link directly to that section. 

Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and Alaska 

Native Students. ERIC Digest 2 

RESILIENCE 2 

WAYS TRADITIONAL NATIVE CULTURES FOSTERED 

RESILIENCE 2 

CONNECTIONS THAT FOSTER ADOLESCENT WELL-BEING 4 

FACTORS THAT FOSTER RESILIENCE IN NATIVE YOUTH 5 

CONCLUSIONS 6 

REFERENCES 6 

ERIC ii Digests 

ERIC Identifier: ED471488 

Publication Date: 2002-12-00 

Author: Strand, Joyce A. - Peacock, Thomas D. 

Source: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural Education and Small Schools Charleston WV. 

Nurturing Resilience and School Success in 

American Indian and Alaska Native Students. 



ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and Page 1 of 9 
Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



ERIC Digest. 

THIS DIGEST WAS CREATED BY ERIC, THE EDUCATIONAL RESOURCES 
INFORMATION CENTER. FOR MORE INFORMATION ABOUT ERIC, CONTACT 
ACCESS ERIC 1 -800-LET-ERIC 

This Digest examines recent literature on factors related to resilience, well-being, and 
school success for American Indian and Alaska Native students. The characteristics of 
resilient Native youth; traditional Native ways of fostering resilience; and connections 
within family, community, and school that foster resilience are considered. Although 
there are tribal differences in traditional Native ways among the 554 Native American 
(U.S.) tribes, the focus here is on some commonalities that exist in "shared core values, 
beliefs, and behaviors" (HeavyRunner & Morris, 1997, p. 1). The authors review findings 
of a recent study on what Native youth believe parents, teachers, and schools can do to 
foster resilience. Additional studies that make connections between resilience and 
Native spirituality and biculturalism are briefly reviewed. 

RESILIENCE 



Resilience is a term used to describe a set of qualities that foster a process of 
successful adaptation and transformation despite risk and adversity (Benard, 1995). 
Persons who are resilient have the capacity to withstand, overcome, or recover from 
serious threat (Masten, 2001). Simply put, resilience is the ability to bounce back from 
adversity. 

As it relates to American Indian and Alaska Native youth, resilience is exemplified by 
certain qualities possessed by these children and youth who, though subjected to undue 
stress and adversity, do not give way to school failure, substance abuse, mental health 
problems, or juvenile delinquency (Peacock, 2002). These youth benefit from "protective 
factors" provided through family (including extended tribal family who share the 
responsibility of child care), schools, and the community. These protective factors 
enable children to alter or reverse negative outcomes that might have been predicted 
for them, fostering instead the long-term development of resilience (HeavyRunner & 
Morris, 1997; Wenzlaff & Biewer, 1996). 

WAYS TRADITIONAL NATIVE CULTURES 
FOSTERED RESILIENCE 



The Indigenous people of North America were nearly obliterated by disease, war, and 
genocide during the period of European colonialism. Their numbers were reduced from 
an estimated 10 million to fewer than a million people (Zinn, 2000). Many of the 
survivors and their descendants struggled to resist federal efforts to terminate their 
special status and limited sovereignty. They endured the boarding school era, during 
which the federal government overtly worked to eradicate tribal languages and culture 



Page 2 of 9 ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and 

Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



and "Americanize" Native young people by removing them from elders, family, and 
community. American Indians and Alaska Natives also experienced grinding poverty 
and the social ills that accompany it. 

Through all this adversity, they survived with much of their traditional cultures still intact. 
One explanation for their survival is that fostering resilience in young people is not a 
new concept for Native people. HeavyRunner and Morris (1997) explain that, 
traditionally, resilience has been cultivated by focusing on four developmental areas: 



1. "spirituality"-living according to the belief in the interrelatedness of all things 



2. "mental well-being"--having clear thoughts 



3. "emotional well-being"--balancing all emotions 



4. "physical well-being"--attending to the physical self 

Brendtro, Brokenleg, and Van Bockern (1990) described Native ways of building 
self-esteem as fostering resilience in young people. In traditional cultures, there were 
four bases of self-esteem: 



1 . "Belonging." From the time they were born, children were looked after by caring 
adults. Everyone in the community treated others as related, so children developed a 
sense of respect and concern for others and experienced a minimum of friction. All of 
this fostered good will. 



2. "Mastery." American Indian and Alaska Native families told stories, provided nurture, 
and acted as role models to foster balance in spiritual, mental, emotional, and physical 
competence. 



3. "Independence." Many traditional Native cultures placed a high value on individual 



ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and Page 3 of 9 
Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



freedom, and young people were given training in self-management. Young people 
were never offered rewards for doing well. Practicing appropriate self-management was 
seen as the reward in itself. 



4. "Generosity." Giving to others and giving back to the community were fundamental 
core values in many Native cultures, where adults stressed generosity and 
unselfishness to young people. 

CONNECTIONS THAT FOSTER ADOLESCENT 
WELL-BEING 



Today, a common misconception about young people is that their race, ethnicity, family 
structure, or economic status are the major factors affecting their success or failure in 
school and, ultimately, in life. This misconception can lead some educators and others 
to view Native youth as coming from such deficient circumstances that they cannot be 
expected to succeed. 

However, the National Longitudinal Study of Adolescent Health (NLSAH), which 
analyzed a nationally representative sample of more than 90,000 young people of all 
ethnicities, came to different conclusions. The NLSAH explored the social settings of 
adolescent lives, the ways in which youth connect with their social worlds, and the 
influence of these settings and connections on health and behavior. The study produced 
insights into the role of (1) families, (2) schools, and (3) the personal characteristics of 
individual youth in protecting adolescents from harm (Blum & Rinehart, 1997). The 
findings may influence our understanding of adolescent resilience. Some of the factors 
that protect youth from engaging in risky behaviors and harmful health practices may 
also help them develop the ability to bounce back when they encounter adversity. 

The importance of family. The NLSAH reported that healthy youth who avoided risky 
behavior felt strongly connected with their families. They felt they were understood, 
loved, wanted, and paid attention to by family members. They did not have access at 
home to guns, cigarettes, alcohol, or illegal drugs. None of their family members had 
attempted or committed suicide in the preceding year. Their parents disapproved of 
them having intercourse and using contraception at an early age and had high 
expectations for high school and college completion (Blum & Rinehart, 1997). 

School connections. The NLSAH also found school-related factors in adolescent health 
and avoidance of harmful behaviors. Youth tended to do well when they: 



* felt teachers at their school treated students fairly 



Page 4 of 9 ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and 

Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 



ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



felt close to people at school 



* got along with teachers and other students 



* felt their fellow students were not prejudiced 

The schools, which were of several different types (comprehensive public, magnet, or 
parochial schools), had high daily attendance, a strong parent-teacher organization, low 
drop-out rates, a high percentage of teachers with master's-level degrees or higher, and 
a high percentage of college bound students (Blum & Rinehart, 1 997; Resnick et al., 
1997). 

Individual factors. Adolescents' well-being was affected by whether they believed they 
had good qualities, liked themselves, and felt loved and wanted (Resnick et al., 1997). 
Practices of spirituality, religion, and prayer were important. Probably because of the 
way society treats homosexuals, youth who had same-sex attraction tended to be more 
at risk. Students who didn't perceive a risk of their own untimely death, those who didn't 
work too many hours per week after school or on weekends, and those who physically 
looked their age (neither appearing too young nor too old for their age) tended to 
experience lower levels of distress and engaged less frequently in risky behaviors. The 
same was true of students who kept up their grades in the basic subjects and avoided 
repeating a grade level. 

FACTORS THAT FOSTER RESILIENCE IN 
NATIVE YOUTH 



The family, school, and individual factors identified in the NLSAH study as promoting 
adolescent well-being have parallels in a recent study by Bergstrom, Cleary, and 
Peacock (2003) involving in-depth interviews with 120 Native students from across the 
United States and Canada. This study identified connections to parents, communities, 
teachers, and schools as major contributors to the resilience of Native youth. But 
students in this study identified another important factor: They reported that being well 
grounded and connected to their tribal culture was a big reason they stayed in school. 
The students in the study who were doing well (often after experiencing serious 
adversity) shared three positive characteristics in particular: good self-concept, a strong 
sense of direction, and tenacity. Feeling good about their tribal culture was a consistent 
theme among these students, who talked about their ability to feel comfortable living in 



ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and Page 5 of 9 
Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 



www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



both worlds (the Native community and mainstream schools); participation in cultural 
activities; strong positive feelings of belonging to a Native community and family; 
appreciation of the influences of elders, grandparents, and parents; and participation in 
a school curriculum that included Native history, language, and culture. 

Other studies. Other recent research has identified spiritual and cultural factors as 
important in fostering Native student resilience that leads to school success. 

Whitbeck, Hoyt, Stubben, and LaFromboise (2001) found in interviews with 196 
American Indian children in grades 5-8 that the degree to which children were 
embedded in traditional culture positively affected their school performance. According 
to its authors, this study provided empirical evidence that "enculturation is a resiliency 
factor in the development of [American Indian] children" (p. 57). 

Graham (2001) investigated the role of spirituality in promoting resilience, which, in turn, 
supported school-based competence. Using a sample of 56 Native students identified 
by their principal as being both high-risk and resilient, she found that spirituality reported 
by adolescent students was related to competence in the school context. 

Using retrospective qualitative study design, Evans (1997) interviewed 26 individuals of 
various ages who had successfully met the challenges and adversities of living on the 
Great Basin Indian reservation. Study participants said they strived throughout their 
lives to follow the "right path," a process made easier through the support of others, a 
belief in God or the Creator, and self-caring. 

A study of 1 17 American Indian adults living in San Diego, which classified participants 
according to their cultural identities, found that individuals classified as "bicultural" were 
least likely to suffer depression. This group was followed by the "assimilating," 
"traditional," and "marginal" groups (Byron, 1997). Other qualitative studies, each 
focused on a small sample, produced findings showing similar links between spirituality 
and/or enculturation and wellness and/or resilience (Klassen, 1996; Montgomery, 

Miville, Winterowd, Jeffries, & Baysden, 2000; Ness, 2001). 

CONCLUSIONS 



A growing collection of studies is beginning to shed light on what qualities make for 
resilience in American Indian and Alaska Native children and youth, and on what factors 
are necessary to develop those qualities. However, even taken together, current 
research on these issues remains more suggestive than definitive, and thus they remain 
a fruitful and necessary area of inquiry (Trimble & Beauvais, 2001). 

REFERENCES 



Benard, B. (1995). Fostering resilience in children. ERIC Digest. Champaign, IL: ERIC 
Clearinghouse on Elementary and Early Childhood Education. (ERIC Document 
Reproduction Service No. ED 386 327) 



Page 6 of 9 ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and 

Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



Bergstrom, A., Cleary, L., & Peacock, T. (2003). The seventh generation: Native youth 
speak about finding the good path. Charleston, WV: ERIC Clearinghouse on Rural 
Education and Small Schools. 

Blum, R. W., & Rinehart, P. M. (1997). Reducing the risk: Connections that make a 
difference in the lives of youth [Monograph], Bethesda, MD: Add Health. (ERIC 
Document Reproduction Service No. ED 412 459) 

Brendtro, L., Brokenleg, M., & Van Bockern, S. (1990). Reclaiming youth at risk: Our 
hope for the future. Bloomington, IN: National Education Service. 

Byron, D. M. (1997). The relationship of cultural identification to depression and alcohol 
use among urban American Indians. Dissertation Abstracts International, 57(7-B), 4778. 

Evans, C. M. (1997). There needs to be somebody: An exploration of the ways Great 
Basin Indian youth get through difficult times (Substance Abuse Prevention, Resiliency). 
University of Utah. Dissertation Abstracts International, 57(1 2-A), 5068. 

Graham, B. L. (2001). Resilience among American Indian youth: First Nations youth 
resilience study. Dissertation Abstracts International, 62(3-B), 1615. 

HeavyRunner, I., & Morris, J. S. (1997). Traditional native culture and resilience. 
Research Practice, 5(1). Minneapolis: University of Minnesota. Center for Applied 
Research and Educational Improvement (CAREI), College of Education and Human 
Development. Retrieved November 18, 2002, from 
http://www.coled.umn.edu/carei/Reports/Rpractice/Spring97/traditiona l.htm 

Klassen, H. M. (1996). The development of resiliency in American Indian adolescents 
(Native Americans). Harvard University. Dissertation Abstracts International, 57(7-A), 
2857. 

Masten, A. S. (2001). Ordinary magic: Resilience processes in development. American 
Psychologist, 56(3), 227-238. 

Montgomery, D., Miville, M. L., Winterowd, C., Jeffries, B., & Baysden, M. F. (2000). 
American Indian college students: An exploration into resiliency factors revealed 
through personal stories. Cultural Diversity and Ethnic Minority Psychology, 6(4), 
387-398. 

Ness, J. K. E. (2001). American Indian completers and noncompleters in a tribal and 
community college in northern Minnesota. Doctoral dissertation. Minneapolis: University 
of Minnesota. (ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 457 912) 

Peacock, T. (2002). The perceptions and experiences of American Indian high school 
graduates and dropouts. Unpublished doctoral dissertation, University of Minnesota, 



ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and Page 7 of 9 
Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 




www . eric . ed . gov 



ERIC Custom Transformations Team 



Minneapolis. 

Resnick, M. D., Bearman, P. S., Blum, R. W., Bauman, K. E., Harris, K. M., Jones, J., 
Tabor, J., Behring, T., Sieving, R. E., Shew, M., Ireland, M., Bearinger, L. H., & Udry, J. 
R. (1997). Protecting adolescents from harm: Findings from the National Longitudinal 
Study on Adolescent Health. Journal of the American Medical Association, 278(10), 
823-832. 

Trimble, J. E., & Beauvais, F. (2001). Prevention of alcoholism, drug abuse, and health 
problems among American Indians and Alaska Natives: An introduction and overview. 

In J. E. Trimble & F. Beauvais (Eds.), Health promotion and substance abuse 
prevention among American Indian and Alaska Native communities: Issues in cultural 
competence (pp. 1-34). Rockville, MD: National Institute on Drug Abuse (DHHS/PHS). 
(ERIC Document Reproduction Service No. ED 452 004) 

Wenzlaff, T. L., & Biewer, A. (1996). Research: Native American students define factors 
for success. Tribal College, 7(4), 40-44. 

Whitbeck, L. B., Hoyt, D. R., Stubben, J. D., & LaFromboise, T. (2001). Traditional 
culture and academic success among American Indian children in the upper Midwest. 
Journal of American Indian Education, 40(2), 48-60. 

Zinn, H. (2000). A people's history of the United States: 1492 to Present. New York, NY: 
HarperCollins Publishers. 



Joyce A. Strand, Ph.D., is an assistant professor and coordinator of special education at 
the University of Minnesota, Duluth. 

Thomas D. Peacock is an associate professor of education at the University of 
Minnesota, Duluth, where he teaches and coordinates a doctoral program in 
educational leadership. He is a member of the Fond du Lac Lake Superior Band of 
Chippewa. 

This publication was prepared with funding from the Office of Educational Research and 
Improvement, U.S. Department of Education, under contract no. ED-99-CO-0027. The 
opinions expressed herein do not necessarily reflect the positions or policies of OERI, 
the Department, or AEL. 



Title: Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and Alaska Native 
Students. ERIC Digest. 

Document Type: Information Analyses— ERIC Information Analysis Products (lAPs) 
(071); Information Analyses— ERIC Digests (Selected) in Full Text (073); 



Page 8 of 9 ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and 

Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 




ERIC Resource Center 



www . eric . ed . gov 



Available From: ERIC/CRESS, P.O. Box 1348, Charleston, WV 25325-1348. Tel: 
800-624-9120 (Toll Free). For full text: http://www.ael.org/eric/digests/edorc02-11.pdf. 
Descriptors: Academic Achievement, Adolescent Development, Adolescents, 
American Indian Education, American Indian Students, Cultural Influences, Elementary 
Secondary Education, Family Influence, Nonformal Education, Resilience (Personality), 
Student School Relationship, Well Being 
Identifiers: ERIC Digests 
### 



[Return to ERIC Digest Search Page] 



ED471488 2002-12-00 Nurturing Resilience and School Success in American Indian and 
Alaska Native Students. ERIC Digest. 



Page 9 of 9 



