PROGRESS • RUSSIAN CLASSICS SERIES 




FYODOR 

DOSTOYEVSKY 

Stories 


L/\afixffa £j%tzmat C$os« 
M. A < Triple ) B.T, 
Dimsog^r Lake Compound 
Agai tala, Tripura (West). 



progress publishers 

MOSCOW 



Translated from the Russian 
fgiutrated by Andrei Goncharov 


4>. AoCTOeBCKMfl 
nOBECTH H PACCKA3H 

Ha OHZAU&CKOM H3blKe 



mm mm tmytkPtoa* 


First printing 1919 


Printed in the Union of Soviet Socialist Republics 


70301-016 

016(01)-77 


6c3 o6i»sibji. 


CONTENTS 


DOSTOYEVSKY by Abram Belkin, translated 
by Julius Katzer . 7 

POOR PEOPLE. 

translation edited by Olga Shartse and Julius 
Katzer . 29 

WHITE NIGHTS. 

translated by Olga Shartse . 149 

A FAINT HEART. 

translated by Olga Shartse . 205 

A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT. 

translated by Ivy Litvinoff. Edited by Olga 
Shartse . 253 

THE MEEK ONE. 

translated by Olga Shartse. Edited by Julius 

Katzer . 311 

+ 

THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN. 
translated by Olga Shartse. Edited by Julius Katzer 359 








'm* •S' * l/PTttlt S^ 

J/. -d c Triple > B.T # 

Dimsag-r Lake Comi oimd 
Agaitala. Tripuia (West). 


DOSTOYEVSKY 





Fyodor Dostoyevsky. Portrait by Vassily Perov, 1872 




I 


afuttct &Cumat L*$oso 
M. A ( Triple ) B.T, 
frtf p& agat 1 Lak© Compound 
Agaitala, Tiipuia lWest|. 


It might seem that destiny itself had prepared the 
extraordinary circumstances of this writer's life so as to 
enable him to express in his works all of mankind's bound¬ 
less suffering. 

Such was the background of Fyodor Dostoyevsky, that 
genius of Russian literature which perhaps has more tragic 
lives to its credit than any other literature in the world. 
Two of its greatest poets—Pushkin and Lermontov—were 
killed in duds; the poet Ryleyev was hanged; the revolu¬ 
tionary writer Chernyshevsky languished in exile in Siberia 
for 20 years; Herzen, Saltykov-Shchedrin and Korolenko 
were sentenced to exile. However, even against this back¬ 
ground, Dostoyevsky's life is conspicuous as a cluster of 
tragic circumstances. Fyodor Dostoyevsky was born in 1821, 
in the family of a physician at the Mariinsky Charity 
Hospital in Moscow. There were seven children. 
Dostoyevsky's mother, a delicate religious and tender¬ 
hearted woman, died of consumption in 1837 at the age 
of S3. Her life was a round of suffering and anxiety owing 
to her husband's severity, parsimony and savage jealousy. 
It is characteristic of Dostoyevsky's father that his cruel 
treatment of his serfs during several years led to his being 
murdered by them in 1839 on a small estate he bought 
near Tula towards the end of his life. The future writer 
was only eighteen at the time, and some of his biographers 
believe that this was the cause of his first epileptic fit 

The following excerpt from the manuscript of tike novel 
A Maw Youth tells us something of the young Dostoyevsky 9 * 
psychology: ‘There are children who, from a very early 
age, brood over their families, who fed outraged by their 
fathers* unseemliness and by that of the fathers of the 



10 


INTRODUCTION 


—- - - — -- ■ - ----— 

families in their immediate environment and, above all, who begin 
to grasp from childhood the disorderliness and fortuitousness of the 
life’s very foundations, the absence of established standards and 
family tradition.” 

Until the end of his days^the writer could forget neither his 
tormented and humiliated childhood nor the privations he suffered 
in his youth during his six years at the Military Engineers' School 

Dostoyevsky was racked by epilepsy all his life. It was impossible 
either to prevent or predict the fits which physically and mentally 
shattered his whole being. They could overtake the writer at any 
moment jpf his life, wherever he might be. The moment of aura takes 
the form of acute psychological tension accompanied by hallucina¬ 
tions (musical, vocal and olfactory). Medical authorities say that the 
patient remembers hardly anything he experiences during the fit, but 
Dostoyevsky's brain retained everything, as we see in the illuminat¬ 
ing description of such an attack in T he Idiot . His most attractive 
personage, Prince Myshkin, is an epileptic able to describe his mental 
condition during his fits. 

Upon graduation from the Engineers’ School, Dostoyevsky resigned 
his commission to devote himself to a literary career. 

The immediate success of his first novel, Poor People (1845), brought 
him into close contact with the leading' writers of his time, and in 
particular with Vissarion Belinsky, great literary critic of the 1840s, 
revolutionary democrat, and socialist. Dostoyevsky became passion¬ 
ately attracted to socialist ideas (in the way he took up anything he 
felt drawn to). His discussions with Belinsky, his reading of the 
French utopian socialists and especially Charles Fourier, his percep¬ 
tion of the ideas expounded by Russian writers (Pushkin, Griboye¬ 
dov, Lermontov, Gogol, Herzen and Nekrasov) and by Western 
European authors (Shakespeare, Voltaire, Schiller, Cervantes, Dickens, 
George Sand and Balzac) and, finally, his constant reading of the 
Bible—all these tnade a profound impression on the young writer’s 
morbid and susceptible mind and helped mould his spiritual world. 
Each of the authors mentioned above not only left his mark on Dosto¬ 
yevsky’s consciousness but subsequently came to be reflected in his 
writings and imagery. There are Pushkin motifs throughout almost 
all of his works, right up to the extraordinarily profound ’’Pushkin 
Address” at the unveiling of the Pushkin monument in Moscow in 
1880, several months before his death. Voltaire’s Candide and Schil¬ 
ler’s Robbers were transformed in the imagery of The Karamazov 
Brothers; Don Quixote rides with the hero of The Idiot; Dickens’s 


introduction 


ft 


. *... ■■■ ... . V.—'.. 

child (bnctm hover behind die tormented children in Dwte ynd f ’ * 
works; (hbsc'i Evginie Grandet, first translated into Russian by 
Dostoyevsky and published in 1894, was closely akin to Dostoyevsky 
in its ideological and artistic conception. 

The image of Christ is seen by Dostoyevsky as die supreme 
criterion of truth (The Legend of the Grand Inquisitor in The Kara¬ 
mazov Brothers). 

During this period of Ids work, so crowded with intdlectual 
activity, Dostoyevsky created his first novel, Poor People, and such 
stories as The Double, White Nights, and The Mistress. 

Poor People, a realistic portrayal of the social tragedy of a poverty- 
stricken and downtrodden petty clerk, wen praise from Belinsky for 
its deep sympathy for outraged human dignity. This was an expres¬ 
sion of democratic and humanist ideas typical of the traditions of 
Russian classical literature. It was with profound psychological in¬ 
sight that the young Dostoyevsky showed the vacillation between 
rebellion against the wealthy and the powerful, and acceptance of 
a wretched fate. Poor People, a novel in letters between two people 
who love each other, was a lyrical confession from two miserable, 
unstable and lonely dreamers. 

White Nights, another story of the same period, featured the 
colourful aspect of St. Petersburg life which came to be known as 
“Dostoyevsky’s Petersburg". Here is how the young dreamer, the 
main character in White Nights, describes it to the girl he loves: 
“ ..There are some rather queer comers in Petersburg. The sun, 
which shines for all the rest of the city, never seems to peep into 
those places. It’s another sun that does, a new one, specially ordered 
for those remote comers, and it throws a different, a peculiar light 
on everything. Life in those remote corners seems a world apart, 
in no way resembling the life that seethes about us; it is the sort 
of life that could be going on in some fabulous and strange kingdom, 
and not on our planet at all, in these very, very serious times of 
ours. And this life is that peculiar mixture of something that is 
purely fantastic, ardently idealistic and also, at the same time (alas, 
Nastcnka), bleakly humdrum and ordinary, not to say incredibly 
banal.” 

Dostoyevsky shows us how the beautiful dreamers must inevitably 
perish in this weird atmosphere, while vulgar reality emerges triumph¬ 
ant The hero and heroine of White Nights are granted only the 
strange and pathetic joy of renouncing their personal happiness. 

However, ‘this Initial period of the writer's literary career was 




12 


INTRODUCTION 


biutally cut short by an event that sp/it his life into two distinct 
halves. In 1847, Dostoyevsky began to attend the meetings of a 
progressive study circle conducted by the revolutionary socialist 
Petrashevsky (where he read Belinsky's banned letter to Gogol), and 
he later joined a group led by Speshnev, a Petrashevsky adheient 
who wanted to set up a secret i evolutionary organisation for the 
struggle against the autocracy. Along with other members of the 
ciiclc, Dostoyevsky was arrested in April 1849 and kept in solitary 
confinement in the Fortress of St. Peter and St. Paul for some eight 
months When the investigation was completed, he was sentenced 
to death On December 22, 1849 (he was twenty-eight years old at 
the time), Dostoyevsky lived through some minutes of horror. Tsar 
Nicholas I had decided lo subject the pnsoncis to the cruellest tortuie 
on eaith—the torture of waiting to be executed One frosty morning, 
the condemned went thiough all the preliminaiies. the drums tolled, 
the filing squad was drawn up, and the priest held up the crucifix lor 
the last kiss The prisoners wcie blindfolded, and the fiisl thiee wcie 
led and tied to the posts, lacing the firing squad. 1 he order rang 
out- “Present’” The soldiers' rifle barrels weie already levelled at 
the condemned Dostoyevsky was in the second group, so he had no 
more than a minute to live Several interminable seconds later, the 
tsar's older was announced commuting the death sentence to four 
years’ hard labour and subsequent service in the ranks in a Siberian 
regiment. 

That same day, just before being sent to seivc his sentence, Dos¬ 
toyevsky wrote a letter to his brother Mikhail, who stood closest to 
him. ”My dear brother, I am not despondent and have not lost heart 
life is life everywhere There will he people aiound me: to re¬ 
main a human being among them, to be always human in the face 
of any misfortune, to keep one’s courage and not to fall—that is 
what life is about; that is the supreme challenge” It was these emo¬ 
tional experiences which, nineteen yeais later, gave birth to Mysh¬ 
kin’s masterly desciiption of the last moments of the prisoner just 
before his execution. In his last novel, he endowed the Karamazovs 
with this same unquenchable and overwhelming thirst for life These 
same experiences, one may assume, whetted the lust for life which 
the writer himself acknowledged. 

This mock execution was only the beginning of the writer’s 
sufferings. He served four years of penal servitude in prison at Omsk, 
where his shackles were never removed, not even in the bath-house 
or the hospital. He baked bricks, carried hods to building sites, and 




INTRODUCTION 


13 


unloaded barges on the Ritar Irtish in ice-cold water or in the bitter 
frost. 

Notes from the Dead House , in which Dostoyevsky described his 
personal experience of convict life, shows the reader that this expe¬ 
rience alone was enough to turn the writer for the rest of his life 
into a bard of human suffering. No nineteenth century writer apart 
irom Dostoyevsky experienced such concentrated suffering, torment 
and humiliation. But this convict happened to be a genius! His 
interest in the problem of crime and punishment and in the psycho¬ 
logy of victim and murderer was enhanced by his prison life. 

It was there that the embryo of the parricidal plot in The Kara¬ 
mazov Bi others was conceived. The crimes, murders and suicides 
which ciowd Dostoyevsky’s works are not merely products of a wri¬ 
ter’s let tile imagination designed to thrill the reader, but themes 
stemming straight from the heart. Around him were murderers, rap¬ 
ists and sadists; thrown into their midst by blind fate, human passion, 
tsarist arbitrariness or legal blunders, were helpless, innocent people, 
many ol them gifted and oiiginal. Only Dantes Inferno can bear com¬ 
parison with Notes fiom the Dead House. Those who have experi¬ 
enced the horrors of the mid-twentieth century, when the nazis 
destroyed millions ol lives in theii concentration camps, cannot but 
find an echo of their suffeiing in the writings of Dostoyevsky. 

The following five years ol army service—first as a private and 
then as an NCO and commissioned officer—were somewhat easier. 
On returning to St. Petersburg in 1859, Dostoyevsky once again began 
to write, the following twenty-five yeais proving him to be a writer 
of genius and the pride of Russian and world literature. During these 
years, however, his private life was full of spiiitual crises and tragic 
conflict. The epileptic fits, which he was sometimes spared for months 
on end, but which at times xecurrcd daily, were a source of great 
torment to him Constantly short of funds and besieged by creditors, 
publishers and editors, in the fifties and sixties, he began to reveal a 
new tiait. A man of uncontrollable passions, Dostoyevsky was a 
desperate gambler. He counted on his good luck at the roulette tabic 
to enable him. during his visits abioad to w r in a fortune outright 
and thereby financial independence. So great were his passion for 
gambling and his utter despair that, on one occasion in Baden, he 
actually pawned his wife's earrings and clothes. Huge winnings were, 
ol course, invariably followed by devastating losses. Hence Dostoyev¬ 
sky s consummu^ pcnetiation in depicting, in his story The Gambler , 
the psychology ,f this consuming passion. Dostoyevsky w r as equally 




14 


INTRODUCTION 


passionate in his intimate life and his love of women. In 1857, in 
the town of Semipalatinsk, he married M. D. Isayeva, the widow of 
a colleague, and a sickly, hysterical woman. The marriage was not 
a happy one. After his first wife's death in 1865, he entered into a 
second maniage, which was marked by extraordinary circumstances, 
as were most of the other cru< ial moments in his life. In 1866, as a 
icsult of a harsh contract with his publishers, Dostoyevsky found 
himself in difficult straits, with only one month left in which to 
submit a 160-page novel. A fiiend advised him to engage the services 
of a stenographer. He did so, and began dictating his story The 
Gambler on October 4, 1866, finishing it twenty-six days later. The 
stenographer was twenty-year-old Anna Grigoryevna Snitkin, whom 
he manied four months later. The marriage proved a happy one. 
Anna Grigoryevna was a devoted wife to him till the end of his 
days, and was instrumental in preserving Dostoyevsky’s literary 
heritage, besides writing the best extant memoirs of his life. She 
also sponsored the Inundation of the Dostoyevsky museum. She died 
in 1918 at a very advanced age. 

Dostoyevsky’s passionate and extraordinary lile coincided with 
turbulent social developments in Russia and West Europe. In 1848, 
most European countries were swept by a wave of revolution. The 
old feudal fabuc of Russian society was shatteicd by the abolition 
oi serldoni in 1801 and the attendant emcigenre of new bourgeois 
telations in the coun.ry. Russian ievolutionary Populists staged a se¬ 
nes ol ten mist acts aimed at bringing about the overthrow of the 
tsarist regime and accelerating Russia’s revolutionary development. 
These attempts ended in lailuic and merely bolstered the reactionary 
regime sirnc the Russian peasanti> was not lipc for ievolutionary 
action The leaders were brought to trial, the cases reverberating 
throughout the countiy 

In defining Dostoyevsky's attitude to all these events it should 
be lenrembercd that lie was nc\cr an artist puic and simple. In the 
revolutionary atmosphere cl the 1859-1861 period in Russia, he be¬ 
came a militant journalist, publisher of the magazines Viemya (Time) 
(1861-lNb5), and Epokha (The Epoch) (1864-1865), an active editor 
of the journal Grazhdanin (The Citizen), and a keen publicist, 
who, in his Diary of a Writer , reacted to all the burning 
issues at home and on the international political scene. Dostoyevsky 
travelled abroad in 1862, 1863, 1865, and 1867-71, visaing Geimany, 
Switzerland, Italy, England and Austio-Ilungary, and describing the 
impressions of his travels in his Winter Notes on Summer hnpics - 



INTRODUCTION 


15 


sions. While in Dresden in 1871, he closely followed the Franco- 
Pi ussian war and the Paris Commune. The writer's personal life was 
thus closely interwoven with the major social and political events 
of the time in Russia and Europe: the downfall of serfdom, which 
launched Russia on the road of capitalist development; the exacerba¬ 
tion of the contradictions in bourgeois society and the intensification 
of exploitation in Europe and, finally, the rapid spread of social¬ 
ist ideas all over the world and the upsurge of the revolutionary 
movement. 

What views did Dostoyevsky hold at the time? His years of penal 
servitude did not destroy his love of life and his faith in man; they 
enhanced his peiception of human suffering. At the same time, they 
were years of inner crisis, disillusionment in socialist ideas, and the 
maturing of tragic contradictions in his ideology. 

While serving his sentence, the young writer came into contact 
with soldiers and peasants, an experience that was a revelation to 
him. At the same time, he became keenly aware of the blank wall 
dividing the inner world of the “common people’* from that of the 
nobility and the raznochinets revolutionaries, still rare in the for¬ 
ties and fifties, whom he knew. This sense of the gulf between the 
educated and the common people was to give Dostoyevsky much food 
for tragic thought. In the conditions of the political reaction that 
engulfed Europe in the fifties, Dostoyevsky became profoundly scep¬ 
tical of the revolutionary movement and its possibilities. In the sixties, 
this put him in opposition to Chernyshevsky and other Russian revolu¬ 
tionary democrats. 

He considered that the new bourgeois society, whose negative 
features had so shocked him during his travels in Western Europe, 
would prove utterly disastrous to Russia, as had been the develop¬ 
ments in Europe following the French Revolution of 1789. Like Leo 
Tolstoi and the Russian Fopulists, Dostoyevsky clung to the historic¬ 
ally utopian dream that Russia could in some way escape the “West¬ 
ern” pattern. He applied all his talents as writer, publicist and jour¬ 
nalist in order to prove to thinking Russians, especially the country’s 
younger generation, that the Russian people should follow a road 
of their own. The more obvious it grew, especially in the seventies, 
that Russia was unswervingly following the bourgeois course of devel¬ 
opment, the more obsessed he became with the need to prove the 
u f ter erroneousness of that course and the practical possibility of 
Russia taking a road that would bypass the horrors of the European 
model. This illus ; *n of his found expression in his “Back to the soil" 



16 


INTRODUCTION 


/ 

theory, first voiced in his publicist essays appearing in his journals, 
and later in The Diary of a Writer. According to Dostoyevsky, Rus¬ 
sia could only fulfil a “Messianic” role and bring mankind universal 
happiness, provided that the nobility, who had become alienated from 
the “soil”, and the intellectuals embraced the common people, and 
all classes of society became united under the aegis of the monarchy 
and the Russian Orthodox Church. In this respect, Dostoyevsky’s ideas 
diffcied horn Tolstoi’s theory of “simplicity” and, of course, from 
Populist socialism. 

His refusal to admit any clash of interests between the people 
and the ruling classes and his efforts to contrapose to the social 
•truggii his own “supra- class” and supposedly national ideals weie 
the cause of profound differences between Dostoyevsky and the demo¬ 
cratic camp. 

In his view, the triumph of ethical standards was only possible 
on i religious basis and through the moral perfection of the indivi¬ 
dual. He wiotc the following in his Notes : “A strongly developed 
individual, confident of his right to be a person and without any 
personal fear foi himself, can use his personal qualities in no other 
way than by offering them to all others, so that they may become 
independent and happy individuals like himself.” * 

In its broadest terms and its ultimate aims, this dream shows that 
Dostoyevsky stood close to the ideas of socialism. But only in the 
In Oddest of tarns and in the ultimate aims. In all other respects, he 
diflcred sharply both from Western European socialist doctrines and 
the socialism of his compatriots—the Russian revolutionary demo¬ 
crats. He feared that the ideas of revolutionary struggle advocated 
by < onternporary socialist thinking would not solve the problem of 
the individual’s freedom as he understood it. lie was horrified by the 
anaichisls’ wilfulncss and the terrorist methods of struggle practised 
by his contemporaries—the anarchist Mikhail Bakuuin and the terror¬ 
ist Sergei Nechayev—who indeed did serious harm to the genuine 
revolutionary socialist movement. 

Even only a brief sketch of the writer’s biography reveals the 
basis of his creative work—the portrayal of the world of human 
suffering This was the foundation of the complex and variegated 
range of characters, ideas and situations that crowd his novels, novel¬ 
ettes, and short stories. And it is this foundation that provides a 
solid and realistic basis for all the many structures ot his works, 
however abstract, grotesque, or fantastic those structures may be. 

1 see Dostoyevsky’s writings as a kind of huge pyramid, its broad 





Mikhail Dostoyevsky (1789-18-59) the wnteis 

f athcr 



the wntei 





A wing of the hospital where Dr Mikhail Dostoyevsky's 
living quaitcrs were located Fyodot Dostoyevsky lived 
here between 1823-1837. At present a Dostoyevsky Museum 






INTRODUCTION 


17 


foundations filled with portrayals of human suffering. On this founda¬ 
tion rise the massive and complex problems of rebellion and submis¬ 
sion/ timidity and ferocity, with moral and political ideas growing 
more active. Towering at the apex are the philosophical problems of 
life and death, of man’s place in the universe, the conflict of good 
and evil, of religion and atheism. 


II 

Dostoyevsky was a past master in the art ol depicting the harsh 
gamut of human suffering—the anguish of the human soul and the 
human spirit. The corporal punishment of convicts; the violation and 
humiliation of woman’s dignity; the maltreatment of little children 
by their parents and, finallv, the beating of helpless animals—these 
jar the nerves of any readet of Dostoyevsky *ho is not innately 
callous. It will suffice to recall the flogging scenes in A oi* y s from the 
Dead House; the agony of little Nelly in The Insulted and the Humi¬ 
liated] Sonya Marmeladova’s humiliation in Cume and Punishment - 
she has become a prostitute at seventeen to support the family of her 
lather and stepmother; the baitcring over the beautiful Nastasia Phi¬ 
lippovna in 'Ihe Idiot; the psychological torture to which a husband 
subjects his wife in 7 he Mick One . This sum of human suffering is 
a source of unmitigated anguish to the writer, depriving him of all 
peace of mind and goading his principal characters to acthm 

Ivan Karamazov says to Alyosha: *T was going to talk about 
human suffering in general but it would be better to dwell on the 
sufferings of children alone. It will cut down the volume of my argu¬ 
ments by nine-tenths, but I’d rather speak only about them. 1 have 
only taken the little children to make my point obvious. I shan’t say 
a word about the rest of mankind’s tears which ha^e saturated the 
earth from its crust to its centre.” Ivan goes on to cite some examples. 
A well-bred and educated gentleman and his lady thrasb then seven- 
year-old daughter until she loses consciousness, but his barrister jus¬ 
tifies the father because this is meielv an “ordinary family affair”. A 
five-year-old child is locked up for the night in a latrine as punish¬ 
ment. A general sets his hounds on a naked chi hi in front of its 
mother for having thrown a stone at his favourite dog. 

As the critic Nikolai Dobrolyubov wrote, Dostoyevsky is always 
“in distress over Man”. However, Dostoyevsky does not belong to 
the naturalist school, which concentrates on recording the facts. Un- 




18 


INTRODUCTION 


like many other writers, he is not satisfied with merely evoking 
sympathy for the oppressed. He is both artist and thinker , driven by 
the spectacle of human suffering to pose the cardinal philosophical 
problems of mankind. 

Let us return to the “pyramid” simile. It might be said that 
above the woild of suffering lies a stratum that I would call psycho¬ 
logical—in the main, the exploration of the human soul. There have 
been other writers, such as Balzac, Leo Tolstoi, and Thomas Mann, 
whose revealing penetration into human feelings has amazed the 
reader. How does Dostoyevsky differ from them as a psychologist? 
One of his psychological discoveries consists in his ability to show 
how suffering affects man’s inner world, and how it changes, corrupts 
and even perverts the human soul. 

Humiliation may evoke two diametrically opposite reactions. It 
reduces some people to dull submissiveness, a humble admission of 
their own nonentity. In others it awakens an acute and even morbid 
sense of individuality, of human dignity trampled underfoot. 

In portraying man’s humiliation, Dostoyevsky reveals abysses in 
the human soul that are awesome to contemplate. His characters dis¬ 
play every kind of distorted form of self-assertion. Such psychological 
conditions can exist in many people in some slight t>r diluted mea¬ 
sure; they do not often come to the surface. In a bourgeois or bour- 
gcois-serfowning society (such as Russia of the 19th century), and 
even more so in the capitalist society of the epoch of imperialism, 
where humiliation o* the individual (or even entire nations) reaches 
its highest pitch, the psychological conditions revealed by Dosto¬ 
yevsky have become particularly acute. Writers of many lands have 
described them in the twentieth century. 

Dostoyevsky magnified these movements of the soul, which he 
viewed, as it were, through a lens and then described in concentrat¬ 
ed form. Any writer of genius is entitled to do this, and Dostoyevsky 
created a psychological and even philosophical grotesque all his own. 
It is significant that Dostoyevsky expressed the following idea in his 
Diary of a Writer . “Follow up some fact of real life, even one that 
is not so vivid at first glance, and if you have the strength and the 
vision, you will find in it a depth denied even to Shakespeare. But 
the crux of the matter is: who has that vision and capability? It is 
not only in creating and writing works of art that one has to be an 
artist in one’s own way, but in being able to notice the fact.” 

By delving deep into the soul of the man whose dignity is 
trampled underfoot and by making a study of his behaviour when 




INTRODUCTION 


19 


his desires and aspirations are constantly thwarted, Dostoyevsky made 
artistic and ethical discoveries of great moment to Russian and to 
world literature. In the first place, lie revealed the phenomenon of 
4 duality”, i.e., split personality, m which two mutually opposed 
lotccs, desires and qualities are combined within a human being. 
Secondly, he advanced the notion of the “underground”, the image 
of “underground man”. 

“Duality” and the “underground” are the next layer of the meta¬ 
phorical “pyramid” 1 have already mentioned. The psychology of 
duality was first explored thoroughly in The Double (1816), while 
“underground man” first appears in Notes from the Underground 
(1864). Awareness ol one’s insignificance coupled with the need to 
assert oneself creates duality in the human mind. Such duality arises 
in the principal character of The Double, the petty official Golyad- 
kin who undergoes a morbid transformation into Golyadkin Senior 
and Golyadkin Junior. The former is prepared to be meek and sub¬ 
missive and to acknowledge his lowly status. The latter cannot allow 
himself to be tiodden on like a mat by those over him in authority. 
In his flights of fancy, he is an important official who is prepared 
to humiliate others. He even marries his superior’s daughter—some¬ 
thing Golyadkin Senior would never even dare contemplate. This 
duality produces a psychology of submissiveness interlarded with 
rebellion. These two psychological states are also to be seen in other 
Dostoyevskian characters—sometimes in a single character and some¬ 
times in different ones. There are images of the rebellious and images 
ol the meek. In Crime and Punishment, Raskolnikov personifies the 
idea of revolt and Sonya Marmeladova that of meekness In The Idiot, 
Prince Myshkin is the supreme personification of the philosophy of 
meekness and Nastasia Philippovna that of rebellion. In The Kara- 
muzov Brothers, Ivan symbolises rebellion, and Alyosha humility. 

It should not be thought, however, that these two qualities of 
human nature are always distributed so obviously and symmetrically 
among the characters. They are sometimes unaccountably blended 
in a single character to express the dialectics of human behaviour, 
which Dostoyevsky depicts with such genius Dualism is not a 
static condition but a dialectical unity which conveys the tragic 
struggle between the “doubles.” in the soul of one and the same per¬ 
son Suifice it to recall the agonising hesitation that lacerates the 
heart of Nastasia Philippovna when she turns liom Myshkin to 
Rogozhin, the latter's love-hate for Myshkin, and the constant attrac¬ 
tion and repulsion that torment Dostoyevsky’s chaiacters. Here is 



20 


INTRODUCTION 


how the writer replied in 1880 to one of his admirers, who confessed 
to a dualism in herself: “You write about yuur duality? But that is 
a vciy common feature in many people ... only not so much in ordina¬ 
ry people; it is a trait inherent in human nature in general, but it 
veiy iarely occurs with such force as it does in you. The reason you 
arc so dose to me is that the duality in you is identical with what 
lias been in me all my life. There is greater anguish in it, and yet 
there is also great joy.” ( Letters , Vol. 4, p. 137). 

Thus, the problem of duality, which runs through most of his 
writings, was a source of anguish to him throughout the whole 
of his life. 

The problem of duality is intimately and organically bound up 
m Dostoyevsky's writings with that of the “underground'*. In what 
Ioims is one side of the double’s personality—his urge lor sell-asser¬ 
tion and rebellion—likely to manifest itself? The “underground** is 
the most hoixihlc, and socially most injurious form of this urge. It 
is the extreme of self-cent redness and individualism. At the same 
lime, it is a teniblc tragedy lor the sufferei, who is acutely awaie 
of the “underground” in himself- It will be seen that Dostoyevsky’s 
psychological approach was different from that of Leo Tolstoi. Dos¬ 
toievsky was concerned not so much with psychological analysis as 
such as with the lresh possibilities it offered loi lealistie ait. “I am 
called a psychologist,*' Dostoyevsky wrote, “but that is not tiue; 
l am merely a lcdlist in the highest sense, i c , I depict all the depths 
oi the human soul.** 

Dostoyevsky clearly realised the significance of his aitistic disco 
veiv. “1 alone," he wrote “have been able to demonstrate the Pago■ 
dy ol the underground, which consists in sullciing, self-destruction, an 
awareness ol a perfection that is impossible ol achievement and. 
above all, the deep conviction in these miserable creatures that all 
humans are like them, so that to try to cuie themselves is a waste of 
time. What encouragement can there be lot them if they try to cure 
themselves? A prize? Faith? But there is nobody to give the prize 
and nobody to have faith in. One step further, and you have extreme 
vice and crime (murder).” 

Let us consider tire social roots of this phenomenon. The under¬ 
ground appears wheie there is overweening pride. Pride is engen¬ 
dered by an acute sense of personality, but the idea of personality and 
its rights was d legacy of bouigcois society when it was asserting 
itseli in the struggle with feudalism. As the contradictions within 
capitalist society giew and developed, this gieat achievement revealed 




INTRODUCTION 


21 


its tragic opposite. Here is what Dostoyevsky wrote in his Winter 
Notes on Summer Impressions , after his travels in Western Europe: 
‘‘And soon after this (i.e., the emergence of bourgeois society— A.B .), 
they proclaimed liberte, egalite , fratemite. Well and good! But what 
is liberte ? It means freedom. What kind of freedom? Equal freedom 
for all to do whatever they wish within the framework of the law? 
When may one do whatever one wishes? When one possesses a 
million. Does freedom provide each man with a million? No. What 
is a man without a million? A man without a million is not one 
who does whatever he pleases, but one who is treated in any way 
it pleases others.’* Dostoyevsky goes on to show the hollowness of the 
other two slogans—equality and fraternity. As he saw it, the bour¬ 
geois emphasis on individualism precluded the achievement of broth¬ 
erhood. “There is no evidence of fraternity, because what has emerged 
is the personal principle, that of separateness, enhanced by self- 
preservation and self-activity within one’s own /.” In Crime and 
Punishment , the idea of alienation is personified in Raskolnikov: 
“lie was tormented by the sense of separateness, of disunity 
with mankind, which he felt immediately after committing the 
crime.” 

Thus, Dostoyevsky defined a truly tragic paradox: the full devel¬ 
opment of the individual in bourgeois society is hampered by his 
very sense of self as an individual. How can this contradiction be 
resolved? The great writer was able to reveal the main contradiction 
inherent in the idea of individuality—a problem bourgeois art is still 
giappling with. Dostoyevsky was horrified by such “freedom*’ of the 
individual, since it was nothing but a mockery of the very idea of 
individuality. 

It should be remembered, however, that Dostoyevsky was not a 
philosopher engaged in building logical schemes, but an artist and a 
realist who thought in Urms of images. He therefore studied the 
pioblem of personality in living human characters. 

How, then, is the “underground” depicted in terms of images? In 
Crime and Punishment , it is personified in the image of Raskolnikov, 
the murderer of an old woman money-lender. His crime, committed 
as a test of his “underground” theory, is followed by his tiagir “sclf- 
cxecufion”, as the writer called it. During his argument with court 
investigator Porfiri Petrovich, Raskolnikov expounds this theory as 
follows: “I believe only in my principal idea. It is that, by the law 
of nature, people are divided mainly into two categories: the lower 
one (of ordinary people), that is to say, those serving exclusively to 



22 


INTRODUCTION 


reproduce their own likenesses, and people proper, that is to say, 
those who have the gift or talent of bringing about some new devel¬ 
opment in their environment.” What is particularly misleading and 
socially injurious about this theory is that it is couched in humanist 
terms and seems motivated by a striving for human happiness. The 
more sincerely its ideologists are obsessed by it, the more attractive 
it seems. Here is how Raskolnikov explains the idea: “It is my belief 
that if circumstances had prevented Keppler’s or Newton’s discoveries 
from reaching mankind otherwise than at the cost of one, ten, a 
hundred or more human lives that hampered those discoveries 01 
blocked their path, then Newton would have been entitled, and even 
duty bound ... to remove those ten or one hundred people.” The 
murder of the old woman is conceived in the novel as the acid test 
of this theory. One can imagine how much bloodshed it could justify 
at the hands of a fanatic not only obsessed with an idea, but given 
with ieal power to rule the destiny of nations. 

Mankind’s memory knows of many despots and tyrants who have 
forcibly “decided" the late of nations by destroying hundreds of 
thousands of innocent and (to use Raskolnikov's term) “ordinary” 
people. Raskolnikov mentions Solomon, Lycurgus, Mahomet and 
Napoleon. In the nineteenth century, the Napoleonft cult was wid.' 
spread not only in France but in many European countiies as well 
“Napoleonism” being a typical expression of individualistic boui- 
gcois consciousness. “Heir and murderer of freedom in revolt” was 
how Pushkin meruiesslv branded him. Swept forward on the tide 
of the Great French Bourgeois Revolution, with its ideals of 
liberty, equality and fraternity, Napoleon soon turned into an 
unbridled despot and conqueror, for whom the death of thousands 
of people was not too great a price to pay for the attainment of 
his ends. Raskolnikov’s “underground” theory patently bears the 
imprint of Napoleonism. 

It would be a serious mistake to identify the “underground 
ideas" in such characters with Dostoyevsky’s own views. It is not 
merely a matter of these characters’ ultimate downfall, since any 
crime against morality will inevitably meet with punishment. The 
crux of the matter is that the “underground” is a tragedy to those 
who bear it within themselves. 

Raskolnikov and Ivan Karamazov both arrive at their concept of 
the strong personality as a result of their humanist quest. They feel 
sincerely for all human suffering and feverishly seek a way for man¬ 
kind to achieve genuine happiness and freedom. They bear little 



INTRODUCTION 


23 


resemblance to Balzac's Rastignac or Maupassant's George Durois, 
though there is a superficial resemblance in their aspirations. 

Noteworthy are the following words, spoken by a character in 
Notes from the Underground: “And so, long live the under¬ 
ground!. .. Ah! But I’m lying even in this! I’m lying, because I know 
as sure as twice two is four that it’s not the underground which is 
better, but something quite, quite different, something I crave for but 
can’t find! To hell with the underground!” 

Thus, dualism and the underground split the hearts and minds oi 
Dostoyevsky’s characters, and there is no way out. They are indeed 
tragic in the sense that their built-in contradictions are quite irrec¬ 
oncilable, and the more intense the passions that possess them, the 
more inexorably they move towards disaster. 

Many readers, like so many leading film directors abroad, have 
felt drawn by the aspect of crime and detection in Dostoyevsky’* 
novels. Of course, the latter have their full share of murder, suicide, 
insanity, prison camps and crime detection. But it would be a serious 
mistake and a vulgar oversimplification to see his writings in this 
light alone. Dostoyevsky turns to murder because the very act of 
murder is an extreme form of the violation of moral law. A murderer 
is someone who has cast off the criteria of good and evil and lost 
all that is human in him. It is to restore society’s moral laws that 
Dostoyevsky studies the psychology of murder and analyses crime. 
There is a supreme retribution in Raskolnikov and Dmitri Karama¬ 
zov being sentenced to hard labour, in Svidrigailov, Kirillov and 
Smerdyakov committing suicide, and in Ivan Karamazov going out 
of his mind. 

It was in this way that Dostoyevsky revealed the tragedy of 
bourgeois individualism and its incompatibility with the fundamentals 
of human morality. Dostoyevsky discerned this disease of the century 
more keenly than did any of his contemporaries. In his note-books 
of the seventies, he defined the main theme of A Raw Youth as fol¬ 
lows: “The entire idea of the novel is to show that there is universal 
disorder in everything and everywhere in society, in its deeds and 
guiding principles (which for this reason are non-existent), in con¬ 
victions (which are non-existent for the same leason), and in the 
disintegration of the family.” Dostoyevsky portrayed this “universal 
disorder” in all his works. It is mirrored in the fate of all the char¬ 
acters in his novels, and ruins the most honest, sincere and noble of 
them. Take, for example, the fate of Nastasia Philippovna in 'Ihe 
Idiot. The tragedy of this young woman of remarkable beauty, spir- 


24 


INTRODUCTION 


itual endowments and passionate nature reflects the sordid rela¬ 
tions society has forced her into. “With such beauty one could over¬ 
turn the world” is how she is described in the novel. But this love¬ 
liness, whose charm and infinite strength—destructive and creative at 
the same time—arc described by the author with great tenderness, is 
a quality that arouses the basest sentiments, since Nastasia Philippov¬ 
na’s beauty and love are commodities to be bought and sold by all 
those she comes into contact with. Her lover, the sensual nobleman 
Totsky, is prepared to pass her on to the self-centred social climber 
Gavrila Ivolgin with seventy-five thousand rubles cash. Crazed with 
lecherous passion, the merchant Rogozhin tries to buy her love for 
a hundred thousand rubles. Intelligent, charming and proud, she 
becomes the object of an undisguisedly cynical cash deal. And so all 
moral principles tumble to the ground. Nastasia Philippovna’s rebel¬ 
lion and despair make the most moving and dramatic pages in the 
novel. 

Good and evil clash in her soul. Her outraged dignity drives her 
into an act of despair and she flees to Rogozhin. Then her yearning 
for goodness attracts her to Prince Myshkin, weak-willed, trustful 
and touchingly naive. The struggle between good and evil in the 
human soul, as described by Dostoyevsky, made a tremendous im¬ 
pression on Albert Einstein, whose opinion of Dostoyevsky’s writings 
is remarkable in many respects: “The Karamazov Brothers made a 
powerful impression on me. It is one of those books which smash 
the mechanical ideas of man's inner world and of the frontiers be¬ 
tween good and evil.”* 

Dostoyevsky always felt a vital interest in the “frontiers between 
good and evil” in man. Even his portrayals seemed to carry an 
echo of these moral searchings. Let us consider Nastasia Philip¬ 
povna’s description, from this point of view: 

“ ‘It’s a wonderful face,’ the prince replied, ‘and I feel sure 
her story is no ordinary one. Her expression is buoyant, but she has 
gone through terrible suffering, hasn’t she? Her eyes show that, the 
cheek bones, those two points under her eyes where the cheeks begin. 
It’s a proud face, terribly proud, and I can’t tell whether her heart 
is kind.* ” Describing Myshkin’s thoughts when he scrutinises Nastasia 
Philippovna’s portrait once again, Dostoyevsky goes on to say: “He 
felt an urge to delve into the secret of the face that had so recently 

* Quoted from Ilya Ehrenburg, Collected Works , Vol. 9, 
Moscow, 1967, pp. 522-523 (in Russian). 





Dostoyevskys study at his last flat in St Pctcisbuiq 1SS1 



Dost<viuk\ s hiju al llit Iikh\in (itnuUiy ol the Si 
\k\mdci Ncvskv lama in St PtUishuis> Gtaustnm. and 
lu'st In Nikoln I auutskv lied'd m ISS? I’hotosi iph 
taken in ISQ7 


INTRODUCTION 


25 


evoked his amazement.... It seemed that it bore the imprint of some 
boundless pride and disdain, almost hatred, but at the same lime it 
had something trustful, something surprisingly simple-hearted. This 
contrast, when one looked at these features, aroused even a kind of 
compassion.’* 

Everything in Dostoyevsky’s works—from the characterisation and 
the clashes in the narrative to the portrayals and artistic details— 
bears the impress of a social, ethical and philosophical quest. We 
thus see Dostoyevsky not only as a great artist but also as an out¬ 
standing philosopher. 

We now come to the “centre” of Dostoyevsky’s creativity, what 
might be considered the apex of the pyramid, i.e, the ethical and 
philosophical problems posed in his writings. The celebrated scene in 
which Ivan Karamazov tells his brother Alyosha of a child win, is 
chased to death by hounds contains a direct transition from the theme 
of suffering to the social and philosophical problems of being. Ivan 
explains that he has chosen the suffering of children to make his point 
“obvious”. But what is “obvious”? Why have the sufferings of children 
been chosen to make things “obvious”? It is the social injustice in 
the world that is “obvious” and, particularly, in respect of “the chil¬ 
dren, because if all must suffer to pay for etcinal harmony, what has 
this to do with the children, I ask you?” Indeed, gi own-ups already 
involved directly or indirectly in “the sins of this world” may be 
regarded as accomplices—active oi passive —in the injustice of the 
world. But as for innocent children—why should the sins of the 
fathers be visited on them? “I confess in all humility that I am 
quite at a loss to understai* I why it all has to be so,” Ivan admits to 
his brother Alyosha. 

In his humanist outburst, Ivan Karamazov arrives at a negation 
of the contemporary social structure. If mankind has set up a world 
of this kind then “man is vile”. But if God allows innocent children 
to suffer. Ivan begins to doubt Divine Providence. Like Voltaire. Ivan 
Karamazov explains: “It’s not that I don’t accept God, Alyosha, it’s 
just that I most respectfully return Him the ticket.” Alyosha has every 
reason to say, “But that’s rebellion?” Indeed, m the name ol love 
for humanity, both Ivan Karamazov a T u! Rodion Raskolnikov, spiritu¬ 
ally Dostoyevsky’s strongest characters, become rebels against God and 
society. 

But atheistic rebellion leads Dostoyevsky’s characters to the anti¬ 
humanist principle that “everything is permitted”. One cartnot help 
rising up in revolt against this world of ours, but in so doing one 




26 


INTRODUCTION 


should not be guided by the cynical slogan that “everything is per¬ 
mitted”. How is this contradiction to be resolved? In Dostoyevsky’s 
writings, this is a crucial problem. 

We see that his depiction of suffering leads Dostoyevsky to 
reflect on the meaning of life, the essence of the universe, the 
moral foundations of contemporary society, and to doubt Divine 
justice. 

On what foundations could mankind create firm moral standards? 
How was human conscience to be .,eld in check”? These were piob- 
lems of major concern to Dostoyevsky. It was here that the great 
writer’s inner contradictions revealed themselves most clearly. The 
chpths and the acuity with which he posed the problem went hand 
in hand with the historically utopian and conservative solutions he 
proposed. 

In ‘flic Legend of the Grand Inquisitor , a philosophical insert set 
forth by Ivan Karamazov, we find the major social and philosophical 
problems in Dostoyevsky’s writings expressed in a nutshell. He attacks 
the ideas of (latholh ism, which he considers dose to the ideas of 
materialism, atheism and socialism. To revolutionary methods of im¬ 
proving mankind he contraposes religious, idealistic and ethical stan¬ 
dards. which aic to he achieved through the Orthodo? tlhurch and 
the Gospels. When he saw the rapid spread of the socialist ideas 
launched in Russia by Belinsky and Pctrashevskv, Dostoyevsky, con¬ 
trary to the course ol historical development, pinned his hopes on 
the monarchy, the Ru.sian tsar. However, he could not hut realise 
the impracticability of his aspirations. As he admitted in one of his 
letters: “1 will tell you how it is with me: I am still a child of the 
times, a child of unbelief and doubt, and 1 know that I shall remain 
so till the grave. What fearful torment this thirst to believe has cost 
me, and the more arguments I find fo the contrary, the stronger it 
becomes in my soul.” 

Dostoyevsky’s contradictions also made themselves manifest in 
the characters through which he attempted to express his positive 
ideals. 

In fhe Idiot . his ethical ideal finds supreme expression in Prince 
Myshkin. 

Dostoyevsky's meek characters are embodiments of genuine mo¬ 
rality, goodness and humanism. Meekness should not be equated to 
human weakness and lack of moral fibre, Sonya Manneladova, Alyo¬ 
sha Karamazov and Myshkin are not weaklings who have submitted 
to the evils of the world. Their strength lies in their religion-ground- 




INTRODUCTION 


27 


ed conviction, their willingness to suffer for all mankind, their faith 
in the immortality of the soul. To all of them Christ is the criterion 
of morality. 

Prince Myshkin, whom Dostoyevsky saw as the Russian variation 
of the immortal Don Quixote, charms everyone with his moral purity, 
his trust in people, his respect for every man and woman, and his 
ability to discern the best qualities in people. The image of Myshkin 
was very precious to Dostoyevsky. Here is what he wiote about his 
concept of the novel: “The main idea in the novel is to depict a 
positively excellent human being. There is nothing moie difficult on 
earth, especially at present.” 

However, the tragedy ol Myshkin, as of all his other “meek” 
chaiacters, lay in the incompatibility between the ideal and the 
realities of life. To all the religious, kindly and meek 
characters he crc ited, Dostoyevsky might have replied in woids 
addtessed to Myshkin by one of the characters in the novel: “Heaven 
is a difficult business, Prince, far more difficult than it seems to your 
kind heart.” The charm of Myshkin’s moral purity stems from his 
absolute trust in and respect for people, his ability to perceive their 
best qualities. It is this that attracts everybody he meets. He is child¬ 
like in his simplicity of heart, but at times he reveals a kccn-sightcd 
wisdom. He possesses the gift of seeing through people. With him, 
people, both good and evil, do not wish to be hypocritical; they open 
their hearts to him. He wins their hearts by his unfettered and bound* 
less trustfulness. His misfortune, however, lies in his inability to bring 
happiness to those who love him and believe in him. He cannot save 
piny of them from grief or death, neither Rogozhin, Aglaia, nor Nas- 
tasia Philippovna. In a society rent by antagonistic contradictions, 
he may seem ridiculous and tragic at the same time, like Don Quix¬ 
ote dc la Mancha. There is a profound significance in Dostoyevsky 
presenting his charming character as an “idiot”, a mental <ase. There 
is a tragic paradox here: one has to be insane to preserve ones faith 
in goodness and one’s trust in people in a world pervaded by avarice, 
selfishness and venality. The great writer himself thirsted after that 
faith. In A Ridiculous Man's Dream , the main character dreams of 
universal human happiness, the author sharing the dream. In A Raw 
Youth , Versilov, too, shares that dream: “A wonderful dream, man¬ 
kind’s supreme misconception—the golden age—the most impractic¬ 
able dream of all times, but one for which people have sacrified lift 
and energy, prophets have suffered and died, and without which 
nations do not want to live and cannot even die.” 



28 


A 


INTRODUCTION 


Dostoyevsky has faith in man and his futuie. His boundless love 
of life is forcefully expressed in a dialogue between Ivan and Alyo¬ 
sha in The Karamazov B)others: 

“T love the sticky leaves and the blue skies of spring! It’s not 
with the mind, or through logic but with one’s inner self, one’s guts 

that one loves them, loving all one’s lresh-born young strength- 

Do you get any ol this gibberish of mine, Alyosha?’ 

“ ‘Only too well, Ivan: it is indeed with the inner self, with one’s 
guts that one wants to love—how w ' you’ve put it, and I’m terribly 
glad you have such an overwhelming desire to live.... I believe 
everyone must above all learn to love life.’ 

“ ‘ io love life more than its meaning?’ 

“ ‘Indeed, yes To love it more than logic, as you’ve put it. Un- 
doubtedlv before logic it’s only then that I’ll understand what it 
really means.* ” 

Dostoyevsky’s supicme aspiration to see all human suffering done 
away with and justice prevail was worked into a fantastic vision 
dreamed by Dmitri Karamazov, that most passionate and life-Iov- 
mg of his characters When, in his dream, Dmitri saw charred village 
huts, starving peasant women, and a starving baby blue with cold 
and nving in its mother's arms, he felt a passionate ^rrge “to do 
something so that the child should stop crying, and the filthy, ema¬ 
ciated mother should stop crying, there should be no more tears any¬ 
where v\ er again, and that this should be done now, immediately, 
without delay, at all cof's....” 

Dostoyevsky’s heart and mind were a battlefield where religion 
and atheism dashed, suffering was exalted and rejected, submission 
and revolt were contrasted, fear of revolution went hand in hand 
with an intense interest in the ideas of socialism, and thoughts of the 
inevitability of evil, perversion and suffering did not overshadow the 
dream ol a wonderlul and harmoniously developed people living on 
a transformed and happy earth 


A. Belkin 




POOR PEOPLE 
A Novel 





Oh, those story-tel!ri s! Can't they 
write something useful, pleasant, and 
enjoyable? No! 'They must rake up all 
the dirt. I would forbid them to write 
altogether. What is the good of ilY 
You read what they write and tan't 
help reflecting—arid all sorts of drivel 
comes into your head. 1 would simply 
forbid them to write altogether, 1 really 
would! 


PRINCE V. F. ODOYEVSKY 

April 8 


My precious Varvara Alexeyevna, 

1 was so happy last night, so impossibly happy! For once 
in your life, my obstinate darling, you did as 1 asked. It 
was eight in the evening when I awoke (as you know, my 
dear, I like to take a nap after work). 1 fetched a candle, 
laid out my papers and was just trimming my pen when I 
happened to look up and—how my heart did leap! So you 
understood what 1 wanted, what my poor heart desired! 
The corner of your curtain was fastened to the balsam pot 
just as I had suggested. It seemed to me even that your 
dear face appeared at the window, that you were peeping 
out, thinking of me. And how sorry I was, my little dove, 
that I could not see your sweet face clearly. Ah, there was 
a time when I too could see well. Old age is no blessing, 
my dear: everything is hazy, and a little writing in the 
evening makes one’s eyes so sore and tearful in the morning 
that one is ashamed to be seen by strangers. But your smile, 
my little angel, your sweet smile simply glowed in my 
imagination! And I felt as I did the time I kissed you, 
remember? 1 even fancied that you shook your finger at 
me. Did you, you naughty child? You must tell me all 
about it in your next letter. 

And what do you think of our trick with the curtain, 
Varenka? Precious, isn’t it? When at work, going to bed, 
or waking, I at once know that you are thinking of nie 
over there, that you remember me, that you are well and 
cheerful. Dropping the curtain means: “Good night, Makar 
Alexeyevich!” And raising it means: “Good morning, Ma¬ 
kar Alexeyevich, 1 hope you’ve slept well,” or “How do 
you feel, Makar Alexeyevich? As for me, I am well, praise 
the Lord!” See, how it works, dearest; it makes even letters 



32 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


unnecessary! Clever, isn’t it? And I thought it up myself! 
I am good at such things, don’t you think? 

Then, I may tell you, my dear Varvara Alexeyevna, 
that contrary to expectations, I slept very well all night, 
which is very satisfactory. One never sleeps well in new 
places. If it isn’t one thing, then it’s another to keep you 
awake. I got up this morning as cheerful and fresh as a 
lark. And what a morning it was, my dear! The window 
was throw open, the sun was shining, birds were singing, 
there was the fragrance of spring in the air and all of 
nature was coming alive—and everything else was in 
harmony too, everything as it should be in the spring. I 
even did some pleasant musing this morning, and all about 
you, my dear. I compared you to a little bird in the sky 
created for the solace of man and the adornment of nature. 
Here, it occurred to me, Varenka, that we humans living 
in care and worry, ought to envy the carefree and innocent 
birds in the heavens—and so on in this vein, drawing vari¬ 
ous abstract and pleasing comparisons. 1 have a book, Va¬ 
renka, and in it you will find very many things of this 
kind, and in great detail too. There are all softs of dreams, 
my dear, and I can’t help writing about them. Now that 
it is spring they are so exciting, pleasant and fanciful, so 
tender, and all in a rosy hue. That is why I am writing 
like this. But to tell you the truth, I got it all from the 
book. The author’s longing is so like my own, and all in 
verse: 

Were I but a bird, a soaring bird of prey! 

And so it goes on; and there are other ideas too. But 
never mind! Better tell me where you went this morning, 
Varvara Alexeyevna. 1 was not nearly ready to go to work 
when you came fluttering from your room so cheerfully. 
It was a joy to look at you! Ah, Varenka, Varenka! Don’t 
grieve, tears won’t help. Believe me, my darling, I know it 
from experience. And besides, you have peace now, and 
your health is better. And how is Fedora? What a good 
woman she is! Write to me, Varenka, and tell me how 
you get on together. Is everything satisfactory? Fedora 
grumbles a little, but you mustn’t mind. She is such a good 
woman, God bless her. 




POOR PEOPLE 


33 


I have already written about our Theresa—she is a good 
and honest woman too. I was so worried—how would we 
pass our letters to each other? And here, God sent us 
Theresa. She is a kind soul, so meek and obliging. But our 
landlady is merciless and works her to the bone. 

What a place I have come to, Varvara Alexeyevna, a 
regular slum! What a house! I used to live like a hermit, 
as you know: it was so peaceful and quiet that you could 
hear a fly flitting across the room. And here there is noise, 
shouting, an uproar. But I didn’t tell you what the place 
is like. Just imagine a long corridor, .very dark and dirty. 
To the right there is the blank wall, and on the left a row 
of doors like in a hotel, rooms tenanted by one, two or 
three persons. You mustn’t expect any order here, it’s a 
real Noah’s ark! And yet, they seem to be good people, 
well bred and educated. One of them is a clerk (somehow, 
connected with literature), a well-read man who knows a 
good deal about Homer, Brambeus* and all sorts of other 
writings, and about everything—an intelligent man. Then 
theie are two army officers who are always playing cards, 
also a naval officer, and an English tutor. But wait for my 
next letter, dearest. To amuse you, 1 shall describe them 
satirically, just as they are and in detail. Our landlady is a 
very small and slovenly old woman who goes about in a 
dressing-gown and slippers and keeps shouting at Theresa 
all day. I live in the kitchen, or rather it is this way: right 
next to the kitchen there is a room (and our kitchen, I 
must say, is a very good one, clean and bright): the room 
is not large, just a cubby-hole ... or 1 had better say that 
the kitchen is large and has three windows and a bit has 
been partitioned off to form another room, an extra lodg¬ 
ing as it were. It is roomy, comfortable, and has a window. 
And here I live. In short, it is all very satisfactory. Now 
don’t think there’s some hidden meaning in all this, my 
darling, that there’s something shocking in it being the 
kitchen! I do live in that room behind the partition, it 
doesn’t matter—I have my privacy, I keep to myself, live 
quietly and alone. For furniture I have a bed, a table, a 


* Baron Brambeus ■—the pen-name of O. I. Senkovsky, a miscel¬ 
laneous writer popular in the forties.— Ed. 



34 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


chest of drawers, and two chairs. Also, I have put up an 
icon. True, there may be better rooms than mine, far better 
perhaps, but the main thing is convenience, isn’t it? And 
so I have done it all for convenience, and don’t think for 
a moment that I had anything else in mind. And your 
window is just across the courtyard, and the courtyard is 
narrow, and I can see you pass, and it brightens up the 
days of a lonely man. And it’s cheaper too! The most 
wretched room in the hous? costs thirty-five rubles with 
board—more than 1 can afford. Now my room costs twenty- 
four and a half with board, while 1 used to pay a full 
thirty and had to deny myself many things. Before, 1 could 
not always afford tea, and now I’ve saved enough for both 
tea and sugar. Somehow I am ashamed to do without tea, 
my dear; everyone is well-to-do here and it is embarrass¬ 
ing. That is why one drinks tea, dearest; because of the 
others, for the sake of appearances, for good tone. If not 
for this I would not care, I am not the fussy sort. And if 
you put some money aside for emergencies, for shoes, or 
some bit of clothing, what will remain? And there goes 
the whole of my salary. It is not that I’m <»mplaining. It 
is enough. I have been earning enough for several years 
now, and sometimes I receive bonuses as well. 

Well, good-bye, my angel. I have bought a few pots of 
balsam and geraniums for you—it didn’t cost much. And 
perhaps you are fond of mignonette? They have mignon¬ 
ette too—you just write to me, but please set everything 
down in greater detail. And by the by, my dearest, have 
no thoughts or doubts on my account because I have rent¬ 
ed such a room. It was convenience which made me do 
this, nothing but convenience. I am saving money, dear 
heart, 1 have a bit put away. I may appear so timid that 
a fly could knock me down with its wing, but come to think 
of it, I am not like that really, 1 know what I’m about: I 
have the character of a man who is firm and serene of 
soul. Good-bye, my little angel! I find that l have written 
two full sheets, and I should have gone to work long ago. 
1 kiss your fingers, my darling, and remain 

Your most humble servant and truest friend, 

Makar Devushkin 




POOR PEOPLE 


35 


P.S. There’s one thing I beg of you: write to me, dear, as 
fully as possible. I’m sending you a pound of sweets, Va- 
renka, I hope you’ll enjoy them, and for the love of God 
feel no uneasiness about me. And so, once again, good-bye, 
my darling. 

April 8 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

I am afraid I shall have to quarrel with you after all. 
I assure you, my good Makar Alexeyevich, that it is really 
diflicult for me to accept your presents, knowing as 1 do 
what they have cost you, what sacrifice, what self-denial. 
How many times have I told you that I need nothing, 
absolutely nothing? You know that I cannot repay the 
kindnesses you shower upon me. Why have you sent those 
Uowers? A pot of balsam would not have been so bad, but 
why the geraniums? One has only to say an unguarded 
word, as 1 did about geraniums, and off you go to buy 
them! And they must have been expensive. But the flowers 
are lovely—little crimson crosses. Wherever did you get 
them? -I have put them in the most conspicuous place at 
the window. 1 shall also put a bench beneath, and on the 
bench more flowers—just wait till I’m a little richer. Fe¬ 
dora never gets tired of looking at them. It is heavenly 
here now—so clean and bright. But why the bonbons? I 
knew at once from your letter that there was something 
wrong—too much of paradise, and spring, and fragrance, 
and singing birds. I was sure there would be poetry too. 
You should have written some verses, Makar Alexeyevich! 
The rest was all there—the tender feelings, the rosy 
dreams and what not! As for the curtain, 1 never meant it. 
It probably got caught when 1 set the plants down. So 
there! 

Ah, Makar Alexeyevich! No matter what you say or 
how you try to convince me that all of your money is spent 
for your own needs, you cannot conceal anything from me. 
I can see that you deny yourself bare necessities for my 
sake. Whatever made you rent such a room, where there 
is no peace and quiet, where you are cramped and uncom¬ 
fortable? You are fond of privacy, the one thing you will 
not find there. And you could live far better, too, judging 



36 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


by your salary. Fedora says that you used to live much 
better. Can it be that you have spent all your life alone, 
in want and gloom, with never a friendly word, in odd 
corners rented from strangers? My kind friend, how my 
heart aches for you! But at least try to keep well, Makar 
Alexeyevich. You say that it hurts your eyes to write by 
candle light. Then why'do so? Surely, your employers 
know how diligent you are as it is. 

Once more, I implore you not to spend so much money 
on me, 1 knew you love me, but you are not rich. This 
morning I too rose in good spirits. I felt so very cheerful. 
Fedora had been at work for a long time, she had brought 
work for me too. This made me so happy; I went out to 
buy some silk and then took up my work. All morning 1 
felt light-hearted and cheerful. But now I’m sad again 
and my heart is heavy. 

What is to become of me? What awaits me in the future? 
It is so depressing to be uncertain, to have no prospects 
or even a laint idea of what will happen. And the past was 
so awful that the mere thought of it breaks my heart. To 
the end of my days I shall have a bitter plaint against 
those wicked people who wrecked my life. 

But it is growing dark and I must set to work. I should 
have liked to write much more, but there is no time: the 
work is urgent ard 1 must hurry. It is good to write letters, 
of course; one is not so lonely. But why don’t you ever 
come to us? Why not, Makar Alexeyevich? You have not 
far to go and surely you can find the time for this. Please, 
do come! I have just seen your Theresa. She was looking 
so ill and I felt so sorry for her that 1 gave her twenty 
kopeks. Oh, I have almost forgotten: please, give me a 
full account of the way you live. What sort of people live 
with you and how do you get on with them? 1 should very 
much like to know. See that you set it all down. Tonight I 
shall purposely loop up the corner of my curtain for you. 
Go to bed earliei—last night I saw your candle burning 
until nearly midnight. Well, good-bye! Today’s a sad, dull, 
miserable day. It’s simply that sort of day. Good-bye. 

Your friend. 

Varvara Dobrosyolova 



POOR PEOPLE 


37 


April 8 

My dear Varvara Alexeyevna, 

Yes, dear heart, yes, it was a bad dav to fall to my 
miserable lot. You have surely had your laugh at me, the 
old fogey, Varvara Alexeyevna! But it is my fault, my own 
entirely. An old man with a tuft of hair on his bald pate, 
dallying with cupids and sentiments! Yet, I'll say this, 
dearest: man is a strange creature sometimes; he will talk 
such frightful nonsense and go to such lengths—good heav¬ 
ens! And what comes of it all, what follows? Nothing at 
all, except such rubbish from which the Lord preserve us! 
I’m not angry, dear heart, but simply annoyed to think 
that I should have written to you in that stupid and flow- 
ery manner. Today I went to work happy as a king. 1 here 
was such a radiance in my heart, a holiday in mv soul 
In short, I did feel jolly! At first I took to my papers 
zealously enough, but later, when I looked about, every¬ 
thing was as drab and bleak as before. The ink spots were 
the same, the tables and the papers, and I too was the 
same. Then why had I climbed on to the back of Pegasus? 
What had made me do such a thing? Because the sun had 
shone upon me and turned the sky to blue? What sort of 
fragrance could there have been when any sort of garbage 
may lie about in the courtyard under our windows. Tt 
must have come from my foolish fancy: one may stray 
so far as to forget oneself completely—out of sheer excess 
of foolish ardour. But on the way home, this evening, 1 
dragged myself along rather than walked. Besides, for 
some reason or other, my head began to ache. One thing 
always comes upon another. Perhaps the wind had chilled 
my back: I was so glad it was spring that, fool that I was, 
1 had gone out only in a thin service coat. 

Let me say that you have mistaken my feelings, you 
have misunderstood them altogether. It was fatherly affec¬ 
tion, pure fatherly affection, Varvara Alexeyevna. In 
your lonely orphanhood I have taken the place of your 
father. I say this in all sincerity, as a true relative should. 
I am after all a distant relative of yours, am I not? A very, 
very distant relative, of course, but a relative just the same 
—and now I happen to be your closest relative and pro- 



38 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


tector, because where you should have received help and 
protection you found treachery and insult. As for verses, 
I may say, my dear, that it is not seemly for a man of my 
age to indulge in poetry-making. Poetry is trash. Little 
boys nowadays get spanked for it in school. That is what 
I think of it, my dear. 

Why do you write about comfort and peace and all the 
rest, Varvara Alexeyevna? I am not finicky and need 
little. I have never been better off than now. Why should 
I be so particular in my old age? I have enough to eat, 
some clothes and shoes, and who am I to want extrava¬ 
gances? I’m not of a princely stock. No, my father was not 
of the nobility. He kept a family on an income lower than 
mine. Nor am I a molly-coddle! Yet, if the truth be told, 
my old place was much better. I felt more at home there, 
my dear. My present room is good enough, of course, and 
in some respects more cheerful and, if you like, more live¬ 
ly. 1 can’t say anything against it, but I miss the old 
mom just the same. We old people, that is, elderly people, 
grow attached to things. The room was small, you know, 
and the walls.. . . Well, the walls were, of #ourse, like any 
other walls. Walls are nothing. It is the memories that 
make me sad. Strange that they should make me so miser¬ 
able because they are quite pleasant in themselves. Even 
the things that were bad and once annoyed me now seem 
good and pure. Wc used to live there so quietly, I and the 
old lady who is now dead. Thinking of her makes me sad 
too. She was a good woman and never overcharged for 
her rooms. She was always knitting bed covers from strips 
of different cloth with yard-long knitting needles. We 
shared the same candle and so worked at the same table. 
Her little granddaughter Masha—I still remember her as 
a baby—must be a girl of thirteen now. What an imp she 
was, always up to something, and how she made us laugh. 
And that is how we lived together, the three of us. During 
the long winter nights we would have tea at the round 
table and then set to work. To amuse the child and keep 
her out of mischief, the old lady would tell stories. And 
what stories they were! Not only a child, but a grown-up 
and sensible person too could forget himself listening. 
Even f sat there smoking a pipe and listening until I forgot 





POOR PEOPLE 


39 


all about my work. And the child, that little piece of mis¬ 
chief, would rest her rosy face on her hand, her pretty 
mouth half-open. And if the story was at all frightening 
she would press closer to her grandmother. How we loved 
to look at her then! And there we sat forgetting to snuff 
our candle, deaf to the wind and maybe the snow-storm 
blowing outside. Yes, it was a good life, dearest, and we 
lived together like that for nearly twenty years. But I’m 
carried away. The subject, perhaps, does not interest you 
at all and I find it none too easy to recall, especially now. 
It is growing dark. Theresa is fussing with something or 
other; my head aches and my back hurts a little, and my 
thoughts are so odd and rambling as if in pain too. 1 am 
sad today, my dear. 

But what are you saying, mv dear? How can I come 
to visit you? What will people say? If I cross the courtyard 
there will be questions, talk and gossip. They will misinter¬ 
pret everything. No, my little angel, I had better see you 
tomorrow at Vespers—that will be better and less harmful 
to ns both. Please forgive me for writing a lettet like this, 
my dear: reading it again I see that it is all made up of 
odds and ends. I am an old man, my dear, old and igno¬ 
rant. When 1 was young I learned very little and now noth¬ 
ing will stay in my mind even if I should try to learn from 
the beginning. I dare say I am no master at describing 
things; and without being told or laughed at. 1 know that 
whenever I try to put things down in a more fanciful way, 
1 only manage to scratch together a heap of nonsense. 1 
saw you at the window today—drawing down the blind. 
Good-bye, good-bye. and may God keep you. Good-bye, 
Varvara Alexeyevna. 


Your devoted friend, 
Makar Devushkin 

P.S. I cannot write satirically anv more about anyone, 
dearest. I am too old to jeer, Varvara Alexejevna! And 
people would laugh at me and remember the old Russian 
proverb that he who digs a pitfall for his neighbour shall 
fall into it himself. 



40 


j. 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


April 9 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

Are you not ashamed to give way to such moods and 
tantrums, my friend and benefactor? Could I really have 
hurt you? I know I’m often thoughtless, hut I never imag¬ 
ined that you would take my words as a mean jest at your 
expense. I assure vou that 1 could never make fun of your 
age or character. It is simply tny thoughtlessness, and still 
more that I am terribly bored: and what doesn't one do 
out of boredom? To tell you the truth, I supposed that you 
had been joking in your letter. I was terribly upset when 
I saw that you were so displeased with me. My friend and 
benefactor, you will wrong me if you suspect me of un- 
feclingness and lack of gratitude. I do appreciate all you 
have done foi me by protecting me from my enemies, from 
theii hatred and persecution. I shall always pray for you— 
and if God hears my prayers, you will be happy. 

I’m quite unwell today: l feel hot one minute and shivery 
the next, and Fedora is worried. You should not be 
ashamed to come and see me, Makar Alexeyevich. Let 
people mind the ir own business. We are well enough 
acquainted, aren't we? Good-bye, Makar Alexeyevich—I 
have said all that there is to say and am too unwell to 
write more. Again, don’t be angry with me and be assured 
of the constant respect and attachment of 

Your most devoted and humble servant, 

Varvara Dobrosyolova 


April 12 

My dear Varvara Alexeyevna, 

What is the matter? What is wrong? You’re always 
frightening me! In every letter 1 plead with you, beg you 
to be more careful, wrap yourself well, stay at home in 
bad weathei, be sensible in all things. But you won’t listen, 
my darling angel, you're as bad as a little child. I know 
you’re as frail as a blade of grass, that you catch cold at 



POOR PEOPLE 


41 


the slightest puff. You must be careful, dearest, and look 
after yourself, and avoid everything dangerous, and spare 
your friends the grief and worry. 

You wanted to know all about my daily life and sur¬ 
roundings? With the greatest of pleasure, my love. But let 
me begin at the beginning. The stairs at the Iront of the 
house are quite elegant, especially the main stairway: it is 
bright, clean, and wide, and the banisters are all mahogany 
and metal work. But of the back stairs, the less said the 
better: they twist about, damp and dingy, and the steps 
aie all crumbling, and the walls arc so grimy that your 
fingers stick when you touch them. Every landing is piled 
high with boxes, chairs and old wardrobes and there are 
lines of washing. Most of the windows aie broken and 
everywhere there arc tubs Idled with dirt, litter, egg shells 
and fish bladders. And the smell is abominable. . . In a 
word, it isn’t nice. 

As for the rooms, I told you how they are arranged: con¬ 
venient enough, but a little, well—stuffy. 1 don’t mean to 
say that they actualh smell bad—tiny meiely give off a 
sickly sweet odour At first it is annoving, but vou grow 
used to it in a few minutes because everything here 
smells—even your clothes, and hands. But the canaries 
soon die. The naval officer who lives here has just bought 
his fifth—they just can’t stand the air. It’s a bit sour in 
the morning when the fish and meat are cooking and the 
kitchen is sloppy; but in the evening it is heavenly. The 
kitchen is bright and aige and is full of old washing 
hung out to dry and the smell is a little bothering since my 
room adjoins. But never mind, one can get used to it if 
one lives here long enough. 

The house is astir from earliest dawn: everybody is get¬ 
ting up, walking and stamping about. Some have,to go to 
work and those who don’t get up just the same. First we 
all have our tea. Most of the samovars belong to the land¬ 
lady and since there are not enough of them, each has to 
wait his turn. If anyone conies rlong with his kettle out of 
turn the entire company will pcK.rice upon the culprit. It 
happened to me, too, the first time—but that is not worth 
mentioning. It was on that occasion that I got acquainted 
with everyone. The naval officer was the first. He is a 



42 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


confiding soul and told me all about his father, mother, and 
sister (who is married to an official in Tula) and about the 
town of Kronstadt. He offered me his protection and then 
and there invited me to tea. I found him in a room where 
card playing never ends. After tea they insisted that I 
should join them, seriously or not I cannot say. They had 
been playing all night and were still at it when I entered. 
They were engrossed in their cards, there was chalk dust 
everywhere, and the smoke hung so thick that it made 
your eyes smart. When I refused to gamble, I was told 
to stop talking philosophy. After this no one spoke to me 
at all. And to tell the truth, I didn’t mind. I won't go there 
any more. Gamblers, that’s what they arc, gamblers! The 
writer also arranges parties in his room. But here it is all 
very innocent, respectable, delicate, and on a high level. 

lo this I may add, Varenka, that oui landlady is a vi¬ 
cious old woman, a proper witch. You've seen Theresa and 
know how thin she is: like a plucked chicken. There are 
only two servants—Theresa and Faldoni. Perhaps Faldoni 
has some other name, but he answers to Faldoni. And so 
everyone calls him Faldoni. He is a red-haired cross-eyed 
lout with a pug nose and always wrangling with Theresa— 
they nearly come to blows. On the whole, 1 would say 
that life hcic is not so pleasant. There is no such thing as 
bedtime here, when all would grow quiet and vou could 
go to sleep. In one room or another they are sure to be 
playing cards: and sometimes there are goings-on of which 
1 am ashamed to speak. I’ve grown used to it myself, but 
can't help wondering how the family people can bear to 
live in such a bedlam There is a poor family in the room 
on the other side of the hall, a coiner room somewhat 
apart from the others. They are quiet folk, no sound or 
sight of them behind their partitions. The man, Gorshkov 
by name, is an unemployed clerk who was discharged for 
something or other seven years ago. He is a little grey man 
and his clothes are so shabby and ill-kept that it hurts to 
look at him. His coat is even worse than mine, a sad little 
stick of a man! (We meet in the corridor at times). His 
knees are wobbly and his hands and head are also shaky, 
from some sickness ot God knows what! He is a timid, 
frightened man, and keeps out of everyone’s way. I 



POOR PEOPLE 


43 


too may seem bashful at times, but he is even worse. 
He has a wife and three children. The eldest boy is as 
puny as his father. The wife must have been pretty once— 
one can see it even now. But she is clothed in rags, poor 
thing. They are behind with their rent, I have heard. The 
landlady, at any rate, is not very kind to them. I have 
also heard that Gorshkov got into some trouble or other 
which was why he lost his post: he was accused of 
something, maybe he was put on trial, or maybe he was 
under examination: I can’t say for sure. But they are poor, 
God, how poor! There is never a sound from their room, 
as though not a soul lived there. Even the children can’t 
be heard. I have never seen them run about or play. A bad 
sign! As I passed his door one evening when the house 
was unusually still, I heard a sob, then a whisper, and 
another sob. Someone seemed to be weeping so pitifully 
that it wrung my heart. 1 kept thinking about them all 
night and could not fall asleep. 

Well, good-bye. Varenka, my priceless friend. 1 have 
described everything as well as I could. I have been think¬ 
ing of you and you alone all day. I’m so worried about 
you, 1 know you need a warm coat for these Petersburg 
springs with their winds and their rains and their snows 
—they’ll be the death of me, I know, Varenka. God save 
us from this mellow season! Don't be angrv, dear heart, 
for the way I write. I have no style, none at all. I wish I 
had. I write what come" to my mind in the hope of cheer - 
ing you a little. If I had had a decent education, it would 
be different. But what sort of an education did I have, a 
kopek's worth not more! 

Your constant and faithful friend, 
Makar Devushkin 


April 25 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

Today, I met my cousin Sasha! It was awful! She is 
going to ruin! Rumours have reached me, too, that Anna 
Fyodorovna has been making inquiries about *me. Will 



44 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


she ever leave me alone? She wants to forgive me, to let 
bygones be bygones and intends to call upon me soon. She 
claims that you are no relative of mine, that she is closer 
to me, that you have no right to meddle in our family af¬ 
fairs, and that 1 ought to be ashamed to be living on your 
charity and support. She says that I have forgotten her 
hospitality, that it was she who saved my mother and me 
from starvation, that for two and a half years she was put 
to great expense feeding us, and above all that she was 
quite willing to forgive our debts. She did not spare even 
my poor mother. If Mama could know what they did to 
me! But God sees all! Anna Fyodorovna says that I have 
myself to blame for the loss of my happiness, that she 
showed me the way, and that it is no fault of hers that I 
could not or perhaps would not save my reputation. Then 
whose fault is it, dear God! She says that Mr. Bykov is 
quite right and that no man can be expected to marry a 
woman who. .. . What is the good of writing about this? 
It hurt cruelly to hear that lie, Makar Alexeyevich! I am 
in a terrible state. I sit here, trembling, sobbing and weep¬ 
ing. It took me two hours to write this letter. I was sure 
she would at least acknowledge how she has wronged me. 
But there you are! And don’t worry, my one and only 
benefactor! Fedora always exaggerates. I am not ill. It 
is only a slight chill that I caught yesterday when I went 
to Mass at Volkovo. Why didn’t you come with me? 1 had 
begged >ou to. Ah, my poor, dear Mama—if you could 
rise from the grave, if you could know and see what they 
have done to me! 

V. D. 

May 20 

Varenka, my dove, 

I am sending you some grapes, dear heart, because 
grapes arc good for convalescents. The doctors too recom¬ 
mend them to quench thirst—and that is why I’ve sent 
them, just against thirst. Yesterday you wanted some 
crullers. And so, I’ve sent you some. How is your appetite, 
darling? That is the main thing. Thank God that it is all 
over and our troubles are coming to an end. Let us thank 




POOR PEOPLE 


45 


heaven for that. As for the books, I haven't been able to 
get them yet. They say there is a very good book here, 
very beautilully written. A good book, they sav. 1 haven’t 
read it myself, but everyone praises it and they have piom- 
ised to lend it to me too—but will you read it'* 1 You are 
m) hard to please—it is difficult to suit your taste. 1 know 
that well enough, my dear. You probably want something 
poetic, something full of sighs and love. I’ll get it for you, 
never fear. There’s a notebook of copied verses. 

As for me, l’m quite well. So please don't worry, dear 
heart. And pay no attention to what Fedora says. Tell 
her she is an old gossip. Just tell her so! 1 have not sold 
my new uniform. And why should Whatever for? I have 
heard that 1 am going to receive a bonus of forty rubles. 
Why should 1 sell it then? So don’t worry, my darling 
Fedora, you know, is so {ussy, so fussy and nervous. There 
are happy days to come! Only do get well, my angel. Get 
well lor (he love of God, don't sadden vour old fjiend. 
Who told you that I’ve grown thin? It’s gossip again, just 
slander! 1 m as healthy as can be and have grown so stout 
that I’m actually ashamed of myself—in shoit, I'm living 
in clover. If only you would get well! Now. good-bye, my 
angel. I kiss your fingers one by one and ever temain 

Your eteinal friend, 
Makar Devushkin 

P.S. Reallv, my love, why are you writing on the subject 
again? Be reasonable! flow can 1 come to visit you so 
often? How can I do such a thu g? You can’t expect me 
to come except under cover of haik. How can you, my 
dear? And what darl ness is there left of the nights in this 
season? And when you were so ill and your mind was 
wandering 1 scarcely left your bedside. I hardly know how 
1 managed. But I had to slop coming because of the talk 
and the gossip. Even so the tongues arc already wagging. 
I completely trust Theiesa—she •>> not a gossip. But just 
imagine what it would be like if they knew more about us, 
what they would think and what they would say! Have 
patience, dear heart, and wait till you get well. We’ll 
have our rendezvous then. 



46 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


June 1 

My esteemed Makar Alexeyevich, 

I so wanted to do something to please you for all the 
affection you have shown me, that I at last decided to 
rummage my chest of drawers and find this old copybook 
which 1 am sending you. I began it in happier days and 
continued it at intervals. You often asked me about the 
past, about my mother, about Pokrovsky, and my life 
with Anna Fyodorovna, and finally about the more recent 
troubles. You were so eager to read these notes, in which, 
1 don’t know why, I described—whenever I had time— 
various moments in my past life, that I am sure they will 
give you pleasure. As for me, I am saddened when I read 
them. 1 seem twice as old to myself as I was when I wrote 
the last lines. Good-bye, Makar Alexeyevich. I’m so weary 
and lonely and suffer from sleeplessness. What a boring 
convalescence. 

V. D. 

I 


1 was fourteen when my father died. My childhood was 
the happiest time in my lile. My father was the steward 
of the vast estate ol Prince P. in the Gubernia of T. And 
there we lived happily and quietly in one of the villages of 
the prince, far, far from here. 1 was a restive child, always 
running about the gardens, the meadows and the woods, 
and no one looked after me. Father was always busy with 
the affairs of the estate, and mother with housekeeping so 
that 1 was left to myself. There was no one to teach me 
and l was the happier for it. Early in the morning I would 
run to the pond, to the grove, to the haymakers or to the 
reapers—never mind if the sun was scorching or I had 
roamed far from the house, whether I had scratched my 
hands and face in the bushes and torn my dress. They 
would scold me for this at home afterwards but I didn’t 
give a care. 

1 should have been happy to spend all my life in that 
village, but it was ordered otherwise: I was still a child, 
twelve years old, when we moved to St. Petersburg. It 



POOR PEOPLE 


47 


hurts me to remember how we made ready for the journey, 
how I wept as 1 took leave of everything so dear to me, 
how I hung on my father's neck pleading to stay a little 
longer. Father was annoyed and shouted at me. Mother 
wept and said that we had to go because of Papa’s affairs. 
The old Prince P. had died and his heirs dismissed my 
father. He had invested a little money with private persons 
in St. Petersburg and now thought that his presence in 
the capital would improve our circumstances. My mother 
told me ol this afterwards. Arrived in the capital, we 
settled in the Petersburg Side where we stayed until my 
lather died. 

How hard it was to get used to the new life. We anived 
in the city in the autumn. Wc left the village on a bright 
sunny day; it was warm and gay. The field work was 
neatly done. The threshing lloors were stacked with grain 
and the birds fluttered noisily oveihead. Eveiything was so 
bright and joyous. And when we arrived in the city 
there was nothing but rain, the rawness and slush of au¬ 
tumn under a gloomy sky. There were crowds of stran- 
geis. inhospitable, hostile and moiose. But eventually wc 
settled down—1 remember how everyone bustled about 
and iusstd, setting up a new household. Papa was hardly 
ever at home, and Mama never had a quiet moment. 
1 v\as completely loi gotten. And how sad it was on 
that lust morning alter our arrival! Our windows opened 
upon a yellow fence and the mud in the street below was 
never diy. There were lew passeis-by, and all huddled in 
theii coats because it was so cold. 

Our home too was oppressive tnd dreaiy all day. We 
had scarcely a relative or a frund. Father was njt on 
speaking terms with Anna Fyodorovna (he owed her some 
money). Out liequcnt visitors wcie his business associates 
who usually wiangled, argued and shouled. Such visitors 
always left him down-hearted and out of temper. For 
hours on end he would pace the room blooding. Mama 
was afraid to speak to him then, • ad I too would sit as 
quiet as a mouse in some corner, book in hand. Three 
months after our arrival in St. Petersburg 1 was sent to a 
boaiding school. I felt so sad among strangers. All were 
so unfriendly, the teachers foi «vei shouting, the girls 



48 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


poking fun at me, and I feeling so uncouth. It was all very 
strict and exacting! There were regular hours for every¬ 
thing, there were our common meals, and our dull teach¬ 
ers, and at first I felt tormented, wretched. I could not 
even sleep, but lay weeping all the night; those endless, 
cold, miserable nights! As we sat doing our lessons in the 
evening and I pored over my verbs and sentences, afraid 
even to stir, my thoughts would wander home, to father 
and mother, to my old nanny, to the fairy-tales she used 
to tell and—the misery was more than I could bear. It 
was a pleasure to think of even the littlest things at home 
and to wish and wish that I were there, that I could be 
sitting in that small room of ours having tea with Papa and 
Mama, the samovar steaming on the table, and everything 
so cosy, familiar and warm. Wouldn’t I hug my mother, 
hug and squeeze her! As I sat there thinking I would weep 
stealthily until the lessons were quite forgotten, and all 
night 1 would have bad dreams about the teacher, the head 
mistress and the girls, 1 would be conning my lessons in 
my sleep, but in the morning was never the wiser. In 
punishment they would make me stand on nfy knees and 
give me only one course at dinner. 1 was always sad. At 
first all the girls laughed at me, teased me, deliberately 
put me out when I was answering the teacher’s questions, 
pinched me as we walked in pairs to dinner or tea and 
carried tales to the head mistress about me for nothing at 
all. But how wonderful it was when my nanny came for 
me on Saturday evenings. I’d hug her, beside myself with 
joy. She would wrap me up well and off we would go— 
but she could hardly keep the pace as we walked home. 
And I would be chattering away about one thing or 
another until home at last, gay and light-hearted, 1 would 
hug and kiss everyone as though I had been away for ten 
years. And what a happy bustle there would be! I would 
run about greeting everyone, laughing, chattering and 
scampering about. Then there would be earnest talk with 
Papa about my lessons and the teachers and the French 
language and Lomonde’s Grammar and everybody would 
be happy and pleased. Even now I smile at the memory. 
For my father’s sake I did my best to learn my lessons 
well—1 saw that he was spending his last kopek on me, 




POOR PEOPLE 


49 


that he was making shift, God knows how. Every day he 
grew sadder, more discontent and irritable. His affairs 
went from bad to worse and he was hopelessly in debt. He 
was so short-tempered that Mama did not dare speak or 
cry in his presence for fear of annoying him. She looked 
so unwell, grew thinner and thinner, and started cough¬ 
ing badly. Returning from school I would find everybody 
sad, father angry and mother weeping quietly. There 
would be reproaches and rebukes. Father would complain 
that 1 gave him no joy, no consolation, that he had spent 
his last coin on my education and I had not even learned 
to speak French. In short, mother and I were blamed for 
all his failures and misfortunes. And how could he tor¬ 
ment my mother so? The very sight of her wrung my 
heart. Her face was drawn, her eyes sunken and there was 
an unnatural, consumptive flush on her pale cheeks. But 
the worst fell to my lot. It always began with some trifle 
and then went to heaven knows what lengths. Often I lost 
track of what it was all about. All sorts of things were 
held against me: my poor French, that I was a dunce, that 
the head mistress was a stupid woman who neglected her 
duties and cared nothing for our morals, that he, my father, 
had not yet found a situation, that Lomondc’s Grammar 
was a poor book, much worse than Zapolsky’s, that a lot 
of money had been wasted on me, that I was callous and 
unfeeling. In short, no matter how hard 1 struggled with 
my verbs and sentences, 1 was to blame for everything. 
And it was not that my lather did not love me’ on the 
contrary: he doted on mother and me. It was simply his 
character. 

Harassed by his worries and failjres, he became mcody 
and suspicious. Often on the verge of despair, he began 
to neglect his health, c aught a chill and after a short illness 
died so suddenly that for a few days we were stunned and 
could hardly believe he was gone. Mother fell Into a stupor 
which made me fear for her reason. No soonei had Papa 
died than his creditors sprang up on all sides and de¬ 
scended on us in a body. Whatever we had, we had to give 
up. ihe little house that father had bought in the Peters- 
burg Side of town some six months after our arrival had 
to be sold as well. How the affairs were finally settled I 



50 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


do not know, hut we remained homeless, penniless, with no 
one to turn to. Mama was wasting away from a painful 
disease; we could not support ourselves, we had nothing 
to live on; there was no salvation. I was only fourteen at 
the time, and it was then that Anna Fyodorovna first came 
to see us. She kept insisting that she was some sort 
of landowner and related to us. Mama too said she was 
1 elated to us, but very distantly. She had never visited us 
when Papa was alive. Now she came to us with tears in 
her eyes, condoled over our loss and our pitiful circum¬ 
stances. but added that father had himself to blame: he 
had lived beyond his means, had wanted to climb too high 
and had been too self-confident. 

She said she wanted to be f wends with us, suggested 
that bygones be bygones, and wept when Mama assured 
her that she had never felt any animosity. Then she took 
Mama to church and ordered Mass for the soul of the dear 
depaited (as she called my father): and so we were recon¬ 
ciled. 

After lengthy preliminaries in which she stressed our 
wretched circumstances, our utter loneline&, helplessness 
and hopelessness, she invited us to take shelter with her, 
as she put it. Mother thanked het, yet for a long time could 
not make up her mind. But as there was no wav out and 
nothing else that we could do, she finally told Anna Fyo¬ 
dorovna that we gratefully accepted her offer. How well 
1 remember the morning when we moved from the Peters¬ 
burg Side to Vasilevsky island. It was a clear, crisp autumn 
morning. Mama was weeping and 1 too felt awfully sad. 
My heart was heavy with vague forebodings. Those were 
hard times. . .... . 


II 

At first, before wc grew accustomed to life with Anna 
Fyodorovna, it seemed strange and somehow frightening 
to us. Anna Fyodorovna’s house in Sixth Line was her own 
properly. There were five rooms, three of which were occu¬ 
pied by Anna Fyodorovna and my cousin Sasha, an orphan 





POOR PEOPLE 


51 


whom she had adopted. The fourth was given to mother 
and me. and the fifth had been rented by a poor student, 
a certain Pokrovsky. Anna Fyodorovna was wealthier than 
could at first be suspected, but the source of her income was 
as mysterious as her occupation. Never at rest, always 
busy and preoccupied, she would leave the house scvcial 
times a day. But just what she was busy with was more 
than I could guess. Her numerous and varied acquaitances 
kept coming and going. Who they were, God knows— 
they always came on business and stayed only a minute 
01 so. Mama always called me into the 100 m whenever the 
d orbell rang and this always made Anna Fyodorovna 
very' angry. She would fume at Mama and say that we 
weie too proud, prouder than we could afford—what 
business had we to he so proud; and she would carry on 
in this manner for hours on end. I could not understand 
ihe significance of her reproaches then; it is onlv now r 
that 1 have realised why Mama was so lcluctant to move 
to Anna Fy'odorovna’s. She was a spiteful woman and 
tormented us constantly. Why she evei invited us to stay, 
is still a mystery to me. She was rather kind at fiist, and it 
was some time before she showed her true nature, when 
she saw that we were utterly helpless and really had no¬ 
where to go. Later she grew kind to me again, even to the 
point ol familiarity and flattery. But at first 1 had to sutler 
no less than my mother. Again and again she reminded us 
of her benevolence, reproaching us every minute of the 
day. She introduced us to olrangers as poor bereaved rela¬ 
tives whom she had sheltered out of Christian chanty. Dur¬ 
ing meals she would jealously watch every mouthful w'C 
took, but if we ate too little she made a scene again- we 
were too finicky, hei table was not good enough for us— 
and had w-e ever known anything better? She never stop¬ 
ped scolding father, saying that he had tried to put himself 
above others and came to a bad end: he had reduced his 
family to beggary and if not for a charitable relative, a 
kind Christian soul, they might ha -< been starving in the 
streets. What did she not say! Listening to her was more 
revolting than painful. Mama cried all the time, her health 
deteriorated from day to day; she was wasting away, but 
still we continued to work hard from morning till night, 


52 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


mostly sewing to order. This too displeased Anna Fyodo¬ 
rovna who kept saying that her house was no fashion shop. 
But we had to work to buy our clothes and meet unfore¬ 
seen expenses. It was essential to have some money of our 
own. Besides, we were trying to save in the hope of mov¬ 
ing elsewhere. But the work consumed what remained of 
my mother’s health; she grew weaker from day to day. 
Illness was sapping her very life. I felt it all and saw it all 
as the weeks slipped by, one much like the other. We lived 
very quietly, we might have been in the province and not 
the capital. Anna Fyodorovna gradually quieted down as 
she realised the power she had gained over us. No one 
dreamed of contradicting her anyway. We were separat¬ 
ed from her rooms by the coiridor, while the room next 
to us belonged to Pokrovsky, as I have said. In return for 
tutoring Sasha in French and German, in history and geo¬ 
graphy—in all the sciences, as Anna Fyodorovna put it, 
he received fiee board and lodgings. Sasha, then thirteen 
years old, was a quick-witted girl, though something of 
a tomboy. And once, when Anna Fyodorovna observed 
that it could do me no harm to take lessons tpo, as my edu¬ 
cation had been neglected at school, my mother joyfully 
assented. I joined Sasha and for a year Pokrovsky taught 
us both. 

Our tutor was a poor, a very poor young man. His health 
had prevented him horn attending any regular courses 
and he was called a student simply out of habit. He lived 
so quietly that wc never heard a sound from his i oom. And 
strange-looking he was too: he moved about so awkwaid- 
ly, bowed so clumsily and spoke in such a queer manner 
that at first I could hardly keep from laughing. Sasha was 
always playing tricks on him, especially during lessons. He 
was short-tempered: any trifle could set him oil. He would 
shout, and rush from the room before the lesson was over, 
and complain to Anna Fyodorovna. Then he would sit 
alone for days, poring over his books. There were very 
many of them, all rare and expensive. He earned some 
money from time to time, for he gave lessons in other 
places too, and as soon as he received his lees, he would 
buy more books. With time I got to know him belter. He 
was the best, the kindest man 1 had e’ er met. Mama 




POOR PEOPLE 


53 


thought highly of him, and, later, he came to be my best 
friend after her. 

But at first 1 too played pranks upon him with Sasha, 
hig girl though I was. For hours we would rack our brains 
how best to tease him and make him lose his temper. He 
was so absurd when angry and we were so amused (I am 
ashamed to think of it now). Once, when we actually drove 
him to teais, I heard him muttering: “What cruel child¬ 
ren!” and all of a sudden a change came over me—I felt 
ashamed of myself and sorry for him. Blushing furiously 
and almost in tears myself, I begged him not to mind us 
md to take no offence at our stupid pranks. But he closed 
the book and left the room without finishing the lesson. 
All day I was tortured by remorse and could not bear the 
thought that we children had driven hi© to tears. Hadn’t 
we expected him to weep? Hadn’t we wanted him to weep? 
And so we, two children, had reminded him, a poor, un¬ 
happy man, of his bitter lot. I could not sleep that night, 
so annoyed was I with myself, so grieved and remorseful. 
It is said that remorse relieves the heart. How untrue! 
And somehow my grief was mingled with vanity. I didn’t 
want him to regard me as a child; I was fifteen by then. 

From that day my imagination was tormented by a 
tiiousand schemes to make Pokrovsky change his opinion 
of me. But I was shy, very timid and could settle my mind 
on nothing but vague dreams (and what dreams they 
wne!). All I could do was to discontinue joining Sasha in 
her pranks; and he ceased being angry with us. -But this 
was too little for my vanity. 

Now, I must say a few words about the most curious, 
strange and pitiful man I have ever known. I speak of 
him at this point because hitherto I had paid no attention 
to him and began to do so only when everything connect¬ 
ed with him had suddenly become of absorbing interest! 

From time to time-a little old man came to the house, 
shabbily dressed, grey-haired, awkward and, in short, very 
strange. He seemed always ashamed of something— 
ashamed of himself. Because of this he was always fidget¬ 
ing, squirming and cutting such capers that one wondered 
if he was in his right mind. On arriving, he would stand 
outside the glass door afraid to come in. When someone 



54 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


happened to pass—myself or Sasha or one of the kinder 
servants—he would make various signs beckoning to us. 
Assured by an answering gesture that there were no visi¬ 
tors in the house and that he was welcome to enter, he 
would open the door gingerly and, rubbing his hands glee¬ 
fully, tiptoe to Pokrovsky’s room. This man was Pokrov¬ 
sky’s father. 

I learned his full story later. Once employed somewhere 
as a clerk, he had shown no ability and had held the most 
insignificant post. When his first wife, the mother of Po- 
kiovsky, died, he decided to marry again. With his new 
wife everything went wrong. She was a proper shrew, and 
kept everyone under her thumb. Young Pokrovsky was a 
boy of ten at that time. His stepmother came to hate him, 
but then fortune smiled down on him. A landowner called 
Bykov who had known the elder Pokrovsky and had been 
his benefactor now extended his protection to the boy and 
sent him to school. He did this for the boy because he had 
known his deceased mother, a young woman befriended 
by Anna Fyodorovna and married off to Pokrovsky.’ 
Moved by generosity, Mr. Bykov, Anna # Fyodoiovna's 
close friend, had given the girl 5,000 rubles as a dowry. 
What became of that money is unknown. So much I 
learned from Anna Fyodorovna. Young Pokrovsky did not 
care to talk of his family affairs himself. His mother was 
said to have been very beautiful and I think it is strange 
that she should have made so poor a match. She died 
young, only four years after her marriage. 

On finishing school, young Pokrovsky entered the uni¬ 
versity, and Mr. Bykov, who came to St. Petersburg often, 
continued to take a kindly interest in him. When the 
young man was obliged to discontinue his studies because 
of ill health, Mr. Bykov recommended him to Anna Fyo¬ 
dorovna who gave him board and lodging for tutoring 
Sasha. 

Meanwhile, the elder Pokrovsky was so harried by his 
second wife that he took to the worst of vices and was 
almost perpetually drunk. His wife beat him, made him 
stay in the kitchen and reduced him to such a state that 
he was inured to ill usage and blows and ceased to com¬ 
plain. Though he was not yet really old, his addiction 



POOR PEOPLE 


55 


threatened to destroy his reason. The last trace of human 
decency in him was his devotion to young Pokrovsky who 
was the image of his mother. Perhaps it was the memory 
of his gentle first wife that engendered this frantic affec¬ 
tion in this broken old man? He could think and speak 
of nothing but his son. He visited him twice a week be¬ 
cause he dared not come more often—even so. young Pok¬ 
rovsky detested these visits. Of all his faults, his greatest 
was lack of respect for his father. But then, the old man 
was the most unpleasant creature in the world at times. 
He was terribly inquisitive, and his chatter and questions, 
o f the most trivial and senseless kind, interfered with the 
young man’s studies. And, finally, he was not always sober. 
The son tried to cure the fathei of his vice, his inquisi¬ 
tiveness and chatter, with the result that the old m.*n rank 
to regard him as an oracle and would not dare so much 
as to open his mouth without special permission. 

The poor old man could not see or hear enough of his 
Petenka (as he called him). He nearly always woie a 
downcast, timid expression when he came to see him— 
never knowing how lie would be received. He would stand 
there hesitating and if I happened to appear would ques¬ 
tion me for a full twentv minutes about his Petenka. I low 
was his health? What kind of mood was he in 1 Was he 
busy with something important? And if so, what? Was he 
writing or fust meditatingWhen I had sufficiently cn- 
touraged and reassured the old man, he would make up 
his mind and open the doci—but, ah, how gingerly—and 
poke his head in. Satisfied that his son was not angry, that 
be had even nodded, he would sli] noiselessly in and re¬ 
move his coat and hat—a crumpled Miing, full of holes and 
with a broken rim. He would hang his things, and with 
equal caution let himself down into a (hair, never taking 
his eyes from his son, as if trying to divine his Pctcnka’s 
mood. If Petenka were at all out of sorts hf* wouhl notice 
it at once, get up murmuring that be had just dropped in 
for a moment, and that, happening » • be passing, he had 
come only to rest a little while. Then, reaching humbly 
for his coat and that rag of a hat, he would again gingerly 
open the door and tiptoe away with a smile meant to con¬ 
ceal his disappointment. 



56 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


When he was well received, on the other hand, the old 
man was beside himself with joy. Satisfaction would then 
shine in every line of his face, in every gesture. If Peten- 
ka condescended to speak to him, he would rise in his 
seat and answer in a subdued, obedient manner, almost 
with awe, in the most refined, that is, the most ridiculous 
words. He was no speaker, poor man, and he was always 
confused and blushing, scarcely knowing what to do with 
his hands, what to do with himself, and always mutter¬ 
ing something as if anxious to correct his answers. But if 
he chanced upon the right answer he would square his 
shoulders, straighten his waistcoat, tie and coat, and put 
on an air of great dignity; he would sometimes even make 
so bold as to rise and stroll over to the bookcase, to reach 
for a book at random and look at the title. He did this 
with feigned indifference, as though accustomed to han¬ 
dling the books of his son, as though a kindness from Pe- 
tenka was a matter of course. But once, I happened to be 
present and saw how frightened he was when his son 
ordered him to let the books be. Abashed and confused, 
he stuffed the book back upside down and then, anxious 
to correct his mistake, wedged it into place with the wrong 
end; and all the while smiling and blushing and not know¬ 
ing how to make up for his crime. 

Anxious to change his father’s ways, Pokrovsky would 
give him twenty-five, fifty or more kopeks, if the old man 
called upon him three times consecutively in a sober state. 
Or he would present him with a new pair of boots, a tie 
or waistcoat which made the old man stalk about as proud 
as a peacock. Sometimes he brought gingerbread and ap¬ 
ples for Sasha and me and we talked about Petenka. He 
would urge us to be attentive at our lessons and obey Pe¬ 
tenka who was a good son, an exemplary son, and, what 
is more, a learned son. Saying this he would wink at us so 
comically and make such faces that we shrieked with laugh¬ 
ter. Mama too was very fond of him. But the old man 
hated Anna Fyodorovna, though he was as quiet as a 
mouse and humbler than dust in her presence. 

My lessons with Pokrovsky were drawing to an end. He 
still regarded me as a child, a naughty girl like Sasha. 
This hurt me because I had been trying to make up for 



POOR PEOPLE 


57 


my former lapses, but he would take no notice, and this 
annoyed me all the more. I hardly ever talked to him 
outside of lessons—I could barely do so even when I had 
the opportunity. I would blush and grow tongue-tied, and 
then weep with anger in some corner. Who knows how it 
would have ended if not for a curious incident. When 
mother was in Anna Fyodorovna’s 100 m one evening, I 
stole into his room; I knew that he was away. What made 
me do it I cannot say. 1 had never been to his room be¬ 
fore, though we had been neighbours for more than a year. 
My heart was thumping madly. First I looked around with 
alarm and curiosity. It was a poorly furnished room and 
badly kept. Five rows of books ran along the wall. The 
chairs and table were piled with papers. Books and papers 
everywhere! And a queer thought came to me then, dis 
turbing and annoying. Why should he care for my friend¬ 
ship and affection? He was a learned man and 1 so stupid 
—I knew nothing and had read nothing, not a single book. 
I stood looking enviously at the shelves groaning under 
the weight of all those books. I felt vexed, resentful, and 
strangely frenzied. I decided to read them all and at once, 
from the first to the last and as quickly as possible. Prob¬ 
ably, my idea was that, having learned what he knew, 
I should be more worthy of his friendship. Hurriedly I 
snatched a dusty old volume at random, clasped it to my 
breast and rushed away, trembling with fear and excite¬ 
ment, blushing and paline by turn. I had meant to read it 
by the night lamp, when my mother would be asleep. But 
how disappointed I was when I opened it in my room and 
found that it was only an old b;. tered and worm-eaten 
treatise in Latin. Losing no time, 1 returned and was just 
about to put it back on the shelf when I heard footsteps 
in the corridor. I fumbled desperately with the wretched 
thing; it had been so firmly wedged in place, that now, 
when it had been removed, its neighbours had dosed the 
space. I could not jam it back! I was pushing as hard as 
I could and the rusty nail on whicn *!.e shelves were hung 
must have been waiting just for this. Down came the 
shelves, books and all. The door opened and Pokrovsky 
entered the room. 

He could not bear to have anyone tamper with his books. 



58 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


God help him who would dare even to touch them! Imag¬ 
ine my horror when all the books, thick and thin and of 
all sizes and shapes, came tumbling down and went skip¬ 
ping under the table and chairs and all over the room. I 
wanted to run, but it was too late. This is the end, 1 
thought. The end! I was lost! Caught at a prank of a ten- 
ycar-old! Like a silly girl! An awful fool! Pokrovsky was 
wild with anger. “What next?” he shouted. “Aren’t you 
ashamed of such tomfoolery? When will you grow up?” 
He knelt to pick up the books. I stooped to help. “Don’t 
bother!” he rasped. “You’d have done better to keep away, 
when uninvited!” But he had noticed my humble gesture 
and softened his tone to that of the chiding tutor, the tone 
of our recent lessons. “When will you come to your senses 
at last? Look at yourself: you are not a child, not a little 
girl. You are fifteen.” And as though to convince himself, 
he looked up at me and suddenly reddened. I could not 
understand—and stood staring. He got up, looking em¬ 
barrassed, and began to speak incoherently—apologising 
foi something, perhaps for noticing only now that I was 
a grownup. And at last I understood. Just wh»t I did then, 

1 hardly know, except that I blushed even moie hotlv than 
he and, completely flustered, covered my face and rushed 
fiom the room. 

I did not know what to do with myself for shame. To 
think that he had found me in his room! For three days I 
did not dare to look at him and blushed till I almost cried. 
The queerest and most confused ideas came to my mind. 
The strangest of them was to go to him and make a clean 
breast of it—to explain it all and convince him that I was 
not just a silly girl, but had meant well. 1 had almost made 
up my mind to do so, but lacked the courage, thank God* 

I can well imagine how silly I should have looked. Even 
now J am ashamed to think of it. 

My mother fell seriously ill a few days later. She took 
to her bed and by the third night was in a high fever and 
delirious. I never left her for a minute, giving her drink 
and medicine. By the second night I was completely ex¬ 
hausted and hardly awake. Green spots danced before my 
eyes and everything seemed to swim round me. I could 
have dropped off to sleep at any moment, but for the weak 



POOR PEOPLE 


59 


moans of Mama. Again and again I would start up, but 
then sleep would steal on as before. It was torture! I don’t 
know, I cannot remember, but in a moment when sleep 
was contending with wakefulness, a strange dream, a ter¬ 
rible vision invaded my overwrought mind. I woke with 
a start. The room was dark; the candle had burnt down, 
and streaks of light now flickered across the wall, now 
vanished completely. Fear, a stiange horror crept over 
me—my imagination was caught in an evil dream, and my 
heait contracted. I sprang from the chair with a cry of 
grief, of unbearable pain. The door opened and Pokrovsky 
came in. I remember that I was in his arms when I recover¬ 
ed. Gently he placed me in a chair offered me a glass of 
water and asked question after question. I said some¬ 
thing—I don't remember what. 

“You are ill,” he said as he took my hand. “Very ill! 
You are feverish, you are endangering vour health. Take 
a rest. Lie down and go to sleep. I’ll call you in two hours. 
Do lie down please!” He kept urging without giving me 
time to protest. I was leady to collapse from weariness; 
my eyes weie so heavy. I nestled into the chair intending 
to rest for half an hour, but slept until morning when Po¬ 
krovsky woke me because it was time for my mother’s 
medicine. 

At eleven o’clock on the following night, as I sat at the 
bedside determined not to fall asleep, Poktovsky knocked. 
“It must be lonely sitti*'? here by yourself,” he said as I 
opened the door. “I’ve brought you a book. It will help 
to pass the time.’’ Gratefully I took it. 1 can't remember 
what book it was, or whether I »pened it at all, though I 
did not sleep a wink that night. A strange elation kept 
me awake. I was restless, unable to sit still, and again and 
again got up to pace the room. A pleasant warmth glowed 
within me, a sense of satisfaction! I was so pleased with 
his attention, so proud of his concern fer me. All night I 
sat dreaming and thinking. He did not come again and 1 
knew that he would not. And so 1 wondered if he would 
come the night after. 

On the following evening, when everyone had gone to 
bed, Pokrovsky opened his door and stood on the threshold 
talking to me. I cannot remember a word of what we said 



60 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


to one another, only that I kept blushing confused and an¬ 
noyed with myself, that I wished it was over, though 1 
had craved it, dreamed of it, and rehearsed my questions 
and answers all day. On that evening our friendship be¬ 
gan. We spent several hours together every night through¬ 
out my mother’s illness. Gradually I overcame my shyness, 
though every conversation still left me annoyed with my¬ 
self. But I was secretly pleased and proud to see that he 
was forgetting his nasty books to be with me. Once, the 
talk turned jestingly upon the upsetting of the shelf. I 
was in a queer mood and too confiding and sincere at the 
moment. I was carried away by a strange exultation and 
confessed that I had wanted to learn, to know something, 
that I resented being looked upon as a mere child. I really 
must have been in a strange mood; I was full of tenderness 
and there were tears in my eyes. I told him everything— 
of my friendship for him, of wishing to care for him, to 
be at one with him, to comfort and soothe him. He looked 
at me oddly, surprised and embarrassed, and said nothing. 
All at once I felt hurt and disappointed. He hadn’t under¬ 
stood and might even be laughing at me. I buret into tears 
like a child, unable to restrain a fit of sobbing. He took my 
hands, kissed and pressed them to his breast, murmuring 
consolations. He was moved What he told me I cannot 
remember—only that 1 wept and laughed and wept again, 
my cheeks were hot and I could not utter a word for joy. 
Though agitated, I noticed that he was constrained and 
uneasy. Perhaps he could not lecover from his surprise 
over my elation, my sudden ardour. Perhaps he was only 
curious at first, but afterwards he accepted my devotion, 
my warm words and concern with a sincerity equal to mine, 
with the same attention and kindness, as a friend, almost 
like a brother. It was so pleasant, so comforting! There was 
no need to conceal anything; he could feel this well and 
drew closer to me day by day. 

We talked about everything under the sun during those 
sweet and anxious nights by the flickering candle, at my 
mother’s bedside. We spoke of all that came to our minds 
and escaped our hearts and we were almost happy. Those 
were joyous hours, though sad, and it is both pleasant and 
painful to remember them. Memories, whether pleasant or 




POOR PEOPLE 


61 


sad, are always painful, or so they are at least to me. But 
it is a pleasant kind of pain; and when my heart is heavy 
the memories are as exhilarating and refreshing as the 
dew of evening must be to a poor flower faint from the 
heat of noon. 

Mother was getting better, but I still sat up at her bed¬ 
side. Often, Pokrovsky would bring me books. Reading 
them merely to keep awake, at first, 1 gradually began to 
read them with more attention and finally with eagerness, 
and so much that was new, unsuspected was revealed to 
me, flooding my heart with fresh impressions. And the 
harder they were to grasp, the dearer they were to me, the 
sweeter to the soul. Crowding into my heart without end, 
they gave me no respite. Chaos disturbed my whole being. 
But the strange spiritual invasion could not unbalance me 
altogether. I was too much of a dreamer, and this sated 
me. 

When mother grew well our evening vigils and long 
talks came to an end. We sometimes managed to exchange 
a few words, trivial perhaps, but I loved interpreting them 
in my own way, and reading their secret meaning. My life 
was full, and I was happy, serenely happy for several 
weeks. 

One day, old Pokrovsky came to see us. Talkative as 
always, he was unusually cheerful, high-spirited and 
wordy. He laughed and joked and at last disclosed the 
cause of his excitement by informing us that his Petenka’s 
birthday was only a week away, that he was going to visit 
his son on the occasion, that he intended to wear his new 
waistcoat and the boots his wife had promised to buy for 
him. In short, the old man was > ery nappy and chattered 
away without end. 

His birthday! I thought of it day and night. 1, too, would 
give him a birthday present as a reminder of our friend¬ 
ship. But what should it be? At last I decided to give him 
some books. I knew that he wanted the complete works of 
Pushkin in the latest edition. And so Pushkin it would be. 
With my sewing I had been to save some thirty 
iubles intended for a frock. I sent old Matryona, our cook, 
to find out the price of the complete set. And, oh dear! The 
eleven books, plus binding, would cost at least sixty rubles. 



62 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


Where was I to get the money? I thought and thought, but 
could not make up my mind. I just could not ask my 
mother. She would have helped me, of course, but in that 
event everyone in the house would have known of it and 
the gift would be simply a token of gratitude lor Pokrov¬ 
sky’s tuition. I wanted the present to be entirely my own. 
As for the trouble he had taken to teach me, I would re¬ 
main his eternal debtor, to repay him with my friendship 
alone. At last 1 found the way. 

1 knew that the booksellers at Gostiny Dvor sometimes 
sold second-hand books that were almost new at half the 
price if only one bargained with them. So I resolved to 
visit Gostiny Dvor as soon as possible. My opportunity 
came on the next day: there was something we needed 
to buy and as my mother was unwell and Anna Fyodo¬ 
rovna had a most timely fit of laziness, the errand fell 
to me. 

I set off with Matryona and very fortunately soon found 
a handsomely bound set of Pushkin. I began to bargain. 
The bookseller at first demanded more than the price at 
the shop. But then, after no little effott, it i« true, pretend¬ 
ing to go away and coming back several times, I got the 
dealei to come down to ten rubles in silver.* What fun it 
was to bargain! Poor Matryona could not understand why 
l was so excited or why I needed so many books. But the 
trouble was that l had only thirty rubles in bank-notes, 
and the dealer would not let the set go for a kopek less 
than the sum he had named. But 1 pleaded and pleaded 
and at last he relented and reduced the price by another 
two lubles, calling upon God to witness that he was doing 
this only because I was such a sweet young lady, that he 
would not have lowered the price for anyone else in the 
woild. To think that only two and a half rubles were want¬ 
ing! I was ready to weep with vexation; but an unforeseen 
circumstance helped me in my distress. 

At another bookstall, not far away, I saw old Pokrovsky 
surrounded by four of five booksellers who were harrying 
him to distraction. Each was extolling his own books. What 
didn’t they offer him, and he was eager for them all, and 


One silvti luble equalled 3 rubles 50 kopcKs in bank-notes 



POOR PEOPLE 


63 


more! The poor old man stood among them looking so 
cowed, and obviously too bewildered to make his choice. 
When I approached and asked what he was doing there, 
he was overjoyed: he loved me to distraction, perhaps as 
dotingly as he adored his Petenka. “1 am buying books, 
Varvara Alexeyevna, some books for Petenka. His birth¬ 
day is coming and he likes books, and so I am buying 
books.” The old man always expressed himself comically 
and now he was confused as well. No matter what he chose, 
the price was one, two or three silver rubles. As for the 
larger books, he did not even ask the price, but only 
looked at them wistfully, fumbled with the leaves and 
tenderly put them back. “No, no, that’s too dear,” he would 
murmur, “perhaps those others?” And he would rummage 
in the periodica's, song books and almanacs of the ch< aper 
order. “Why do you want to buy these?” I asked. “They 
are awful trash.” “Oh, no,” he replied, “theie are nice 
books here, take a look and you’ll see- some arc very, very 
nice.” The last woids he uttered so plaintively that 1 
thought he was about to cry because the better books were 
too expensive, and 1 could almost see a big tear trickling 
down his red nose. 1 asked how much money be had. “Oh 
that,” he muttered and produced, poor man, his entire 
hoard wrapped in a scrap of newspaper. “Now here is a 
hall-ruble, a twenty-kopek piece, and twenty more in 
copper.” 1 drew him away, to my bookseller. “Here are 
eleven books which cost thirty-two rubles and fifty kopeks. 
I have thirty. Let me .avc your two iubles fifty and we’ll 
buy the books togethei and make it a joint i>ift.” lie was 
wild with joy and tumbled all the money he had into the 
hands of the bookseller who at once burdened him with 
our purchase. The old man went home with the books 
stuffed into his pockets and clutched under his arms, pro¬ 
mising faithfully to bring them to me privately on the next 
day. 

On the following day he came to see his son, and after 
staying for about an hour, as i.snal, dropped in on us. He 
seated himself beside me wi’h the most comical and 
mysterious expression conceivable. Smiling blandly, and 
gleefully rubbing his hands he told me that the books had 
been secretly brought to our rooms and stowed away in 




64 


X 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


the kitchen under Matryona’s care. The conversation then 
turned to the happy event and the old man described in 
great detail just how we were to present the gift and the 
more he talked, the better I could see that there was some¬ 
thing on his mind, something that he did not dare and was 
even afraid to mention. I said nothing, and waited. The 
spark of glee, the secret satisfaction hitherto evident in 
his antics, grimaces and the winkings of his left eye van¬ 
ished, and he was growing more and more anxious and 
uneasy with every passing minute. 

“Varvara Alexeyevna,” he began at last, timidly, in a 
low voice, “do you know what I think, Varvara Alexeyev¬ 
na?” He was now in utter confusion. “It is this way: what 
if you were to give him ten books, that is, for yourself, as 
your own gift. And I will bring the eleventh for myself, 
that is, as my own gift. In that way, you see, you shall 
have a present for him, and I shall have a present for 
him—both of us will have presents, each his own....” He 
was too confused to go on and resignedly awaited my ver¬ 
dict. “Why do you not want us to present our gifts together, 
Zakhar Petrovich?” I asked. “Well, Varvara Alexeyevna, 
the thing is, in fact....” He was stammering, entangled 
in his words, and very red. 

“The thing is ...” he explained at last, “I indulge a bit 
now and then, Varvara Alexeyevna, that is, I am always 
indulging, I’m afraid. In short, I don’t behave as I ought— 
sometimes it’s so cold outside, or there’s some unpleasant¬ 
ness or other, or a sadness comes over me, or something 
goes wrong, and then I can't help myself, and sometimes 
take a drop too much. And Petenka doesn’t like it, you 
know. He gets quite angry, scolds and lectures me—and 
so my gift will show him that I’ve been mending my ways, 
So to speak. He will see that I have been saving money foi 
a long time because I never have any unless Petenka gives 
me some. He knows it... and so he’ll be glad that I have 
spent the money in such a way, that I have saved it all for 
him alone.” 

I was sorry for the old man who sat looking at me so 
anxiously, and quickly made up my mind. 

“Why, Zakhar Petrovich,” I said, “give him all the 
books yourself!” “All? Do you mean all the books?” “Of 



POOR PEOPLE 


65 


course!” “As my own gift?” “Yes.” “As a present all my 
own?” “As a present all your own!" He could not seem to 
grasp it for a long time, although I had put it clearly 
enough. 

“I see,” he muttered dreamily, “that, of course, would be 
wonderful—it certainly would be splendid. But then, 
you.... Then what will you do, Varvara Alexeyevna?” 
“There will be nothing from me, that’s all,” I said “Noth¬ 
ing!” he cried in some alarm. “Nothing from you, nothing 
at all?” Dismayed, he was ready to give up the idea so 
that I, too, should have a gift for his son. He was a kind 
‘oul. I assured him that I should have been glad to give 
his son something, but did not want to spoil his pleasure 
“If your son is pleased,” I added, “and you are pleased 
then I’ll be pleased too because secretly, in my heart, I’ll 
feel that I had made him this present myself.” This reas¬ 
sured him. He stayed with us two hours more, but could 
not sit still for a moment, and kept jumping up, talking, 
laughing, romping with Sasha, kissing me furtively and 
pinching my arm and making faces at Anna Fyodorovna 
when she was not looking. Finally, Anna Fyodorovna 
turned him out. Never had he been so boisterous before. 

When the great day arrived he appeared at the door 
exactly at eleven o’clock, directly from Mass, wearing a 
carefully mended dress-coat and, sure enough, a new 
waistcoat and new boots. In each hand he carried a parcel 
of books. We were just having our coffee in Anna Fyo¬ 
dorovna’s drawing room 'it was Sunday). His first observa¬ 
tion was that Pushkin was a very good poet, but he became 
immediately confused and drifted into another topic, pro¬ 
claiming that one ought to behave oneself and if one 
didn’t, one would be indulging, and that evil proclivities 
were the undoing of man. He adduced several examples of 
fatal intemperance and stated that for some time past he 
had been mending his ways and conducting himself in 
exemplary fashion. He had always been aware of the jus¬ 
tice of his son’s words and had taken them to heart, but it 
was only now that he had really changed for the better. 
In proof of this, he begged his son to accept these books 
bought with the money he had been saving so long. 

Listening to the old man, I could not help laughing and 


66 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


crying in a breath. He knew how to make up a story when 
the occasion required. The books were transferred to his 
son’s room and installed on the shelf. Pokrovsky, of course, 
had guessed the truth at once. The old man was invited 
to stay for dinner and what a jolly day it was. After dinner 
we played cards and forfeits; Sasha was full of mischief 
and 1 no less than she. Pokrovsky was attentive and tried 
to find a chance to be alone with me for a few words, but 
1 just would not let hint It was the happiest day in fout 
>ears. 

And now come the sad and painful memories, the dark 
days. Perhaps, that is why my pen is moving slower, un¬ 
willing to go on. But that too, perhaps, is why I have so 
lovingly described all the small details of my happier days. 
They were so few and were followed by grief and hopeless 
misery which will end God knows when. 

My misfortunes began with the illness and death of 
Pokrovsky who took to his bed two months after the 
events I have just described. In those last two months 
he worked hard to earn a living. He had no secure posi¬ 
tion. Until the very last minute, like •all consumptives, 
he clung to the hope that he had long to live. He could 
have easily obtained the position of a tutor if he had 
not detested such an occupation. As for the civil service, 
it was out ol the question because of his poor health. Be¬ 
sides, he would have had to wait for his first salary for 
a long time. There was nothing but failure everywhere, 
and his disposition was sorely tried. His health, too, was 
declining, though he did not notice it. Autumn came. He 
went out every day, wearing only a thin coat, to apply 
and plead for a position, which humiliated him terribly. 
Time and again he was caught in the rain and got his feet 
wet, and he finally took to his bed never to rise again. 
He died ifi mid-autumn, at the end of October. 

Throughout his illness 1 scarcely left his room, watched 
over him attended to his needs and often kept awake 
all night. His mind was wandering most of the time and 
he would talk of all sorts of things: of hi<s books, of the 
positions he had sought, of me, of his father—of much 
that I had never known or even guessed before. In the 
first days of his illness everyone in the house seemed to 




POOR PEOPLE 


67 


be watching me strangely, and Anna Fyodorovna would 
shake her head. But I calmly returned their looks and 
gradually they ceased to pay attention, at least my mother 
did. 

Sometimes Pokrovsky recognised me, but these mo¬ 
ments of lucidity were rare. He was mostly delirious. He 
would be arguing with someone all night in long, vague 
and indistinct sentences; his hoarse voice in that small 
room rang strange and hollow as in a vault. And I was 
afiaid. On the last night especially he was in a frenzy, 
suffering greatly and moaning. His anguished moans 
wrung my heart. The whole household was alarmed, and 
Anna Fyodorovna prayed to God to take him soon. A 
doctor was called. He said that the end must come in 
the morning. 

Old Pokrovsky spent the night at the door where a mat 
was laid for him. fie kept entering the room, fearful to 
look upon. He was broken-hearted, stunned with grief 
and stupefied. His head shook with fear, he was trembling 
all over, he kept muttering and debating with himself. 
I feared for his reason. Succumbing to exhaustion just 
belore dawn he fell into death-like sleep. 

Soon after seven o’clock I saw that death was near and 
woke the father. The dying man was fully conscious and 
took leave of each of us. Strangely, I could not weep, 
though my heart was breaking. 

But the last moments were the woist. He kept plead¬ 
ing for something with a laltering tongue, but 1 could 
not make out the woids. ft was more than I could bear. 
For an hour he was restless, looking at me piteously and 
tiying to convey his meaning with gestures. Then he 
pleaded again in his hoarse, indistinct voice. Again I 
could make nothing of it. By turns, I brought eveiyone 
to his bedside, gave him some water, but he shook his 
head sadly. At last I understood what he wanted: he was 
asking me to draw back the curtain to have a last look 
at the daylight, at the sun and aM God’s world. I raised 
the curtain, but the early day outside was a sad and 
mournful as the waning of his poor life. There was no 
sunshine. Clouds stretched across the sky in a misty veil. 
It was such a sad, rainy, overcast sky. A fine rain patter- 



68 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


ed on the window-panes, streaking them with rivulets 
of cold, dirty water; it was bleak and dark. The pale light 
of day stole into the room and weakly challenged the 
trembling flame of the icon lamp. The dying man looked 
at me wistfully and shook his head. The next moment he 
was gone. 

The funeral was arranged by Anna Fyodorovna. A very 
plain coffin was bought and an ordinary cart hired. To 
recompense the outlay, Anna Fyodorovna seized the dead 
man’s books and other belongings. The old man quarrelled 
bitterly with her, recovered as many of the books as he 
could, stuffed them into his pockets, into his hat and would 
not part with them all the three days until the funeral, 
carrying them even to church. He was so dazed, he seemed 
to be bereft of reason; he kept fussing around the coffin, 
now straightening the venchik * now lighting or snuffing 
the candles. His thoughts could not long remain fixed on 
any one thing. Neither Mama nor Anna Fyodorovna at¬ 
tended the service in church. Mama was unwell and Anna 
Fyodorovna was about to go, but again quafrelled with old 
Pokrovsky and changed her mind. The old man and I 
alone were present. During the service a sort of panic came 
over me, a sort of premonition of the future; I could hard¬ 
ly endure it till the service was over. At last the coffin was 
closed, nailed down, placed upon the cart and carried off. 
I followed till the end of the street. The driver had set 
the horse at a trot and the old man was running behind, 
weeping loudly, his sobs breaking off when his breath 
caught. He had lost his hat, but did not pause to pick it 
up. His hair was wet with the rain and the sharp wind 
lashed his face. He seemed to notice nothing and kept 
darting from one side of the cart to the other, the tails of 
his old coat flapping. Books protruded from all his pockets; 
he clutched the largest to his breast. The passers-by took 
off their hats and crossed themselves. Some stopped to 
stare at the poor old man. The books kept falling from his 


* Venchik —a satin or paper ribbon with the images of Jesus 
Christ, the Holy Virgin and the Apostle John, placed on the forehead 
of the deceased in accordance with the custom of the Greek Orthodox 
Church.— Ed. 




POOR PEOPLE 


pockets into the mud. When someone stopped him and 
told him he had dropped a book, he would pick it up and 
dash after the cart again. At the corner of the street a 
ragged old beggar woman tagged after him. When the 
cart disappeared, I went home, fell upon my mother’s 
breast, sobbing violently. I kissed her and flung my arms 
about her as though to keep my last remaining friend 
safe from the clutches of death. But death hovered over 
her already. 


June 11 

How grateful I am for yesterday’s walk to the Islands, 
Makar Alexeyevich. How lovely they are, how fresh and 
green! I had not seen trees and grass for such a long lime. 
When I was ill I thought I was going to die, and so imag¬ 
ine how I felt yesterday! Please don’t be annoyed because 
I seemed so sad yesterday. I was really happy and light of 
heart, but somehow in my happiest moments I am always 
sad. And if I did cry, it doesn’t matter, I often weep and 
don’t know why. I feel everything so poignantly; my im¬ 
pressions are always so painful. The pale, cloudless sky, 
the setting sun and the stillness of the evening—well, I 
don’t know—I was in a state to be easily moved and my 
heart was heavy and asked for tears. Why am I writing 
all this? It is all vague even in my heart and on paper it 
seems meaningless, bui perhaps you will understand. Tears 
and laughter! How good, how kind you are, Makar Ale¬ 
xeyevich. How you looked at me yesterday to read what 
I was feeling in my eyes, and delighting in mv enthusiasm. 
Whether it was a bush, a sapling, an alley of trees, or a 
strip of water that I saw, there you were watching me 
and strutting before me as proud as though it were all 
your own estate. All this shows that you have a kind 
heart, Makar Alexeyevich, and I love you for it. Good¬ 
bye, my dear. I am unwell ag?in today. I got my feet wet 
and caught cold. Fedora, too, is unwell and so both of us 
are invalids. Don’t forget us and come as often as you 
chn. 

Yours, 

V. D. 




70 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


June 12 

My dear Varvara Alexeyevna, 

Do you know, I thought you would describe your im¬ 
pressions of yesterday in verse, and instead you have put 
it all in one plain page. But I mean to say that though you 
have written very little, it is very good and very dear. 
There is nature and -all sorts of landscapes and feelings, 
in short, you have described it all very well. As for me, 
I have no talent. Nothing will come of it even if I write 
a dozen pages. I have tried it and I know. You say, my 
dailing, that I am a kind man, incapable of wronging my 
neighbour, and responsive to the merciful goodness of God 
as manifest in nature, and you praise me in many other 
ways as well. It is all true, my dear, the Gospel truth, I 
am just as you described, I know it myself. Yet my heart 
cannot help melting when I read the things you write, but 
then I begin to brood. Now I shall tell you something of 
myself. 

When I first came to the office 1 was seventeen. It was 
thirty years ago, if a day. And l dare say^it is many a 
sei vice coat 1 have worn out in that time. I grew older and 
wiser in the service, and I have seen something of people 
too. 1 have lived, you may be sure! Why, there was a time 
when I was nearly recommended for decoration. You may 
not believe it but as God is my witness. And what do you 
think happened, my dear? It was all ruined for me by 
spiteful people. 1 am an ignoramus and simply stupid, 
perhaps, but I have a heart just as anybody else. And so, 
Varenka, do you know what those spiteful people did to 
me? I am ashamed to say—you had better ask why they 
did it. Only because I am timid, because 1 am humble, 
because I am soft-hearted. I was not to their taste, that’s 
why. It began with little things: “Makar Alexeyevich is 
this, and Makar Alexeyevich is that.” Then it came to: 
“Now what can you expect of Makar Alexeyevich?” And 
finally: “Who is to blame? Makar Alexeyevich of course!” 
And so you see, my darling, it was always Makar Alexeye¬ 
vich’s fault. That is what they did: make Makar Alexeye¬ 
vich a byword in the whole ministry. But this was not 
enough for them. Soon there were remarks about the boots 




POOR PEOPLE 


71 


I wore, about my service coat, my hair and even my figure: 
it was all wrong and had to be changed. And this has gone 
on for years, every blessed day, as long as I can remember. 
I’m used to it by now, I can get used to anything because 
I’m only a little man, of no account. Yet, why should I 
put up with it all? What wrong have I done? Have I 
snatched another man’s promotion out of turn? Have I ever 
slandered anyone to our superiors? Have I ever wrangled 
for a rise? Have I ever intrigued against anyone? It would 
be sinful even imagining such a thing! What need had 1 
for all that? And just consider, my dear, am 1 sufficiently 
clever to be ambitious and deceitful? What have I done 
to deserve all this? You find me a worthy man, and you, 
my darling, are an incomparably better person than all 
of them. And, after all, what is the greatest civic virtue? 
Yevstafy Ivanovich in a private talk yesterday said tha* 
the greatest civic virtue was to make money. Yevstafy 
Ivanovich was joking, of course (I’m sure Yevstafy Ivano 
vich was joking), but the moral is that one should not be 
a burden to anyone, and I am a burden to nobody. I have 
my crust of bread, stale perhaps, but honestly earned and 
very lawfully consumed. What is a man to do-* Thcic is 
no great feat in the copying of papers, but I’m proud of it 
still, for I work by the sweat of my brow. And then, what 
is wrong with copying papers? Is it a sin? “He sits there 
copying!” “The office rat is copying!” What of it? What’s 
dishonest about that? My writing is very neat and nice 
to look at and His Excellency i« always pleased—it is I 
who copy the most important papers for His Excellency. 
As for style, bother it, I have none: 1 know it very well; 
and that’s * why I have never risen in the service. 
Even to you, my Varenka, I write as I am writing now, 
without flourishes, just as the thoughts come to me. I know 
it very well, but let me ask: what would happen if every¬ 
body began composing? Who would do the copying then? 
I am asking you this question, and I want an answer. Well 
then, I know that 1 am necessary and let them stop trip¬ 
ping me up with their jibes. Eet them even call me an 
“office rat” if I look like one, but can’t they see that this 
rat is necessary, that this rat is useful, that it is a rat that 
is appreciated, a rat remunerated? That’s the sort of a rat 



72 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


I am! But enough of rats, my dear: I hadn’t meant to 
write about this, I simply lost my temper a bit. From time 
to time it is pleasant to give the devil his due. Good-bye, 
my darling, my kind comforter, my little dove. I’m sure to 
come to see you soon, my angel. Until then don’t be lonely. 
I shall bring a book too. Good-bye, Varenka. 

Your sincerest well-wisher, 
Makar Devushkin 


June 20 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

I am writing this in a hurry to get my work finished on 
time. Let me explain: there is the chance of a very good 
bargain. Fedora says that someone wants to sell a new 
uniform complete with trousers, waistcoat and cap—quite 
new and cheap too. Couldn’t you buy it? You are better off 
now, you have some money, as you yourself admit. Now, 
please don’t be a miser, you need all those things. Just 
look at yourself, look at the clothes you are wearing. 
T hey’re so shabby, it’s a shame. And you have nothing 
new whatever. I’m sure of it, though you say you have. 
God knows what you’ve done with your new uniform. And 
so please listen to me and buy it. Do it for my sake, to 
show that you love me. 

You have sent me a gift of some linen, but you are just 
ruining yourself. It is a frightening sum you spent on me— 
a terrible lot of money! What a spendthrift you are! These 
things are really unnecessary. I know, I am perfectly sure 
that you love me, there is no need to remind me of it by 
your gifts, especially when it is so hard for me to accept 
them. I know what thev cost you. Once and for all, don’t 
ever do it again, I beg of you. You won’t, will you? 

You have asked me, Makar Alexeyevich, to send you 
the rest of my notes and you want me to finish them. To 
tell the truth, 1 don’t know how I could have written even 
as much as this. I can’t bear to speak of the past or think 
of it even, the very memory frightens me. And it is hardest 



POOR PEOPLE 


73 


of all to speak of my poor mother who left her daughter 
in the clutches of monsters. The thought of it still makes 
my heart bleed. It is all so fresh that I have not been able 
to come to myself, let alone to regain my peace though a 
year has passed. But you know all about it. 

I have told you what Anna Fyodorovna thinks now. She 
is accusing me of ingratitude and flatly denies that she had 
anything to do with Mr. Bykov’s actions. She wants me 
to return, and says that I am living on alms and will come 
to a bad end. She says that if I return she will induce Mr. 
Bykov to make amends and give me a dowry. I don’t want 
anything from them. 1 am happy here with you and my 
kind Fedora who reminds me of my nanny. You are a dis¬ 
tant relative, but your name is a protection. As for them, 
I do not want to know them and will forget them if I can. 
What more can they want of me! Fedora says that it is all 
gossip and that they will leave me alone. God grant that 
they will. 


V. 1). 


Jwie 21 

My dear, my little dove, 

I don’t know how to begin. How strange it is, dear 
heart, that we live here, this way. What I want to say is 
that I have never known such blissful days. It is just as 
though the dear God had blessed me with a home and 
family. Oh, you sweet, darling child! Why waste your dear 
breath on those poor four chemises that I sent. You needed 
them, Fedora told me. It has been such happiness to give 
you pleasure; it is my own pleasure, so don’t cross me, 
don’t argue. Nothing like this has ever happened to me 
before, my love. I’m going into society, too. My life is 
doubly full because you live across the street to brighten 
my days. And then, I’ve been invited to tea today by my 
neighbour Ratazyaev, the official who gives those literary 
parties. We are going to read literature. That’s the sort 
we are. There! Good-bye, my dear. I have just jotted this 



74 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


down with no special purpose except to let you know that 
I am well. Through Theresa you have let me know, my 
darling, that you need some coloured silk for embroidery. 
I shall buy it, my darling, I certainly shall. No later than 
tomorrow I shall have the delight of gratifying your wish. 
I even know just where it can be bought. I remain 

Your sincere friend, 
Makar Devushkin 


June 22 

My dear Varvara Alexeyevna, 

I am sorry to inform you of something so pitiful, so very 
very pitiful that happened in our house. Gorshkov’s little 
boy passed away soon after four o’clock this morning. I 
can’t say of what he died: of scarlet fever ur something of 
the sort. I went in to comfort them, of couise. They do live 
poorly and how untidy their room was! And no wonder: 
they all live in one room separated only by several screens 
for the sake of decency. The coffin stood readv, a plain 
little coffin but rather pretty. They bought it ready made. 
The boy was nine years old, a promising child they say. It 
hurt to look at them, Varenka. The mother was not cry¬ 
ing, but she looks so sad, the poor thing. It may be a relief 
to have a child less to feed. There are two more: a baby 
and a little girl of six or so. There’s not much joy in watch¬ 
ing the suffering of children, especially if they are your 
own and you can't help them. The father in an old shiny 
frock-coat sat on a broken chair. Tears were streaming 
down his cheeks, not from grief, perhaps, but habit, be¬ 
cause there is something the matter with his eyes. He is a 
queer sort, always blushing when you talk to him, confus¬ 
ed and tongue-tied. The little girl, his daughter, stood near 
the coffin, so wan, poor thing, and thoughtful. I don’t like 
to see a child so lost in thought, Varenka; somehow, it is 
unpleasant. Her rag doll lay on the floor—she was not 
playing with it; she stood there with a finger pressed to her 




POOR PEOPLE 


75 


lips, and did not stir. Our landlady gave her a sweet and 
she took it but didn’t eat it. This is so sad, Varenka, isn’t 


it? 


Makar Devushkin 


June 25 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

1 am returning your book, a nasty book. It’s too disgust¬ 
ing to touch. Wherever did you dig up such a gem? Jok¬ 
ing apart, do you really like such books, Makar Alexeye¬ 
vich? The other day you promised to send me something 
to read. We will share it, if you wish. And now good-bye. 
I have no time to write more. 


V. D. 


June 26 

Dear Varenka, 

To tell the truth I haven’t read that book. I read only 
a few pages and saw that it was all frivolity just to make 
people laugh, and 1 thought that it would really be jolly. 
Who knows, 1 thought, Varenka will perhaps like it too, 
and that is why I sent it. 

But Ratazyaev—he has promised to lend me something 
really worth while, so you will have plenty to read, my 
dear. That Ratazyaev is a deep one, a real scholar, he 
even writes himself. Heavens, how well he writes! He has 
a facile pen and knows how to put style into it, that is, 
into every word, why, even such empty, trivial and vulgar 
words, as I might use when speaking to Faldoni or The¬ 
resa, are full of style when he uses them. I go to his parties 
too. We sit there smoking and he reads his writings to 
us, sometimes until five o’clock in the morning. A feast 
of literature! It’s so lovely, like flowers, there’s no other 
word for it. You can make a bouquet out of every page! 
And he is so kind, too, so considerate and obliging! What 



76 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


am I compared to him? Nothing! He has a reputation! 
And I? I have none. I just don’t exist! And still, he is 
benevolent to me! He even allows me to copy some things 
for him! But don’t think, my darling, that it is only a 
scheme, that he is benevolent only to make me copy 
things! That’s nasty gossip, my dear, just nasty gossip! 
I’m doing it because I really want to, for my own pleasure 
and that exactly is why he is benevolent—to give me 
pleasure. I am well able to appreciate delicacy when I see 
it, my darling! He is a good, kind man. Yes, and a mar¬ 
vellous writer! 

It’s a good thing, literature is, Varenka, really good. 
That’s what 1 learned from them the day before yesterday. 
A profound thing, too! It’s edifying and fortifying, and 
all this and a good deal more is to be found about “it in 
their book! And so well written! Literatuie is a picture, 
that is, a picture of a kind, and a mirroi; it expresses pas¬ 
sion, gives fine criticism, instruction, and is also a record 
of life. I got it all from them. To put it frankly, darling, 
I can sit theie listening (smoking my pipe like the others), 
but as soon as they begin arguing over all serts of matteis, 
then I am out of it, Varenka. That’s over our heads! I 
lcally feel ashamed of myself: sitting there all evening like 
a block of wood, racking my brains for an apt word to 
put in. and not finding even half an apt word! And one 
feels so sorry, Varenka, that one is not quite up to the 
inaik, that years ha\e made me no wiser. What do 1 do 
with mv leisure: I sleep like a log. Whereas I might be 
doing something pleasant: 1 might be writing. It would 
be useful to me and edifying to others. Why, do you know 
how much they earn for this, may God foigive them? Take 
Ratazyaev, for one, the money he’s paid! To write a sheet 
is nothing to him. He can write as many as five a day, he 
gets three hundred rubles a sheet, he says. And if it is an 
amusing story or something that people are curious about, 
he’ll get the whole of five hundred. Let them dare refuse. 
We’ll ask foi a thousand next time! None of your nonsense 
with us, Varvara Alexeyevna! Why, my darling, take 
verses, just short verses—he has a full copybook of them— 
costs seven thousand, if a kopek! Just think of it! The price 
of an estate, of a mansion! He says they have offered five 




POOR PEOPLE 


77 


thousand, but he knows better. I tried to reason with him: 
take the five thousand, I said, and to the devil with them! 
It’s five thousand rubles in cash! But he is stubborn. 
“They’ll give me seven!” Isn’t he shrewd, really. 

Why waste words? I’ll do better to quote The Italian 
Passions, that is what his book is called and you can judge 
for yourself: 

“Vladimir started, for in his veins the lust of passion 
had welled until it had reached boiling-point. 

“ ‘Countess!’ he cried. ‘Do you know how terrible is this 
adoration of mine, how infinite this madness? No! My 
dreams have not deceived me—I love you ecstatically, 
madly! All the blood in your husband’s body could never 
quench the furious, surging rapture in my soul! No obsta¬ 
cle could arrest the all-destroying, infernal flame which 
is consuming my weary breast! Oh, Zinaida, my Zinaida!’ 

“ ‘Vladimir!’ she whispered, almost beside herself, as 
she sank upon his bosom. 

“‘Oh, Zinaida!’cried the enraptured Smelsky once more. 

“His breath was coming in sharp, broken pants. The 
lamp of love was burning brightly on the altar of passion, 
and searing the hearts of the two unfortunate sufferers. 

“ ‘Vladimir!’ again she whispered in her intoxication, 
while her bosom heaved, her cheeks glowed, and her eyes 
flashed fire. 

“Thus was a new and dread union consummated. 


“Half an hour later the aged Count entered his wife’s 
boudoir. 

“ ‘Well, my love?’ said he. ‘Shouldn’t we order tea for 
the welcome guest of ours?’ And he patted her on the 
cheek.” 

Now what do you think of that, Varenka? A little frivo¬ 
lous perhaps? But good just the same. Let’s give a man 
his due. And here is another bit from his story Yermak and 
Zuleika. Imagine, my dear, this Yermak, the wild and 
teriible conqueror of Siberia, is in love with Zuleika, the 
daughter of the Siberian tsar Kuchum. Zuleika is his cap¬ 
tive. As you see, it is something straight from the times of 
Ivan the Terrible. 



78 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“ ‘You love me, Zuleika? Say again that you love me, 
you love me!’ 

“ ‘I do love you, Yermak,’ whispered Zuleika. 

“ ‘Then, heaven and earth, I thank you! Heaven and 
earth, you have made me happy! You have given me all, 
all that my tortured soul has been seeking ever since I was 
born! ’Tis for this that you have led me hither, my guid¬ 
ing star—’tis for this that you have led me beyond the 
Stone Range! To all the world will I now show my Zulei¬ 
ka, and people, those frenzied monsters, will not dare to 
blame me. Oh, if men would but understand the secret 
anguish of her tender heart, and see the poem which lurks 
in each of her little tears! Oh, let me kiss away your 
tcais, let me drink those heavenly drops, divine one!’ 

“‘Yermak,’ said Zuleika, ‘the world is cruel, and men 
are unjust. They will drive us from their midst—they will 
condemn us, my beloved Yermak! A poor maiden who was 
reared amid the snows in the tents of her father will wilt 
in that false and icy, heartless and haughty society of 
yours. They will never undeistand me, my heart’s desiie ’ 

“ ‘Then my Cossack sword will whistle over their heads!’ 
uied Yermak, his eyes aflame.” * 

Imagine how he must have felt, Varenka, when he 
learned that Zuleika had been stabbed to death. Under 
covet of night, the blind old Kuclrum stole into Yeimak’s 
lent and stabbed his own daughter. He knew he was 
delivering a fatal blow to the man who had robbed him 
of his thione and sceptre. 

“ ‘1 love the sound ol steel against stone!’ cried Yermak 
in the passion of his wiath as he whetted his blade on the 
enclianted rock. ‘I want their blood. They must be hacked 
and hacked to pieces!’ ” 

Then Yermak, unable to beat the loss of his Zuleika, 
throws himself into the Irtish and the story ends. 

And here is a bit in a comical vein, just to make people 
laugh: 

“Do you know Ivan Prokofyevich Zheltopouz? He is the 
man who bit Prokofy Ivanovich’s leg. Ivan Prokofyevich 
is a short-tempered person, but he possesses many rare 
virtues. Piokofy Ivanovich, on the contrary, is fond of 
radishes with honey. When Pelageya Antcnovna was his 



POOR PEOPLE 


79 


friend.... Do you know Pelageya Antonovna? She is the 
woman who always puts on her petticoat inside out.” 

Isn’t it hilarious, Varenka, isn’t it simply hilarious? We 
laughed fit to split when he read it aloud to us. That is 
the kind of man he is, God forgive him. Perhaps it is a bit 
fanciful and much too frivolous, but then it is all innocent 
and has nothing in it of free thought and radical ideas. 1 
must say, Varenka, that Ratazyaev is a man of good char¬ 
acter and therefore an excellent writer—which is more 
than can be said of most writers. 

And what if—what absurd ideas one gets—what if I 
wrote something? Imagine that you suddenly saw a book 
entitled Poems by Makar Devushkin. What would you say 
then, my little angel? How would it strike you, eh? As for 
me, my darling, I would not dare to show myself on Nev¬ 
sky Prospekt then. How would I feel if everyone were 
looking at me and saying: “There goes Devushkin, the 
poet and litterateur !” “Devushkin in the flesh!” What 
would I do with my boots then? In passing 1 must mention 
that they are always patched and that the soles sometimes 
gape in a most unbecoming way. How horrible if all could 
see that Devushkin, the poet and litterateur, went about in 
patched and broken boots. What would the comtesse-duch- 
esse say if she saw me? I don’t suppose she would notice 
it at all because a countess doesn’t really care about one’s 
boots, especially a clerk’s boots. (There are boots and 
hoots, of course.) But my own friends would give me away, 
and Ratazyaev would be the first. He often visits Countess 
B., every receiving day, he says, and he also drops in 
casually. She is a delightful woman, he says, literary 
through and through. What a clever fellow that Rata¬ 
zyaev is! 

But enough of this. I have been writing just for the fun 
of it and your amusement. Good-bye, my precious. It’s a 
good deal of nonsense that I have scratched together here, 
but that’s because I’m in the highest spirits today. We all 
had dinner with Ratazyaev and they (the rascals!) drank 
wine too. I oughtn’t to write about it. But don't imagine 
anything wrong about me. It’s nothing really. I’ll send 
you the books, I’ll send them for sure.... There’s a book 
by Paul de Cocque circulating in the house. But that is 


80 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


not a book for you, my darling, on no account! It is said 
that he has aroused the virtuous indignation of all the 
critics in St. Petersburg. I am sending you a pound oi 
sweets—I bought it specially for you. Enjoy them, my 
darling, and remember me every time you take one. You 
must suck the fruit-drops, my dear, and never bite them, 
or you’ll have toothache. Do you like candied fruit? Write 
to me if you do. Well good-bye, Varenka, good-bye! God 
bless you, my little dove, and I remain 


Your truest friend, 
Makar Devushkin 


June 27 


My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

Fedora savs that, if I wish, there are *people who will 
help me and secure me a good post as governess. Shall I 
consent or not? What do you advise? If I agree I shall no 
longer be a burden to you: and it’s a well-paid post too, 
I believe. On the other hand, the idea of entering a strange 
house somehow appals me They are landowners some- 
whcie. They will start making inquiries, asking me about 
my past and prying, and what shall I tell them? Besides, 
1 am such a recluse. I’m so unsociable, and 1 grow used 
to the places I have lived in long and feel better even if 
the life is hard And it is fai away and who knows what 
I shall have to do, perhaps just nurse the children. And 
they seem hard to please too:, they have had two govern¬ 
esses in two yeais. I entieat you to advise me, Makar Ale¬ 
xeyevich. Shall I go or not? Why don’t you ever call upon 
us? We see so little of you these days. Only on Sundays 
and in church. You too are rather a recluse, just like my¬ 
self. And I am almost a relative of yours. You just don’t 
love me, Makar Alexeyevich, and I am so sad alone. 
Sometimes, especially towards evening, I sit all alone, all 




POOR PEOPLE 


81 


alone. Fedora may be away and I sit and think and think— 
going over the past, the sad and the joyful both—and it 
all passes before my eyes, and again I see all the familiar 
faces (they are almost real) and Mama more often than 
others. And what dreams I have. I feel that my health is 
gone; I’m so weak. When 1 got up today 1 suddenly went 
faint. I have had a bad cough for some time. I will die 
soon, 1 feel it, 1 know it. Who will care, who will weep 
for me, who will follow my coffin to the graveyard!* And 
perhaps I shall have to die in a strange house, in a strange 
place. 0 Lord, how sad life is. 

Why do you feed me with sweets all the time, Makai 
Alexeyevich? 1 really can’t imagine where you find the 
money? Save your money, my dear friend, save it, foi 
heavens’ sake. Fedora is selling a rug which 1 embroider¬ 
ed. They are offering us fifty rubles in bank-notes, it is 
a good price, more than I expected. I shall give three rubles 
to Fedora and make a frock for myself, a simple, but warm 
frock. Also I’ll make a waistcoat for you, make it mysell 
and out of good material. 

Fedora has brought me a book, The Talcs of Ivan Bel¬ 
kin* which I am sending to you; read it if you care. But 
please don’t get it soiled or keep it too long. It is not mine. 
Two years ago mother and 1 read these stories together 
and it saddened me so to read them alone now. 11 you 
have any books, please send them to me—unless they come 
from Ratazyaev. He will probably offer you his own works 
if they are printed at all. How can you possibly like 
them, Makar Alexeyevich? They are such rubbish. Now 
good-bye, 1 have chattered too much as it is. 1 like to 
chatter sometimes when I’m sad. It is like medicine, 
it helps at once, especially if 1 pour out cveiything 
that is burdening my heart. Good-bye, my friend, good¬ 
bye. 

Yours, 
V. D. 


A collection of stories by A. S. Pushkin wiitten in 18-50s — Ed. 


82 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


June 28 

Varvara Alexeyevna, my dove, 

Come, you mustn t brood like that. Aren’t you ashamed 
oi yourself? Come, come, my angel! How could you ever 
have such thoughts? You’re not ill at all, my love, notill 
at all! You are blooming, simply blooming! A little pale 
perhaps, but blooming just the same. What are those 
dreams and visions of jvrnrs? You ought to be ashamed, 
my little darling. Just snap your lingers at them. How is it 
that 1 sleep well, that nothing ever troubles me? Why, 
look at me! 1 sleep like a log, am hale and hearty, as 
strong as a youth—1 really am! Come, come, Varcnka! 
Take yourself in hand! 1 know how you go on: any trille 
will set you oft dreaming and brooding. Don’t do it any 
more, for my sake! As for that post ot governess, never! 
No, no, no! 'Die idea of such a thing! How could you 
think of it! And the place is far away too. No, my darling, 
I won’t stand for it. With all my might I protest against 
it! I’ll sell ray old frock-coat fiist and go about in my shirt¬ 
sleeves lather than let you suffer in wank No, Varenka, it 
is not for you. It is folly, just foolishness! I’m sure it’s all 
Fedora’s fault; it is she, stupid woman, who pul you up 
to it. Don’t trust her, dear There may be things about her 
that you do not know. She is a stupid, nagging gossip. She 
nagged her late husband to death. Perhaps she has made 
you angry? No, no, my sweet, not for anything in the 
world! And what will 1 do, what will be left to me? No, 
Vaienka, no, dear heart! Put the thing out of your mind! 
What, after all, do you lack here? And what joy you give 
us, Fedora and me! And you are fond of us too. So why 
not live on, nice and cosy, the way you do! You may read 
or rew; or just read and not sew—only don’t go away. It 
won’t do at all, your going away! I’ll get the books you 
need and we’U take walks again, but be sensible and think 
no more of such foolishness. I’ll come to see you, and very 
soon too. Forgive me for speaking my mind, but it’s bad 
of you, my sweet, very bad. I’m not a learned man, of 
course, the schooling 1 ve had was paid for with kopeks, 
as the saying goes, but it’s not of myself, but of Ratazyaev 
that I want to speak. Forgive me, darling, but I must stand 


POOR PEOPLE 


83 


up for him. He is my friend and I must stand up for him. 
He writes well, very, very well, not bad at all in fact. 
I cannot agree with you in this, I simply cannot. He writes 
in such a flowery style, with such nice figures of speech 
and all sorts of ideas. Not bad at all! Perhaps you did not 
read it with the proper feeling, Varenka? Or you were just 
in a bad mood—perhaps you were angry with Fedora or 
something unpleasant had happened? Read it again, Va- 
lenka, with the proper feeling and more attentively; read 
it when you are merry and content and in a happy mood, 
for instance, with a fruit-drop in your mouth. I do not 
doubt (who does?), of course, that there are better writeis 
than Ratazyaev, far better perhaps. They are good, yet 
Ratazyaev is good too; they write well, but he does not 
write badly either. He writes for himself, does his bit of 
writing—and good for him! Good-bye, darling, I can* 
write any more. I am busy today. Now mind, my little bird, 
don’t be troubled any more by gloomy thoughts and may 
God be with you, while I remain 

Your true friend, 
Makar Dcvushkin 


P.S. Thanks ever so much for the book, darling, I’ll read 
Pushkin too. I’ll call upon you later in the day, towards 
evening. 


July 1 

My dear friend, Makar Alexeyevich, 

No, my friend, there’s no life for me among you here. 
On consideration I find that it is quite wrong to refuse 
such an advantageous offer. I would at least be sure of 
my daily bread, and I would do my best to deserve the 
kindness of a strange family. I would even try to change 
my character if necessary. It is, of course, hard to live 
among strangers, seeking their favour, hiding one’s 
thoughts and suppressing one’s feelings, but God will help 
me. I cannot remain so unsociable all my life! Such things 



84 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


have happened to me before. I have not forgotten my days 
at the boarding-school. I remember the Sundays when I 
would be romping at home; even when Mama scolded me 
my heart was easy and ever so light. But as evening crept 
on my spirits dropped and I was utterly dejected: I had 
to be back at school by nine o’clock, at school where every¬ 
thing was so strange and cold and strict, and the mistres¬ 
ses so ill-tempered on Mondays. And I wanted to 
cry. Somewhere in a corner I would weep secretly— 
because they might say 1 was lazy. But it wasn’t my 
lessons that made me weep. And what happened after¬ 
wards? In time I grew so used to the school that there 
too, I cried when I had to leave and to part with my 
friends. 

And then, it’s not right that I should be a burden to you 
and Fedora. It’s a tormenting thought. I am putting things 
plainly because I’m used to frankness with you. Don’t I 
see how Fedora gets up at the grey of dawn to do her 
washing all day long? And old bones, as you know, crave 
rest. Don’t I see that you are spending your all on me, 
your very last kopek? And this, in your prcumstances, my 
friend You write that you will sell the coat off your back 
to keep me from want. I believe you, my dear, I believe 
your kind heart. But that’s what you say now—when you’ve 
had a windfall, that bonus! But afterwards? You know 
that I’m constantly ill. I cannot keep working the way you 
do, though I’d be very glad to. And then there is not al¬ 
ways enough work. And what is left to me? To waste 
away as I look at you, poor things. How can I be of the 
least use to either of you? Why am I so necessary to you? 
What good have I done you? I'm attached to you with all 
my heart. You are very, very dear to me—but such is my 
destiny: I can love, but cannot turn my love into good 
deeds—to repay you for your kindness. Don’t keep me any 
longer. Think it over and tell me your final word. Await¬ 
ing your answer, I am 


Your affectionate 

U D. 




POOR PEOPLE 


85 


July 1 

What nonsense, what fancies, Varenka! No sooner are 
you alone than all sorts of silliness come into your pretty 
head! You don’t like this and you don’t like that, and all 
of it is sheer nonsense. Just tell me what you need, just 
what do you lack? We love you, and you love us, we aie 
content and happy—what more can there be? What will 
vou find among strangers? You don’t know what strangers 
are, my dear! You ought to have asked me what they 
aie. I know what they are like, I know it very well. I have 
tasted of their bread. They are mean, Varenka, spiteful 
and mean, oh so mean! They’ll tear your heart to pieces 
with reproachful words and nasty looks. And here, with 
us you are as warm and cosy as a little bird in a nest. And 
if you fly away what shall we do, poor people with noth¬ 
ing to live for? What shall I, an old man, do? You say 
that you are useless? Useless? How can you say that? You 
are not doing us any good? Just consider, my dear, how 
much you are doing for me. For one thing you have so 
beneficial an influence and ... for instance, I’m thinking 
of you tight now and it makes me so happy.... Some¬ 
times I set all my feelings down in the letters 1 write to 
you and then get a detailed answer.... 1 can also buy you 
nice things to wear—I have even bought you a hat.... Or 
there are things you want me to do. How can you say that 
you are useless? And what would I do, an old man, all 
alone? What am I good for? Perhaps you did not think of 
that, Varenka. But you ought to. Just put it this wav: what 
would the old man do without me? I’m used to having you 
near. And if you go, there is only one thing 1 can do: go to 
the Neva and put an end to it all. What else is there to 
do? Ah Varenka, my darling Varenka, it seems you would 
like to have me laid on a cart and carried all alone to the 
Volkovo graveyard where only an old beggar woman will 
watch them fill my grave with sand and go away, leaving 
me there all alone. It’s a sin, dear heart, a grievous sin to 
want such things. I am returning your book, Varenka, and 
if you want to know my opinion, my little friend. I'll say 
this: I have never read a better book in all my life And 
I keep asking myself: how could 1 have been such a bump- 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


kin, may God forgive me! What have I been doing with 
myself? Fiom what foiests have I sprung? Honestly, I do 
not know a thing, my dove, nothing at all! Plainly, I’ll say 
this, Vaienka: I’m an ignorant man. I have read very little, 
very little indeed, almost nothing: A Picture of Man, a 
very wise book, also A Boy Who Learned to Play Pretty 
Pieces on the Chimes, also Ivick’s Storks and that is all. 
That’s all I’ve read. And now I have read The Station- 
Master* in that book of yours. And so you see, mv Va- 
renka, that it can come to pass that you live a long time 
and never know that right at hand there lies a book which 
tells the whole story of your life as simply as a song. What 
you could not see before grows clear as you read on, and 
you remember things, and understand things, and guess 
things. And what else I like about the book is this: other 
books are sometimes so clever that I read and read and 
can’t understand a thing for the life of me. I’m so dense 
by nature that the too important books are not for me. 
But when you read this book, it’s just as if you wrote it 
yourself as if, in a manner of speaking, it were your own 
heart—whatever kind it may be—that lay there turned 
inside out for all to read. That’s how it is. Really, it’s 
simple enough. I could have written it myself. Why not? 

1 feel it just as it is written in the book. Didn’t I have the 
same experiences as that poor Samson Vyrin.^ How many 
Vyrins, poor devils, are there among us! And didn’t the 
authoi describe it all so cleverly? I almost wept, as I read 
how he took to drinking, how he drank himself out of his 
mind and lay sleeping all day on that sheepskin, or sat 
wiping the tears away with the dirty hem of his coat as 
he thought of his poor stray daughtei. That is life. Read 
it, do. It is a living thing. I have seen it myself. It’s all 
about me. Take our Theresa for instance, or our poor clerk. 
Isn’t he another Samson Vyrin, though his name is Gorsh¬ 
kov? It’s a common matter, and to each of us this very 
thing may happen. It may happen even to a count who 
lives on Nevsky or on the embankment, though it will 
seem different there with their high tone. But it will be 


One of 7 he 7 ales of Ivan Belkin by A Pushkin 
* A character from The Station-Master. — Ed. 




POOR PEOPLE 


87 


the same, for all that. Yes, anything may happen. Even 
to me! You see how it is, dear heart: how can you think 
of leaving us? The vice of Vyrin may overwhelm me also 
and both of us will be undone. So for the love of God, my 
darling, put those willful thoughts out of your head and 
torture me no longer. My poor little fledgling, how can 
vou earn your living, keep safe from harm, and defend 
yourself from evil people? Come, come, Varenka! Pav no 
heed to bad advice. You will do better to read your book 
again and more attentively: it will do you good. 

I have told Ratazyaev about The Station-Master. He 
insists that it is old-fashioned and that nowadays all good 
books have pictures and various descriptions. 1 didn’t 
undei stand him very well. He conceded that Pushkin was 
a good writer, that he contributed to the glorv of Russia, 
and said much more in the same vein. Yes. Varenka. its 
a good book, a very good book. You should read it again 
with attention. Take my advice and make an old man 
happy by your obedience. God will reward you, mv love. 
He will surely reward you. 

Your faithful friend, 
Makar Dcxmskkin 


July 6 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

Today. Fedora brought me fifteen rubles in silver and 
she was so pleased when 1 gave her three rubles, poor 
thing. I am writing this in a hurry: I’m cutting the waist¬ 
coat for you—the material is lovely: it’s yellow and pat¬ 
terned with tiny flowers. I’m sending you another book, a 
collection of stories. I have read some of them. Read the 
one entitled The Service Coat * You are pressing me to 
accept your invitation to the theatre. Isn’t it too expensive? 
If we go at all, then buy the tickets for the gallery. I 
haven’t been to the theatre for longer than I can remem- 


A stoiy by N, V. Gogol, written in 1842.— Ed. 



88 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


ber. But again, I’m afraid: isn’t it too dear? Fedora keeps 
shaking her head and saying that you are living beyond 
your means. I can see that for myself—how much you 
have spent on me alone! I’m afraid something may hap¬ 
pen if you go on like this. Fedora has been telling me of 
some rumours concerning your arguments with the land¬ 
lady about the rent. I fear for you, Makar Alexeyevich! 
Good-bye, I’m in a hurry just now. There is a small 
matter to which I must attend: I must change the ribbon on 
my hat. 

V. D. 

P.S. If we go to the theatre I think I shall wear my new 
hat and black mantilla. That will be nice, won’t it? 

July 7 

My dearest Varvara Alexeyevna, 

To continue our talk of yesterday, let me tell you, my 
darling, that once upon a time I too was a featherbrained 
young man, thoroughly smitten with atj actress, but the 
funniest part was that I had practically never seen her 
except that once in the theatre. And yet I was in love, 
head over ears. My neighbours at the time were five bois¬ 
terous young men with whom I grew friendly almost 
against my will; I kept my distance, at first. Not to be a 
killjoy, however, I generally humoured them. The things 
they told me about that actress! Every evening, whenever 
there was a show, the whole crowd would take seats in 
the gallery—they never had a kopek for bare essentials— 
and there they would be, clapping and calling her again 
and again and applauding like mad! And afterwards there 
could be no question of sleep; they would be talking of 
their dear Glasha all night: they were all in love with her, 
all to a man. That canary sang in every heart. They fi¬ 
nally roused me too, a helpless youth, and before I knew 
it I found myself in the gallery with the others. Only a 
bit of the curtain was visible from where I sat, but nothing 
missed my ears. True enough, the canary had a very sweet 
voice, a ringing, honeyed, nightingale warble. We shouted 
ourselves hoarse, clapped oui hands sOit, until one of us 




POOR PEOPLE 


89 


was actually turned out. I came home all in a daze with 
only one ruble in my pocket and the next salary ten days 
off. And what do you think, my darling? On the very next 
day before office hours I spent the remainder of mv money 
on some perfume and scented soap at the French barber’s. 
Why I bought it is more than I can say. I went without 
dinner that day, but used the time to moon under her win¬ 
dow. She lived on the third floor, in Nevsky Piospckt. I 
would rest at home for an hour aftei work, and then back 
to the Nevsky to walk beneath her window. 1 kept doing 
this for a month and a half. I would hire a cab at the 
corner and dash past her window in all my glory l ran 
into debt, of course, but finally my passion cooled. 1 got 
tired of it. This is what an actress can reduce an honest 
man to, dear heart. But then I was young in those days. 

M.D. 

July 8 

My esteemed Varvara Alexeyevna, 

1 hasten to return the book I received on the sixth of 
the current month and at the same time avail myself of 
the opportunity to explain myself. Wasn’t it wicked of you, 
my darling, to have sent me such a book! The Almighty 
gives every man the place in life which he deserves. Some 
are destined to wear the epaulettes of generals, others to 
serve as privy councillors, some to command and others to 
obey in fear and meekness. This is all ordained according 
to man’s capability. Some are fit for one thing, others foi 
another, and this is ordered by God himself I have been 
working at the office for thirty years now. My s:rvicc has 
been irreproachable, behaviour abstemious, and 1 have 
never been accused of disorderly conduct. As a citizen I 
in all consciousness regard myself as a man with short¬ 
comings, but with virtues as well. I am respected by my 
superiors and His Excellency himself is pleased with me. 
I know he is pleased with me even if he has not shown 
special marks of favour hitherto. I have lived to a good 
age with no grave sins on my conscience. As to the small 
trespasses, who is not guilty of them? Everyone has tres- 



90 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


passed in small things, even you, my darling. But I have 
never been guilty of misdemeanour or disrespect, of violat¬ 
ing the rules or disturbing the peace. No! Never! There was 
a time when I was even recommended for decoration. But 
why mention such a thing! In all fairness, you should have 
known all this and he, the author, should have known it 
too. If a man has decided to describe everything he should 
also know everything. I never expected such a thing of 
you, my dear. You, of all people, Varenka! 

Does this mean that a man is not allowed to live peace¬ 
ably in his little corner, such as it might be, to live as quiet 
as can be, fearing God and offending no one and justly 
expecting that others too should leave him alone, that 
they should pot sneak into your dog kennel and pry into 
your private life, to see if you have a decent waistcoat, 
underclothes, and an extra pair of boots—resoled or not?— 
to see what you eat, drink and copy. What if I do tiptoe 
where the pavement is bad in order to preserve my boots! 
Why should the author tell his readers that his fellow- 
man is sometimes in such bad straits that he has to do 
without his tea? As though everyone has to have tea! Do 
I watch every morsel that my neighbours take? Do I? Can 
anyone say 1 ever hurt anyone? Then why do others hurt 
me? This is what I mean, Varvara Alexeyevna: a man 
may be doing his work with zeal—respected even by his 
chief (sav what you like, it is true)—and all of a sudden 
some scribbler pops up to make a fool of him He mav, 
of course, get something new made for himself once in a 
while. He may, it is true, be so elated as to lie awake at 
night. It’s true, 1 have experienced it. That is just the way 
I felt, for instance, when I was putting on mv new boots. 
It was sinfully pleasant because it was a delight to see 
one’s feet in such fine leather. Granted that the author 
has described this accurately. Still, I’m really surprised 
that Fyodor Fyodorovich did not protest against this book. 
It is true, he is still a young official and likes to shout at 
us sometimes. But why shouldn’t he? Why shouldn’t he 
haul us over the coals? The small fry should be hauled 
over the coals once in a while! True, he sometimes docs 
it for the sake ot authority. And why shouldn’t he? He 
has to put us in our place, to put the fear pf God into us 




POOR PEOPLE 


91 


because, between ourselves, Varenka, we small fry are 
quite worthless without the fear of God and each of us 
thinks only of being a member of the staff some place, any 
place: the main thing is to belong, not to woik. And 
as there are different ranks and each of them calls for its 
own kind of hauling over the coals, the tone used differ 
according to the different rank. How else should it be? 
Such is the way of the world, darling. Each of us sets 
himself up over the others and some haul the others over 
the coals. Without this precaution there would be an end 
to the world, an end to order. 1 am truly astonished that 
Fyodor Fyodorovich put up with such impeltinence. 

What is the good of writing such things? What is the 
use of it? Will the reader present me with a new service 
coat? Or with a new pair of boots? Nothing of the kind. 
Varenka. He will just read it all and ask for more One 
is so careful to hide one’s shortcomings, so careful to keep 
to oneself because of gossip: every molehill mav be tuined 
into a mountain—and before you know it, there is the 
whole of your civic and family life laid brazenly baie in 
a book, laughed at and bandied about. How can one show 
oneself in the street after that! Everything has been so 
exactly described that we will be recognised by the way 
we walk! It would not have been so had, perhaps, if the 
author had come to his senses towards the end of the book 
and had somehow softened it down a bit by saying, after 
the description of how they tossed bits of paper over him. 
something to this effect: for all that, he was a good, virtu¬ 
ous man, did not deserve such treatment at the hands of 
his comrades, obeyed his superiors (here it is advisable to 
cite some example), bore no malice, belie\ed in God and 
died (if the author insists that he should die 1 ) mourned by 
his family and friends. It would have been still better not 
to let him die, poor fellow, but let him retrieve his service 
coat, let him be summoned by His Excellency who, after 
due inquiries as to his virtues, promotes him in rank and 
raises his salary—so that virtue triumphs and vice is duly 
punished in the persons of his comrades. That is how I 
should have written it. And what is good about the way 
he wrote the story? He just described a trivial episode in 
our nasty workaday existence How could you have brought 



F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


yourself to send me such a book, my precious? It’s a per¬ 
nicious book, Varenka. It is simply untrue because there 
cannot be such a clerk. A complaint ought to be lodged 
against such'a book, Varenka. 

Your obedient servant, 
Makar Dexmshkin 

July 27 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

The things that have been happening lately and your 
last letters have caused me great anxiety and made me 
wonder, until Fedora explained it all. Why give way to 
despair and fall into such an abyss, Makar Alexeyevich? 
Your explanations have not satisfied me. As you now see 
I should have taken that remunerative post after all. Be¬ 
sides, my last adventure has really frightened me. You say 
that it was for the love of me that you have been conceal¬ 
ing things. I always felt indebted to you though I used 
to believe that the money you were spending on me came 
from your savings in the bank. How must I feel*now that 
I have learned that you never had any money at all, that 
you have been drawing your salary in advance only be¬ 
cause you pitied my condition, that you sold your coat 
when I was ill. What shall 1 do! My poor Makar Alexeye¬ 
vich! You should have stopped it all after those first kind¬ 
nesses bestowed on me out of sympathy and feeling of 
kinship. You shouldn’t have squandered money on luxu¬ 
ries. You are not a real friend: you were not frank with 
me, Makar Alexeyevich, and now that I know that your 
last kopeks were spent on clothes, on sweets, theatre tickets, 
books and amusements I am paying dearly for my unfor¬ 
givable thoughtlessness. (Didn’t I accept everything with¬ 
out thinking of your needs?) And all the things with 
which you hoped to bring me joy have brought grief and 
futile regrets. I had noticed your depression of late and 
felt uneasy too, but the thing that actually happened sur¬ 
passed my worst fears. Good God! How could you lose 
your self-possession so completely, Makar Alexeyevich? 
What will people say! To think that you, who were so re- 




POOR PEOPLE 


93 


spected for modesty, prudence and kindness, have lapsed 
into such a disgusting vice, of which, I believe, you had 
never been suspected before. What was I to feci when 1 
learned from Fedora that you were found intoxicated in the 
streets and were brought home by the police? 1 could hard¬ 
ly believe my ears, though I had expected something out 
of the ordinary since you had not come to visit me for four 
days. Had you thought, Makar Alexeyevich, what your 
chiefs would say when they learned the real cause of your 
absence? 

You write that everybody is laughing at you, that they 
have learned about our friendship and that your neigh¬ 
bours often mention my name in their jibes. For the love 
of God, Makar Alexeyevich, pay no attention to them and 
compose yourself. I’m also worried about that incident 
you had with the officers. Some vague rumours have 
reached me. Please tell me all about it. You wrote that you 
were afraid to tell me the whole truth, afraid you would 
lose my friendship, that you were in despair because you 
did not know how to help me in my illness and how to keep 
me out of the hospital, that you had sold everything, had 
borrowed as much money as you could and that your 
landlady was making trouble every day. You could have 
done nothing worse than to conceal all this from me. And 
anyway I know it now. You were ashamed to make me 
admit that I was the cause of your troubles, but have 
actually doubled my grief by your conduct This is crush¬ 
ing, Makar Alexeyevich! Ah, my friend, misfortune is 
contagious! Those who are poor and unhappy should keep 
away from one another. 1 have brought you tumbles you 
have never had before in all your modest and retired 
existence. The thought is tormenting and killing me. 

Tell me frankly just what has happened to you and how 
you came to such a state. Tell me something comforting, 
if possible. It isn’t selfishness that makes me ask for this, 
but my friendship which nothing can drive from my heart. 
Good-bye. I am impatient for your answer. It was wrong 
of you, Makar Alexeyevich, to think of me as you did. 

Your affectionate 
Varvara Dobrosyolova 



94 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


July 28 


My priceless child, Varvara Alexeyevna, 


Now that it is all done with and over and my life is set¬ 
tling into its usual course, I can inform you of this: you 
were worried about what people might think and so 1 
hasten to assure you that my honour is more dear to me 
than anything else in the world. In consequence of which 
I inform you herewith about my adversities and state that 
my superiors haven’t the faintest idea about them and 
never will. And so they continue to hold me in respect as 
of old. Only one thing worries me: gossip. The screaming 
of my landlady has been reduced to a grumble by your 
ten rubles with which 1 paid part of my arrears. As for 
the others, they cause no trouble, no trouble at all so long 
as I don’t try to borrow any more from them. I will con¬ 
clude my explanations with this statement, ipy darling: 
your esteem is more important to me than anything in 
the world and fully compensates me for all my temporary 
icverses. Thank God, the first squalls of the storm are 
over and you do rot regard me as a false friend and a 
selfish person because 1 could not bear to let you go away 
and so deceived you, loving you as I did, my darling 
little angel. I have returned to my work with double zeal 
and cope with my duties excellently. Yevstafy Ivano¬ 
vich didn’t say a word when I passed him yesterday. I 
won’t conceal, my darling, that I am crushed by my debts 
and the state of my wardrobe. But it really does not mat¬ 
ter and I beg you not to woriy. The fifty-kopek piece you 
sent me has cut me to the heart. So it has come to this. 
It is not I, old fool that 1 am, who is helping you, but you, 
my poor defenceless orphan, who is helping me. It was 
nice of Fedora to have got that money. For the time being, 
my darling, I have no real prospects of getting money. 
Should any turn up, I shall let you know at once. But gos¬ 
sip—it worries me most of all. Good-bye, my angel. I 
kiss your little hands and pray that you may get well soon. 

I cannot write in greater detail because I have to hurry 




POOR PEOPLE 


95 


to the office. I must make amends for my negligence. This 
evening I’ll write about the other things that happened and 
my trouble with those officers. 

Your respectful and affectionate friend, 

Makar Devushkin 


July 28 

Ah, Varenka, Varenka! 

It is you who ought to be ashamed of yourself now and 
not 1! It will remain on your conscience for ever. Your 
last letter left me completely bewildered; but searching my 
heart I saw that 1 had been right, perfectly right. I am 
not referring to that brawl of mine of course (enough of 
that, my darling, enough!) but to the fact that I am fond 
of you and that it is not at all imprudent to be fond of 
you, not at all. You know nothing about it, dear heart. If 
you really knew why I can’t help being fond of you, you 
would not say the things you did. It is your head alone 
that is speaking. I’m sure your heart would tell another 
story. 

To be honest, my darling, I cannot remember just what 
took place exactly between me and those officers. 1 must 
say, my dear, that I had been in embarrassing circum¬ 
stances. For an entire month I had been hanging on, by a 
single thread, so to say; it was a nasty situation. I kept 
things hidden from you and from iny neighbours as well. 
But my landlady raised a terrible row. I did not care, of 
course. Let the old witch shout to her heart’s content. But 
lirst of all it was a disgrace and then, she had learned, God 
knows how, about our letters and began yelling such things 
that 1 had to stop my ears. Unfortunately, the others did 
not stop theirs but on the contrary pricked them up. Even 
now, my dear, I feel greatly ashamed.... 

And so, Varenka, all these different troubles coming one 
on top of the other had nearly finished me. And then I 
heard the strangest things from Fedora that some wretch 
came to your dwelling and insulted you with his despicable 
proposals. How deeply you were hurt by thia, my dear, 



F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


I was able to judge from the pain it caused me. It was 
then that I lost my head—went off the deep end. I rushed 
off, Varenka, in an impossible frenzy and wanted to go 
straight to that sinful wretch. I did not know just what I 
was going to do, but I could not bear to have you insulted, 
my little angel. It was so sad and, to make matters worse, 
it was raining and the streets were so wet and slippery, so 
terribly depressing. I had almost changed my mind and 
was about to turn back—and then came my downfall. I 
ran into Yemelya, that is, Yemelyan Ilyich. He is a clerk, 
that is, he was a clerk until they discharged him; and 
what he does for a living now is more than I can say. And 
so the two of us went together. And then—but what pleas¬ 
ure will you find, Varenka, in reading the story of your 
friend’s misfortunes and temptations? On the evening of 
the third day Yemelya goaded me into calling upon that 
officer. 1 learned the address from the janitor. Speaking 
of that officer, my dear, 1 had long noticed that there was 
something wrong about the fellow: I had watched him 
when he lived in our house. Now I see that J was guilty 
of an indiscretion because, to tell the truth, 1 was not 
altogether sober when I was ushered in. I can’t remember 
a thing, Varenka, except that the room was full of of¬ 
ficers—or perhaps I was seeing double—God knows. I 
cannot remember just what I said, but 1 know that 1 said 
a good deal in my indignation. Then they turned me out 
of the room and even threw me down the stairs, that is, 
they did not exactly throw me down, just pushed me out 
of the house. You have already learned how I came home 
and that is all there is to tell. My dignity, of course, was 
injured, but no one knows about this, that is, no strangers 
do. Since you are the only person who knows, it is as 
though it never happened. Isn’t that so, Varenka? What 
I do know for certain is that last year Aksenty Osipovich 
insulted Pyotr Petrovich at the office in a similar fashion. 
But it was done secretly, so secretly. He first called him 
to the janitor’s room—I saw it all through a chink in the 
door—and then settled scores with him there, but in an 
honourable way—privately. As for me, it didn’t matter, 
since I said nothing about it to anyone. Pyctr Petrovich 
and Aksenty Osipovich then went on as if nothing had 




POOR PEOPLE 


97 


happened. Pyotr Petrovich was very dignified and kept 
silent about the matter. After this they shook hands and 
bowed to each other. I won’t argue, Varenka, I dare not. 
1 have fallen low, very low indeed. And worst of all, I 
have fallen in my own opinion. That must have been or¬ 
dained from above. And who shall escape the hand of 
destiny. So now you have the full story of my misfortunes 
and adversities, Varenka. They are not really worth read¬ 
ing about. I am not quite well, my darling; 1 have lost all 
the gaiety of my disposition. And permit me to assure you 
of my esteem, love and affection and to remain, my dear 
Varvara Alexeyevna, 

Your obedient servant, 
Makar Dcvushkin 


July 29 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

I read your two letters and gasped! My poor friend! 
Either you have withheld a part of your troubles or.... 
Really, Makar Alexeyevich, judging by your letters you 
have some trouble you do not tell me about. Please come 
to see us without fail today. Better yet, come and have din¬ 
ner with us. You did not even tell me how you manage to 
live from day to day, how you get on with that landlady 
of yours. You seem to keep silent about it deliberately. 
Good-bye, my friend, and be sure to come. You would do 
better to have your dinners with us always. Fedora is a 
good cook. Good-bye. 

Yours, 

Varvara Dobrosyolova 


August 1 

Varvara Alexeyevna, dear heart, 

You are happy, my dearest, that God has sent you the 
opportunity to repay kindness with kindness. 1 am sure of 
it, Varenka, because I’m so sure of the goodness of )our 


• F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


heart. Only don’t chide me—1 don’t mean to reproach you 
of course—for having kicked over the traces in my old 
age. Well, so it was a sin—if you insist. But it hurts me so 
much to heat it from you, my little friend. Don’t be an¬ 
gry with me for saying such things. My heart is so sore. 
Poor people are cranky. That is the way they are born, I 
suppose. I have felt this even before. A poor man is 
always suspicious, he is constantly watching all who pass 
from the corner of his eye wondering whether they are 
speaking of him and what they are saying of him—perhaps 
they are saying: “What a poor wretch! What can he be 
thinking of.'* What a sorry figure he cuts from this side or 
that!” And as everyone knows, Varenka, a poor man is 
worth less than rubbish and can be respected by no one— 
no matter what the scribblers say—everything will con¬ 
tinue as of old. And why? Because they expect a poor man 
to wear everything inside out, for all to see; to have noth¬ 
ing innermost, nothing that is sacred to him. As to self- 
lespect—not for him! The other day Yemelya told me that 
a subscription was raised for him once, and for every ten- 
kopek piece he received he had to endure something like 
an official inspection. They thought they were giving the 
money away, but actually they were paying for the spec¬ 
ial le of a poor man. Charity is strangely distributed now¬ 
adays. Or perhaps it has always been so, who knows. Either 
they don’t know how to go about it or they know it only 
too well. So that is how it is, my dear. Of othei things 
we may know very little, but of this one thing we know 
more than is good for us. And why? Because of experience, 
because we ate sute to see some gentleman on his way to 
his cafe saying to himself: “Now I wonder what that 
shabby clerk will have for dinner today? I’ll have sautce 
Jwfrilliotte and he will eat porridge without butter most 
likely.” Why should he care what 1 eat? There really are 
gentlemen like that, Varenka. They are nasty scribblers 
constantly watching you to see whether you put your foot 
down gingerly or not, or whether some poor clerk of such 
and such a department has his bare toes sticking out from 
his broken boots, or whether he is out at the elbows—and 
then he goes home and writes it all down and gets this trash 
printed. Now, my dear sir, what business is it of yours if 




POOR PEOPLE 


1 am out at the elbows? Forgive my indelicacy, Varenka, 
hut on this score a poor man has as much shame as a mai¬ 
den. You would not disrobe—excuse my rudeness—before 
strangers, and similarly a poor man docs not like to have 
anyone poking his nose into his kennel, into his family re¬ 
lations. And that is just the trouble! And now to be hurt 
by you, Varenka, as if you were siding with my enemies 
who sullied my good name and self-esteem. 

At the office, too, 1 sat feeling terribly small, like a 
mangy sparrow. I burn with shame to think of it. How can 
1 help being ashamed of my elbows peeping through the 
sleeves or the buttons swinging on their threads like bells. 
As ill luck would have it, it was worse today than usual. 
It was enough to discourage anyone. Even Stepan Kailo- 
vich noticed something. Talking of some business matter 
he suddenly broke off and said: “My poor Makar Alexeye¬ 
vich,” and then stopped short. But l guessed the rest and 
blushed so that even my bald pate was flaming. It is 
nothing, of course, but annoying just the same. Could they 
have got wind of something? God forbid that they have! 
To tell the truth, there is a man whom I very strongly 
suspect. To the scribblers it’s nothing. Those scoundrels 
will sell your private life for a kopek. Nothing is sacred 
to them. 

I know whose handiwork this is. Ratazyaev’s and no 
other’s. He is acquainted with someone in our ministry and 
might have told him all about it, with many embellish¬ 
ments too. Or perhaps he spoke of it in his own ministry 
and it has seeped through to ours. My neighbours know all 
about it, all to the last man. 1 even saw them pointing at 
your window. When I went to have dinner with you they 
all poked their heads out of the windows and the landlady 
said that the old devil had taken up with an infant and 
called you a bad name. But what is all this compared to 
Ratazyaev’s vicious intention to put us in a book and des¬ 
cribe us in subtle satire? He has said as much and I have 
been warned by good people. I’m at my wits’ end, darling. 
What should we do? God wishes to punish us, my angel. 
You promised to send me a book to while away the time. 
Never mind the book. What’s a book, after all? Just a lot 
of prattle! And a novel is stuff and nonsense, too, written 



100 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


for the amusement of idlers! Don’t I know it from long 
experience? And if they talk Shakespeare to you and say: 
“In literature, you see, there is Shakespeare,” you may 
be sure it is stuff and nonsense like the rest. It’s all non¬ 
sense and slander and good only for lampoons. 

CPiaftlUa mat C$o$9 

J!/. A ( 7 •;/ ) B.T, 

Dims&g-r L« k« ^ nit oundl 
Agaitala. '1 1 n tWest), 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

Do not worry about anything. With God’s help all will 
be well. Fedora has secured a great deal of work for both 
of us and we have begun with a will. Perhaps we shall set 
everything right. She suspects that those latest troubles of 
mine are somehow connected with Anna Fyodorovna, but 
what is the difference? Today I am strangely gay. I’ve 
learnt that you intend to borrow money again. God for¬ 
bid! You’ll have endless trouble when the time for repay¬ 
ment comes. Please remember that you are our closest 
friend, come to see us mote often and pay no attention 
to your landlady. As for the rest of your enemies and ill- 
wishers. I’m sure that your fears are imaginary, Makar 
Alexeyevich. I told you that your way of writing was very 
uneven and it still is. Farewell, until we meet again. I 
expect you to visit us soon. 

Yours, 

V. D. 


Yours, 
Makar Devushkin 


August 2 


August 3 

Varvara Alexeyevna, my little angel, 

1 hasten to tell you, my dearest heart, that my hopes 
are rising. But how can you ask, my little angel, that I 
should borrow no money? It is quite impossible, my love. 



POOR PEOPLE 


101 


Here I am, without money, and what if something happens 
to you, God forbid? You are so delicate. And so I say 
that it is absolutely necessary to borrow. But to continue: 

First let me tell you, Varvara Alexeyevna, that at the 
office I sit beside Yemelyan Ivanovich; not the Yemelyan 
I told you about. This one is a titular councillor' like my¬ 
self. He and I are probably the oldest employees in the 
place. He is a kind, unselfish person, but never says any¬ 
thing and looks like a boor. Still, he is very efficient, and 
his handwriting is pure copperplate! To tell the truth, no 
worse than mine. He’s a worthy man, in short. We have 
never been really friendly, but only on greeting terms. 
Naturally, whenever I needed a penknife 1 would ask him: 
“Would you kindly lend me your penknife, Yemelvan Iva¬ 
novich?” And so on.... But today he suddenly said to me 
“A penny for your thoughts, Makar Alexeyevich ” 1 could 
feel that he wished me well and so told him everything. 
That is, not everything. I didn’t have the courage. But 
simply that I was in straitened circumstances and all that. 
“But my dear friend,” says Yemelyan Ivanovich, “why 
don’t you borrow some money from Pyotr Petrovich? He 
lends money on interest. I used to borrow monev from him 
myself. And the interest is reasonable, not extortionate.” 
And how my heart did leap when 1 heard that, Varenka. 
Perhaps God will whisper into Pyotr Petrovich’s ear and 
urge him to lend me that money. I have aheadv been cal¬ 
culating how to pay the landlady and how to help you 
and buy the things I need myself. As you know, I'm a 
frightful sight. It makes my flesh creep to sit there like 
that. Besides, my tormentors are making fun of me, may 
God forgive them. Ilis Excellency, too, passes our desks 
sometimes. What if he, may God have mei cy on me, should 
notice how 1 am dressed. He is so strict about tidiness. He 
might pass and say nothing, of course, but l would die of 
the disgrace. That is why I finally had to hide my shame in 
my’ ragged pockets and go to Pyotr Petrovich more dead 
than alive with fear, but full of expectation. And imagine 
Varenka, that it should have all come to nothing, nothing 
at all. Pyotr Petrovich was busy talking to Fedosei Ivano- 

* One of the lowest ranks in the fourteen giade system of the 
bureaucratic hierarchy.— Ed. 



102 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


vich when I sidled up and tugged at his sleeve as though 
to say: “Pyotr Petrovich, eh!” When he turned I ex¬ 
plained that it was thirty rubles that I needed, and so on. 
At first he did not seem to understand me and when I had 
explained it again he laughed and that was all. I began 
to explain it all over again until he said: “What security 
have you?” Then he grew absorbed in his papers and 
seemed to forget all about me. This put me out a bit. “No, 
Pyotr Petrovich,” I answered, “I have no security. But 
I’ll return the money as soon as I get my salary. I’ll re¬ 
turn it to be sure. You may be sure I’ll return it.” Here 
someone called him away and I stood waiting, but when 
he came back he began to trim his pen as though I did 
not exist. So I went at it again: “Can’t it be done some¬ 
how, Pyotr Petrovich?” But he didn’t seem to hear. I stood 
and stood there and finally decided to have a last try and 
tugged at his sleeve again. Do you think he said so much 
as a word? Nothing of the kind. He finished trimming his 
pen and began to write. And so I went away. 

Perhaps they are all very worthy people, my darling, 
but so proud, ah so proud, and so very far removed from 
us, Varenka. Why am I writing all this, my dear? When 
1 told Yemelyan Ivanovich he laughed and shook his 
head, but he gave me heart, bless him. He is a worthy man 
and promised to ’.ecoinmend me to an acquaintance, an 
official of the fourteenth class, who lives on the Vyborg 
Side and lends money on interest. Yemelyan Ivanovich 
says that he is sure to lend me the money. 1 shall go to 
sec him tomoirow. Shall I? God grant that I get the money: 
the landlady is driving ine fioin the house and gives me 
no dinner. My boots, too, ate completely worn and some 
buttons are missing. . . . Ah, what is not missing in my 
wardrobe! What if one of our chiefs should get a good 
look at my disreputable figure. There is no end to our 
troubles, Varenka, no end! 

Makar Dcvushkin 
August 4 

Makar Alexeyevich, my kind friend, 

For the love of God borrow the money as quickly as you 
can! I would never a"Sk for your help undei the present 




POOR PEOPLE 


103 


circumstances, but if you only knew in what a position 
we are! We cannot stay in this house any longer. I have 
had so much trouble and can hardly tell you how agitated 
I am. This morning an elderly man, almost an old man, 
wearing decorations, came to see me. I do not know him 
and could not imagine what he wanted. Fedora was out 
shopping. He asked me how I lived and without waiting 
for an answer explained that he was the uncle of that of¬ 
ficer; that he was very angry with his nephew for the way 
he had behaved, making us the talk of the whole house. He 
said that his nephew was only a young good-for-nothing 
and that he, the uncle, was ready to give me his protec¬ 
tion. He advised me to ignore the young people and add¬ 
ed that he sympathised with me like a father, that his 
feelings were paternal and that he was ready to help me. 

I stood blushing, not knowing what to say, but in no 
huriy to thank him. He took my hand against my will, 
fondled my cheek saying that 1 was very pretty, that he 
was very pleased with my dimples (God knows why) and 
finally he tried to kiss me, pleading that he was only an 
old man (and a nasty old man at that). Just then Fedora 
came back. He was a little embarrassed and again assured 
me that he respected me for my modesty and good sense 
and hoped that 1 would not regard him as a stranger. 
Then he took Fedora <iside and tried to give her money 
under some strange pretext. Fedora refused, of course. 
Finally he got ready to go, repeating his assurances and 
saying that he would i me to visit me again and would 
bring me a pair of earrings. (He seemed to be embarrassed 
himself.) He also advised me to move to a better apart¬ 
ment, one which he had in mir.d, and which would cost 
me nothing. Again he declared that he liked me immense¬ 
ly because I was such an honest and sensible girl, and 
urged me to beware of the corrupt youth. At last he admit¬ 
ted that he knew Anna Fyodoiovna and that she had in¬ 
structed him to tell me that she would cotnc to visit me in 
person. Then I understood everything. I can hardly tell 
you how I felt. This was the first time in my life that I 
found myself in such a position. I lost my temper and 
roundly told him what 1 thought of him. Fedora supported 
me, and turned him out almost using force We arc sure 



104 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


that it is Anna Fyodorovna’s doing; how else could he 
have learnt about us? 

Now I appeal to you, Makar Alexeyevich. Don’t desert 
me in such a position. Please borrow some money, even if 
it isn’t much, because we have to move, we simply cannot 
remain here any longer, and Fedora is of the same opi¬ 
nion. We need at least twenty-five rubles. I’ll return the 
money. I’ll earn it, Fedora will find more work for me 
to do. And so please borrow the money regardless of the in¬ 
terest. I'll return it all, only help me. It is painful to trou¬ 
ble you now when your own circumstances are so bad, 
but you are my only hope. Good-bye, Makar Alexeye¬ 
vich. Think of me and with God’s help do your best. 

V. D. 


August 4 

Mv precious darling, Varvara Alexeyevna, 

How .shaken I am by all these unexpected blows! How 
these disasters shatter my spirit! This rabble of lickspittles 
and old wretches will harass you into illness, my angel, 
and drive you to your death bed, and those lickspittles want 
to be the death of me too. And they will be, I swear they 
will. I would rather die than not find the money for you 
now. If I don’t help you, it will kill me, Varenka, it will 
kill me for certain, and if I do you will fly away, 
like a bird from a nest upon which ferocious owls have 
descended. It worries me so, my darling. And you, Va¬ 
renka, how could you be so cruel, how could you? You are 
suffering, you are hurt and tormented, my little chick, and 
yet you have scrupled to trouble me and assure me so 
pitifully that you will return the money, that is, that you 
will be ruining your frail health in order to meet the in¬ 
terest on time. Think well, Varenka, before saying such 
things. Why should you slave and sew and worry your 
little head and ruin your sweet eyes and undermine your 
health? Ah, Varenka, Varenka! I myself know that I am 
fit for nothing, but I shall force myself to be fit for some¬ 
thing, after all. Nothing will deter me. I’ll get extra work. 




POOR PEOPLE 


105 


I’ll copy papers for the writers, I’ll go to them myself 
and beg them to give me some work. Surely, they need 
someone who can copy well; I know they do. I just won’t 
permit you to work yourself ill; I won’t allow you to carry 
out your disastrous intentions. I shall certainly borrow the 
money somehow, my angel. I would rather die than fail. 
You say that I should not be afraid of the heavy interest. 
Don’t worry, my darling, I am not afraid of anything now. 

I am going to ask for forty rubles in bank-notes. That is 
not too much, is it? Can I be trusted with forty rubles? Will 
they take my word and nothing more? Am I capable of 
inspiring confidence at first sight? That is, can a first 
glance at my face make a favourable impression? just 
visualise my person, darling, and tell me: can I inspire 
all this? What do you think of it? I’m very nervous now— 
it is really painful. Of the forty rubles I shall set aside 
twenty-five for you, Varenka, two rubles for my landlady 
and the rest for my own needs. The landlady, of course, 
ought to receive more. She is entitled to it, in fact. But 
just consider my needs, Varenka, and you will see that I 
really cannot give her more. And so, why talk about it, 
or even mention it? A ruble in silver will be enough for 
a new pair of boots. I’m afraid my old boots will not cairy 
me to the office even tomorrow. A neckerchief, too, would 
be welcome: the one I have is a year old. But then, you 
promised to cut a neckerchief for me out of your apron, 
and a dickey too. So there is no need to worrv about these 
And so I shall have a new pair of boots and a neckerchief. 
But what shall we do about buttons, my little friend ? You 
will agree, my little Varenka, that I cannot do without 
buttons. On one side of my jacket they aic all gone and I 
tremble at the thought that His Excellency mav nr tice such 
untidiness and say—just what he will say, I shall never 
know, my darling, because I shall be dead before I hear 
it; I shall simply die on the spot for shame. That will 
leave me three rubles for my living expenses and for hall 
a pound of tobacco. I cannot do without tobacco, mv little 
one, and it is nine days since 1 have smoked my pipe. I 
could buy it and say nothing about it to you, but 1 would 
be ashamed to do such a thing. You are in dreadful trou¬ 
ble, and here I am indulging in luxuries. I am writing all 



106 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


this, Varenka, to unburden my conscience. I must tell you 
frankly, my dear, that I am now in straitened circum¬ 
stances, or rather that it has never been as bad as this be¬ 
fore. My landlady despises me, no one respects me anymore; 
there are so many things I need and 1 am appallingly in 
debt; the clerks at the office have always been unbearable, 
and now even more so. I take such care to conceal every¬ 
thing from everybody; I try to conceal even myself; I do 
my best to slip in unnoticed and keep strictly to myself. It 
is only to you that I have the courage to speak. And what 
if l fail to get the money? No, no, Varenka, we had better 
not think of that, not torture ourselves with such thoughts. 
I am writing this so that you should not worry, you should 
not torment yourself with this evil thought. Good God, 
what will become of you then! You won’t be able to move 
and will still be near me, it is true—but then, I shall never 
return, I shall simply vanish, fade away. 1 ought to be 
shaving instead of writing so much. 1 shall look more pre¬ 
sentable perhaps and, as you know, it is the presentable 
who are trusted, may God help me. I shall say my prayers 
arid start on inv way. 

M. Dcvushkin 


August 5 


My esteemed Makar Alc\e\evich. 

You. at least, must not give wav to despair! We have 
troubles enough. I am sending you thirty kopeks in silver; 
1 cannot send more. Buy only what you need most to last 
till tomorrow. Fedora and I have almost nothing; and 
what we shall do tomorrow I do not know. It is very sad, 
Makar Alexeyevich. But do not grieve so. You had no 
luck, and there’s no helping it. Fedora thinks that we might 
as well continue to live here, and that even if we moved 
to another place, they would find us if they wanted to. 
Only it’s somehow not nice staying on here. I would write 
more, if I did not feel so sad. 



POOR PEOPLE 


107 


What a strange person you are, Makar Alexeyevich. 
How you do take things to heart. This will always make 
you the unhappiest of men. I read your letters very atten¬ 
tively and can see that you worry over me far more than 
yourself. Everyone will say, of course, that you have a kind 
heart, but I’ll say that it is too kind. Permit me to give you 
some friendly advice, Makar Alexeyevich. I am grateful, 
very grateful for everything you have done for ine. I am 
deeply sensitive about it. Imagine, therefore, how I feel 
when 1 see that after all your disasters, of which I was 
the unwitting cause, you continue to share my joys and 
sorrows, to live for my affection alone. Taking other peo¬ 
ple’s troubles to heart as you do, it is no wonder that you 
are the unhappiest of men. You frightened me when you 
came to see me after office hours today. You looked so paV, 
terrified, and desperate—and all because you were afraid 
to tell me that you had failed, afraid to upset me. And how 
relieved you were when you saw that 1 was almost ready 
to laugh. Do not worry and take on so, Makar Alexeye¬ 
vich. Do be sensible, I beg of you. Everything will turn 
out well, you will see! Or else yout life will be very hard, 
grieving for other people as you do. Good-bve, mv friend. 
Don’t woi ry over me so. I beg of you. 

V. 1). 

Aiigust 5 

Varenka, my little dove, 

Very well then, my angel, very well! You say that it 
docs not matter so much, even if 1 failed to get die money. 
Very well then. I am reassured and almost happy on your 
account. I am even glad that you will continue to live here 
and will not forsake this poor old man. To tell vou the 
truth, I was delighted with your letter, with the wav you 
do credit to my sentiments. And I am not sas ing this out 
of pride, but only because 1 see that you love me and show 
every consideration for the feelings of my heart. But why 
speak of my heart? My heart, after all, is only my heart; 
but then you have said, my darling, that 1 should not be 
faint of heart. Perfectly true, my darling. One should not 


108 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


be faint of heart. And still, my little one, there are boots 
to think about, boots in which to go to the office tomorrow! 
That is where the trouble lies. Such broodings can destroy 
a man, destroy him completely. And it is not on my own 
account that I am tormenting myself. For my part, I would 
not care at all even if I had to go out coatless and bare¬ 
footed in the bitterest frost. I’d endure it. I’d stand every¬ 
thing, it wouldn’t matter to me, I am only a little man, a 
very ordinary man. But what would people say? What 
malicious things my enemies would say if they saw me 
walking about without a coat! That is why one wears a 
coat, and boots too perhaps. And so you see.Varenka, the 
boots are necessary to preserve my honour and good name. 
In torn boots one can lose the one and the other. You may 
be sure that this is true, my darling. 1 have learned it from 
years of experience. And so you had better believe me, an 
old man who knows what the world and the people in it 
are like, and never listen to those pen-pushers and scrib¬ 
blers. 

But I have not yet told you, dear heart, how it all hap¬ 
pened today. What I went through and suffered this morn¬ 
ing would suffice another for a whole year. This is what 
happened: I set off in the wee hours of the morning so‘as 
to find him at home and not be late at the office. It was 
raining and there were puddles everywhere. 1 walked 
along, huddled in my coat and thinking: “Merciful God, 
foigive me my sins and answer my prayer, just this once!” 
Passing a church I crossed myself, and again asked God 
to forgive me my sins but remembered that it was not 
right to make terms with Him. And so I went on, lost in 
thought, and splashing blindly through the mud. The 
streets were empty and the few who did walk by were 
preoccupied and anxious like me. And why wouldn’t they 
be—walking in such weather at such an hour. I met a 
band of grimy workmen and they jostled me, the louts. 
Suddenly I grew nervous and uneasy. I did not care about 
the money any more—just another attempt and I would 
give up! As 1 reached Voskresensky Bridge the sole of my 
boot began to flap and it was difficult to go on. And whom 
should I meet just then if not Yermolayev—he is only a 
copyist, not even a junior clerk. He stopped short when 



POOR PEOPLE 


109 


he saw me, stiffened to attention, and followed me with his 
eyes as though expecting a copper coin to drink my health. 
“Ah!” I thought, “drink my health, would you:* Who cates 
about it now?” I felt terribly tired, stopped to test for a 
while and then plodded on. 1 looked around foi something 
to hang my thoughts on, something diverting, something 
encouraging; but no, not a single thought occurred to me, 
and I only splashed into a puddle and got so dirty that I 
almost wept from vexation. From afar, I saw a yellow 
wooden house with a gabled attic serving as a second floor. 
“This,” I thought, “is Markov’s house, just as Yemelyan 
Ivanovich described it.” (The Markov who lends money on 
interest.) But I was nervous and though I know it was Mar¬ 
kov’s house, I made sure of it by asking a watchman. 
“Whose house is this, my friend?” I asked. The answer 
was unfriendly, a surly watchman’s answer: “This is Mar¬ 
kov’s house, if you want to know.” Watchmen are so un¬ 
feeling. The watchman did not matter, of course, but still 
1 was left with a bad taste in my mouth. As you know, one 
thing leads to another and every trifle seems to have a 
bearing on one's situation. 1 passed the house three times 
and found it harder and haider to enter. “He won’t give 
me the money,” I thought. “Never! I am a total stranger, 
unattractive in appearance and the matter so delicate— 
but then let the fates decide! I’ll do it if only not to re¬ 
proach myself later; they won t eat me up, after all.” And 
so I gently opened the gate and went in; but then there was 
some more trouble—a worthless little cur which jumped 
about barking its head off. It is just such a nasty trifle 
as this that can drive a man mad, shatter his composure 
and upset all his decisions. I entered the house more dead 
than alive, and there ran into more tioublc. At _the very 
threshold I stumbled over an old woman—1 hadn't noticed 
her in the dust—who was busy with some jugs of milk she 
was straining. The jugs were upset of course. How she 
shrilled and shrieked at me! “What could you be wanting 
here!” And so on over and over again! I am writing this, 
Varenka, because such things always happen to me under 
these circumstances. It is my fate: I am always blundering 
into difficulties. The commotion brought the Finnish land¬ 
lady, a terrible harridan, to the scene. I asked her if Mar- 



110 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


kov lived there and she said that he did not. But looking 
me over carefully, she must have changed her mind be¬ 
cause she inquired what 1 wanted to see the gentleman 
for. 1 explained that I had been sent by Yemelyan Iva¬ 
novich and told her everything. The old hag now called 
for her daughtei, a rathei tall barefooted girl. “Gall fa- 
thei,” she said, “he is upstairs with the tenants.” And to 
me: “Please come in.” 

The room was comfortable enough; there were pictures 
on the walls, mostly generals, there was a sofa, a round 
table and mignonette and balsam pots on the window-sill. 
Perhaps I had better go while the going is good, 1 thought. 
I came near to running away, my darling. I had already 
decided to return on the morrow; the weather would be 
better then, with no milk overturned, and the generals on 
the walls looking less angiy. 1 was just making for the 
door when he enteied. A little grey old man with shifty 
eyes, in a greasy dressing-gown caught about at the waist 
with a length of rope He asked me what l wanted of 
him, and 1 told him of Yemelyan Ivanovich and forty 
rubles and all that—but did not finish. Bv his«eyes alone 
l could see that 1 had tailed. “You need the money ur¬ 
gently,” he said, “but I haven’t any And what tan you 
give me as security?” 1 explained that I had no security 
to olfer, but talked again of Yemelyan Ivanovich and again 
assured him that it was vety urgent. “What has Yemelyan 
Ivanovich to do with it J ” he asked “I have no money.” 
Of course not. I thought. I had known it all along. Ah. 
Varenka, it only the earth could have opened and swal¬ 
lowed me then! My legs tui ned to ice and a chill ran down 
mv spine. 1 was looking at him and lie at me, his eyes 
saying: “Get going, there’s nothing for you here!” If this 
were not a business mattei, I should have been quite em¬ 
barrassed. “What do you need the money lor?” (this is 
actually what he asked, my darling) l began to talk again 
only for the sake ol saying something, but he was no 
longer listening. “No. 1 have no money,” he said again. 
“I am sony.” But 1 kept urging and pleading, promising 
to icturn the money in time, even ahead of time and with 
any interest -he might want. Couldn't he let me have even 
a little of it? At that moment 1 was thinking of you, my 




POOR PEOPLE 


111 


darling, of that half ruble you gave me, of all our troubles 
and needs. “No,” he said again, “don’t talk of interest: 
you must offer something as security. I have no money, 
and, by God, I am sorry!” By God! Taking God’s name 
in vain, the robber! 

I really cannot remember how I left the house, how I 
got to Voskresensky Bridge. I was tired and chilled to the 
bone and reached the office late, at 10 o’clock. I should 
have liked to brush my clothing, but the watchman. Sne- 
giryov, would not let me. He was afraid that 1 might spoil 
the brush and the brush, after all, belongs to the office. 
\nd so you see, my darling, I’m no better than a door mat 
for these lordships too. It is this that is killing me, Va- 
renka, not the lack of money, but this misery, the smiles, 
the jokes and insinuations. What if His Excellency should 
bear of it by some accident! I have fallen on evil days. 

1 have reread all your letters today, my darling. How 
cad it all is Good-bye, dear. God bless you! 

M. Devushkin 

P.S. I had meant to describe my troubles jestingly, Va- 
renka, but it hasn't turned out that way. 1 wanted to 
please you. I’ll call on you, my darling, f shall surely visit 
you tomorrow. 


August U 

Varvara Alexeyevna, my little dove, my dearest, 

I am lost! We are both hopelessly lost! Everything lies 
in ruins; my reputation, my honour. I am ruined and you 
are ruined too, my poor darling, you too are ruined irre¬ 
vocably together with me. I, 1 am the cause of your ruin. 
They are persecuting me, reviling and ridiculing me, and 
my landlady actually cursed me; she shouted and shouted 
at me today, scolded and scolded me, treating me no better 
than a chip of wood. And at Ratazyaev’s party someone 
read aloud a rough copy of a letter I had written to you, 
a letter which had fallen out of my pocket. How they did 
make fun of us and said all sorts of things; thev were sim- 



F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


112 


ply howling with laughter, the traitors. I entered the room 
and denounced Ratazyaev as a perfidious friend, a traitor. 
But he came back at me saying that 1 was a traitor myself, 
a past hand of conquete. He called me a secretive person 
and a Mr. Lovelace. And that is what everybody calls me 
now: Mr. Lovelace. It is horrible, my darling, but they 
know everything, all there is to know, about you and me. 
To think that even Faldoni has followed suit. When I 
asked him to go to the grocery for something, he refused 
and said he was too busy. “But it’s your duty,” I told him. 

‘ No, it is not,” he retorted, “because you don’t pay your 
rent.” 1 could not bear such an insult from a stupid peas¬ 
ant and called him a fool. And what did he answer? “Fool 
yourself!” I could not believe that he was sober: “You are 
drunk, you stupid lout!” But he came back with: “You 
treated me to a glass, I don’t think! Why, you can’t even 
buy yourself a drink to come to your senses after the night 
before! You’re always begging ten kopek alms from that 
piece.” And to all this he added: “And you call yourself 
a gentleman!” That is what we have come to, dear heart. 

I am ashamed to go on living. I am treated like an outcast, 
worse than a vagrant without a passport. Horrible, horri¬ 
ble! 1 am done for, lost beyond redemption. 

M. D. 


August 13 

Misfortune upon misfortune, my esteemed Makar Ale¬ 
xeyevich! I scarcely know what to do. What is to become 
of you? Of what good can I be to you now? I have injured 
my hand today with the iron. It slipped from my fingers 
and burned and bruised me both. What shall I do now? I 
cannot work and Fedora has been ill for three days. I am 
awfully worried. I am sending you thirty kopeks in silver. 
This is nearly all we have. God knows 1 should have liked 
to help you more. It is enough to make one weep. Good¬ 
bye, my dear friend. I would be much comforted if you 
called on me today. 


V. D. 


POOR PEOPLE 


m 


August 14 

Makar Alexeyevich! 

What has come over you? Have you lost all fear of 
God? You will drive me mad. You ought to be ashamed, 
you are ruining yourself; just think of your reputation. 
You, a respectable and dignified man? How could you? 
What if they heard about it at the office? You would die 
of shame! Think of your grey hair, don’t lose your fear 
of God! Fedora says she will not help you any more; and 
1 won’t either. Do you think that your conduct means 
nothing to me? You don’t know how 1 suffer on your ac¬ 
count. I hardly dare to appear on the stairs with everyone 
looking at me and saying all kind of things: they say that 
I have taken up with a drunkard. And when they cairy 
)ou home I hear people say: “They have brought that 
clerk again!” I could weep for shame. I swear that I shall 
move away from here. I’ll go to work as a maid, a laun¬ 
dress, but I shall not stay here. 

I asked you to come to see me, but you did not. My 
pleading and my tears mean nothing to you, Makar Ale¬ 
xeyevich! And where did you get the money, I wonder? 
Take care of yourself, please! You arc ruining yourself! 
And what for? I have heard that your landlady would 
not let you into the apartment and that you had to spend 
the night in the passage. What a disgrace! How awful I 
felt when I heard of it! 

Do come to see us. You will be happy here. We shall 
read together and remember old times. Fedora will tell 
us of her pilgrimages to the holy places, and for God’s sake, 
my dear friend, do not ruin yourself and me. It is for you 
alone that I am living, that I am staying here. Be an 
honourable man, firm in adversity and remember that it 
is not a sin to be poor. And why should you despair so? 
God is merciful and our troubles will pass. But you must 
bear up. 1 am sending you a twenty-kopek coin to buy 
tobacco or whatever else you may need at the moment, but 
please don’t spend it on evil. Please come to see us. Per¬ 
haps you are ashamed to do so as you used to, but you 
shouldn’t be. Abandon your false pride and repent since¬ 
rely. Trust in God, who will do everything for the best. 



114 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


August 19 

Varvara Alexeyevna, my sweet dear! 

I am ashamed, really and truly ashamed. But by the by, 
my darling, what harm has been done, really? Why not 
gladden the heart once in a while? I forget then that the 
soles of my shoes are no good any more because, come to 
think of it, soles are nonsense and will remain ordinary, 
vulgar and dirty soles, all said and done. And boots, too, 
are nonsense. If the wise men of Greece could walk about 
without them, why should we bother with such unworthy 
things? Why then should people make fun of me and insult 
me ? Couldn’t you find something better to write about, 
my little darling? And tell Fedora for me that she is an 
unreasonable wench, a troublesome, violent wench and 
foolish besides, extremely foolish. As for my grey hair, 
you are mistaken, my darling. 1 am not as old as you think. 
Yemelya sends his regards. You write that you were crushed 
on my behalf, and cried. And I write that I was crushed 
on your behalf, and wept too. In conclusion, I wish you 
good health and good cheer. As for me, T am in good 
health, all is well with me, and I remain, my little angel, 

Your friend, 
Makar Devushkin 


August 21 

M> dear and esteemed friend, Varvara Alexeyevna, 

1 know I am at fault. I know I deserve blame from you, 
but what good docs it do that 1 know it, my love, what’s 
the use. I felt all this before my misdeed too, and yet 1 
fell in spirit, for all my consciousness of guilt. My dearest, 
1 am not malicious or hard of heart. To hurt you, my child, 
one must have the heart of a feiocious tiger, and I have 
only the heart of a lamb and, as you know, am not dt all 
inclined to be ferocious. Consequently, my dearest, I am 
not entirely to blame for my misdeed, nor is my heart or 
mind What is to blame for it is more than I can say: it 
is so obscure, my dear. You sent me thirty kopeks in silver. 




POOR PEOPLE 


115 


and then, twenty kopeks more. And I sat there looking at 
those poor orphan’s coins of yours with an aching heart. 
You have burned your hand and cannot work and will be 
starving soon and yet you send me money to buy tobacco. 
What should 1 have done? Plunder a poor orphan without 
scruple? I was so depressed, my darling. That is, I felt at 
first that I was worthless and not much better than the 
soles of my boots. And so it seemed to me quite ridiculous 
to regard myself as something of consequence. On the con- 
tiary, 1 decided to regard myself as something of no con¬ 
sequence, as something quite unbecoming and even in¬ 
decent. And as soon as I had lost my self-respect I could 
not help disclaiming all my virtues and my worthiness. 
And this inevitably brought about my downfall. It was 
fate, you know. I went out foi a bieath of Ircsh air, and 
one thing led to another: nature was so sad and the weath 
or cold and it was raining and there was Yemelya, and 
he had pawned everything, Vaienka. All that he had 
owned had gone the same way and he hadn’t had a bite 
to eat for two days. Now he wanted to pawn something 
that couldn’t be pawned at all. Really, Vaienka, 1 suc- 
tumbed more out of kindliness and sympathy for the 
man than out of my own desire. That is how l came to 
sin. How we wept, the two of us, and rcmembeied you. 
He is a good soul, Yemelya, tender, and kind to the 
core. 

And 1 feel all this myself and that is why such thing.-, 
happen to me—because I feel. I know how indebted to \ou 
I am, my darling. When I came to know you. 1 came to 
know myself better and to love vou. And bcfoic that, iny 
angel, 1 was so alone in the woild and slept rathci than 
lived. In those days, the villains used to say that even my 
figure was all wrong and were so contemptuous of me that 
1 finally grew contemptuous of myself. Thev used to say 
that I was a fool and I came to think so too. But when 
you appeared to me like a vision from above, you biought 
light into that dark existence of mine, brought light into 
my heart and soul and there was peace at least and I 
knew that I was no worse than others. 

The polish was missing perhaps, and the tone and bril¬ 
liance too, but I was a man at heart and in mind. And 



116 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


now I felt that I was being persecuted by fate, humiliated, 
I no longer valued my own dignity and, oppressed by the 
weight of misfortune, I lost heart. Now uiat I have told 
you all, I beg you with tears in my eyes never to mention 
the matter again, for I am sad and weary and my heart is 
breaking. 

With all respect, my darling, I remain 

Your constant friend, 
Makar Dexmshkin 


September 3 

I did not finish my last letter, Makar Alexeyevich. It 
was too difficult to write. There are moments when I want 
to be alone, to be alone and sad without measure; and this 
mood comes over me more and more often now. There is 
something about memories that I cannot explain, some¬ 
thing that carries me irresistibly away so that I may be 
oblivious to everything for hours. There is scarcely an im¬ 
pression now, sad or pleasant, that does not remind me of 
something similar in the past, and most of all in my golden 
childhood. But after such moments I am always depressed. 
1 grow weak; my dreamings exhaust me and my health is 
growing worse as it is. 

But today we have had one of those crisp, refreshing 
mornings, so rare in autumn, and I welcomed it joyously. 
And so the autumn has come. How I used to love the 
autumn in the country. I was a child then, but how keenly 
I felt things. I liked the evenings of autumn better than 
the mornings. There was a lake at the foot of the hill, a 
short distance from the house—1 can almost see it now. It 
was broad and bright, a great sheet of crystal. And if the 
evening was quiet, it lay so very still with not a murmur 
in the overhanging trees. The air would be so cool and 
bracing. The dew would settle on the grass, lights would 
appear in the windows beneath the thatched roofs, and 
the cows would be returning home. That was when I loved 
to slip away to look at my lake, forgetful of every- 
thing. The fishermen would be burning some brushing on 



POOR PEOPLE 


117 


the shore and the light would stream far, very far across 
the water. The sky would be so cold and blue, painted 
with red, fiery streaks, and these streaks would turn paler 
and paler. And then the moon would rise; and the limpid 
air would carry all sounds like a silver bell; the wing of a 
bird, the slightest whisper of the rushes or the splash of 
a fish—you could hear everything. And then the mists 
would rise, so thin and transparent over the darkening 
surface, and in the distance all things would grow vague 
and disappear. But close at hand everything was so sharp¬ 
ly etched, as if carved: the boats, the water’s edge, the 
islets; or a barrel—abandoned or forgotten—bobbing in 
the water close to the shore; or a twig of broom with yel¬ 
lowed leaves caught in the rushes. A belated gull would 
dive into the cold depths and Hurry off again. I would 
stand there looking and listening and feeling wonderfully 
strange. And I was only a child then. 

Yes, I loved the autumn, especially the late autumn 
when the harvest had been taken in and all the woik done, 
and the villagers gathered in one cottage or another to 
talk and sing and wait for the winter. Then everything 
would grow gloomier under the lowering skv, and yellow 
leaves lay thick at the edges of the naked forest, turning 
constantly darker and more blue, especially towards eve¬ 
ning when the fogs would settle and the trees loom in the 
depths like giants, like huge ghosts. There were times 
when 1 happened to be out-of-doors too late or fall behind 
the others during a walk—and suddenly I would know 
that I was alone, and I hurried home stricken with panic. 
Trembling like a leaf I would expect some fearful face 
to stare at me from the hollow of a tree; and then the wind 
would suddenly dash through the forest and roar and moan 
as it swept the remaining leaves from the bare boughs and 
sent them whirling. And then the birds would follow in 
vast and noisy flocks darkening the skv and I would be 
filled with an unaccountable dread and seem to hear a 
whispering voice: “Run, my child, run away! Soon it will 
be terrible here. Run!” And I would run until 1 had lost 
mv breath. Home at last, I would find everything so cheer¬ 
ful and warm: we, the children, would be set to shelling 
peas or poppy-heads while the damp wood crackled in the 



118 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


stove, and mother looked on and our old nurse Ulyana 
told us of bygone days or tales about sorcerers and vam¬ 
pires. We would press closer to one another, but smile as 
we listened. And then there would be a hush. Hadn’t some¬ 
one knocked on the door? But no, it was only old Fro¬ 
lovna’s spinning wheel; and what shouts of laughter would 
arise. At night we’d have terrible dreams and keep waking 
up. 1 would start up at midnight afraid to stir and lie 
awake till dawn, shivering under my quilt. And yet I 
would be up in the morning as fresh as a daisy. I would 
look out of the windows and see that the fields had 
already been clutched by the cold and that the thin hoar¬ 
frost of autumn was clinging to the naked boughs. The 
lake would then be covered with a film of ice. white va¬ 
pour would rise from it; and the birds would be darting 
about with cheerful cries. But the thin crust over the lake 
melted quicklv under the warm rays of the sun. it was a 
bright world, vivid and happy. And the stoves would be 
roaring again as we sat about the samovar and our black 
dog Polkan, still shaking with the cold of night, would be 
looking in at the window and wagging hi* tail so hope¬ 
fully. A peasant cart would rumble by on its way to the 
forest for firewood. And we were all so content and so gay 
in those happy days. 

These memor ies make me weep. The past stands out so 
bright and the present is so dreary and dark. How will it 
end. dear God! Do you know, I have the feeling that I 
will die this autumn; I am sure of it. I am very, very ill. 
I often think about it and do not want to die here, to be 
buried in this earth. Perhaps 1 will take to my bed again, 
as I did last spring. You know that l never really recov¬ 
ered. Now, too, 1 feel very ill. Fedora has been gone all 
day and I am quite alone. Theie are times when I am 
afraid to be alone and have the queer feeling that there 
is someone else in the room, someone who is speaking to 
me, especially when I’m startled from my reveries. I’hat 
is why I have written such a long letter. The fear passes 
when I write. Good-bye. I must finish now because there 
is no more paper; and, besides, I have no time. Only one 
ruble in silver has remained of the money I received for 
my dress and hat. 1 am glad that you have given your 


POOR PEOPLE 


119 


landlady two rubles in silver; this ought to keep her quiet 
for a time. 

Try to have your clothing put in order. Good-bye, my 
friend. 1 am so weak and tire so easily. The slightest effort 
exhausts me. How shall I be able to work—even if work 
is to be had. The thought of it alone kills all hope. 


V. D. 


September 5 

Varenka dear, 

I have had so many impressions today. To begin with, 
I had a headache. To clear it away, 1 took a walk along the 
Fontanka. The evening was damp and it was dark—it gets 
dark soon after five, you know. There was no rain, but 
the fog was worse than any shower. Clouds moved across 
the sky in wide streaks. Crowds of people were hurrying 
along the embankment, a strangely ugly crowd, such a 
depressing sight they made. There were drunken peas¬ 
ants, snubnosed and bare-headed Finnish women in top- 
boots, workmen, cabmen, clerks of our sort, a thin con¬ 
sumptive apprentice in a striped smock with his face black 
with grease and a huge lock in his hands, and a disc barged 
soldier, incredibly tall. It must have been the lime of the 
day for such people to appear. And the canal itself was 
worth looking at. How could so many barges find room 
there! On the bridges sat women selling damp nonev takes 
and rotting apples, a lot of bedraggled, dirty women. The 
Fontanka is a dismal place to take a walk in There is only 
wet stone underfoot and tall, smoke-blackened Houses; 
mist on the ground and mist overhead. What a sad, dark 
evening it was. 

When I turned into Gorokhovava it was quite dark and 
they had started to light the gas lamps. I hadn’t been on 
this street for a long time and it seemed very lively There 
were the beautiful shops, large and small, and all spark¬ 
ling and glittering with rich materials and flowers and 
ribboned hats. One might think it was all arranged just 
for display, but no, there really are people who buy such 



f20 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


things for their wive?! A wealthy street. Many of the 
German bakers live here too and they are people of means. 
There are so many carriages one wonders how the street 
can support them all. And what luxurious vehicles they 
are, with shining windows, silk and velvet upholstery, 
and lackeys with swords and epaulettes. I looked into each 
of them as they passed, and guessed that the ladies inside 
were either countesses or princesses, for they were all 
dressed up in such finery. It tnust have been the time of the 
day when everybody goes to balls and evening parties. I 
would be curious to see a countess or any great lady close 
to; they are lovely, I am sure. I have never had the oppor¬ 
tunity to do so unless peeping into the carriages as now. 
I thought of you too and how it pained me, my poOr dear 
darling. Why should you know such misery, Varenka? My 
dearest little angel, in what way are you less worthy than 
the others? You are so kind, beautiful and learned, shouM 
your lot in life be so hard? Why should good people live 
in need and neglect, and others have all the happiness 
coming their way? I know, my darling, I know that I 
should not say this because it savours of free thinking. 
But in all fairness, why is it that fate should smile upon 
one while he is still in ihe womb and croak like a raven 
at another on 1 / because he was born in the poor house. 
As in fairy-tales, it sometimes docs happen that happiness 
falls to Ivanushka the Fool. In that case he may rummage 
in the coffers of his inheritance and drink and make merry, 
while another poor wretch can only lick his lips and 
watch—that is all he is good for, all that he was born 
for. It is sinful, of course, to think this way, but these 
sinful thoughts come uninvited. Why couldn’t you be rid¬ 
ing about in one of those carriages, my darling, with gen¬ 
erals, and not the likes of me, eager for your sweet smile? 
You would be wearing gold and silver then, and not poor, 
worn frocks of linen. And would you be as wan and frail 
as you are now? Nothing of the sort! You would be like 
a little sugar-coated ginger doll, so rosy, fresh and plump. 
It would be happiness enough for me to peep into your 
brightly lighted windows just to see your shadow and 
to know that you are happy and joyous. But how are 
things in real life? Grief, you have been brought to grief 



POOR PEOPLE 


121 


by evil people, and to add insult to injury, you arc now 
pestered by that bewhiskeied piece of trash. Just because 
he struts about in a frock-coat and ogles you through a 
gold lorgnette, that coxcomb imagines that he can take 
liberties and you must listen to liis impertinences with good 
grace. Why? Why? Because you .arc a helpless orphan 
without strong friends to protect you. What sort ol people 
they must be, what sort of man is he, it he thinks nothing 
of insulting a defenceless orphan? A piece of trash and 
not a man! A man in semblance only! I’m sure of it. Why, 
the organ-grinder I met in Gotokhovaya Street deserves 
more respect. What if he docs walk about the street all 
day in the hope of an extra kopek? He is his own master 
and earns his own bread. He is not a beggar, but gtinds 
away for people’s pleasure. Heie! Enjoy yourselves, that 
is what l am for! Perhaps he is a beggar, a real beggar, 
but an honourable beggar for all that. Though tired and 
hungry, he keeps working in his own way, but working 
just the same. There are many who do humble work and 
cam veiy little, but will bow to no one and ask foi noth¬ 
ing. I am exactly like that organ grinder, that is, not 
exactly like him, not even at all like him, but exactly lik*' 
him only in the decent, honouiable sense I work as hard 
as I can. What more can I do? 

What made tnc think of the organ-grinder was that 
today 1 felt my poverty more keenlv than evei. I stopped 
in the stieet to watch him play 1 did this to distract niyself, 
to keep away unplca.- lit thoughts. Some cabmen, a young 
woman and a little grimy girl stood watching too. The 
organ-grinder had taken up a stand under someone’s win¬ 
dows. Now, 1 noticed a little hoy of about ten who would 
have been good-looking if he were not so pinched and 
sickly. Almost barefooted and only in a shirt, he stood 
gaping and listening—boys will he boys! He could not 
take his eyes off the dancing doll on the hand organ 
though his knees were shivering with cold and he kept 
sucking the sleeve of his shirt 1 noticed, too, that he held 
a scrap of paper in his hand. Finally, some gentleman 
dropped a coin into the box on which the tov Ficnthman 
and his ladies were dancing. The clink ol the falling coin 
startled the boy and he looked timidly around. He must 



122 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


have thought that 1 had dropped the coin because he ran 
up to me and handed me the paper with trembling fingers 
and in a piping voice begged me to read it. 1 unfolded it— 
it was the usual thing, of course; the usual thing about a 
dying mother with three starving children with an appeal 
to the dear kind people for help, and a promise that when 
the mother died, she would intercede for them on high. 
There was nothing singular in this, it might happen to 
anybody, but what was I to $ive him? Nothing at all. But 
how sorry I was! Such a poor little boy, blue with cold! And 
hungry, too. I’m sure. lie was not lying to me. No, no, 
he could not Be. I know it well. The nastiest thing about 
it is that a mother will send her unclothed child out into 
the cold with one of those notes. Perhaps she has simply 
lost heart; there is no one to help her and so she sits there 
doing nothing; perhaps she is really ill. Still, she ought to 
appeal to the proper authorities. But then, she may be 
simply imposing on the public by sending her weak, hun¬ 
gry little boy out to beg. And what sort of an upbringing 
will he get with those scraps of paper? There he is running 
about and pleading, but people have no time for him. Their 
hearts are like stone and their words cruel: ‘‘Off with you! 
None of your mischief!” The boy will grow callous as he 
trembles with the cold, a frightened little fledgling fallen 
from the nest. Mis hands are numb and he can hardly 
breathe in that chilling air. Before he knows it, he begins 
to cough, disease creeps into his breast like a slimy reptile, 
and already death stands over him, waiting in some dark 
and dingy corner because there is no one to care for him, 
no one to help him. And there is an end to his little life. 
That is all there is to some lives, Varenka. It is not easy 
to hear someone say, “Help me for the love of Christ”, 
and pass bv without giving anything and merely saying, 
“God will help you”. There arc times, of course, when the 
words, “For the love of Christ”, are not so terrible (there 
are different kinds of “For the love of Christ”, my darling). 
Some are whined mechanically in the way that beggars 
always do. To give such a one nothing is not nearly so 
tormenting. That one is hardened to it, he is the sort who 
will pull through somehow. But at other times, the “For 
the love of Christ” sounds strange, hoarse and terrifying. 



POOR PEOPLE 


123 


Just as it sounded today when I was reading the boy’s 
note and someone, right near the fence—he had been just 
standing there and not begging—said to me: “Spare me 
a coin, sir, for the love of Christ.” The voice was so hoarse 
that I was startled. But what could 1 give him? 1 had noth¬ 
ing. The rich do not like it when the poor complain of 
their hard lot out loud: the rich say they aie a nuisance 
and so impudent! Do the moans of the hungry trouble 
their sleep? I fear not. 

To tell you the truth, my darling own, 1 have written 
all this partly to relieve my heart and partly to give you 
an example of my good style in writing. As you see, my 
deal, my style has been taking shape of late. And just now 
I am so despondent that I cannot help sympathising with 
my own thoughts; and though 1 know, my darling, that 
such sympathy will lead me nowhere, yet it is pleasant to 
do oneself a bit of justice. All the more so that one is 
usually inclined to humble oneself, to make less than noth¬ 
ing of oneself and rank oneself even lower than a shaving 
of wood. To give you a comparison. I may tell you that it 
is all because I am just as harassed and crushed as that 
little boy who asked me for alms. Forgive me, Varenka, for 
indulging in a little allegory: as 1 go to the office early 
in the morning, 1 sometimes happen to look about the city, 
at all the smoke, the seething and the rumbling which 
makes me feel so small, as if someone had snapped his 
fingers under my prying nose. When that happens I sluink 
and shuffle on, meek as a mouse. But now, mv darling, let 
us have a closer look and see what is happening in those 
big dark drab houses. Look and then consider whether it 
is right to place oneself so low and be einbairasscd on that 
account. Mind, Varenka, that I have been saying all this 
allegorically, not in the direct sense. Now what shall we 
see in those houses? We shall see how in some dingy corner 
of some dank hall, called an apartment, a workman wakes 
up. It is possible that all through the night he has been 
haunted by the thought of the 6hoes which he spoiled the 
day before. To think that a man should dream of such 
trash. He is a workman, of course, a cobbler and may be 
excused for thinking constantly of such matters. His child¬ 
ren are whimpering and his wife is hungry. And it is not 



124 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


only cobblers who get up with such things on their minds, 
my darling. It would not matter, of course, and perhaps 
the whole thing would not be worth mentioning if not foi 
another circumstance, namely, that in the same house, on 
the floor above there is a very rich man who has also been 
dreaming in his gilded chamber throughout the night about 
shoes, that is, not exactly the same shoes, but of shoes 
nevertheless, and in this sense, my darling, we are all 
cobblers to a certain degree. And again, it would not mat¬ 
ter, but the trouble is that there is no one to whisper into 
the very rich man's ear that he should stop thinking of 
and living for himself alone, he is not a cobbler and his 
children are healthy, and his wife is not hungry; why 
shouldn’t he look around and see if he cannot find some¬ 
thing nobler to concern himself with than his shoes. This 
is what l had meant to tell you allegorically. This may be 
an awfully free thought, Varenka, but it sometimes does 
occur to me and when it does, it gushes from my heart in 
words. And so there is no need at all to humble oneself 
and be afiaid of all that seething and rumbling. In con¬ 
clusion 1 will say this, my darling: you may think that I 
am only gossiping or that I am just in a bad mood or that 
I have copied it all out of some book. No, my dear, let me 
teas,sure you; there is nothing l scorn so much as gossip 
and l am not in a bad mood and 1 haven’t copied anything. 
So there! 

I came home in a melancholy mood, pul the kettle on 
the stove and was prepanng to have a cup of tea when 
suddenly Gorshkov, my poor neighbour, came in. In the 
morning 1 had noticed that he wanted to sidle up to me 
and the other tenants In passing, I may mention, Va¬ 
renka, that his life is incomparably worse than mine. Far 
worse! With a vvife and children to feed! If I were Gorsh¬ 
kov 1 would really not know what to do. And so, Gorsh¬ 
kov entered the room and bowed with his eyes streaming 
as always and stood there scraping and unable to say a 
word. 1 offered him a chair, a broken one, because I 
have no other, and some tea. For a long time he kept 
apologising, but finally accepted the glass of tea. But he 
declined the sugar and began again to apo'ogise. When 
I urged him to take the sugar, he argued for a long time 



POOR PEOPLE 


125 


and then fished out the tiniest lump and assured me that 
the tea was astonishingly sweet. Lord, how poverty hum¬ 
bles a man! “How are you getting on, my friend. 1 '” I asked. 
“Thank you,” he said and went on: “Couldn't you, Ma¬ 
kar Alexeyevich, show me the charity of God and help 
an unfortunate family? My wife and children, you know. 
They have nothing to eat and you can imagine how a 
father feels.” I was about to say something, but he inter¬ 
rupted again: “I am afraid of every lodgct here, Makar 
Alexeyevich, that is, not so much afraid as ashamed to 
speak to them. They are so standoffish, so haughty. 1 would 
never think of troubling you, my friend and benefactor. 
I know that you have troubles of your own, that you can¬ 
not help me much, but please do lend me something. It 
was not easy to come to you for this, but I know what a 
kind heart you have, that you are in need like mysell and 
more likely to feel for me in my misfortune.” To this he 
added many apologies for his presumption and shameless¬ 
ness. I said that, glad though I should have been to help 
him, 1 had nothing, absolutely nothing. “Makar Alexeye¬ 
vich, my kind friend,” he pleaded again, “I do not ask 
for much, but this is how things arc (and here he turned 
red): my wife and childicn, you know. They are starving. 
Couldn’t you spare just ten kopeks?” This made me feel 
so bad. Yes, the man was worse off than me. All 1 had 
at the moment was twenty kopeks; and I had been count¬ 
ing on this for pressing needs tomorrow. “No,” I said, “I 
really could not.” I explained why. “My dear Makar 
Alexeyevich, anything, anything you please, even if it’s 
only ten kopeks!” I took my twenty-kopek piece and gave 
it to him. And twenty kopeks, too, is a help, isn't it, Va- 
lenka? What poverty! We begun to talk and l finally asked 
him why he had rented a room at five rubles when he was 
in such straits. He explained that he had moved in six 
months before and had paid three months’ rent in advance, 
hoping that his case would be settled by then. It is an 
unpleasant case indeed. He committed a breach of law of 
some sort. lie is involved in the case of a met chant who 
defrauded the treasury. When the matter was discovered 
the rascal was tried and then embroiled Gorshkov. Now 
the truth is that Gorshkov is guilty only of oversight, of 



126 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


culpable neglect of the state’s interests. The case has been 
going on for years, but Gorshkov keeps running into new 
obstacles. “Of the dishonour heaped upon me, I am inno¬ 
cent,” says Gorshkov, “innocent as can be! Of fraud and 
theft I am innocent!” But the case has cost him his repu¬ 
tation. He was dismissed and though not actually found 
guilty, was not entirely cleared. If he had been fully ac¬ 
quitted, that merchant would have had to pay him a 
handsome sum of money, his by right. I am ready to take 
Gorshkov’s word, but the court will not. It is a tangled 
affair, so twisted that it will take more than a hundred 
years to unravel it. No sooner do they unravel one of the 
knots than the merchant thinks up another. I am sorry 
for Gorshkov and sympathise with him deeply. He has 
no work. No one will employ him because of his reputa¬ 
tion. Everything that he owned has long been sold. The 
case drags on and in the meantime a child was born, 
quite at the wrong time. All this, of course, costs money. 
When the boy was ill, it cost money again; and when he 
diet!, still more money was needed. His wife is ill and he 
too lias an old ailment. In short, he has suffered* He claims, 
however, that there may be a favourable decision in a 
few days, that there can be no doubt about it. I’m so sorry 
for him, Varenka. 1 tried to comfort him as well as I 
could. He is a lost little man, so much in need of pro¬ 
tection; and I comforted him as well as I could. Good- 
bve, my darling. May Christ be with you and keep you 
in good health. Varenka. my own datling! Thinking of 
you is balm for the soul, and suffering for you, a relief. 

Your true friend, 

Makar Dcvushkin 


September 9 

Varvara Alexeyevna, my darling, 

I am nearly out of my mind: a fearful thing has hap¬ 
pened. My head is in a whirl and everything around me 
is whirling too. You will never guess what I have to tell. 
We have never imagined such a thing. No, it can’t be 




POOR PEOPLE 


127 


that 1 had not felt it in my heart! I even had a dream 
something like it the other day. 

This is what happened. I’ll describe it to you without 
any style, just as it comes to my pen. This morning 1 
went to the office as usual, took my place at the desk and 
began to write. Here I must mention, my darling, that I 
did exactly the same yesterday when Timofei Ivanovich 
approached me in person and said that he had a paper 
to be copied immediately. “Please copy it as neatly and 
quickly as possible,” he said, “it is to be signed by His 
Excellency today.” 1 must mention, my darling, that yes- 
teiday I was not altogether myself. 1 felt so sad and 
lonely; my heart was gloomy and chill, 1 was so worried 
about you, my darling. 1 got down to work and copied 
the document accurately and well. But then, perhaps it 
was the devil’s doing, or it was preordained from above 
or it was simply bound to happen that way; l missed a 
line. And God knows how it changed the sense, il sense 
there was left at all. They were late with that paper yes¬ 
terday and His Excellency signed it only today. 1 came 
to the office, suspecting nothing and took my place next 
to Yemelyan Ivanovich. Here 1 must mention, my darling 
own, that for some time I have been especially shy and 
ashamed. I have been trying to look no one in the lace. It 
has come to such a pass that even the creaking of a chair 
frightens me out of my wits. And today too I had drawn 
my head in like a turtle more dead than alive, so that 
Yeiim Akimovich (the worst practical joker in the world) 
said for all to hear: “Makar Alexeyevich, just look at you!” 
And here he made such a funny face that thev all shouted 
with laughter. And, of course, they went at it again. 
But 1 just shut my eyes, llattened my ears and pretended 
neither to hear nor to see. It is the best way to make them 
leave me alone. All of a sudden there was a commotion 
far away and then my name was mentioned—1 could 
hardly believe it: it was me, Devushkin, whom they were 
calling. My heart missed several beats—I don’t know why 
I was so frightened, more frightened than ever in my life. 
I was rooted to the chair and did not stir—as if it was 
not me they were calling. And the voices were coming 
nearer and nearer until they sounded just above me. 



128 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“Devushkin, Devushkin! Where is Devushkin?” I looked 
tip and there stood Yevstafy Ivanovich saying: “His Ex¬ 
cellency wants you at once, Makar Alexeyevich. You have 
made a mess of that document!” That was all, but it was 
enough, wasn’t it? I turned cold all over and almost lost 
consciousness, I was really more dead than alive. I can’t 
even say what I was thinking about at the moment. I 
remember only that we passed through one room, then 
another, and still another, into the private office. I was 
in the presence ! There were His Excellency and all the 
others! I’m afraid I forgot even to bow 1 . I stood there with 
trembling lips and shaking knees, and with good reason, 
my darling: firstly, I happened to glance at tne mirror to 
the light and what 1 saw there was enough to derange 
anyone. And secondly, I had always behaved as if 1 did 
not exist, so 1 doubt that His Excellency knew that I exist¬ 
ed at all. Perhaps he had heard someone mention a De¬ 
vushkin in the ministry, but had never troubled to find 
out who it was. 

“What is the meaning of this?” he began angrily. “Care¬ 
lessness, that's what it is. Spoiling an urgent, impor¬ 
tant document!” His Excellency now turned to Yevstaly 
Ivanovich and I could hear only snatches of what he said. 
“Such negligence. . . . Extra trouble. ...” Several times I 
opened my mouth to apologise, but no sound came. 1 
should have liked to run away, but dared not. And then 
came the worst, something so awful, my darling, that my 
pen trembles lor shame! A button on my coat, curse it, 
a button that was hanging bv a single thread suddenly 
broke olf and bounced and skipped, jingling and rolling 
to the very feet of His Excellency. And this amid the ge¬ 
neral silence. So much for my apologies, for my excuses, 
lor everything I was going to say in answer and in self- 
delencc to His Excellency. The consequences were too hor¬ 
rible to describe. His Excellency turned his eyes upon me, 
noting the details of mv figure and my dress. I remem¬ 
bered what 1 had seen in the mirror and—bent down to 
retrieve that button. What possessed me to do it! I 
snatched at it, but the thing kept rolling and spinning; and 
so you sec, I also distinguished myself by my deftness. I felt 
my senses leaving me. All was lost: my reputation and 




POOR PEOPLE 


129 


all, irretrievably lost! In the jumble of my mind 1 could 
somehow hear the shrieks and shouting of Faldoni and 
Theresa and the gossip of a thousand tongues. Finally, 1 
caught the button, straightened up and stiffened. 1 should 
have stood perfectly still with my hands at mv sides. But 
no: 1 had to fiddle with that button, push it on the broken 
threads as though it could stick on again. And all the time 
1 was smiling, smiling, mind you. llis Excellency turned 
away, then gave me another glance and said to Yevstafy 
Ivanovich: “What does this mean:’ Just look at the man! 
What is the matter with him. 1 ’” Oh dearest, think of it: 
‘ What is the matter with him'/” 1 had distinguished my¬ 
self, had I not/ And Yevstafy Ivanovich answered him: 
“An absolutely clean record, conduct exemplary, salary 
according to the rates.” “Well, help him somehow,” said 
His Excellency. “Let him have something in advance ” “But 
he has already drawn all that is coming to lnm. Ciicum- 
stances must have led him to do it since his conduct is 
excellent, his iccord is clean, absolutely clean. Theie is 
nothing against him.” I was burning in the liies ol hell. 
m> darling. "Well, well,” said His Excellency in a loud 
voice. “Have the paper copied again as quickly as possible 
Devushkin, come here. Copy this paper without a mis¬ 
take, and listen....” Here His Excellency dismissed the 
others and we were left alone. Huniedlv drawing a wal¬ 
let from his pocket, he found a hundred-ruble bank-note 
and pressed it into my hand. “Ileie ... legard it as a 
loan, il you like. I’d like to do something for you ” I 
started, my angel, 1 was struck dumb, hardly knowing 
what was happening. 1 would have, kissed his hand, but he 
turned very red, the dear man, and then—l am not exag¬ 
gerating one bit, Vaienka—he actually took my unworthy 
hand in his and shook it as if 1 were his equal. "Sorry I 
cannot do more for you,” he said. “Make no more mis¬ 
takes. We ll share the blame for what’s happened.” 

Now here is what 1 ask of you and Fedoia: please pray 
for His Excellency every day. And if 1 had children I 
would ask them also to pray for His Excellency even more 
than they would for their own father. In all seriousness, 
I will say this too—I am in earnest, my darling—that ter¬ 
rible though my. anguish was in the days of our worst 



130 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


need, knowing the privations you had to suffer and tortur¬ 
ed by my own humiliation and helplessness, in spite of 
all this, 1 swear that these hundred rubles are not as dear 
to me as the fact that he, His Excellency, shook my hand, 
the hand of a scarecrow and a drunkard. He has made 
a man of me again. He has restored my spirit and sweet¬ 
ened my life for all time. And 1 am strongly convinced 
that, sinful though I may be, my prayers for His Excel¬ 
lency will be answered. 

Varenka, I am very agitated, I am utterly distraught. 
My heart is leaping from my breast and I am very weak. 
1 am sending you forty-five rubles in bank-notes. 1 shall 
give twenty to my landlady, which will leave me thirty- 
live. 1 will take about twenty to repair my clothing and 
there will be lifteen for other needs. The impressions of 
this morning have upset me completely. I had better lie 
down. And yet I am composed, and my mind is at ease. 
Only m)’ soul aches somehow, and deep within I can hear 
it trembling and stirring. I shall visit you later. Just now 
1 am too dizzy after all these happenings.^God sees all, 
my darling, my dearest heart! 

Your friend, 

Makar Devushkin 

September 10 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

1 am very happy to hear of your good fortune and 
fully appreciate the kindness of your chief. Now you may 
have a lest fiom your cares. But don’t squander your 
money, for the love of God. Live quietly and as modestly 
as vou can and begin to put something by, if only a little, 
so that misfortune will not find you unprepared. Please 
do not worry about us. Fedora and I will manage some¬ 
how. Why have you sent us so much money, Makar 
Alexeyevich? We really do not need so much—we were 
satisfied with what we had. It is true that we shall need 
money to move to another house, but Fedora hopes to col¬ 
lect an old debt. I shall keep twenty rubles for emergencies 
and I am sending you back the rest. Take care of your 
money, Makar Alexeyevich. Good-bye. May you rest from 



POOR PEOPLE 


131 


your cares; be well and in good spirits. I would write more 
if I were not so tired. Yesterday I kept to my bed. I am 
glad that you have promised to visit me. Yes, please do. 

V. D. 


September 11 


Varvara Alexeyevna, my own darling. 

Please do not go away now that I am so happy and 
content. Don’t listen to Fedora, dear, and 1 will do every¬ 
thing you wjmt me to do. I will behave pioperly, if only 
out of respect for His Excellency. We shall again be writ¬ 
ing happy letters to one another as we used to and share 
each other’s joys and troubles, if there aic any troubles. 
We will live in harmony and peace. Again, we shall take 
up literature. Everything has changed for the better in 
my liie, Varcnka. The landlady has grown friendlier, 
Theresa more intelligent and even Faldoni more willing. 
1 have ntade up with Ratazyacv. 1 was so happy that I 
went to him myself. He is a good fellow at heart, my 
darling; and all the evil things people have said about 
him are slander, 1 discovered. He never intended to put 
us in a book. He told me so himself and read to me some 
of his new writings. As for calling me Lovelace, he has 
explained that it is not really an indecent word or a bad 
name, but only a word borrowed from a foreign language 
and meaning a shrewd fellow. Or, to put it in a more ele¬ 
gant and bookish way it is the same as saying: ‘‘A sharp 
young gentleman!” That is all. And so, it was <nly an 
innocent joke, my angel, which I misunderstood in my 
ignorance. 1 have apologised. And the weather, too, has 
been beautiful today. It is true that there was a drizzle 
and-a light frost in the morning, but this has onlv freshened 
the air. I have bought a fine pair of shoes. 1 took a walk 
down Nevsky and stopped to read 'the Bee:' 


Severnaya Pchela (The Northern Bee )—a newspapw — Ed. 



132 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


Oh, I have forgotten to tell you the main thing: this 
morning I got into a conversation with Yemelyan Ivano¬ 
vich and Aksenty Mikhailovich about His Excellency. I 
learnt that 1 was not the only one to whom he has acted so 
kindly. His Excellency is well known for his kind heart; 
blessings are sent him from different places, and manv 
have wept for gratitude. They say that he adopted an or¬ 
phan and later married her off to a man of importance, a 
clerk on special errands for His Excellency. It is known, 
too, that he once found a post for the son of a widow and 
that he has performed many other good deeds besides. 
I felt it my duty to add something to all this and told my 
story to the others, keeping back nothing. 1 just pocketed 
my shame; and, after all, what talk can there be of shame 
under such circumstances. Let His Excellency’s good deeds 
be praised for all to hear. I spoke warmly, was carried 
away and, far from blushing, was even proud to have such 
a thing to tell. I told them everything (but said nothing 
of you, of course). 1 told them all about my landlady and 
Faldoni and Ratazyaev and my shoes and about Markov, 
in short, about everything. Some of them ^sniggered, in 
fact all of them did. Perhaps there was something funny 
about my figure or about my shoes. Oh yes, now I’m sure 
it was my shoes. They could not have meant any harm. It 
is simply that they are young and well off. Surely, they 
were not malicious. How could they laugh at the expense 
of His Excellency? Now, could they, Varenka? 

1 am still overtoine, my darling. The events have con¬ 
fused me so. Have you enough firewood? Take care of 
yourself, Varenka, and don’t catch cold. Ah, my own dar¬ 
ling, your melancholy thoughts are killing me. 1 keep pray- 
in to God about it. Have you got woollen stockings and 
some warm things to wear? Be kind to an old man and 
tell him if there is anything you need. Just tell me. The 
bad times are over and the future is so bright, so radiant! 

Those were sad times we had, Varenka, but they are 
gone for good and as the years pass we shall be sighing 
for them too. I temember my young days. There were 
times when I had not a kopek to my name, I was cold and 
hungry, but happy for all that. Walking down the 
Nevsky in the morning I’d see a pretty face, and that 




POOR PEOPLE 


133 


would keep me happy all day. Those were the times! It is 
good to live, Varenka, especially in St. Petersburg. Yes¬ 
terday I prayed to God with tears in my eyes and pleaded 
to be forgiven for those sins of mine during our troubles: 
for complaining, for liberal thoughts and my indulgence. 

1 thought of you during my prayers with tenderness. It 
was you who fortified me, cornlorted me and gave me 
good advice. I shall never forget it, my own darling. 
Today 1 kissed all your letters one by one, my dear. 
Good-bye, dear heart. I have heard that there is a service 
coat for sale in a shop not far away. Perhaps 1 should 
inquire? Good-bye, my little angel, good-bye. 

Your affectionate 

Makar Devu.shkin 

Sc/'f ember i~> 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

1 am greatly agitated. Let me tell you what happened. 
I have the worst of forebodings! Judge for yourself: this 
is what happened. Mr. Bykov is in St. Pcteisbuig. Fedora 
lias met him. He was riding in a droshky, but stopped and 
got out when he saw Fedora, approached her and asked 
where she lived. When Fedora refused to tell him, he said 
with a little laugh that he knew who was staying with her 
(Anna Fyodorovna must have told him). Fedora could not 
contain herself and began to scold him roundly, saying 
that he was an immoral man and the cause nl my unhap¬ 
piness. To this he observed that 1 must be unhappy indeed 
since I had not a kopek. Fedora then told him that I could 
have earned my living by working, oi manied some one, oi 
found a situation, but that thanks to him l was dl and 
going to die. To this he said that I was too young to die, 
that I was featherbrained, and that my vii/itc f had become 
somewhat tarnished too (his exact voids). Fedora and 
I had thought that he did not know where wc lhccl, but 
then yesterday, when 1 had gone out to uu some shopping 
in Gostiny Dvor, he suddenly came to our place. He 
seemed to have come intentionally when I was not at home. 
He asked Fedora many questions about me and 4 ibout 



134 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


our life, inspected everything, my needlework too, and 
finally asked: “Who is that clerk with whom you are 
acquainted?” You were just crossing the yard at the mo¬ 
ment and Fedora pointed you out to him. He looked and 
only smiled again. Fedora asked him to go away, said 
that I was ill through my troubles, and that to see him 
would be most unpleasant for me. To this he made no 
answer, but then remarked that he had just dropped in 
for want of something better to do. He then offered her 
twenty-five rubles which she, naturally, declined. What 
does all this mean? Why did he come? How did he 
manage to find out everything about us? I am lost in con¬ 
jectures. Fedora says that Aksinia, her sister-in-law, who 
comes to see us sometimes, knows Nastasia, the washwo¬ 
man. and Nastasia’s cousin is a watchman at the ministry 
where a friend of Anna Fyodorovna’s nephew is em¬ 
ployed. That, undoubtedly, is how Anna Fyodorovna has 
got wind of it. But perhaps Fedora is mistaken. We don’t 
know what to do. Will he come again? I am terrified at 
the thought. When Fedora told me all this yesterday, I 
nearly fainted. What else could lie want # of me? I refuse 
to have anything more to do with them. Why should he 
pursue poor me? 1 am in constant fear. What if Bykov 
should come again this very minute? What is in store for 
me? Come to see me immediately, Makar Alexeyevich! 
Please come at once, come for God’s sake. 

V. D. 


September 18 

Varvara Alexeyevna, my dear. 

On this date a giievous, unexpected and quite inexplic¬ 
able happening took place in our house. Our poor Gorsh¬ 
kov has cleared himself completely. The decision was 
passed long ago and today he went to hear the final verdict. 
The case ended very fortunately for him. Whatever fault 
was his in the way of negligence has been condoned. He 
has been awarded a handsome sum in damages from the 
merchant, and so his circumstances have improved, the 
blot has been removed from his reputation. In short, 




POOR PEOPLE 


135 


everything has changed, and his best expectations have 
been fulfilled. He returned at three in the afternoon, pale 
as a ghost, his lips trembling, but smiling nonetheless. Lie 
embraced his wife and children, and we came to him in 
a crowd to congratulate him. Deeply moved, he bowed 
continuously and shook hands several times with each of 
us. He seemed to have grown taller somehow, his bark 
was straighter, and his eyes had stopped running. How 
excited he was, the poor man! He could not stand still for 
a minute, he kept picking things up and putting them 
down, smiling and bowing, sitting down and getting up, 
saying anything that came to his mind, speaking ol his 
honour, his good name and his children. He even wept. 
Most of us, too, had tears in oui eves. Probably intending 
to encourage him, Ratazyaev said: '‘What good is honour, 
my friend, when there is nothing to cat. The main thing 
is money, it’s the money you should be thanklul for,” 
and he patted him on the shoulder. It seemed to me that 
Gorshkov was offended by this. Not that he expressed his 
displeasuie directly, but he gave Ratazyaev a strange look 
and removed the hand from his shoulder, lie would never 
have done such a thing before. People diffei of course 
I, for instance, would not have been so proud on such a 
joyous day. There aie occasions when one bows an extra 
time and even humiliates oneself for no other cause than 
excess of benevolent feeding over flowing one's soft heart. 
But why talk about myself? “Yes,” Gorshkov said, “the 
money is a good thing too. God Ire thanked for it! ’ Again 
and again he kept saying: “God be thanked for it!” His 
wife ordered a better and more abundant dinnci and the 
landlady heiself did the cooking Out landl rdv is a kind 
woman in her own was. Waiting for dinner, Goishkov 
was very restless and visited all the rooms, whether invit¬ 
ed or not. He would just enter, smile, take a seat, sjv some¬ 
thing or perhaps nothing at all and then get up "urd go 
away. In the naval offieei s room he was asked to make 
a fourth, and even played a hand, or two TTt made some 
sillv mistakes and three or four ahsmd leads, and gave 
up. “I just thought I’d play a game or two.’ he said, and 
left the room. Meeting me in the passage, he took me by 
both hands, looked me straight in the eye, but in a scry 


136 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


queer way, then pressed my hands once more and went 
off, still smiling, but again in a queer wav, a forced, 
somewhat lifeless smile. His wife was weeping for joy 
bustling happily in their room as though it was a great 
holiday. After dinner he said to his wife: “I think I’ll 
rest a little.” He lay down on the bed, called his little 
daughter and stroked her head again and again. Then he 
turned to his wife and asked: “Where is our Petenka?” 
His wife at once crossed herself and reminded him that 
Petenka was dead. “Oh, yes, 1 know,” he agreed. “Petenka 
is in heaven.” She saw that he was not himself, that he 
was shaken and overcome, and urged him to go to sleep. 
“I’ll do that ... I’ll sietp a little.” Then he turned away, 
lay still for- a while and turned his head again as though 
to speak. She did not understand and asked him what 
he had said, but he did not answer. Believing him asleep 
she went to see the landlady and staved for an hour. 
When she returned she found him still asleep and sat 
down to do some sewing. For the next half-hour she was 
so engrossed in her work and her thoughts, that she forgot 
all about him. But something made her start jrp with fear, 
and the hist thing that struck her was the dead silence. 
She looked at the bed and saw that he had not changed 
his position She came up to him, pulled back the covers, 
and knew at a gl mce that he was dead—be had died, poor 
Gorshkov, as if struck by lightning; and nohodv knows 
win. I am confounded and have not come to myself yet. 
How can a man die like that? The poor fellow, this Gorsh¬ 
kov. What a life he had, what a life! His wife is weep¬ 
ing, and so fiightened, and his little girl is huddling in 
some corner. Such a commotion then arose. There is to be 
a postmortem, so I have heard. I am sorrier than I can 
say; which of us can foretell the hour?... Here today 
and gone tomorrow! 

Yours, 

Makar Devushkin 




POOR PF.OPI r 


H7 


S( />/< mlh ) V) 

M\ dcai c st Vai v ara Alt \t > t \ na, 

I hasten to infoim v »u that Rata/\ae\ Iku Unaid some 
woik foi me with a wider. lb uinie to Rat<./ V acv with a 
\civ thick manusciipt— pleinv of woik thank God l T n- 
foitunatdy, his handwiiling is so dh ,*b)e *h * I d< u i 
know how to go about it It has to be done quukk and 
it is wntteninsu/h a queei wav that one cannot nuke out 
the meaning We have agieed to the pi hi of imtv kopeks 
a sheet I am wiiting this to Jct \ou know fha' ) slid) 
ha\e some additional mono Go J * mv dailm 1 * i 
must get clow n to woj k now 

Youi cum bint ti e ah 

\*u\tn Ik 4 '//v//A u 


St / m mlft r } > 

Makai A]f\e\evicli niv deal fncnd 

1 hue not wnttcii io son these tlucc days a? f in fhc 
meantime I have had much Uoubi olid w«n\ 

Hie d av hefoie \estuday Bvkov uim In «i me iedma 
had gone out somewhue and 1 was alon» \V!k » l opened 
the (loot at his knoik 1 was so liielthmd Ih a I could 
haxllv move I mml have turned \ »> o. n fie enfued 
with his usual loud lau«»h, took a rhaii aid sat d ji 
finally l icgained i/i; mruposme md sal dc v,d woik 
in the coinu His snide soon laded aa In' I'^ok a 
look at me 1 have giown so thin of late rdy »f ceks and 
eves aic sunken and 1 must havv. been as vmte as a dicet. 
Indeed, people who knew me a ytni ago would haidlv 
lecogmse me now. Foi a time he sat theic looking hxech> 
at me, and then giew meuv again. He s iid sOindhing. 
]ust what I answeied I cannot lememuu, end he laughed 
again He was lieie foi a wliole liom, talking and asking 
questions When he got up to leave, he took me bv the 
hand and said (to quote his exact words)* “Between you 
and me, Varvaia Alexeyevna, this Anna Fvodow vna, >oui 
i dative and my elosc aequaintanec, is a vile ci^atuie” To 




138 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


this he added a grosser word. “She has led your cousin 
Sasha astray and ruined you as well. As for me, I have 
behaved like a scoundrel, of course. It’s a common fail¬ 
ing with men,” and he laughed at the top of his voice. 
Then he observed that he was not much of a speaker, but 
that he had said the main thing, the thing that his sense 
of honour had compelled him to say, and now he intend¬ 
ed to put the rest very briefly. Then and there he told 
inc that he wanted to marry me, that he regarded it his 
duty to restore my honour, that he was wealthy and that 
after our wedding he would take me to his estate in the 
steppes where he intended to hunt hares; he would not 
(omc to St. Petersburg any more because it was a nasty 
town; he had a worthless nephew in the city whom he had 
sworn to disinheiit and that this was. in fact, the reason 
for his proposal: he wanted a direct heir. Then remarking 
that 1 lived very poorly, and small wonder that I looked 
dl, living in such a hole, lie presaged certain death for me 
if I stayed here another month. Lodgings in St. Petersburg 
were horrid, he added, and asked if there was anything 
that I needed. # 

1 was so amazed by his proposal that 1 began to cry, I 
don’t know why. Mistaking my tears for an expression oi 
gratitude, he declared that he had always been sure that 
I was a good, war.n-hcarted and learned girl, and yet he 
had hesitated to take this step until he had made the 
proper inquiries about me. He then asked a few questions 
about you and added that he had heard that you were a 
man of honouiable principles and that he, for his part, 
did not w’ish to be indebted to vou. and would five hundred 
rubles be enough for everything that you had done for 
mei* When I explained that ineie money could never re¬ 
pay you for what you had done, he retorted that it was all 
nonsense: sheer novels, he called it, and added that I 
was still too young and probably fond of reading verses, 
that novels and verses were always the ruin of voung girls, 
that books in general corrupted the morals and he detest r 
cd them. “Live to my age.” he said, “and then you’ll be 
a better judge of people.” He urged me to give careful 
consideration to his proposal because it would be unfor¬ 
tunate if I took such a step rashly. Rashness and thought- 



POOR PEOPLE 


139 


lessness had always been the undoing of the young. Of 
course, he was anxious to have a favourable answer. Other¬ 
wise he would be compelled to marry a merchant’s 
daughter in Moscow because he had sworn to disinherit 
that rascally nephew of his. Ignoring my protests, he left 
five hundred rubles on my embroidery frame, to buy some 
sweets, as he put it. In the country, he said, I would grow 
as round as a bun and live in clover. He was fearfully 
busy at present, and had been running about all day only 
dropping in to see me for a minute. And then be took his 
leave. My dear friend, I have thought long about all this 
and suffered much, but at last I have made up my mind. 
I am going to marry the man. 1 must agree to his 
proposal. If anyone can rid me of dishonour, lestore my 
good name, and avert poverty, hardships and misfo: 
tunes, he is the man. What else can I expect of the future; 
what more can I ask from destiny? Fedora says that one 
should not miss one’s happiness and that if this is not 
happiness, then what is? As for myself, I can see no othei 
way, my friend. I’ve been working so hard that I’ve ruined 
my health, and 1 cannot work all the time. To be a govci- 
ness or a servant? I would waste away from loneliness 
and would not suit anyone besides. I am sit kly by natuie 
and will always be a burden to someone. 1 realise that it 
is no paradise that I am going to, but what shall 1 do? Just 
tell me. what shall l do? What choice have 1 ? 

1 am not really asking for advice. 1 wanted to think it 
out alone. The decision you have read is unalterable and 
I shall announce it to Bykov, who is pressing me. He said 
that his affairs could not wait and that he could not post¬ 
pone the wedding because of mv fancies. Hod knows 
whether or not I shall be happy, but I shall entrust my 
fate to His inscrutable will. They say that Bvkov is a kind 
man. He will respect me and perhaps I will learn to re¬ 
spect him too. What more can I expert of such a mar¬ 
riage? 

1 have told you all there is to say, Makar Alexeyevich, 
and am sure that you will understand. Do not try to dis¬ 
suade me. You will not succeed! Weigh in your heart, for 
a moment, all that has led me to take this step. 1 was 
frightened at first but now 1 am calmer. What awaits me, 



140 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


1 do not blow The future i*» obscure. (<ome what may. 
His wdl done* 

Bvko\ has pist arrived and I shall have to leave this 
h Iter unfinished, though I have much more to say. 

V D. 


September 2J 

Ya vaia \i« \< ) i \na, mv dean »t, 

1 liunv to inswei \om leUei, deal, and announce that 
1 am p<»Uct!v anui/^d Iheie n something vuong some- 
wluie Atotcidrv, we huucd tnushlon Yes, B\kov has 
i<ted noblv ot course But have \ou ieallv agreed, mv 
doi m ' \d i m ? od Knids of course 1 hat is undoubt 
rdh till' mi this too mod he i.i c bid's hands, and the 
wU’. ot out Make r ait hh^ed 'bough uisuutable as ate 
tin wa\s of fiU f No u M 'di<n about it* Fedora also ap 
proves of d Now \mi will be* Inppv, of course living in 
content n\ da»!o ^ htth do* e u,x little heautiTul angel - 
bid wh\ s< v* *n \auika' \h\*s thcie aie Mi Bvkovs 
ikui 1 \cr\ouf has bis affairs, of ionise so he, too, ma\ 
ii i\v au> nc^s to alt' ml to l saw him leaving the house 
!o is ,m imposing man am < than imposing 1 But there 
is ounfoiip uauiff some\\ 1 m 'c lb point is not that lit 
*s )smg. nut thd I am o < te upset llow in the world 
sh dl x ' wnte to eub other now ‘ And bow shall 

1 hv ahuu ' 1 uu v\e*ghim> r ill mum uasous in mv hcait 
as vou isUd me to 1 m put fitting here all the time and 
vt mi hmg I was ilii ads tops mg the twentieth page of 
that inarm enpt when tour IiHm cairn You are having, 
m\ dailing and must bo\ *1* knnds of things hocks and 
shoes and all that Ae it happens hen is a shop I know 
on t* >p khov as a 1 hive t< * ^ on , bout it be foie, lemcm 
b J But how c ui \ ou leave now 3 Aon cannot go now It 
is lmpossthh, absoluo T \ nnoo^jhle* 'I here ait so m m> 
thine s to bm and a can nun too 1 And the weather is bad, 
see how it is laimm,, coming down m buckets And such 
a wet lain, toed And beside s A oil will i>e cold, nn 
angel Youi hcait will ftrl cold Aic sou not afiaid to go 




POOR PEOPLE 


141 


off with a stranger? And what will be left for me? Fedora 
says you are very lucky, but she is a rowdy wench and 
thinks only of ruining me. Will you be going to Vespers? 
I would go there to have a look at you. It is true, my dar¬ 
ling, very true that you are a learned, virtuous and warm¬ 
hearted giijl. But he would do better to marry the mer¬ 
chant’s daughter. Don’t you think so, dear? Wouldn’t he 
do better to marry the merchant’s daughter? I’ll drop in 
for an hour after dark. It gets daik early now and I'll be 
sure to come. As soon as dusk falls I’ll be sure to come 
You are expecting Bykov now, and when he leaves I’ll 
(ome. Wait for me, dear heart, I will drop in. 

Makar Devushkin 
September 27 

My dear friend, Makar Alexeyevich, 

Mr. Bykov says that I must have three dozen chemises 
ol Dutch linen. 1 shall have to lind a seamstress who can 
make two dozen, and theie is so little time. Mr. Bykov 
is irritated, he says that these fripperies are too trouble¬ 
some. Our wedding is to take place in five days; and on 
the day after we are to leave. Mr. Bykov is in a hurry 
and thinks it a shame to waste so much time. I have been 
lunning about so much that l scarcely have the strength 
to stand. There is so much to do and. honestly, it would 
be better if there was none of this. And another thing' 
we have not enough blonde or lace, some more has to be 
bought, because Mr. Bykov says that he does not want his 
wife to look like a scullery maid and that 1 must put the 
noses of the local ladies out of joint, as he puts it. Could 
you go to Madame Chiffon in Gorokhovaya and ask her 
to send some seamstresses and to be kind enough to come 
herself. I am not well today. Our new apartment is cold 
and there is no order. Mr. Bykov’s aunt is so old and ill 
that I am afraid she may die before our departure, but 
Mr. Bykov says that it is nothing, that she will come 
round. Everything is in such disorder. Mr. Bykov does 
not live here and the servants keep running off, God knows 
where. Sometimes there is only Fedora to do the work. 



142 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


Mr. Bykov’s valet who is generally in charge has been gone 
for three days. Mr. Bykov comes here every morning and 
is always angry. Yesterday he thrashed the steward which 
led to trouble with the police. There has been no one to 
bring you my letters, and I will post this one. Oh, I have 
almost forgotten the most important thing. Tell Madame 
Chiffon that she should alter the blonde according to 
yesterday’s sample. Perhaps she could come herself and 
show me the new patterns. Tell her, too, that I have 
changed my mind about the canezou : it should be done in 
crochet. And the monograms on the handkerchiefs should 
be in tambour and not satin stitch. The word is tambour. 
Will you remember? I have almost forgotten another thing: 
please, tell her that the lappets on the fur cloak must be 
raised and that the gussets should be braided and the 
collar fringed with lace or broad falbala. You won’t 
forget, will you? 

Yours, 

V. D. 

P. S. I’m ashamed to trouble you with my errands. The 
day before yesterday, too. you were running about all 
morning. But I can’t help it, really! There is not even a 
semblance of order here and I am ill. So do not be angry 
with me, Makar Alexeyevich. I am so depressed. What 
is to become of me, my dear, my kind Makar Alexeye¬ 
vich? 1 am afraid to look into the future. 1 am troubled by 
forebodings and am living in a haze. 

P.P.S. Please do not forget what I have asked you. I am 
afraid that you may make a mistake. Do not forget: in 
tambour and not satin stitch. 

V. D. 


September 27 

My dear Varvara Alexeyevna, 

I have carefully carried out all your instructions. Ma¬ 
dame Chiffon told me that she herself had meant to do it 
in tambour stitch which is more suitable or something—I 
didn’t quite understand. She said something about falba- 



POOR PEOPLE 


143 


la, but I have forgotten what. All I can remember is that 
she spoke a good deal about falbala; she’s a maddening old 
hag! What else did she say? She had better tell you her¬ 
self. I am half-dead with running about and have not been 
to the office today. But don’t worry on my account, dar¬ 
ling. I’m prepared to run to every shop in the city for your 
peace of mind. You say that you are afraid to look into 
the future, but then you will know everything at seven 
o’clock. Madame Chiffon has promised to conic. Don't 
be downhearted, my darling. Perhaps everything is for 
the best. I can’t get that cursed falbala out of my mind. 
Oh that falbala—falbala! I would come to see you, 
my darling, 1 certainly would. I have in fact passed the 
gates of your house twice, but Bykov, that is, Mr. 
Bykov is always so angry that 1 really... Well, there 
it is! 


Makar Dcvmhkin 


September 28 

My dear Makar Alexeyevich, 

Please, please, run to the jeweller’s immediately and 
tell him that he needn’t make the pearl and emerald car- 
rings. Mr. Bykov says the price is more than he is pre¬ 
pared to pay. He is rather annoyed and says that all this 
has cost him plenty already and that he is bung robbed. 
Yesterday, too, he said that if he had anticipated such 
expenses he would have nevet started the whole thing. 
He said that we shall go away immediately after the wed¬ 
ding ceremony, that there will be no guests and that I 
should not expect to be dancing about and flirting, since 
there is no cause for celebration yet. That is the way he 
talks God knows that 1 don’t care at all for these things 
and that Mr. Bykov himself has ordered them. 1 dare not 
answer him because he is too easily irritated. What is to 
become of me? 


V. D. 


144 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


September 28 

Varvara Alexeyevna, my darling child, 

I.... That is, all is well as regards the jeweller. As for 
myself, I first meant to say that 1 am ill and in bed. I had 
to fall ill just when there are so many things to do, cursed 
luck! To complete my misery, His Excellency was very 
angry the other day and he shouted at Yemelyan Ivano¬ 
vich until his breath gave out. poor man. That is what I 
wished to tell you. 1 would like to write more, but am 
afraid to cause you unnecessary trouble. I am a plain, not 
very clever man, and write whatever comes to my mind; 
so that you may find that some of the things I scribble are 
not quite as they should be. Well, it doesn’t matter really. 

Y ours, 

Makar Dcvushkin 


September 29 

Varvaia Alexeyevna, deai heart. 

I met Fedora today, my darling, and she said that you 
would be wed tomorrow and will leave the day after to¬ 
morrow and that Mr. Bykov has already hired the horses. 
1 have already told you that piece of news about His Ex¬ 
cellency. What else.'* Ah yes, 1 have looked over those 
bills sent by that shop in Gorokhovaya. Everything is 
correct but vciy expensive. Why is Mr. Bykov angry with 
you? Well, may you be happy for ever after, my dar¬ 
ling. 1 will be so glad to know that you are happy. 1 would 
attend the ceremony if not for the pain in my back. 

To mention the letters again . . . Who will carry them? 
You have treated Fedora handsomely. You are very kind. 
And for this God will bless you. Good deeds never go 
unrewarded, and virtue never fails to win the halo ot 
divine justice. My darling, my only one, I should like 
to write to you every hour, every minute and just write 
and write and write. I have your book, The Tales of Ivan 
Belkin. Please, leave it with me, my dear. It is not that I 
want to read it so much. But as you know, winter is near 



POOR PEOPLE 


145 


and the evenings will bo long and sad, and that will be 
the time lor reading. 1 will move from my room into your 
old one which 1 will rent from Fedora. 1 will never part 
with that honest woman. She is so industrious, you know! 
Yesterday I visited your deserted room, walked about and 
looked at things. And there, in the corner, stood your 
dear embroidery frame with even a piece of work in it 
that you had been doing. 1 examined it and saw some other 
odds and ends. I was so happy to see that you had used 
one of my letters as a spool to wind your silk. On the table 
too 1 found a scrap of paper with the words- “My dear 
Makar Alexeyevich, 1 hasten to...Someone must have 
interrupted you just then. And in the corner behind the 
seieen stood your little bed My poor, dear little dove! 
Well, good bye, good-bye, my dear. Please answei soon, 
1 implore you. 


Makca Dri’iishki/i 


St [it cm be r SO 

Makai Alexeyevich, my constant and truest fiiend, 

The thing is done, the die is cast. What awaits me I do 
not know, but will submit to His will. Tomorrow we leave 
and 1 am writing these lines in farewell, rny closest liiend, 
my protector, my lieait. Don’t grieve for me. Be happy, 
icmcmber me and may Clod be with you always. I will 
remember you and always mention you in my piayers. 
And so ends the life that 1 have led heie. Most of what 1 
shall remember will give me little comfort in the future, 
but my memory of you will be all the dearer. You are 
my only friend, the only person who loved me. I saw and 
knew that you loved me. Just a smile or a line fiom me 
was enough to make you happy. Now vou shall have to 
do without me. How lonely you will be! Who will there be 
to comfort you? My kind and only friend! 1 shall leave 
you the book and the embroidery frame and the lettei 
that I once began. Read the first lines again and imagine 
what pleases you for the rest. God knows what I would 
have wiitten! Remember your poor Varenka who loved 



146 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


you so well. 1 have left all your letters in the top drawer 
of Fedora’s dresser. You write that you are ill, but Mr. 
Bykov would not let me go out today. I shall write to 
you, of course, but God knows what may happen and so 
we had better say good-bye, my dear, my dear friend. I 
would love to embrace you. Good-bye, my friend, good¬ 
bye. Be well and happy always! I will pray for you. My 
heart is heavier than I can say. Mr. Bykov is calling. 

Your ever loving, 

V. 

P. S. My soul is so full, so full of tears. The tears arc suf¬ 
focating me. Good-bye! Oh, how sad it is. Remember 
your poor Varenka! 


Varenka, my dear, my dove, my precious! 

You are being carried off from me. You are going! I 
would rather they had torn the heart out 8f my breast! 
How could you let them? You are weeping and yet going. 
Your letter still wet with tears has just reached me. And 
so you do not really want to go: and so they are making 
you. . . . And so you are sorry lor me.... And so you love 
me. Who will take care of you now? Your little heart 
will be so sad and cold. Grief will drain it of blood, sad¬ 
ness will break it, you’ll die theie alone and they will 
bury you in the cold earth with no one to weep over the 
grave. Mr. Bykov will be busy hunting hares. Ah, my 
dailing, how could you have taken such a step? What 
have you done! What violence have you done to yourself! 
They will drive you to the grave, they’ll starve your spirit 
to death. You are only a little feather, my little angel. And 
what was I about? What was I doing? I saw that the child 
was beside herself, that the child was ill. I should have 
put my foot down—but no! 1 behaved like a fool, thought 
of nothing and saw nothing as though it were no concern 
of mine. Good God! I was running about after falbala. 
No Varenka, I shall rise from my bed. I shall recover 
tomorrow and rise from my bed. 1 shall throw myself 




POOR PEOPLE 


147 


under the wheels of your carriage. I shall not let you go! 
It’s an outrage! What right have they! I will go with 
you—I’ll run behind your carriage if you won't take me. 
111 run until I fall! Where are you going? Do you know? 1 
shall tell you! You are going to the steppes, to the steppes 
as bare as the palm of my hand. There’s no one theic 
except unfeeling peasant wives and their rude, drunken 
men. Even the trees have shed their leaves there, and 
it is rainy and cold. That is where you are going! Mr. 
Bykov will be busy with his hares, and you? Do >ou want 
to be a landowner’s wife, my darling? Just look at voui - 
'elf, my little cherub. Are you at all like a landowner's 
wife? It’s out of the question, \arenka! To whom shall 
1 write my letters then? Just stop to think for a moment! 
To whom shall 1 write? Whom shall 1 call "dear heart” 
then? Whom shall I call by that sweet name? Where will 
1 lind you, my little angel? 1 will die, Varenka, I will sure¬ 
ly die, my heart will not bear this misfortune. 1 loved 
you as the very light of God, as my own daughter. I loved 
everything in you, my darling, 1 have lived for you alone. 
1 have worked and copied my papers and walked and set 
down my observations in loving letters only because you 
were near. Perhaps you have never realised this, but it 
has been so. Now listen again: how can it be that you are 
going away? You can’t! It’s quite impossible. Altogether 
out of the question! It is raining and you arc sure to 
catch cold—you are so weak, so frail. And the carriage 
roof is sure to leak. The cairiage will break down; it will 
surely break down the moment you are out of town. They 
make rotten carriages here in Petersburg. 1 know those 
carriage-makers, they are only concerned with the lashion, 
a pretty toy they want to make, but they cannot build 
>olidly; they cannot, I swear! I will throw myself on my 
cnees before Mr. Bykov, my darling. I will prove it to 
lim, prove it to them all. And you, my sweet dear, reason 
vith him too. Tell him that you must stay here and cannot 
, r o. Oh why didn’t he marry that merchant s daughter in 
Moscow! It would have been so much better if he had. 
The merchant’s daughter is more suitable. By far more 
suitable! I’m sure of it. And then you could stay here, with 
me! And why do you need Mr. Bykov? How has he en- 


148 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


dcared himself to you? Surely not because of falbala! What 
is falbala anyway? Why even mention falbala? It is non¬ 
sense, my darling. Here it is a matter of life and death 
and not of falbala! Falbala is only a piece of cloth; falbala 
is only a worthless rag. Just wait until I receive my salary 
and I’ll buy you all the falbala you want, my darling. In 
that shop, you remember? Just wait until I receive my 
salaty, my sweetest cherub! Oh Varenka, good God! Are 
vou definitely going away with Mr. Bykov? For ever? Oh 
Varenka! No, you must wiite again, just one letter more! 
And then again from there. If you don’t, then the letter 
that I have now will be the last; and surely it cannot be 
the last. How could it be? All of a sudden—the last letter! 
I’ll be wiiting to you just the same. And you write to me 
too My style is just taking shape now.... Oh, my dear, 
bother style! I baldly know what I am saying and what 
I am writ'ng about, md it doesn't uathr as long as 1 ketp 
on wiiting and writing . . My little dove, my dearest, 
my own! 





WHITE NIGHTS 

A Sentimental Love Story 

(From a Dreamer's Reminiscences) 




■. .Or was he born that he might dwell. 

If only for a fleeting hour. 

In the reflection of your lover 

t. nvc.L.ix 


FIRST NIGHT 

It was a beautiful night, a night that we may only Know 
when we are very young, dear reader. The skv was so 
starry, so clear was the sky, that, looking at it, you < ould 
not help asking yourself: how can all sorts of (toss and 
crotchety people live beneath a sky like this? That's a very 
youthful question, too, kind reader, very youthful indeed, 
but may it please the Lord to trouble your heart with suth 
questions mote often. Speaking of all sorts ol «,osi, t n> 1 
crotchety people, 1 cannot but teeall my own exemplar v 
behaviour all that day. Ever since the morning, 1 was pi-y 
to a peculiar melancholy. 1 suddenly fancied that ever} one 
was forsaking me in my loneliness, that everyone was 
casting me off. It would only be fair to ask, of course: who 
was everyone? For I have been living in St. Petersburg 
for eight years and I have not managed to make any 
friends to speak of. But why should I make any friends? As 
it is, I am friends with the whole of St. Petersburg, and 
that was why, when all the town suddenly parked up and 
left for the country, I fancied that everyone was forsaking 
me. It frightened me to be left alone, and foi three whole 
days I wandered up and down the streets in deep dejec¬ 
tion, quite unable to understand what was the math r with 
me. I’d go to Nevsky Prospekt or to the park, or I'd iamble 
along the embankment, and wherever I went I missed 
seeing the people I was used to meeting at the same place 
and at the same hour for a whole year now. Of course, 
they don't know me, but I know them. I know them well, 
I have made a study of their faces; I delight in them when 
they are gay, and grow melancholy when they are cloud¬ 
ed. I almost made friends with one old man I had been 
encountering on the Fontanka every single day at the same 
hour. He had such a grave and pensive face; he kept 



152 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


whispering to himself, gesticulating with his left hand, 
while in his right he carried a long knotty walking-stick 
with a golden knob. He had noticed me, too, and took a 
sincere interest in me. 1 am sure he would have felt dispir¬ 
ited if he had failed to meet me at the same spot on the 
Fontanka at the same hour. This is why we almost greet¬ 
ed one another at times, especially when we were both in 
a happy frame of mind. The other day when we met 
aftei an interval of two whole days, we were actually 
on the point of raising our hats but, fortunately, we pulled 
ourselves up in time, dropped our hands, and passed each 
other by with unspoken sympathy in our hearts. 

I am friends with the houses too. When I walk down 
the street they all seem to step forward before me, and 
they almost speak, staring at me with all their windows: 
“How are you? 1 am very well too, another storey will be 
added to me in May!” or “How are you? I’m to go into 
repair tomorrow”, or “I almost caught fire, and 1 was so 
frightened!” and so on. I have my favourites among them 
and my intimate friends. One of them intends to take a 
course of treatment at the architect’s this summer. I shall 
make a point of coming here every day to see that it 
doesn’t come to any harm, bless it. But I shall never forget 
what happened to one very pretty, pale pink little house. 
It was such a sweet little house, it smiled at me in such 
a friendly way and looked so haughtily at its clumsy 
neighbours that my heart rejoiced whenever I chanced to 
walk past it. And then, last week, as I was going down 
the street I heard a piteous cry: “They’re painting me 
yellow!” I glanced at my friend. The brutes! The barbari¬ 
ans! They had spared nothing: neither the pillars nor the 
cornices, and my friend had turned yellow like a canary. 
I almost had an attack of jaundice over it, and to this day 
I cannot bring myself to go and see my poor, disfigured 
friend, painted the colour of the Celestial Empire. 

And so you see, dear reader, that I am friends with the 
whole of St. Petersburg. 

I have already said that I was feeling depressed, and 
the mood persisted for three full days before I understood 
the cause of it. I felt ill at ease out-of-doors (that one was 
pot there, this one was not to be seen, and what could 



WHITE NIGHTS 


153 


have happened to so and so?), and at home I felt restless 
too. I cudgelled my brains for two nights in succession: 
what was amiss in my flat? Why was I finding it so unin¬ 
viting? And, seeking an answer, 1 looked about me at the 
green grimy walls, the ceiling hung with cobwebs, which 
Matryona allowed to gather so luxuriantly, 1 examined all 
the furniture I had, peering at every chair, thinking that 
here lay the root of the trouble perhaps, for if I see a single 
chair standing differently fiom where it had stood the day 
before, I grow restless; I looked at the window, but my 
mind was not relieved! It even occurred to me to summon 
Matryona and give her a fatherly .scolding about the cob¬ 
webs and the untidiness generally, but she only looked at 
me in surprise, and left the room without a word, and so 
the cobwebs remain undistuibed to this dav. And finally, 
only this morning, I understood what was the matter. Why, 
they were bolting from me into the country! Forgive me 
this vulgar expression, but 1 was beyond the choice of 
lofty words ... because everyone who lived in St. Peters¬ 
burg was cither going or had gone to the country: because 
in every respectable-looking gentleman hiring a caiiiage 
I instantly saw a sedate family man who, having finished 
with his daily work, was hurrying off to the country to 
join his family: because every man in the street had quite 
a peculiar look now, which all but said to cvcrv passer¬ 
by: “We are only here in passing, gentlemen, and in a 
< ouple of hours we shall be leaving town ” If 1 s.iw a 
w’odow pushed open— slim siigur-wlnte fingers di'iniming 
on the pane first, and (hen a pretty girl thrusting out her 
bead and railing a vendor of potted flowers—1 instantly, 
there and then, imagined that those flowers w<.n> b< tot 
bought not at all because the people wanted to enjoy the 
sptrng and the flowers in a stuffy flat in town, but 1 <cause 
veiy soon they would .til be moving to the countiv and 
would be taking the flowers along. Moreover, I h rd already 
made such strides in m> new and peculiar lied ot observa¬ 
tion that 1 could tell unerringly, hv outward appearances 
alone, where each one had his summer residen c* 

Those who came from the Kamenny and Aplckarsky 
Islands, or from down Pcterhof way, could be identified 
by their studied gracefulness oi manner, their tashjonable 


154 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


summer clothes and the splendid carriages which brought 
them to town. Those from Pargolovo and places further 
away instantly impressed one with their prudence and 
their dignity; while an unruffled and gay look stamped the 
summer resident of the Krestovsky Island. 

Whether I happened to meet a long procession of coach¬ 
men walking lazily, reins in hand, beside their dray-carts 
piled high with furniture of every description: tables, 
chairs, divans, Turkish and otherwise, and other household 
possessions, with a skinny cook perched on the very top 
of the load, presiding over all this and guarding her 
master’s belongings zealously; or whether I watched the 
boats, laden with furniture and utensils, gliding down the 
Neva or the Fontanka towards the Chornaya River or the 
islands—the carts and the boats increased tenfold, a hund- 
ledfold in my eyes. It seemed to me that everything had 
started up and taken to the road, everything was moving 
to the country in whole caravans, it seemed that St. Peters- 
buig itself was threatened with becoming a desert. And 
then I felt ashamed, hurt and sad: there was absolutely 
no reason and no place for me to go to in the country. I 
was prepared to go with every cart, with every respect¬ 
able-looking gentleman hiring a carriage; but no one, no 
one at all invited me; it was as if l were forgotten, as if 
I were indeed a stranger to them! 

I walked so long and so far that I quite lost my bear¬ 
ings, which was a usual thing with me, when suddenly I 
found myself at the town gate. All at once I felt gay, I 
passed the barrier and walked through the green fields 
and meadows feeling no weariness and only aware, with 
the whole of my being, rhat a weight was lifting from my 
heart. All those who drove past me threw such friendly 
glances at me, they all but greeted me, they all seemed so 
happy about something, and every one of them was smok¬ 
ing a cigar. And I, too, felt happy as never before. It was 
as though 1 had suddenly found myself in Italy, so strong 
was my impact with Nature, half-sick townsman that I 
was, who had almost suffocated in the walled-in streets. 

There is something ineffably touching in the country 
around St. Petersburg when, with the coming of spring, 
Nature suddenly displays all its might, all the strength 



WHITE NIGHTS 


155 


which the heavens have endowed it with; when it dons its 

finery, decks itself out with bright flowers_For some 

reason it reminds me of a sickly, consumptive young girl 
whom you regard with pity at times, with a compassion¬ 
ate sort of affection at others, and ignore altogether at 
others still, but who suddenly, for a single moment, turns 
strangely and wondrously beautiful and you, stunned and 
entranced, have to ask yourself: what force has made those 
sad, pensive eyes flash with such fire? What brought the 
colour to those pale, wan cheeks? What breathed passion 
into those delicate features? Why does her bosom heave 
so? What has so suddenly brought strength, life, and 
beauty into the face of this poor girl, making it glow with 
a smile so radiant and light up with laughter so sparkling? 
You look about you, you wonder, and then you begin to 
undei stand.... But the moment is gone, and perhaps on 
the morrow you will again meet the same pensive and list¬ 
less look, the same wan face, the same attitude of meekness 
and timidity, and even see remorse, or even tiaces of 
morbid regret and vexation because of that one moment 
of inspiration. ... And you feel sorry that the ephemeral 
flower of beauty has wilted so quickly, so irrevocably, that 
the flash has been so deceptive and in vain, you feel soriy 
because you have not even had the lime to come to love 
it. . . . 

But still, my night was better than my day! This is what 
happened. 

It was very late when I got back to town, the clock had 
already struck ten when 1 was nearing my h >me. My route 
lay along the embankment of the canal, where you would 
hardly meet a soul at this hour of the night. It’s true, of 
course, that I had my lodgings in the most remote part 
of the city. I walked and sang, for when I am happy I 
invariably hum a tune, like every happy man who 
has neither friends nor acquaintances to share his hap¬ 
piness with. And suddenly, I had a most unexpected ad¬ 
venture. 

A woman was standing close to the railing a little dis¬ 
tance away from me; she seemed to be staring absorbedly 
at the murky canal waters as she leaned against the grille. 
She was wearing a pretty yellow bonnet and a dainty little 



156 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


black cape. “She’s a young girl and she is sure to be a 
brunette,” I thought. Apparently she did not hear my 
footsteps, she never stirred as I walked past her with bated 
breath and loudly beating heart. “That’s odd,” thought I. 
“She must be deep in thought about something.” And 
suddenly I froze to a standstill. I thought I heard muffled 
sobs. Yes, I was right. The girl was crying, and she sobbed 
again and again. Good Lord! My heart contracted. And 
shy though I am of women, this was an exceptional mo¬ 
ment. ... I turned back, took a step towards her and would 
have certainly cried “Madam!” had 1 not been aware that 
this exclamation had already been uttered thousands of 
times in all the Russian novels of the beau monde. That 
stopped me. But whilst I searched my mind for a suitable 
opening, the girl recovered her senses, looked about her, 
pulled herself together, dropped her eyes, and slipped past 
me along the embankment. I followed her at once, but she 
crossed the street when she heard me. and walked along 
the pavement on the other side. 1 did not venture to cross 
the street. My heart fluttered like a captured bird’s. And 
then mere chance came to my aid. 

Suddenly I saw a gentleman in evening clothes, digni¬ 
fied in years but not in deportment, appear on the pave¬ 
ment clo.se to the g'rl. He swayed as he walked, steadying 
himself by clutching at the wall. The girl hurried on, as 
fleet and light as an arrow, the way all young girls walk 
when they do not want an offer of an escort home at night. 
The swaying gentleman would never have caught up with 
her of course, had not the destiny that ruled my fate 
prompted him to resort to extreme measures. Suddenly, 
without a word, the gentleman sprang forward and tore 
off after the girl. She was swift as the wind, but the sway¬ 
ing gentleman was gaining on her, then he caught up with 
her, the girl cried out, and ... I bless my stars for the 
splendid knotty stick I happened to be carrving in my right 
hand. In a flash I was on the other side of the street, in a 
flash the importunate gentleman realised what was afoot, 
resigned himself to the irresistible argument of the stick, 
fell back without a word, and only when we were very 
far away broke into protest against me in rather forceful 
terms. But his words hardly carried. 




WHITE NIGHTS 


157 


“Give me your hand,” I said to the young lady, “and he 
will not dare accost us again.” 

Silently she gave me her hand, which still trembled 
from fright and agitation. Oh, unknown gentleman! How 
1 blessed you just then! I gave her a fleeting look: she 
was very sweet and a brunette—so I had surmised cor¬ 
rectly! Her black eyelashes were still glistening with tears 
of recent fright—or was it recent sorrow—I know not. 
But a radiant smile already touched her lips. She stole 
a glance at me too, blushed faintly, and dropped her 
eyes. 

“Now you see, you shouldn’t have shunned me earlier. 
Had 1 been there, nothing would have happened.” 

“But 1 did not know you, I thought you, too. . ..” 

“And do you know me now?” 

“A little. Now tell me. to begin with, why are you 
trembling?” 

“Oh you have guessed it! You have guessed at once 
who you are dealing with!” I replied, delighted to find my 
young lady so clever: not a bad thing to go with beauty. 
“It is true that I am shy of women, I admit that I am 
agitated as much as you were a minute ago when that 
gentleman frightened you.... I feel somewhat frightened 
now. It’s like a dream, and even in my dreams 1 never 
imagined that some day 1 would speak to a woman.” 

“No? Really?” 

“Yes. If my hand trembles now it is because it has never 
yet been clasped by a hand as pretty and small as yours. 
I have become quite unused to women, or rather 1 have 
never been used to them. I’m quite alone, you know. I 
don’t even know how to talk to them. At this very moment, 
too, I may have said something silly to you, have I? Tell 
me frankly, I assure you I shall not mind....” 

“Oh no, no, on the contrary. But if you insist on my 
being frank with you, 1 shall tell you that shyness appeals 
to women; and if you wish to know more, then I’ll tell you: 
it appeals to me too, and I shall not send you away until 
we reach my house.” 

“You’ll make me lose all my shyness instantly,” 1 began, 
breathless with happiness. “And then—adieu to the only 
means that I possess!” 


158 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“Means? What means? Now that wasn’t very nice of 
you.” 

“Forgive me, I won’t say it again, it was just a slip of 
the tongue, but do you think it possible that at a moment 
like this 1 should have no wish to....” 

“To be liked?” 

“Well, yes. Be kind to me, for heaven’s sake, be kind. 
Think what 1 am! Here I am, twenty-six years old, and I 
have never known anybody vet! So how could I speak 
well, cleverly and smoothly? You’ll like it better too, if 
everything is put openly, frankly.... I cannot remain mute 
when my heart is clamouring within me. Oh well, never 
mind. Can you believe it, not one woman, never, never! 
No! a friend! All 1 do is dream that some day somewhere 
1 shall meet someone. Ah, if you only knew how often I 
ha\e been in love like that!” 

‘But how? With whom?” 

“Oh, no one, just an ideal, with anyone I saw in my 
dreams. I make up whole romances in my dreams. Oh you 
do not know me! Of course, I have met two or three wo¬ 
men, but what women were they? They werf such house¬ 
wives ... But I'll tel! you something that will make you 
laugh. 1 have often thought of starting a casual conversa¬ 
tion in the sheet with some lady of the aristocracy, if she 
were by herself, that is. I would speak to her timidly of 
course, with respect and feeling. I’d say that 1 was dying 
liorn loneliness, I’d beg her not to drive me away, I’d tell 
her thaf l bad no means of becoming acquainted with anv 
woman at all. I’d make her see that it was part of her 
calling as a woman to hear out the timid plea of a man 
as unhappy as I was. And that, after all, the only thing I 
was asking of hei was to say two words of sisterly com¬ 
passion to me, not to send me away at once, but to take 
me at my word, to listen to what 1 had to say, to laugh at 
me if it pleased her, but to give me some hope, speak a 
few words to me, just a few words, even if we were never 
to meet again! But I see you arc smiling.... However, 
that’s what I’m telling you all this for... 

“Don’t be upset, I am only smiling because it’s your 
own fault if you’re lonely, and because if you tried it, you 
would perhaps succeed, even if it did happen in the street; 




WHITE NIGHTS 


159 


the simpler the better-No woman with a kind heart, 

unless, of course, she was stupid or particularly angry at 
something just then, would dare send you away without 
speaking the few words which you so timidly entreated 

her to speak-Oh but what am I saying! Of course she’d 

take you for a madman! I was judging by myself. Little 
do I know of the ways of people in this world!” 

“Oh thank you!” 1 cried. “You cannot know what you 
have done for me!” 

“Come, come! But tell me, how did you know I was the 
soil of woman who ... well, whom you consideied worthy 
of your attention and friendship ... in short, not a house- 
wife, as you put it. Why did you venture to come up to 
me?” 

“Why? But you were alone, that gentleman was too 
bold, it’s night, you will admit that it is one’s duty_” 

1 No, no, before that, there on tlie other side of the 
street. You did want to come up to me then, didn’t 
you? 

“There, on the other side? But 1 reaily don’t know how 
to put it. I’m afraid ... d’you know, I was feeling happy 
today, I walked and sang. I’d been oat of town, I had 
never known such happy moments before. You ... but 1 
may have just fancied it.... Forgive me if 1 bring it back 
to you: I fancied you were crying, and 1 ... and I could not 
bear it ... it wrung my heart.... O dear God! Surely l 
may be allowed to grieve for you! Surely it was not really 
sinful of me to feel a brotherly compassion for you? Foi- 

give me, I said compassion-Well, in a word, could 1 

have offended you with mv impulsive wish to come up 
to you?” 

“Enough, say no more, enough,” she said, pressing my 
hand. “It’s my own fault, I brought it up myself. But I am 
glad 1 was not mistaken in you.... Well, here we arc, I 
must turn into this alley, it’s only a step or two. Good-bye 
and thank you.” 

Can it, can it really mean that we shall never meet 
again? Is this all there is to be?” 

“Now you see,” the girl laughed, “all you wanted at 
first was a few words, and now.... However, l shall not 
say anything. Perhaps we shall meet again.” 


160 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“I’ll be here tomorrow,” I said. “Oh, forgive me, I am 
being persistent already.” 

“Yes, you are impatient, you are almost too persist- 
ent.” 

“Pray listen, listen,” I broke in. “Forgive me if I say 
something to you again that is not — but this is how it is 
with me: 1 must come here tomorrow. I am a dreamer. I 
have so little actual life, moments like this come to me so 
rarely that I cannot help living them over and over again 
in my dreams. I shall dream of you the whole night 
through, I shall be dreaming of you for a whole week, 
a whole year. I shall certainly come here tomorrow, to 
this very spot, at this very hour, and I shall be happy 
recalling the day before. This spot is dear to me already. 
I have two or three such spots in Petersburg. Once 
my memories even made me weep, like you ... who 
can tell, perhaps you, too, were weeping for your memo¬ 
ries a little while ago. But pray forgive me, I have for¬ 
gotten myself again. Perhaps you were once very happy 
here.” 

“Very well,” said the gill. “I think I’ll dbmc here to¬ 
morrow, at ten o’clock. I see that 1 cannot forbid you to 
come The point is that I shall have to be here; do not 
think that 1 am making a rendezvous with you, I am warn¬ 
ing you that I shall have to be heie for my own reasons. 
There's only one thing ... oh well, I’ll tell you frankly: 
I shall not mind if vou come too. Firstly there might be 
some unpleasantness like there was tonight, but that’s be¬ 
side the point. In short, I should simply like to see you ... 
to say a few words to you. But you will not judge me 
severely now, will you:* You won’t think that I make 
rendezvous too freely? I wouldn’t have made this one 
either, if only.... But let it remain my secret. However, 
on one condition.” 

“One condition! Tell me, tell me now: I agree to any 
condition, I am prepared for anything,” I cried, enrap¬ 
tured. “I shall answer for myself, I shall be obedient, re¬ 
spectful ... you know me.’" 

“It is only because I do know you that I am inviting 
you tomorrow,” the girl replied with a laugh. “I know 
you perfectly. But mind you come on condition that (and 




WHITE NIGHTS 


1(51 


do be so kind and do what I am about to ask of you—you 
see how frank I am?) you do not fall in love with me.... 
You mustn’t, I assure you. I am prepared to be your friend, 
here is my hand ... but you must not fall in love with 
me, I beg you!” 

“I swear!” I cried, grasping her hand. 

“Come, do not swear. I know you are likely to flare 
up like gunpowder. Do not mind my saying so? If you 
only knew.... I too have no one to talk to, no one to 
advise me. Of course, the street is not the place to 
look for advisers, but you are an exception. I feel 1 
know you so well, as though we have been friends for 
twenty years. You will not break your promise, will 

O’* 

your 

“You shall see . . but now I don’t know how to siuvive 
the intervening hours.” 

“Sleep soundly, that’s the way. Good-night, and remem¬ 
ber that I have already put my trust in you. How well 
you said it that surely every feeling, even brotherly com¬ 
passion, did not have to be accounted for! D’you know, 
it was so well said that it instantly occuned to me to con¬ 
fide in you.” 

“Do, for heaven’s sake, but confide what ?" 

“Until tomorrow. Let it remain a secret till then. So 
much the better for you, it will seem like a romance, if 
only in imagination. Maybe I’ll tell you everything to¬ 
morrow, and maybe not. I shall talk to you first, we’ll 
come to know each other better.” 

“Oh yes! I shall tell you everything about myself to¬ 
morrow! But what is it? It’s as if a miracle were hap¬ 
pening to me ... where am I, dear God? Tell me, surely 
you cannot be displeased with yourself because you did 
not become angry, like anyone else would have done, and 
sent me away at the outset? Just two minutes, and you 
have made me happy for ever. Yes, happy! Who can tell, 
perhaps you have reconciled me to myself, dispelled my 
doubts. Perhaps I’m just given to spells like that. Oh 
well, I’ll tell you everything tomorrow, you’ll know 
everything, everything.” 

“Very well, so be it. You will be the one to begin.” 

“If you wish.” 



162 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“Good-bye.” 

“Good-bye.” 

We parted. I walked all night long, I could not bring 
myself to go home, 1 was so happy ... Till tomorrow! 


SECOND NIGHT 

“You see, you have survived!” she said to me, laughing 
and shaking both my hands. 

“I’ve been here for two hours; you can’t imagine what 
this day has been like for me!” 

“1 can, I can ... but let’s get to the point. Do you know 
why I’m here? I didn’t come here to chat about trifles the 
way we did last night, you know. Now then: we must act 
more sensibly in future. 1 thought about all this for a long 
time last night.” 

“But in what way must we be more sensible? For my 
part I am willing, but truly this is the most sensible thing 
that ever happened to me in my life!” 

“Really? First of all 1 must ask you not to crush my 
hands so, and secondly I want you to know that I won¬ 
dered about you for a long time today.” 

“Well, and what did you conclude?” 

“Conclude? I contluded that we must begin from the 
beginning, because this morning I came to realise that I 
hardly knew you, that last night I behaved like a child, 
like a silly girl, and it natuially followed that the fault 
lay in my kind heart, in other words 1 ended up by prais¬ 
ing myself the way one always does when one begins to 
analyse one’s actions. And so, to correct my fault, I decid¬ 
ed to hnd out everything about you to the smallest detail. 
But since there’s no one I could ask, you must tell me 
everything yourself, all your secrets. Now, what sort of 
person are you? Hurry and answer me, tell me the story 
of your life.” 

“My story?” I cried in alarm. “My story! But who told 
you I had a story? I have no story.” 

“How did you live then if you have no story?” she in¬ 
terrupted me with a laugh. 

“There’s no story to my life at all! I have simply lived 




WHITE NIGHTS 


163 


all by myself, entirely alone that is—alone, quite alone— 
do you know what it means—alone?" 

“But how—alone? D'you mean } ou’ve ncvci even seen 
anyone?” 

“Oh no, 1 do see people of course, but nevertheless I 
am alone.” 

“Don’t you ever talk to anyone?’ 

“In the strict sense of the word—no.” 

“But what sort of a person crc you. do explain! Wait 
a minute, I think 1 know: you piobably have a grand¬ 
mother like I do. She’s blind and it’s ages since I’ve been 
allowed to go anywhere, and so I've almost lost the habit 
ol conveisation. And once, two years ago, I did something 
naughty and then she saw there was no holding me, so 
she called me to her and pinned my chess to hers with a 
safety pin—and that’s the way we’ve been sitting pinned 
together day after day, ever since then. She sits and knits 
a sock, blind though she is, and I’ve got to stay beside hci, 
sewing or reading aloud to her. It’s such an odd custom, 
pinning down someone for two whole yeais.” 

“Good heavens! What a misfortune! But no, I have no 
grandmother like that.” 

“But if you haven’t what makes you stdv at home?" 

“Look here, do you want to know who I am?" 

“Of course I do.” 

“In the strict sense?” 

“In the strictest!” 

“Very well. I am a type.” 

“A type? What sort of type?” the girl oxc lainiod and 
burst out laughing so merrily one might have thought she 
had not had a chance to laugh for a whole year. “Oh, 
you’re such fun! Look, there’s a bench over there, let’s sit 
down. No one ever comes here, no one will hear us, and 
begin on your story now, because you do have one, what¬ 
ever you may say, you’re just making a send oi it. First 
of all, what does ‘type’ mean?” 

“A type? A type is an eccentric, a lunny sort of man,” 
I replied, joining in her child-like laughter. “It’s that sort 
of character. Listen, do you know what a dreamer is?” 

“A dreamer? Goodness, who doesn’t? I’m a dreamer 
myself! When I sit beside Giandmama, the things that 


164 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


come into my head sometimes! And then I start weaving 
dreams, and they carry me so far away I almost see my¬ 
self marrying a Chinese prince! You know, it’s good to be 
a dreamer sometimes. But no, perhaps it isn’t, l don’t 
know, especially if you have something else to think 
about,” the girl added, rather seriously now. 

“Splendid! Since you’ve seen yourself marrying a Chi¬ 
nese prince you’ll be able to understand me perfectly. Now 
then, listen. But just a moment—I don’t even know your 
name yet!” 

“At last! You didn’t think of it too soon, did you?” 

“Oh good heavens, it never entered my head. I was 
happy enough without.” 

“My name is Nastenka.” 

“Nastenka—is that all?”’ 

“That’s all. Isn’t it enough, you greedy man?” 

“Enough? On the rontiaiy, it’s plenty, it’s moie than 
plenty. Nastenka, you must be a very kind-hearted girl 
since you’ie allowing me to call you Nastenka right away!” 

“I hope 1 am. Well, rairy on.” 

“Now then, Nastenka, iust listen to this amusing story!” 

I sat down beside her. assumed a pnmly grave attitude 
and began as it 1 were reciting a memorised passage: 

“You may not be awaic oi it, Nastenka, but there aie 
some rather qucei cornets in Peteishuig. The sun. which 
shines lor all the rest oi the eity, nevet seems to peep into 
those places. It’s another sun that does, a new one, spe¬ 
cially ordeied foi those umote corners, and it throws a 
different, a peculiar light on everything, l.ife in those rc 
mote coiners seems a world apart, in no way resembling 
the life 1 hat seethes about us: it is the sort of life that 
could be going on in some fabulous anu strange king¬ 
dom. and not on out planet at all. in these very, very 
serious times of ours. And this life is that peculiar mixture 
of something that is purely iantastic, ardently idealistic 
and also, at the same time (alas, Nastenka), bleakly hum¬ 
drum and ordinary, not to say incredibly banal.” 

“Oh! Good heavens, what a preamble! What am I 
going to hear, I wonder?” 

“Nastenka (I think I ll never tire of repealing your 
name), Nastenka, you’ll hear that these remote corners 



WHITE NIGHTS 


165 


are inhabited by some queer people—by dreamers. A 
dreamer—if you must know the precise definition of the 
word—is not a real person, he’s a sort of neuter creature, 
you see. This creature usually settles down in some inac¬ 
cessible corner, as if he were hiding from the very light 
of day, and once he crawls into his shell, he grows at¬ 
tached to it like a snail or, rathci in this rt sped he ie 
semblcs that very amusing animal, which is a house ami 
an animal all in one, called the turtle. Why is he so fond 
of his four walls, invariably coated with green paint, his 
grimy, dismal and outrageously smoke-blackened v alls, 
do you think? And why, when one ol his few friends 
comes to call on him—and he ends up by having no 
friends left at all—why docs this funny gentleman icceive 
his visitor in such a state of confusion, why is he so cm 
barrassed, his features so contorted, as if he bad just i-ur> 
initted a crime within Ids four walls, oi had been on 
gaged in foiging banknotes or making up some vtises he 
was going to send to a magazine, accompanied by an 
anonymous letter saying that the poet himself was dead, 
but he, his friend, considered it his sacred duly to have 
the rhymes published? Why, tell me. Naslenka, is the 
conversation between those two so stilted? Why is their 
neither laughter nor some witty lemaik fiom the pu/zlcd 
visitor who, under other circumstances, is veiy lond of 
laughter and witty remarks, of discussing the fail sex and 
chatting on other cheerful subjects? Why does this fiiend, 
who is obviously a new acquaintance paying his first and 
only call (for in this case there will be no second, because 
the friend will never call again), why docs this friend 
become so embarrassed and tongue-tied fo< all his quick¬ 
ness of wit (if he has it) when he secs the upset expies- 
sion of his host, who in his turn has become utteily con¬ 
fused and deprived of all coherence after his valiant but 
vain attempts to cover the gaps and brighten up the con 
versation, to show that he, too, is well versed in the social 
niceties, to make some soit of remark about the fair sex 
and with this submission, if nothing else, to endear him¬ 
self to the poor man who has come calling on him by 
mistake? Why does the visitor snatch up his hat so sud¬ 
denly and burry away, remembering all at once a most 



166 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


important and non-existent appointment, pulling his hand 
free of his host’s feverish grasp, while the latter docs 
everything he can to show that he is sorry and to try and 
remedy the situation? Why does the visitor burst out 
laughing as soon as he is out of the room, swearing there 
and then never to call on this queer man again, although, 
in point of fact, the queer man is a splendid chap really: 
but at the same time he cannot refuse his imagination to 
indulge in a little game. That is, to draw a comparison— 
far fetched though it be—between the face of his host, 
the way it looked all the time they were in conversation, 
and that of a miserable little kitten which, after being 
mauled about, terrorised and maltreated in every possible 
way by some children who have taken it prisoner by foul 
means, has crept away to hide from them under a chair, 
forced to spend a whole hour there, bristling and sneez¬ 
ing, washing its pathetic little face with both paws, if ter 
which and for a long time to come, it is to look with ani¬ 
mosity upon the world in general and even upon the bits 
and pieces from the master’s table, saved up for it by the 
kind housekeeper?” 

“I say,” broke in Nastenka, who had all this time been 
listening to me in wonder, with her eyes wide and lips 
parted, “1 say, T have no idea why all this has happened 
01 why you are asking me such funny questions at all - but 
what 1 know definitely is that all those experiences from 
beginning to end have happened to you.” 

“Undoubtedly,” I replied with a most serious mien. 

“Well if that is so, go on,” she said, “because 1 very 
much want to know how it will all end.” 

“You want to know, Nastenka, what the hero was doing 
in his remote coiner, or rather I, for the hero of the story 
was myself, my own modest self: you want to know why 
the unexpected visit of my friend threw me off my bal¬ 
ance, disconcerting me for a whole day? You want to 
know why I was so startled and flustered when the door 
opened so suddenly; why I was incapable of receiving my 
visitor properly and collapsed so ignominiously under the 
brunt of my own hospitality?” 

“Yes, that’s it,” Nastenka replied. “That’s what I’d 
like to know. Look, you are telling it splendidly, but 



WHI TE NIGHTS 


167 


couldn’t you somehow make your speech less splendid? 
Because you sound as il you were reading it out of a 
book.” 

“Nastenka,” I replied in a gnu c and stem voice, barely 
mastering my desiie to laugh. “Dear Nastenka, I know 
that my speech is splendid, but I am son y I cannot talk 
differently. At the moment, Nastenla dear. I’m like the 
ghost of King Solomon, which, after having been kept 
in a pot sealed down with seven seals, had at last had 
all the seven seals removed. My dear Nastenka, now that 
wc have met again after our long scpaiation—lor I have 
known you a long time, Nastenka, I ha\e long been 
searching for someone, and that is a sign you aic the one 
1 have been searching for and that this meeting of <>urs 
has been preordained—now a thousand Ians h:«\e binsi 
open in my head, and 1 must give vent to a tomnt ut 
words or else T shall suffoiate And so I beg you not to 
interrupt me. Nastenka, but to Invr me out metklv and 
attentively, or I shall say no moie 

‘‘No, no, no. oh no. continue, do 1 I ‘han’t say anothei 
word ” 

‘“To continue: theic is one hour bin mg mv day width 
I am exceptionally fond of, my deal friend Nastenka It s 
that hour when most of the work, duties and business is 
done, and everyone is hurrying home to dinner, to tak'* 
a nap, or to spend the evening, the night, anti all the test 
of his leisure in various iolly pastimes, width he plans 
as he hurries along. At that hour out heto too- f a you 
must permit me, Nastenka, to carry on this narrative in 
the third person, since I’d feel teitihly bashful about tell¬ 
ing all this in the first person—and so our heio, whose 
day has not been idle either, strides on with everyone else 
But his pale and somewhat wan face is iglow witl a 
curious expression of pleasure. He* watrh.s. m>t iodiffc 
rcntly, the setting sun slowly sinking in the cobl sky of 
St Petcrsbuig. But when I say he w\i*chc-. it I’m telling 
a lie: he does not watch it, he contemplates it absently 
as it weie, as if he wore tired or engrossed in sorttt thing 
else, something of greater inteiest, so all he could span* 
the world about him was a fleeting, rather r.isu d mo 
menl. He is pleased because he is through with bh vex<.»- 



168 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


tious affairs until the morrow, and he is delighted like a 
schoolboy who has been allowed to leave the schoolroom 
and set free to play his favourite games and pranks. Just 
glance at him, Nastenka, you’ll see at once that the 
pleasure lie feels has already had a happy effect on his 
weak nerves and his moibid imagination. Now he is lost 
in reverie. Do you think it’s his dinner he is thinking of? 
Or the evening’s amusements? What is he staring at so? 
Is it the gentleman of imposing appearance bowing so 
picturesquely to the lady who is driving past in a gleam¬ 
ing carriage drawn by fleet-footed horses? No, Naslcn- 
ka. what do all those trifles mean to him now? He is rich 
with the wealth of his own peculiar woild now; lie came 
into these riches quite suddenly, it was not in vain that the 
paiting ray of the setting sun flashed so merrily before 
him, warming his heart and stirring in it a host of fancies. 
He hardly notices the load where hut a moment hefoic 
lie would have been struck by the merest trifles. For al- 
ieady the Goddess of Fancy (if you have tcad Zhukov¬ 
sky, dear Nastenka) lias whimsically intcilaced the eniden 
warp on her loom and has begun to wea^e a tissue of 
dicams tor him, dicanis of a fabulous, fantastic hit, uid 
who knows, pci haps with her magic hand she has whisked 
him ofl the splendid giunite pavement lit was t* ulim> 
homewards to the seventh crystal heaven. If you stopped 
him and asked him aluuptly wheie he was 01 what >tiee. - 
lie had walked tluough. he piobably wouldn't !>e ibl- f o 
remember a thing, neither where he had been i .1 uh- t 
he was, and, blushing in his cmbariassment,!.( wi uld <ti 
tainly have invented some talc to save his digmtv \nJ 
that's why lie is so startled, why he almost scicuius and 
looks about him in alann when a very respectable old lady 
stops him politely in the middle of the pagein ut an*' sk>- 
him to show her the way. Scowling villi am vancc la- 
strides on, barclv conscious of the pussci.. by 'ho mob 
at him and turn back to look after him, or of the little 
girl who steps timorously out of his way and then bursts 
into peals of laughtei when she secs his wide, contempla¬ 
tive smile and his gesticulating hands. But then the same 
Goddess of Fancy picks up and carries away on her play¬ 
ful flight the old lady, the curious passers-bv, the laugh- 



MllIlFNIUHa 11,) 

n„ 1 ii'e n! and the boaMntn, abeam t bug then suppM 
on iii n whiih 1 utltt up the I ntanka f th t< is 

-opposing oui h.,o i j mSiog it at 1. time), -.he lmsiim 
\oisi*' v iavi* .uivniK and ivervthim; * it li i < bit n 

t ipe«ir th< wn> !• ) t won i into i r p ' * \ *nd 

»h ijinu man tutM*- Ins ucii li'lnl uh 1 m i town 
with tin** n< w wc l'tb he *-it 1 wo lia* Ins dnmci «i 1 > 
i il\ amused fi mi his (h< in >*hu> slat ,<ni 1 '* pen 

ive nia’ mu s n low In) 'm\ ant v ’.an na* ucaicil Mu 
tnbb* and InonglP Inin Ins pm He stns md *mi "it>t’> 
with suipiise th it lu lu« d’l.tib lin.sh< 1 Ins ihnnu hav 
ing missed tin, pi ms tnMnly Pm ’.mm gmw * dark 
cmptmtis and sadnu fill his b, >t, * wd ole H.'n, <■' 
faiuy ciuniblts aioilin' hi in. ih * anas into d »*t s.tn 
no noise oi era c h. it b *s 'Ht*» ^1 p. t 1 hi a du un n. 
does not even rememticr what In h • * <• i 'm„ i'> m 
But now sonic obscure **tnsation, 1 ■ * duot \,'iioi 

makes his lieait throb and aclm « n iv.t'w n.d 
stimulating hi*, imagination sedoitiiu n nipcicf] 
tiblv. railing np a thiong of new j h i iii ■ San 

ltigns tn the little xooni. In* lmugiuat m I asks in s >1 * . 
and languni it flaicrs up ottl\, it bo n.« to babbli 1,1, on 
svatei in old Matryona’s rolfeipot is s'a fussi s d >u< in 
the kitchen next door, making her coffue with not imam i 
cjic in the wmld. Then his fancy begins to bteak tlnon^i 
in Kttlc spuits of fite and the book, taken up aimlessly 
and it landom, falls * im my die un. i s hand un* i 1 1 in 
for a page or two His imagination i*> loused inJ Mined 
up again, and suddenly a new world, a new fascinating 
uoild flashes be foie his mmd .a all its dazzling possibdi 
ties. A new dieam-a new liappiness 1 A. new lose ol 
poison, subtle ind sensuous What dots hi cate 1 u oui 
ic.il hie' Fiom his drugged point of vnw, \c»u and I an 
leading such a slow', la/y and sluggish life TVotinha 
lrom Ins point of view we aie all so dusatishod with oui 
lot, wc ate finding life so we mi some And indeed, look 
how cold, how sullen and angry we seem to be with one 
another. Pool souls my dieamei thinks And no wondei 
he thinks so 1 Look at the magic, animated picLuc those 
phantom-, weave lor him so fascinatingly, so intiicatelv 
and so generously, with himself, of course, our dreamer in 



170 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


person, as the most important character, ever in the fore¬ 
ground. Look at the variety of adventures, look at the 
never ending flow of his rapturous dreams! You will ask, 
perhaps, what does he dream of? Why ask? Of every¬ 
thing. Of being a poet, unacclaimed at first and later 
crowned with glory; of Hoffman’s friendship, of St. Bar¬ 
tholomew’s Night, of Diana Vernon, of playing a heroic 
part in the conquest of Kazan by Tsar Ivan, of Clara 
Mowbray, of Effie Deans, of the Council of Prelates with 
lluss before it, of the resurrection of the dead in Robert 
the Devil (remember the music? that graveyard odour it 
has?), of Minna and Brenda, of the Battle at the Bere¬ 
zina, of reading poems in the salon of Countess V.-D., of 
Danton, of Cleopatra ci suoi amanti. of a little house in 
Kolomna, a nook of his own and a lovely creature beside 
him, listening to him on a wintry night with eyes wide 
and lips parted, the way you arc listening to me now. my 
little angel. No, Nastcnka, that sensual sluggard cares 
nothing for the life that you and 1 arc so anxious to taste. 
He thinks it’s a poor and wretched life, lie cannot know 
that for him, too, the bell may toll sadly one day, when 
lor a single hour of this wretched life he’d give all his 
years of lancy, not in exchange for }oy or happiness 
either, he would not even want to choose in that hour 
of sonow, regret, and untrammelled grief. But until that 
dreadful hour strikes, lie desiies nothing, for he is above 
desiie, for he already has everything, he is satiated, be¬ 
cause he is his own artist, creating new world for himself 
whenever a new whim urges him. And then you know, 
this fail y-tale, this world of fancy can be created so easily, 
so naturally, as though it were indeed not a phantom at 
all! Truly, at times I quite believe that this world is not 
a mirage, not the creation of my excited senses, not a trick 
played by my imagination, but that it’s actually real, 
genuine, it exists. Then why, tell me, Nastenka, why is 
inv spirit anguished at moments like those? Why then, 
what magic, what strange power makes the pulse quicken, 
brings tears to the dreamer’s eyes, suffuses his pale, tear- 
stained cheeks with colour, and fills his whole being with 
a joy so heavenly? Why do his sleepless nights seem to 
pass so quickly in infinite happiness and gaiety, and why 



WHITE NIGHTS 


171 


when the first rosy sunbeam flashes across the window and 
the dawn sends its eerie and uncertain light into his room, 
the way it does here in St. Petersburg, why does our 
dreamer, fatigued and exhausted, throw himself across 
his bed and fall asleep, swooning with ecstasy which ob¬ 
sesses his diseased and shaken spirit, and with a pain so 
insufferably sweet filling his heart? Yes, Nastenka, it de¬ 
ceives you and you unwittingly come to believe that the 
passion stirring in his soul is real and genuine, you come 
to believe there is indeed something tangible, animate, in 
his incorporeal dreams. Think of the deceit of it! For in¬ 
stance, love enters his heart in all its infinite joyousness, 
with all its poignant torment. A mere glance at him will 
convince you! Would you believe it, looking at him, 
Nastenka dear, that he has never really known the one 
he has loved so in his rapturous dreams? Surely he touid 
not have seen her in his deceptive fantasies alone and 
have only dreamed of this passion? Can it be true that 
they did not really go through so many years of their 
lives together, hand in hand, just the two of them, forsak¬ 
ing the whole world and joining their destinies, their two 
private worlds into one? Then was it not she who Jay 
sobbing and grieving upon his breast that night, the night 
of parting, deaf to the storm raging beneath the sombre 
sky, heedless of the wind that was blowing the teardrops 
off her black eyelashes and whisking them away? Surely 
it could not have all been a dream—that garden, too, dis¬ 
mal. neglected, and -did, its paths overgrown with moss, 
that gloomy and lonely garden where they had walked so 
often, hoping, despairing, and loving, yes, loving each 
other so long, so long and so tenderly? And that strange 
ancestral home where she hau lived for so many years in 
retirement and sadness with her morose, ever taciturn and 
choleric old husband whom they feared as though they 
were two timid children, concealing their love from each 
other so timorously and disconsolately? What agony they 
suffered, how frightened they were, how pure and inno¬ 
cent was their love, and how vicious people were (that goes 
without saying, Nastenka!). But good God, can it be that 
it was not her he met again long afterwards, far from 
the shores of his homeland, under a foreign sky, a hot 




172 F DOSTOYEVSKY 


and siiltiv sk\ ut tbe hcautitul ctcim 1 un, at a biillimt 
ball, to the usounding stiain of the niche-tia, «* tlw pa 
la?70 (it had to be a palu/vo) Hooded with light; was it 
not bet be srn on ihe balcony, entwined with tosos and 
myrdc 1 When the motiietit .she saw lnm, she lifted hei 
mj'-k so hastily ind wlnsccMug. ‘I am fieo’ 11. w, tiom- 
hlin into ids aims, with i m ol ju>, thrv tluiv togethei, 
md m a moment « xc i ythin** was fo,goU<n- then saiiow 
and tbeii separation, al’ tluii suffetiugs, tin gloomy lious< 
tin old and l.ii'U'n man lb< chfi-’-ss gulden in then 
i-Mant homelan 1, the -raden ,it wo- c with a paitina, 
passionate kiss, she toie bomb away limn bis aims, 
1,1 own numb vs id th< «.gony of despair Ob Nastenka, 
vi/ii must nice tl> .t sou wou d b'' start ltd, Vi u’d blnsli 
mid behave ido a .<hni.il n) who had jum stuffed m*o bis 
;*<k ktt an ipn.e In bad s*< Y« { I( ,ni tin nimh' nils' <mi- 
d<n o , mit »’> i \,</t i itnlv flung op, i t) iduni an 


I’ium 

1*1 

d fin 1 

S* t| l* 

i-'b'i * 

d | l 


* v*ul 

Mii‘1 

. wit 

*s 

ml >• 

1 *)t •» 

s 1 1 1 

» P 

Ml* 

t Mi 

i p d 

n n 

, u\ 

i* 

d'' ’ 

kl 1 

r * ! 

MSI 

1 1 

* u r 

♦ , ,r* 

I «' 


* M V 


*► < * 

* 

Ul)» 

Oil 

[ * HI 

;<* 



W |S 

* < 

hi |l.f 

» *nf 1 

u it, 

l, 

1 ^ 

f' 


i 1 1 h 

j»» 1 


\\ I's , 

• t « V 

• » h 

• 1 

)!hl 

t V * 1 1 

I'M , 

1 

1 >\ six’ 










\ p 

Ml 

< * 11 1 

Of'i '1 

U\ 

' l 

OH ‘ fx 


« ’ ( ! 

It t 1 

II ,u « 

1 w 

M l 

* i 

lit* n ii 

Its * 

h w J» 

li'i 

? » 1 »» V 

* lM 

l>r 

rm ii u 

. M |l {( ‘ 

t O' 

* i i 

• f n • 

iM / 

1' 1 " 1 I' 

IC C » 

- ’ tk 

)H*Stflk 1 

t 1 Mil ' 

»n 

tir 

in i. •' 

IP V 

b. Caill 

V T r 

* „ hi i 

Mi* M» 

' ' t 

In 1 ' \< 

»< 

In - moil 

M> tM 

pil \ - ) 

tioO 

n\ i 

k S 

\M J v 

> • t 

»i M C . 

Mi»i 

- >1C t 

*\ P 

all.nil 

U *' 

^ tiki IK 

l, M * ! 

d « < ,? 

! vlk '"I 1 

1 • till 

\\ 

)u 1 cic\ ct 


v i > " aa opt i \> mid 1 * n«a binvbmg with hti span 

. hi- -'nlcl 1«1 lauab vi at.vl 1 lel< son> f bad gone 

'* la; bad mod 1 ssiv n>ld that wbnb bad lone been ovti- 
hu-dening my hejii, w 1, rh 1 ,onld ionic Eli a passage 
conn,i Um] to mi>.n,v bee..ase 1 li<nl '"ug igo , i-s* d a 
\eidi*t on my.self and 1 bad been t« mplt d to mid it out 
to her, although 1 mod -dnut, I did nc»t expect to be 
urn lei stood But. »o rnv suruiise, slv remained silent and 
a little latei pies'-'I m bmd lightly and asked with a 
note of timid inten.st 


WHITE NIGHTS 


173 


“Have you really lived like that all your life?” 

'All my life, Nastenka,” 1 replied. “All my life, and 1 
suppose 1 shall go on like this till the end.” 

"No, no, you can’t!” she said anxiously. “It won’t be 
so, for then I, too, might have to spend the rest of my 
life sitting beside my Grandmama. Do you know that it’s 
not right at all to live like that?” 

“I do, Nastenka, I do!” I cried, restraining my emotion 
no longer. “I know it better than ever now that 1 have 
wasted the best years of my life. I know it now, and the 
knowledge hurts me more, for God Himself has sent you 
to me, my kind angel, to tell me this and to convince me 
in this knowledge. Now that I am sitting here beside you, 
talking to you, I dread the thought of the future, for the 
future holds nothing but loneliness again, nothing but that 
senseless, musty life; and what am I to dream of now 
that I have been so happy with you in reality! Oh, you 
dear girl, may you be blessed because you did not repulse 
me, because now 1 can say that I have lived at least two 
evenings in my life!” 

“Oh no, no!” Nastenka cried, and teardrops glistened 
on her eyelashes. “No, it will not be so! We shall not part 
like that! What are two evenings!” 

“Nastenka, oh Nastenka! Do you know that you have 
reconciled me to myself for a long time to come now? 
Do you know that I shall no longer think so ill of myself 
as I am sometimes apt to do? Do you know that I may 
not despair any longer that 1 have committed a crime and 
a sin in my life, for a life like mine is a crime and a sin? 
And pray do not think I have exaggerated anything to 
you, for heaven’s sake do not think that, Nastenka, be¬ 
cause at times I am possessed by melancholy, such utter 
melancholy.... Because when these spells come over me, 
I begin to think that I am incapable of ever starting to 
live a new, a real life, because it seems to me that 1 have 
already lost all touch, all sense of the real and the actual, 
because I had been selling my soul, because my nights of 
fantasy are now followed by moments of soberness, and 
they are frightening! And meanwhile, you can hear life 
clamouring and eddying about you in a human whirlpool, 
you can hear, you can see people living—living a real 


174 


V. DOSTOYEVSKY 


life, you ran see that their world has not been made to 
order, that it will not he shattered like a dicatn or a vision, 
that their lilc is ever youthful, ever lejuvenescent, and 
that cveiy houi in it dilleis liom the last, whereas tim- 
oious faney is bleak and monotonous to the point ol bore¬ 
dom, a slave to cveiy shadow and notion, a slave to the 
first cloud that blots out the sun and wrings with distress 
the hearts of every true man of St. Petersburg who sets 
so much store by its sun—and what is fancy in distress? 
You can feel the constant strain wearing out and exhaust¬ 
ing your inexhaustible fancy at last, because you are ma¬ 
turing, you are outgrowing your former ideals; they are 
shatteied to pieces, reduced to dust; if you have no other 
life to live, you are compelled to rebuild it out of the 
same broken bits and pieces. And yet your soul yearns 
for and demands something different! In vain the dreamer 
rakes up the ashes of his old dreams, hoping to find at 
least a tiny spark among the ruins in order to fan it to 
lile again, to warm his chilled heart with this resurrected 
frit* and bitng back to it all that was so dcai befoie, that 
moved it. that set his blood on fire, that w’lUfig tears fiom 
his eyes and deceived him so gloriously! Do you know 
what 1 have come to, Nastenka. J Do you know that 1 now 
have to mark the anniveisary of my past emotions, of my 
affection for what has been before but actually had never 
happened, because this anniveisaiy, too, has to be observ- 
id according to the same foolish, incorporeal dreams; 
1 am driven to it because the foolish dreams themselves 
are no more, for I have nothing to support them with; 

*,nu have to live your dreams too. you know. Do you 
know that now 1 like to remember and levisit, on cer¬ 
tain dates, the spots where 1 have once known happiness 
in iny own peculiar way, 1 like to attune my present to 
my rrrevocable past, and oltcn I w’ander up and down 
the alleyways and streets of St. Petersburg like a ghost, 
depressed and sad. with no aim or purpose. Oh the me¬ 
mories that are mine! I recall, for instance, that here, 
exactly a year ago to the. hour, I had wandered up and 
down the same pavement as lonely and depressed as I am 
now! And l recall that my dreams were just as sad, and 
though it wasn’t any better then than it is now, you some- 



WHITE NIGHTS 


i75 


how can’t help thinking that life was easier and more 
tranquil in those days, untroubled as it was by that black 
thought which is harassing nte now; tiiat I was not preyed 
upon by these pangs of conscience, grim and painful pangs, 
which give me no peace, day and night. And you ask 
yourself: where are those dreams of yours? You shake 
your head and say: how the years go by! And again you 
ask yourself: what have you done with your life? Where 
have you buried your best years? Have you lived or not? 
Look, you tell yourself, look how cold it’s becoming in 
the world. More years will pass, bringing dismal loneliness 
with them, and then shivering old age will come leaning 
on a crutch, and after that just misery and bleakness. 
Your phantom world will grow dim, your dreams will 
wither and fall like dead, yellow leaves. Oh Nastenka, 
won’t it be sad to remain alone, entirely alone, with noth¬ 
ing even to regret—nothing, nothing at all ... for what¬ 
ever 1 lose, all that will have been nothing, a mere, stupid 
nought, nothing but dreams!” 

“Oh, don’t go on, I’m crying already,” said Nastenka, 
wiping away a tear. “It’s all over now! There will be two 
of us now, we'll never part again, no matter what hap¬ 
pens to me. I am a simple girl. I have not studied much, 
though Grandmama did hire a teacher for me, but truly 
I can understand you, because everything you have just 
told me I went through myself when Grandmama kept 
me pinned to her dress. Of course I couldn’t have told it 
as well as you have done, because I’ve never studied,” 
she added bashfully, for she still felt a certain respect for 
my dramatic speech and my lofty style. “But 1 am very 
gJad you have opened your heart to me. Now I know you, 

I know you perfectly. And d’you know, I want to tell you 
my story, too, all of it, without reserve, and for this you'll 
give me your advice afterwards. You arc a very clever 
person; will you promise to give me your advice after¬ 
wards?” 

“Ah Nastenka!” I replied. “Though I’ve never been an 
adviser, and a clever one at that, I see now that if we’re 
to go on like this, it will be the best thing possible, and 
then each of us will advise the other most cleverly. Well, 
my pretty Nastenka, what do you want to know? Tell me 



F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


17(> 


fiankly; 1 am so happy now, so gay, so daring and wise 
that I shan't have to search for an answer 1 ” 

“No, no,” Nasicnka intcnupted, laughing, “it’s not just 
a (level bit of advice I’m looking for, but sincere and 
biotheily counsel, the soit you’d give me il you had been 
fond of me all youi life.” 

“Vei> well, Nastenka, very well!” I cried exultantly. 
“And had 1 been fond of you foi twenty yeais, I never¬ 
theless could not have been fo.idet of you than 1 am now'” 

‘ \our hand!” said Nastenka. 

Take it 1 ’ 1 gave her my hand. 

“And so we shall begin my story.” 

NASTENKA’S STORY 

"You know half ol mv stoiy alieady, at least you know 
that 1 base an old giandmothci 

1 If the othex half is as biief as this one. .I broke in 
viidi a smile 

‘ lb- ijiwet and liskn 1 must make one condition though- 
do not intei i opt me or I'll make a muddle ofrit Do listen 
cjmetly now 

‘1 have an old giandmother. I went to live with her 
whin 1 was a vciy little gill, because both my mother 
and mv lathei wcie dead. I suppose Giandinama was 
vvcalthur then than she is now, loi she still iccalls those 
bitki chiys She taught me l'rench herself, and then she 
luiid a tutoi lor tm Winn f was hltecn (I’m seventeen 
new/, my studies <atue lc> an end lh.it was when 1 did 
tint nan >Id) thin”,, what n was 1 shall not tcdl you, it is 
'•ullKitnt to sav that it w.i‘ nothing much. But Giand- 
mama called me to her one morning and said that being 
blind she could not keep an eve on me and, taking a safety 
pin, she pinned my dress to hets, and that’s when she 
told me we’d stay like that for the rest of our days, unless 
1 improved, of course. Well, in the beginning there was 
no hope of getting away at all. I had to sit by Grand- 
mama’s side whether I was reading, studying or knitting. 
I tried cunning once, and talked Fyokla into taking my 
place. Fyokla is our servant woman, she’s deaf. She took 
my seat; Grandmama fell asleep in her chair just then 



m 


A HI IF NlC.HIS 


mid l went off *o so*' a girl who Jived near by. It all ended 
h idly ol course Giandmama woke up and said something, 
thinking 1 was still sitting quietly beside her Fyokla saw 
th.it Giandmama was asking a question, but she could 
n t hear what it was she thought and thought what she 
should do, and then .'■he undid the pm and lan away 
t this Nastenka hurst out laughing I laughed with hci 
She' bioke off abrupt'y 

1 1 sav, )<»u musln t laugh at Giandniama 1 can, because 
it\s luniiy < ’«rami mania ually can’t help being like tint, 
but still l do 1*i\c liei i ’ittle I was punished pood and 
propti then; in< k m place 1 was put, and 1 eonlel not 
so irnuh as move* a lingei after that. 

“Well then, I forgo* to tell you that we, or rather 
Giandmama, has a house of hci own, I mean a tiny little 
hoi... wi*h tluce window’s facing the stieet, it's ail 
void u and as ohl as Grandmcina huself, and theie'- an 
• O no Ja> i nt*’ lodger nn ved into tin a'tir.’’ 

‘ I h it ox-ans \ ou o id an old lodpn heiotc,” I lem.uke l 
i a uall>. 

()» eou. .e \e had" N> te n. r-.’itd, „ ul til d one 
~ouh’ u id he. Inn* u< bcttci tl. o am e in It’s tun, hi 
mold haidly it o\e his ie,n;ue *. .'4 by *hcn lit w *s a 
ittb* old tu *u, he was fhm, de d, blind and larx u.d a* 

! et t. .oiil*f not go on JivUiP a"y lou'W* .no Ik a ill and 
d't’d I hat**« why w< lad to li ive a n» w I nlj < i, be .nisi 
we can’* manage without out, that and Gi judinim i; pin¬ 
ion is about id lave 's ln«I we old hi\t it |h ;>c w 
1 * hi e r i w is a umn*' man, a ncw.mt'ii mi i ^'a 1 man 

an 'num*.' let lui'i G v'c lue joori vt.ni 1 ' lu didn't 
!•. ggt. u ei the un*. and then .-.lie asked me, ‘leil me*, 
Nastenka, is e>ut lodge* a young maiG' 1 did ml want 
to tell d he, so 1 said, ‘He s not paiticulaily young, Ciand- 
mama, neither is he olcl’ ‘And is his appcaiamc pleas¬ 
ing.’’ she askeel And again I did not want to tell a lie, 
so 1 said, ‘Yes, Ins appealance is pleasing' And Gund- 
mama said, ‘Ah, what a shame, what a shame' I’m warn* 
ing you, Gianddaughtci, don’t you look at him or think 
about him. Dcdi me, what the world is coming to! Just 
imagine, a mere attic lodger and his appeaiarre is pleas¬ 
ing too; it v asn’t like this in my day 1 ’ 



178 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“Grandmama was always harping on ‘her day’. She 
was younger in her day, and the sun shone warmer in her 
day, and cream did not turn sour so quickly then—every¬ 
thing went back to ‘her day’. There was I sitting and 
thinking: now why does Grandmama herself put ideas 
into my head, asking me if our lodger is handsome and 
young? But the thought just occurred to me in passing, 
I took up my knitting again, counted the stitches, and for¬ 
got ali about it. 

“We had promised to paper our lodger’s room for him, 
and so one morning he came in to inquire about it. One 
woid led to another, Grandmaina’s chatty, you know, and 
then she said, ‘Go to my bedroom, Nastenka, and fetch 
me the counting board.’ 1 jumped up at once, blushing all 
over—1 don’t know why—and quite forgetting I was 
pinned down; instead of undoing the pin stealthily, so the 
lodger shouldn’t see, I started up and Grandmama’s chair 
slid along the 'floor. When I saw that the lodger knew 
everything about me now, 1 blushed and froze to the spot, 
suddenly bursting into tears—the bitterness and shame 
of it was more than 1 could bear! Grandmama shouted, 
‘What are you standing there lor?’ and 1 cried harder than 
ever. When the lodger saw that 1 was ashamed because 
of him, he took his leave at once and went away. 

“And ever afterwards, l almost died if I heaid a sound 
in the hall. There comes the lodger, I’d think, and I 
would quietly undo the pin, just to be on the safe side. But 
it was nevet he, he never came. Two weeks went by; one 
day the lodger sent us a message through Fyokla to say 
that he had plenty of Fiench books, all good books, fit to 
jead, and he wondered if Grandmama would like me to 
read them to her for a change. Grandmama accepted his 
olfer gratefully, but she kept asking if the books were 
moral, because if they were immoral, she said, ‘it would 
never do for you to read them, Nastenka, because they’d 
teach you to do wrong.’ 

“ ‘But what would they teach me, Grandmama? What’s 
written in them?’ 1 asked. 

“ ‘Ah,’ she said, ‘they’re all about young men seducing 
decent girls, carrying them off from their parents’ homes, 
pretending they want to marry them, abandoning these 



WHITE NIGHTS 


179 


poor girls to their fate afterwards, and the end the girls 
come to is too sad to relate. I’ve read many such books,’ 
Grandmama said, ‘and they tell all this so beautifully, 
that you stay up all night, reading them on the quiet. So 
mind you don’t ever read them, Nastenka! What sort of 
books has he sent, you say?’ 

“ ‘Novels by Sir Walter Scott, all of them, Grandma¬ 
ma.’ 

“ ‘Sir Walter Scott’s novels? Are you sure there’s no 
trick here? Take a look and see if he hasn’t hidden a love 
letter in one of them.’ 

“ ‘No, Grandmama,’ I said, ‘there is no letter.’ 

“ ‘Look under the binding, they sometimes push them 
under the binding, the scamps!’ 

“ ‘No, Grandmama, there’s nothing under the birding 
either.’ 

“ ‘Well mind there isn’t!’ 

“And so we began to read Sii Walter Scott, and in a 
month we finished half the books. Then out lodger sent 
us more and more books, he sent us some Pushkin too, so 
finally I couldn’t live without books, and 1 stopped dream¬ 
ing of marrying a Chinese prince. 

“That’s how it was when one day I chanced upon our 
lodger on the stairs. Grandmama had sent me to fetch 
something. He slopped. 1 blushed, and he blushed too. 
he smiled, however, said how d’you do, asked how Grand¬ 
mama was and then inquired, ‘Have you read the books?' 
I replied, ‘I have.’ ‘Which book did you like best.'’ he 
asked, and I said, ‘I liked Ivanhoc and Pushkin best of all.' 
That was all there was on that occasion. 

“A week later I came across him on tin stairs again. 
Grandmama hadn’t sent me that time, I had to get some¬ 
thing for myself. It was after two, the hour when our 
lodger usually came home. ‘How d'you do,’ he said, and 
I said, ‘How d’you do.’ ‘Tell me,’ he said, ‘don’t you find 
it dull sitting with your grandmama all day long?' 

“When he asked me that, 1 felt hot with shame and bit¬ 
terness again, I really don’t know why unless it was be¬ 
cause others were beginning to ask me questions about 
this business. 1 thought I’d say nothing and go away, but 
1 had not the strength. 


180 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“‘You’re a good girl,’ lie said, ‘foigive me for talking 
to you like this, hut I assure you I fed a deeper eonreui 
lor you than ymu Giandmama does. Have vou no fiiends 
at all you could go and visit?' 

"1 told him 1 had none, there had been one. Mashenka. 
hut she’d gone away to Pskov. 

“ ‘Look,’ he said, ‘would you iike to come to the theatre 
with me *’ 

“ “I lie theatre. 1 * But what will Grandmama say? 

“ ‘Come without telling Giandmama.’ 

“ ‘No,’ I said, ‘1 don’t want to deceive Grandmama. 
Good bye.’ 

“ ‘Good-bye,’ he said and didn’t utter another word. 

“And then after dinner the same day he came to us; 
he took a chair, talked long with Giandmama, asked her 
it she ever went out at all, and if she had any friends, and 
suddenly he said: ‘I’ve taken a box for the Opeia tonight, 
the Burbt’i of Sivillr is on; some friends of mine were 
coming, but then they changed then minds, and now I 
have the tickets to spare.' 

“ ‘The /hnbn of Si oillcV Giandmama ctied ‘Ts that 
lh< same Binbn they used to pla> in mv day?’ 

“‘Yes,’ he said, ‘the vuy same Binbn. And he cave 
me a look. I had understood it all already, I blushed and 
mv heart leapt in anticipation. 

“ ‘Why, ot com sc,' Giandmama said, ‘of cmnse, I know 
it! I mysell used to pla\ the pait of Bosnia in our home 
theatiicals in the old days.’ 

“ ‘Wouldn’t you caie to come tonight?’ the lodger asked. 
‘I have the tickets, you know.' 

“‘Yes, 1 think we'll go,' said Grandmama ‘Why 
shouldn't we? And then my Nastenka has never been to 
the thealie yet.’ 

“Oh heavens, what jo\! We began to get leady at once, 
we dressed and went. Giandmama is blind, but she wanted 
to heat the music and, besides, she’s a kind-hearted old 
lady; she wanted to give me a treat, we’d never have 
arranged to go by ouisehcs. I can't tell you what my im¬ 
pressions were of the Barber of Seville, but I will say 
that all evening long our lodger kept looking at me so 
kindly, he spoke to me so nicely that I instantly grasped 



WHITE NIGHTS 


IS I 

that he had only been putting me to the test that mom 
ing, when he asked me to go alone with him I was ovci - 
joyed. I went to sleep that night feeling so pioud and 
happy, my heart beat so, it made me slightly feverish, and 
all night long I raved of the Barber of Seville. 

“I thought that now he'd come calling on us more fie 
quently, but I was quite mistaken He almost • -eased tam¬ 
ing altogether. He’d diop in casually once a month oi so, 
and only to invite us to come to the theatre again. Wc did 
go once or twice. But I wasn’t pleased with that at all 
I saw that he was merely sorry for me because f nand 
mama was treating me so badly, and that was all there 
was to it. I brooded and brooded and tin n something 
came over me: I couldn’t sit still, 1 couldn't lead, I 
couldn’t work at mv knitting. i\i laugh sometimes an 1 do 
something to spite Orandmama, or .mother time I’d 
simply weep. 1 giew so thin, I almost fell ill r fhc Opera 
season was over and our lodger stopped coming to sec 
us altogethii* when we happened to meet -on the same 
stairs of toursc -he would bow to inc so gravely and so 
silent 1> as if he didn’t want to talk to inc at all, and he’d 
b' out on the poich and away, while 1 still stood halfway 
up the staits, blushing red like a cherry, because when- 
ivci l saw him all the blood came rushing to mv head. 

“It’s almost the end now. Last May, our lodger called 
on Gianchnama and told her that sir.ee he had completed 
.dl his dfans hcic, he would be going away to Moscow 
igain for a year. When 1 heard this, 1 turned pale and 
sank tainting on to a chair. (Jrandmanut noticed nothing, 
while he, aftei announcing his dcpartuic, bowed and left. 

“What was I to clo:* 1 thought and thought. T ficited 
and woirud, and at last I came to a decision. He was to 
!< rvi on the moriow and 1 made up my mind to lake the 
mud step that very evening after Grandmama had jetiicd. 
And this I did. I made a bundle of all the dicsscs I had 
and some undei clothes, and with the bundle in my arms, 
more dead than alive, I climbed the attic stairs to onr 
lodgci’s loom. I think it took me an houi to climb tiiosc 
slaiis. I pushed open his door and lie gasped when he saw 
me. lie thought 1 was a ghost And then he rushed to 
get me some water for I could hardly stand My heatl 



182 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


was beating so loudly that my head hurt and my mind 
reeled. When I recovered, I simply put my bundle on his 
bed and sat down beside it, and, covering my face with 
my hands, I burst into tears. He must have understood 
everything at once, for he stood before me so pale 
and with such a sad look in his eyes that it tore at my 
heart. 

“ ‘Nastcnka,’ he began ‘p ra y listen to me: I cannot do 
anything; I’m a poor man; I have nothing yet, not even 
a decent post; what would we live on if I married you?’ . 

“Wc talked for a long time and finally, in my distrac¬ 
tion, I told him I could not live with Gtandmama any 
longer, that I would run away, that I did not want to be 
pinned down with a safety pin, and that I’d go to Moscow 
with him whether he wished it or not, because I could not 
live without him. It was everything—shame, love, and 
pride, all welling up in me at once, and l fell on his bed, 
practically in a fit. 1 so dreaded his refusal! 

“lie sat on in silence for a few minutes, then he stood 
up, came close to me and took my hand in his. 

“ ‘My dear, my kind Nastcnka,’ he Tregau, and tears 
rolled down his face. ‘Hear me out. I sweat to you. it 
ever I am in a position to marry, you and no other will be 
the one to make rne happy. Believe me when 1 say that vou 
alone could make me happy now. Listen then: I am going 
awa) to Moscow and I shall remain theic exactly a year. 
I hope I shall have settled my affairs by then. When I 
come back, and if you have not ceased loving me, I swear 
to you wc shall he happy. But now it is impossible, I can¬ 
not, I have no right to offer anything at all. I repeat, 
though, that if it docs not happen in a year’s time, some 
day it certainly will; it's understood, of course, that it is 
orrly in the event of your not preferring another to me, for 
1 cannot and dare not bind you with a promise.’ 

“That’s what he said to me, and he left the following 
day. We had agreed not to breathe a word of this to 
Grandinama. lie wished it so There it is, my story is al¬ 
most finished now. Exactly a year has passed. He has 
come back, he’s been here for three whole days, atrd....” 

“And what?” 1 cried, impatient to hear the end of the 

btory. 



WHITE NIGHTS 


1S3 


“And he has not shown up yet!” Nastenka replied with 
an obvious effort. “No word or sound from him.” 

She stopped, paused a little, dropped her head and, 
suddenly burying her face in her hands, began to weep 
so dreadfully it wrung my heart. Never had I exported 
such an ending. 

“Nastenka,” I began in a timid and coaxing voice. “Nas¬ 
tenka, for heaven’s sake don't cry! How can you know? 
He may not be here yet.” 

“He is, he is,” Nastenka took up, “he's here, I know it. 
We had it all arranged the night before lie left; when 
everything had been said and agreed between us, the way 
I told you now, we came out for a breath of air to this 
very spot here. It was ten o’clock, we sat on this bench, 
I wasn’t crying any more, I listened enraptured to whr.f 
he was saying ... he said he’d come to me the moment 
he returned, and if I didn’t retuse him. we would tell 
Grandmama all about it. And now he’s back, I know it, 
and yet he hasn’t come, he hasn’t come!” 

She burst out crying again. 

“Good God! Can’t something be done to help?” I ciied, 
and sprang up from the bench in utter despair. “Tell me. 
Nastenka, perhaps if I went and saw him it would help?” 

“Could you, d’you think?” she asked, suddenly raising 
her head. 

“No, of course not,” I said, realising the folly of it “I 
have another idea: write him a letter.” 

“No, I couldn’t possibly, it isn’t done,” she replied reso¬ 
lutely, but at the same time she dropped her eves and 
tried to avoid my gaze. 

“Why not? Why isn’t it done?” I continued, carried 
away by my suggestion. “But it must be a special letter, 
you know. It all depends on the way it’s worded. Oh Nas¬ 
tenka, it’s truly so! Put your trust in me, pray do! I would 
not give you ill advice. All this can be put right. You were 
the one who made the first step then, so why not now?” 

“No, no, it will seem that I’m being too forward.” 

“Ah, my dear sweet Nastenka!” I smiled as 1 interrupt¬ 
ed her. “It won't, it won’t, it is your right because he 
gave you his word. And then, from all you’ve told me, 
I can see that he's a tactful man, he acted honourably,” 



184 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


I went on, exulting more and more in the logic of my 
own reasoning and persuasions. “How did he act? He 
bound himself with a promise. He said he would not 
marry anyone but you if ever he married at all, and at the 
same time he left you perfectly free to refuse him when¬ 
ever you wished. Therefore you arc justified in taking 
the first step, you have the right, you have the advantage 
over him, supposing now )ou wanted to release him from 
his promise. ...” 

“Tell me, how would you write it?” 

“Write what?” 

“This letter.” 

“I’d say, ‘Dear Sir....’ ” 

“Must it be dear sir?” 

“Certainly. Hut I don’t know, pci haps. . ..” 

“Never mind. Go on!” 

“‘Dear Sir, I am soiry I....’ On second thought no, 
you need make no excuses. The fact itself will justify 
everything; wiite it simply: ‘I am wiiting to you. Forgive 
me my impatience, but for a whole year i*ow I have lived 
in hopes of happiness. Am I to blame that now I cannot 
bear a day of doubt? You have come back, you may have 
changed your mind. In that case this letter will tell you 
that I neither repine nor judge you. I do not judge you 
because 1 have no power over your heait—such is my fate! 

“ ‘You arc a man of honour. You will neither smile nor 
be annoyed with my impatient lines. You will remember 
that the one who is writing them is a poor, lonely girl, 
who has no one to guide or advise her; one who has never 
been able to master her heart. But forgive the doubt that 
for a single moment crept into my soul. You arc incapable 
of hurting, even in your thoughts, the one who loved you 
so and loves you still.’ ” 

“Yes, yes, it’s exactly the way I thought it should be,” 
Nastenka cried, and her eyes shone with joy. “Oh you 
have dispelled my doubts, it’s God Himself who sent you 
to me! Thank you! Thank you!” 

“For what—for having been sent to you by God Him¬ 
self?” I said, looking in delight at her joyful face. 

“Yes, if only for that.” 

“Ah Nastenka! Sometimes, you know, we’re grateful to 


WHITE NIGHTS 


185 


some people for merely living in the same world with us. 
I’m grateful to you because we rame to know each other, 
because foi the rest of my life now I shall remember you!” 

“Enough, enough! And now, listen to what I have to 
s.ty: we had arranged it between us that as soon as he 
came back he’d let me know at once, by leaving a letter 
for me with some friends of mine, good, simple people, 
who know nothing at all about this; or, if he were unable 
to write to me, foi you can’t always sav everything in a 
letter, he'd come here the very day of his return at ten 
o’clock shaip, to this spot wheie k had made our ren¬ 
dezvous. I know he has arrived, but it’s three days now 
and he has neitlici come himself, noi It ft a letter for me. 
It’s quite impossible for me to leave Grandmama timing 
the day. Will you then go to these good people I te’d vou 
about tomonow and leave my letter with them 3 They’ll 
send it on, and if theie is an answer, you are to biing it 
lieie youisdf at ten o'clock.” 

“But the letttr! The letter! You must wiite the lettei 
fust, \ou know! It won’t be until the day altci tomonow 
then.” 

“The letter. ..” said Nastenka in sonic confusion Vhv 
. . the letter....” 

She did not finish. At first she turned away from me, 
then she blushed like a rose and, suddenly, 1 fell the letter 
in mv hand, evidently wiitten long ago, all icady, ad¬ 
dle ssed and scaled. \ wisp of niemoiy, tender and deli¬ 
cate, flitted through my mind. 

“Ro—Ro, si—si, na—na,” I began. 

“Rosina!” we sang togetlo r, I—all but hugging her in 
my joy, atnl she--blushing t< the roots of fiei hr it, laugh¬ 
ing through the tears which glistened like tiny pcails on 
her blark eyelashes 

“Enough, enough! Good-bye, good-bye now 1 ” she said 
hastily. “Here is the letter, and hen- is the adebrs' wheie 
you’re to take it. Good-bye till tomoirow!” 

She pressed my hands wa ’"ly, nodded liu head and 
flew like an airow into her alleyway. 1 temamed where 1 
was for a long time following her with my eyes 

“Till tomonow 1 Till tomorrow!” raced thiough my 
mind, when she had disappeared from view. 




186 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


THIRD NIGHT 

This was a rainy and doleful day, witli never a glim¬ 
mer of light, a day like my lonely old age will be. Strange 
thoughts are eiowding in on me, feelings so obscuie, piob- 
lems so vague arc thronging my mind, and yet I some¬ 
how have not the strength or wish to give them clarity. 
No, it is not for me to solve all this! 

We shall not meet tonight. Clouds had begun to gather 
in the skv and a mist had risen when we said good-bye to 
each othei last night. 1 said the weather would be bad 
tomorrow; she made no reply, she did not want to disap¬ 
point herself: for her the day would be clear and blight, 
without the llimsicst cloud to overshadow hei happiness. 

“If it rains we shall not see ea<h other,” she had said. 
“I shall not come.” 

I thought she wouldn’t even have noticed today’s lain, 
and vet she had not come 

Last nieht we had 0111 third rendezvous, our third white 
nieht.... 

It is lemarhabh, liowewi, what beauty one attains 
through happiness and jo} 1 How one’s heart brims over 
with lose! 'ton feel \ou want to pout out all your love 
into another heart, vou want everything about you to te- 
sound with gaiety and laughter. And joy—how contagi¬ 
ous it is> Last night there had been such tenderness in her 
woids, such kindness in her hcait. She was so sweet to 
me, so consider at< of my feelings, she gave me hope and 
heart in such caressing tones! Oh what a world of co¬ 
quetry, inspired by her happiness! And I ... I thought 
that it was genuine, I thought that she. . .. 

But good God, how could 1 have thought iH How could 
1 have been so blind when everything belonged to another 
already, when nothing was mine; when her very tender¬ 
ness, hci solicitude, hei lose—ye», even her love for me— 
was nothing hut hei delight in the coming rendezvous 
with the other one, hci eagerness to shaic her happiness 
with me.. Because she did frown, she did glow fright¬ 
ened and timid when he tailed to come, when we had 
waited for him in vain. All her movement,, all her words 
became less light, less playful and gay. And, strangely, 




WHITE NIGHTS 


187 


she redoubled her attentions to me, as if she instinctively 
wanted to lavish on me that which she herself was hop¬ 
ing for and which she dreaded to think might not come 
true. My Nastenka grew so frightened and perplexed that 
I believe she finally understood I loved her and took pity 
on my poor heart. Thus, when we ourselves are unhappy, 
we are more sensitive to the unhappiness of others; feeling 
then is not destroyed in us but concentrated rather.... 

I went to her with a full heart, eager for the hour of 
the rendezvous to arrive. I had no premonition then of 
what I should be feeling now. I had no premonition that it 
would end thus. She was radiant with joy, she was await¬ 
ing his reply. He himself was to be her reply. He was 
to come, to come running at her call. She was there a full 
hour before I was. Everything amused her at first, she 
laughed at every word I said. 

I was about to tell her what was in my heart, but did 
not. 

“D’you know why I’m so delighted?” she said. “Why 
I’m so delighted with you? Why I love you so today?” 

“No, why?” I asked, and my heart jumped. 

“I love you so because you have not fallen in Jove with 
me. Why, anyone else in your place would have pestered 
me and worried me, would have moped and sighed, and 
you are so nice!” 

At this she crushed my hand so hard 1 almost cried out. 
She laughed. 

“What a wonderful friend you arc!” she said \ety 
gravely a minute later. “Why, God Himsell has sent you to 
me. Just think, what would have become of me if you 
hadn’t been with me now? You are so unselfish! Your 
love for me is so generous! We shall be great friends after 
I am married, greater friends than if we were brother and 
sister. I shall love you almost as much as him.” 

For a moment I felt so dreadfullv sad; but something 
not unlike laughter was stirring in my heart. 

“You’re in a fit,” I said, “you’re frightened, you think 
he will not come.” 

“Heavens, no!” she replied. “Were I less happy I be¬ 
lieve I could have cried now from your reproaches and 
your lack of faith. However, you’ve given me food for 




188 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


days of thought, but I shall think about it later, and now 
I confess to you that what you said is true. Yes, it is. I’m 
all upset somehow, I’m all anticipation and my feelings 
are somehow too vulnerable. But enough, let us leave our 
feelings aside.” 

The sound of footsteps startled us: a man emerged from 
the gloom and tame towaids us. We both trembled: she 
almost cried out. I dropped her hand and made as if to 
leave her. But we were wrong, it was not he. 

“What arc you afraid of? Why did you diop my hand?” 
she asked, and gave me her hand again. “Well then, why 
not? Well meet him together. I want him to see how 
much we love one another.” 

“flow much we love one another!” I cried. 

“Oh Nastenka, oh Nastenka!” 1 thought. “How much 
that one word means' Love like this weighs upon the spirit 
heavilv and thills the heart. Your hand is cool and mine 
is hot like fire Oh Nastenka, how blind you arc! . . Oh 
how intolerable a happy person is at times! But I could 
not be anqiv with you!” 

At last 1 could contain my feelings no longer. 

“Nastenka!” I tried ‘I)o von know what I have been 
through sinte last . ght r ’” 

“No, what'* 'Fell me quickly! Whv didn’t sou sav any¬ 
thing untrl now' ’ 

“To begin with, Nastenka. after I had turiicd cut all 
voui errands, dtliveied the lcttei and been to your kind 
It lends. I cairn, home aftei that 1 came back home and 
n ent to sleep ” 

“Is that all"'” she interrupted me laughingly. 

1 Yes, almost all.” I replied with an cffoil. foi stupid 
tears were welling up in my eyes. “I awoke an hour he¬ 
lm e our rendezvous, but I did not seem to have slept ar 
all 1 do not under stand exactlv what it was 1 came here 
to tell vou all about it, to tell you that time had seemed 
to stop for me, that fionr that moment on one lecling 
alone, one sensation would have to remain with me for 
ever aftu, that the moment would have to last an eter¬ 
nity, as if all life had stopped foi me. When I awoke 
1 thought 1 was remembering a melody that T knew long 
ago, something sweet, once heard somewnere and then 



WHITE NIGHTS 


189 


forgotten. It seemed to me that all my life it had been 
striving to burst forth from my heart and only now....” 

“Oh good heavens! Good heavens!” Nastenka broke in. 
“What is all this about? I don’t understand a word you’re 
saying!” 

“Ah Nastenka! I so wanted to try and make you feel 
this strange sensation...” 1 began miserably in a voice 
which still held a particle of hope, though only a very 
tiny one. 

“Hush, don’t go on,” she said, for in a flash she under¬ 
stood all, the clever girl! 

All at once she became rather unusually talkative, gay, 
and playful. She took my arm, she laughed and tried to 
make me laugh as well, and every word I uttered in my 
confusion brought long peals of laughter from her. I was 
getting angry and, abruptly, she changed to a flirtatious 
tone. 

“D’you know,” she said, “it does vex me a little that 
you have not fallen in love with me. Puzzle a woman’s 
heart out after this! But anyway. Mister Adamant, you 
cannot but praise me for my frankness. I tell you every¬ 
thing, everything, no matter how silly the thought that 
comes into my head!” 

“Listen! Gan it be eleven?” I said, listening to the rhyth¬ 
mic booming of the bell in the town tower far away. She 
broke off her laughter, suddenly lapsing into silence, and 
began to count the strokes. 

“Yes, it is eleven,” she brought out at last in a timid 
and quavering voice. 

I instantly felt sorry I had frightened her and had made 
her count the hours, and I cursed myself for my fit of 
malice. Her plight saddened me and I did not know how 
to atone for my sin. I began to console her, to invent ex¬ 
cuses for him, to try and prove to her that his failure to 
come was justified. There was no one easier to convince 
than Nastenka at a moment like this, or, rather, I should 
say that at a moment like this anyone is apt to listen 
gladly to any sort of consolation, and is extremely relieved 
if there is the faintest shadow of an excuse to be found. 

“It’s really funny, you know,” I said, warming to my 
subject more and more, and glorying in the extraordinary 




190 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


lucidity of my arguments. “He couldn’t have possibly 
come! You've deceived and confused me, too, Nastenka, 
so much so that I've mixed up all the time factors. Just 
think a moment- the letter could have hardly reached him 
yet; supposing he can’t come, supposing he’s writing a 
reply, but then you wouldn’t get it till tomorrow! I’ll go 
and fetch it as early as can be tomorrow, and I’ll let you 
know at once. Try to imagine the thousands of unexpect¬ 
ed things that could have happened: what if he wasn’t 
in when your letter arrived, and it may be that he hasn’t 
even read it yet! After all, anything may have happened.” 

“Of course, of course!” Nastenka replied. “I never 
thought of it, 1 dare say anything may have happened.’’ 
she went on in a most compliant tone which was marred, 
however, by a false note struck by some vague and con¬ 
trary thought of hers. “Now this is what you must do,” 
she said, “go there as early as you can tomorrow and if 
you find an answer, let me know at once. You know where 
J live, don’t vou?” And she told me her address again. 

And then she suddenly became so sweet to me, so tender. 
She appeared to be listening intently to all J was saying 
to hei, but when 1 put a direct question to her, she made 
no reply and turned her face away from me in embarrass¬ 
ment. I looked into her eyes—yes, that was it, she was cry¬ 
ing. 

“Oh dear me, dear me! What a baby you are! What 
childishness! Come now!” 

She tried to smile, to pull hei self together, but her chin 
quivered and her bosom still heaved. 

“It's you I’m thinking of,” she said after a pause. 
“You're so good, and only if my heart were made of stone 
would I be incapable of feeling it. D’you know what has 
occurred to me just now? I was comparing the two of 
you. Why isn’t he—you? Why is he not like you? You 
are better than he is, even though I do love him more.” 

I made no reply at all. She seemed to be expecting me 
to say something. 

“It may be, of course, that I do not quite understand 
him yet, that 1 do not know him well enough. You see, 
I think I’ve always been afraid of him, he was always so 
serious, so sort of proud. Of course I know he only looks 



WHITE NIGHTS 


191 


like that, there’s more tenderness in his heart than in 
mine. I remember the way he looked at me that time I 
came to him with my bundle. But still, 1 think I have too 
much respect for him and that sounds as if we weren’t 
equals, doesn’t it?” 

“No, Nastenka, no!” I replied. “It means that you love 
him more than anything in the world, and more than you 
love yourself.” 

“Yes, I suppose that’s it,” the simple-hearted girl 
agreed. “But you know what occurred to me now? Only 
this has nothing to do with him at all. I’m speaking gene¬ 
rally: it has been on my mind for a long time. Now why 
can’t we all be brothers? Why do even the best of people 
seem to be keeping something back, something secret from 
the others? Why not just put into words whatever you 
have in your heart, if you know you mean it? Yet every¬ 
one tries to look more forbidding than he really is, as 
though afraid it would be an insult to his feelings if they 
were displayed too soon.” 

“Ah Nastenka, it’s true what you are saying, but there 
are many different reasons for it,” I put in, curbing my 
own feelings more than ever at that moment. 

“No, no,” she cried, profoundly moved, “you, for one, 
are not like the others. I really don’t know how best to tell 
you what I feel, but it seems to me that you, for one ... 
now, for instance ... it seems to me that you are sacrific¬ 
ing something for me,” she added softly with a fleeting 
glance at me. “You must forgive my saying this to you, 
I am but a simple girl, I have not seen much of the world 
yet, and indeed I don’t know how to say things some¬ 
times,” she said in a voice trembling with some secret 
emotion, which she tried to conceal with a smile. “But I 
just wanted to tell you how grateful I am to you, that 
I can feel all this too. Oh may you be blessed with hap¬ 
piness for this! And as for all those things you told me 
about your dreamer the other day, none of it is true, that 
is, I mean, it has nothing to do with you at all. You are 
recovering, you really are quite different from youi de¬ 
scription of yourself. If ever you come to love someone. I 
wish you every happiness with her. There’s nothing I can 
wish her, for she will indeed be happy with you. 1 know. 




192 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


I’m a woman myself, and you must believe me if I say 
so.*’ 

She fell silent and pressed my hand warmly. In my ex¬ 
citement I could not say anything either. Several mi¬ 
nutes passed. 

“It’s obvious he will not come tonight,” she said at 
last, lifting her head. “It’s late.” 

“lie’ll come tomorrow,” I said in a most firm and con¬ 
vincing tone of voice. 

“Yes,” she added, brightening. “I can see it myself 
now—he’ll only come tomorrow. Well, good-bye! Till 
tomorrow! If it rains I may not come. But the day after 
tomorrow 1 will, I’ll come for certain, no matter what; 
and you be sure to come; I want you to, I’ll tell you every¬ 
thing.” 

And as we were parting, she gave me her hand and 
said, looking at me candidly: 

"We shall always be together now, shan’t we?” 

Oh Nastenka, Nastenka! If you only knew how lonely 
I am now! 

When the clock struck nine I could bea* my room no 
longer. I dressed and went out in spite of the rain. I went 
there and sat on our bench. I started down her alleyway, 
but l felt ashamed and came back without so much as a 
glance at her windows, turning away before I reached her 
home. I came back to my room in such despair as I had 
nevci known before. What a wet and dreary day! I 
would have wandered there all night if it hadn’t been 
lor the weather. 

But till tomouow! Till tomorrow! Tomorrow she’ll tell 
me everything. 

There was no letter today. But then there shouldn’t 
have been. They arc together now'. 

FOURTH NIGHT 

Oh God, the way it all ended! The end of it all! 

I came at nine o’clock. She was already there. I saw 
her when I was still some distance away: she stood lean¬ 
ing against the railing as on that first night, and she did 
not hear me approach her. 



WIHTK NIGHTS 


t*l3 


“Nastcnka!” I called out, lighting down inv cx<ite- 
ment with an effort. 

She turned round promptly. 

‘■Well!’' she said. ‘ Clive it to me quickly!" 

I stood looking at her in bewildeimenl. 

"Well, where’s the letter? Have you brought the let¬ 
ter?'’ she repeated, clutching at the railing with one hand. 

“No, 1 have no letter,” l said at last. “Haven’t you seen 
him yet?” 

She turned dreadfully pale and stared at me fixedly for 
a long time. I had shattered her last hope. 

“Oh well, let him be,” she brought out at last in a 
breaking voice. “Let him be, if he wants to leave me like 
this.” 

She lowered her eyes, then she wanted to look into 
mine, but could not. She struggled to master her emotion 
a few minutes longei and then, abruptly, she turned aw a v 
and, leaning on the tailing, burst into tears. 

“Come, come,” l began, but 1 had not the strength to 
go on as 1 looked at her, and then what was there to say? 

“Don’t console me,” she said through her tears. “Don’t 
talk to me about him, don’t tell me he’ll come, don’t tell 
me lie has not abandoned me so ctucll}, so inhumanly. 
But why? Why? Surely there was nothing in that lettc? 
ol mine, that wretched letter, was then ?” 

She broke off, choking with sobs; my heait was wtuitg 
as l watched her. 

“Oh how inhumanly ciuel of him!” she htgan again. 
“And not a line, not a single line! At least he could haw 
wiitten that he did not want me any longer, that he was 
casting me off; but not a line in three whole days! How 
easy he finds it to insult and hurt a poor, defenceless girl, 
whose only fault is that she loves him! Oh what 1 have 
suffered in those three days! Oh my God, oh my God! 
When I remember that it was I who came to him that 
first time, that I humbled myself before him, weeping and 
begging him lor love, if only for a tiny drop of love! And 
after all that!... Listen, ” she turned to me and her black 
eyes flashed, “it isn’t so! It can't be so! It’s absurd! One 
of us has made a mistake, either you or I; perhaps he 
hasn’t received my lettei yet? Perhaps he still knows 



194 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


nothing about it? Because how can one—tell me for 
heaven’s sake, judge for yourself, explain it to me for 
I cannot understand it—how can one treat anyone so 
brutally, so harshly as he has treated me? Not a single 
word! E-'en the most wretched of the wretched is shown 
more compassion. Perhaps he’s heard something about 
me, perhaps someone’s carried tales to him about me?” she 
cried, turning to me with her last question. “What do you 
think?” 

“Look here, Nastenka, I’ll go and speak to him tomor¬ 
row on your behalf.” 

“And then?” 

“I’ll ask him about everything. I’ll tell him all.” 

“And what then?” 

“You’ll write him a letter. Do not say no, Nastenka, 
don’t say no. I shall make him respect your gesture, he’ll 
learn everything and if....” 

“No, my friend, no,” she broke in. “Enough! Not a 
word, not one word from me, not a line—enough! I do not 
know him, I do not love him any more, I shall forget 
him...” she could not go on. 

“Hush now, compose yourself, come sit down here, Nas¬ 
tenka!” I said as I helped her to the bench. 

“But I am composed. Don’t worry. It’s nothing. These 
are just tears, they’ll dry. Did you think I was going to 
end my life, to jump in the river?” 

My heart was wrung; I wanted to speak but could not 
utter a word. 

“Tell me,” she continued, taking my hand in hers. “You 
would not have done this, would you? You would not have 
abandoned the one who came to you herself, you would 
not have flung into her face your brazen contempt for 
her poor, foolish heart? Wouldn’t you have taken care of 
her? Wouldn’t you have realised that she had been alone, 
that she did not know how it began, that she had not 
knowii how to protect herself from her love for you, that 
she was not to blame, that she was not at fault ... that 
she had done nothing wrong! Oh God! Oh dear God!” 

“Nastenka!” I cried, no longer master of my feelings. 
“Nastenka! You are tormenting me! You are breaking my 
heart, you are killing me, Nastenka! I cannot remain si- 




WHITE NIGHTS 


195 


lent! I must speak, I must at last lay baie befoic you all 
that is overwhelming my heart!” 

1 lose from the bench as I said it. She took my hand 
and looked at me in wonder. 

“What is it?” she spoke at last. 

' Nastenka,” 1 said with resolution, “listen to me, Nas- 
tenka! What I am about to tell you is nothing but a 
loolish, hopeless dream, it’s all nonsensical. I know that 
it can never come true, but I cannot keep silent now. In 
the name of that which is making you suffer I entreat 
V ou to forgive me beforehand.” 

“But what is it?” she said, her eyes diy and fastened 
on mine with a strange light of curiosity and surprise in 
them. “What is it, what is the matter?” 

“I know it’s hopeless, but I love you, Nastenka! Theic 
you are! I’ve said it all now!” I said with a hopeless ges¬ 
ture 

“After this it’s for you to judge whether youxran go on 
talking to me the way you have done, and moieo\ei, 
whether you can listen to what 1 am about to say to 

)OU.” 

“But why not?” Nastenka interrupted me. “What of 
it? Of course I've always known you cared foi me, but 
I kept fancying you loved me differently, not in that way. 
Oh dear, oh dear!” 

“It was like that at first, Nastenka, but now ... now 
1 feel just as you felt when you went to him with >oui 
bundle. Worse than you felt, Nastenka, because he loved 
no other, and you do.” 

“What is it you’ie saying to me? I don’t understand 
you at all. But listen, what is this for, or rather net what 
for, but why did you ... and so suddenly ... heavens! 
I’m talking nonsense! But you....” 

And Nastenka grew utterly confused. Hci cheeks flushed 
crimson, and she modestly averted her gaze. 

“But what can I do, Nastenka, what can I do? I am at 
fault, I took ill advantage.... But no, I’m not, Nastenka: 
I can feel it, I can hear it, for my heart tells me I am 
right, for I could never hurt you or insult you! I was youi 
friend; well, I’m still your friend- I have not betrayed a 
trust. See the tears flowing down my face, Nastenka? Let 




196 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


them flow, let them, they do no harm! They’ll dry, Nas- 
tenka.” 

“Oh sit down, do sit down,’’ she said, pulling me down 
beside her. “Oh dear, oh dear!” 

“No, Nastcnka, 1 shall not sit down; 1 cannot remain 
here any longer, you are not to see me any more; I’ll say 
everything and go. I only wanted to tell you that you 
would never have learned of my love. I would have kept 
my secret. I would never have thought of tormenting you 
at a moment like this with my selfishness. But it was more 
than I could bear; you started speaking of it yourself, it’s 
your fault, you are to blame for everything, and not I. 
You cannot drive me away from you.” 

“But no, I’m not driving you away, no!” Nastenka said, 
doing her best to hide her confusion, the poor dear. 

“You will not drive me away? No? And I was going 
to flee from you myself. 1 shall go away, but before I do 
1 11 tell you everything, because when you were talking to 
me just now I could hardly contain myself, and when you 
were crying and tormenting yourself with |.he thought that 
you, well ... that you (forgive me mentioning it, Nas- 
teuka) weie being cast off, that your love was being 
scoi ned, I felt, I knew' there was so much love in my heart 
for you, Nastcnka, so much love! And it grieved me 
bitterly that 1 could not help you with this love of mine 
... it broke my heart and I, I could not hold my silence, 
1 had to speak, Nastcnka, I had to speak!” 

“Yes, go on, speak to me, do speak to me like this!” 
Nastenka said with an indefinable emotion. “To you it 
may seem strange to hear me say this ... but speak, speak! 
I’ll tell you afterwards! I’ll tell you everything!” 

“You are sorry for me, Nastenka, you’re just sorry for 
me, my little friend! Well, what’s done is done! You 
can’t unsay what has been said. Isn’t it so? You know 
everything now. So let this be our starting point. Very 
well, everything is splendid now! But do hear me out. 
When you were sitting there and crying, I thought to 
myself (do let me say what it was I thought), I thought 
that (well, of course it could never be, Nastenka), I 
thought that you ... I thought that somehow you, well, 
in quite a detached sort of way, did not love him any 



WHITE NIGHTS 


197 


more. And then—I was thinking about this last night, 
and the night before last, too, Nastenka—and then I’d 
do something, I would definitely do something to make 
jou love me; you did tell me, you told me yourself, Nas¬ 
tenka, that you had almost come to love me. Well then, 
what was I going to say? Oh well, I think I’ve said it all: 
all I could tell you now is what it would have been if 
ever you loved me—only this and nothing more! Listen 
then, my dear friend—for after all you are my friend— 
I’m an ordinary man, of course. I’m poor and so insigni- 
licant, but that’s not the point (I seem to be talking out 
of turn, but it's my shyness, Nastenka). the thing is that 
I’d love you so. I’d love vou so that you would never feel 
the burden of my love in any way, even if you still cared 
and went on caiing for the other man, whom 1 do not 
know. All you would ever be conscious of. all vou would 
ever feel would be a heart beating constantly beside you, 
a grateful, ardent heart, that would belong to you for 
ever. Oh Nastenka! Nastenka! What have vou done to 
me!” 

“Please don’t cry, I don’t want you to ciy,” said Na 
stenka, quickly rising from the bench, “dome, get up 
come with me, don’t weep now, don't weep,” she said, 
and wiped my tears with her handkerchief. “Well, come 
along now, I may have something to tell you. Now that 
he's abandoned me, now that he’s foi gotten me, though I 
love him still (I do not wish to deceive you) ... but tell 
me, answer me. If, for instance, if I came to love you, 
that is, if only.... Oh my friend, my friend! When I 
remember, when I think of the way 1 wounded vou when 
I laughed at your love, when I praised you for rot fall¬ 
ing in love with me! Why didn't 1 foresee it, whv didn't 
I? How foolish I must have been, but . .. well, I've decid¬ 
ed, I’ll tell you everything.” 

“Wait, Nastenka, I think I should leave you in peace 
and go. I’m only tormenting you. Your conscience has be¬ 
gun tenvorry you because you laughed at me. and I do 
not wish it, no, I do not wish it, you have your own soi- 
row to bear ... it’s my fault of course, Nastenka, good¬ 
bye!” 

“Stop, listen to me; could you wait?” 




198 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“Wait—what for?” 

“I love him, but it will pass, it must pass, it cannot help 
passing; it’s passing now, I can feel it ... who knows, 
perhaps it will be over this very night, because I hate 
him, because he treated me with scorn whereas you wept 
with me, you love me and that is why you have not cast 
me off as he has done, he never loved me, and then because 
I love you too ... yes, I do! 1 love you as you love me! I 
told you so before, you know I did—I love you because 
you are better than he is, because you are more honour¬ 
able, because, because_” 

Poor Nastenka, she was so overwhelmed, she could not 
go on, she leaned her head against my shoulder, then 
dropped it on my breast and wept disconsolately. I tried 
to comfort her, to soothe her, but she could not check her 
tears; she kept pressing my hand and repeating through 
her sobs, “One moment, one moment, I’ll stop now! I 
want to tell you ... do not think these tears mean any¬ 
thing—I’m just crying from weakness, it’ll be over in a 
moment.” At last her sobbing ceased, sh^ dried her tears 
and we walked on. I was about to speak, but she begged 
me to wait. We both lapsed into silence. At last she col¬ 
lected herself and began: 

“Now then, please do not think that I am so inconstant 
and flighty in my affections,” she said in a weak and shaky 
voice but with a sudden ring of something that plunged 
straight into my heart and throbbed there with a delicious 
ache. “Please do not think that I am capable of forgetting 
so easily and quickly, or of betraying.... I loved him for 
a whole year, and I swear to God that never, even in my 
thoughts, was I untrue to him. He scorned my loyalty, he 
mocked me—let him be! But he has wounded me, he has 
insulted my love. I ... 1 do riot love him, for I can only 
love someone who is generous, understanding, and honour¬ 
able, for this is what I’m like myself, and he is unworthy 
of me— well, let him be! He acted well, it would have 
been much worse if I were to be disappointed in him'after- 

mite, Yfowi \ Wt \s> Vm. Vst VsakV. — 

j> is att mr M Vv^luend;' she 

went on, closing' her fingers around mine, who knov,s, 
perhaps this very love of mine was a mirage, a play of 




WHITE NIGHTS 


199 


my imagination, perhaps it all began with naughtiness 
and nonsense because I was never allowed out of Grand - 
mama’s sight? Perhaps it is not him that 1 should love, 
perhaps another, a different man, one who would pity me 

and ... and_No, let’s leave it, let’s leave it,” Nasten- 

ka cut herself short abruptly, breathless with excitement 
“I only wanted to say ... I wanted to tell you that if, in 
spite of my loving him (no, my having loved him), if, in 
spite of this, you say once more ... if you feel that voui 
love is so great it can really drive the other from my 

heart_if you want to take pity on me, if you do not 

wish to abandon me to my fate, alone, disconsolate, de¬ 
prived of hope, if you want to love me for ever the way 
you love me now, I swear that my gratitude ... that my 
love will be worthy of yours. Will you take my hand, 
after this?” 

“Nastenka!” I cried, my sobs choking me. “Nastenka 1 
Oh Nastenka!” 

“Enough, enough! It’s enough, it’s quite enough!” she 
spoke with an effort. “Everything has been said now, 
hasn’t it? You are happy now, and so am I; Jiot anothei 
word about it, not just yet, have mercy on me!... Do talk 
of something else, for heaven’s sake!” 

“Yes, Nastenka, of course! Enough of this. I’m happv 
now, I ... yes, let us talk of something else, Nastenka let 
us find another topic quickly, yes! I’m ready. . 

We couldn’t find anything to talk about, we laughed, 
wc ciied, we said a thousand senseless, disconnected woids; 
we walked up and down the embankment, or we suddenly 
letraced our steps and started across the load, we stopped 
and crossed back to the railing again; we weic like two 
children. 

“I live all by myself now, but tomonow .” I began 
“You know I’m poor, of course, Nastenka, all l have is 
a thousand two hundred a year, but that doesn’t mat¬ 
ter. ...” 

“Ofjpurse it doesn’t, and then Grandmama has her 
pension; she won’t be a burden to us. We must take Grand- 
manva” 

“We must take Grandmama, of couise ... but then 
there’s Matryona....” 




200 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“Oh yes, we’ve got our Fyokla, too!” 

“Matryona is a good soul, her only fault is she has no 
imagination, no imagination whatsoever, Nastenka, but 
that doesn’t matter.” 

“Never mind, they can both stay together, but you must 
move over to our house tomorrow.” 

“What do you mean? To your house? Very well. I’m 
willing.” 

“Yes, you’ll lodge with us. We’ve got an attic, it’s va¬ 
cant now. We had an old lady, a gentlewoman, staying 
with us, but now she’s moved, and Grandmama, I know, 
wants to let it to a young man. I said, ‘Why a young mem?’ 
and she said, ‘Simply because I’m getting on, but don’t you 
imagine I’m trying to make a match for you, Nastenka! 
And so I knew at once that that was why.” 

“Ah Nastenka!” 

And we both began to laugh. 

“Stop now, stop! And where do you live?” she asked. “I 
foigot to ask you.” 

“Over there, near the bridge, in Barannikov’s house.” 
“It’s a gr|pt big house, isn’t it?” 

“Yes, it’s a great big house.” 

“Oh I know, it’s a fine house, but do leave it and move 
over to our place as soon as you can.” 

“As soon as it’s morning Nastenka, as soon as it’s to¬ 
morrow. I owe a bit of rent, but it doesn’t matter. My 
salary is due shortly.” 

“You know, I might give lessons: that is, I’ll study first 
and then I’ll give lessons.” 

“Why, that’s splendid ... and I’ll be getting my gratuity 
soon, Nastenka.” 

“So you will be my lodger tomorrow.” 

“Yes, and we’ll go to the Barber of Seville because it’ll 
soon be on again.” 

“Yes, let’s,” Nastenka said smiling. “But no, I’d rather 
we went to something else and not the Barber .” 

“Very well, let it be something else; that would bp better 
of course, I’m sorry it never occurred to me.” 

Talking in this strain we wandered up and down as 
though we were intoxicated, in a daze it seemed, not know¬ 
ing what was happening to us. We’d come to a spot and 



WHITE NIGHTS 


201 


pause there, talking for a long time, or we’d start off walk¬ 
ing again and go heaven knows where, we’d laugh again, 
we’d weep again. Or Nastenka would suddenly want to go 
home, I dared not keep her but I would want to take her 
to her very doorstep; off we’d go, and then to our surprise, 
a quarter of an hour later, we’d find ourselves on the em¬ 
bankment again, sitting on our bench. Or suddenly she’d 
sigh and tears would glisten in her eyes again, and I’d 
lose heart, my blood would freeze. But the next moment 
she would be squeezing my hand, pulling me along with* 
her, to walk again, to chat and talk. 

‘It’s time now, it's icallv tune I went home, it must he 
veiy late,” Nastenka said at last. “We’ve been behaving 
like childicn long enough.” 

fc Tine, Nastenka, but I'll never fall asleep now, I shan’t 
go home at all.” 

“1 don’t think I’ll bv. able to sleep eith< r, but do take me 
home.” 

“Of c > use!” 

“But this time, we leally must go home.' 

“Of couise we will.” 

“Promised Because offer all, 1 must return home some 
time, you know." 

“I piomise,” I lepJicd, laughing. 

“Well, come along.” 

“Let us go.” 

“Look at the sky. Nastenka, look! It will be a wondejlnl 
day tomorrow; look at the moon, look how blue the sky 
is! Look—that yellow cloud over there is creeping over 
the moon, look, look! But no, it has moved on. Look now, 
look!'’ 

But Nastenka was not looking at the ( loud, she stood 
rooted to the spot and said nothing; and then I felt hri 
pressing timidly against me. I felt hci hand tremble in 
mine; I looked at her. She leaned hardei on iny arm. 

A young man walked past us. He stopped abrupt!}, 
peered at us, and walked on. My heart sank. 

“Nastenka,” I said softly, “who ; .s it, Nastenka:*” 

“It’s he,” she whispered, clinging ever closer to me, ever 
more tremulously. My knees all but gave way. 

“Nastenka! Nastenka! It’s you!” we heard behind us, 

CPtafiJta 9Cumat Ulose 
M. A- ( Triple ) B.T , 

Dims*g*r Lake Compound 

A 0 ai tala. Tiipura (West). 



202 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


and in the same instant the young man made a few steps 
towards us. 

Good God, the cry, the start she gave! The way she broke 
away from my arms and flew to him.... I stood and 
watched them utterly crushed. But she had barely given 
him her hand, had barely flung herself into his arms, 
when suddenly she turned to me, she was beside me again 
as swift as lightning, as the wind, and before I could 
gather my wits together, she had thrown her arms round 
my neck and kissed me hard and warmly. Then, without 
a word to me, she rushed to him again, took his hands 
in hers and drew him away with her. 

I stood for a long time, watching them go. At last they 
both disappeared from view. 


MORNING 

Morning marked the end of my nights. It was a miser¬ 
able day. Rain was falling, pattering sadly on my window; 
my little room was dark; the sky was overc&st. My head 
ached and reeled; fever was creeping up my limbs. 

“Here’s a letter for you, sir, the postman’s brought it, 
come through the post it has,” Matryona said, standing 
over me. 

“A letter? Who from?” I cried, jumping up from my 
chair. 

“That 1 wouldn’t know, sir, look and see, perhaps it 
says who it’s from.” 

I broke the seal. It was from her 1 

“Oh forgive me, foigive me,” Nastenka wrote. “I beg 
you on my bended knees to forgive me! I have deceived 
both myself and you. It was a dream, a phantom. My 
heart aches for you so today, forgive me, forgive me.... 

“Do not judge me severely for I have not changed to¬ 
wards you at all; I told you I would love you and I do 
love you, 1 more than love you! Oh God! If I,could 
only love the two of you at once! If only you were he!” 

“If only he were you!” the memory flashed through my 
mind. 

I remembered your own words, Nastenka! 



WHITE NIGHTS 


203 


“What wouldn’t I do for vou now, God knows it's 
true! 1 know you’re sad and hint I have done you an 
injuiy, but you know one soon forgives a grievance >1 
one loves. And you do love me! 

“I thank you! I thank you for this love, for it is im¬ 
printed in my memory like a sweet dream which stav s with 
you long after your awakening; for I shall always re 
member the moment when 3011 , with such biotherly can 
dour, opened your heart to me, and so generously .weepted 
the gift of my own broken heait, to care foi it, to cherish 
it and nurse it back to life. If you foigive me, my me¬ 
mory of you will be hallowed by my eternal giatitude to 
you, a feeling which will never be erased ftotn my heart. 
I shall safeguard this memory, 1 shall lcmain tine to it, 
I shall not betray it, l shall not lie false to my heart, it L 
too constant. Only last night, how quickly it flow bark 
to the one it belonged to for ever. 

“We shall meet, you will come to see us. vou will not 
forsake us, you will be my friend, my hi other always. 
And when you see me you will give me your hand, won’t 
> 011 ? You will give me your hand, you have for-ivni me. 
haven’t you? You do love me as before 1 * 

“Oh, do love me, do not forsake me, foi I love you so 
at this moment, for I am worthy of vour love, 1 want to 
be worthy of your love ... my dear, dear friend’ I am 
to marry him next week He came back, in love with me 
he had never forgotten me. It will not anger >011 that I 
am writing about him. But I want to come to v<>ir with 
him, you will not lefuse him your aiiiction, vdi \<ni' 

“Forgive, remember and love your Nastenka. ’ 

1 read this letter over and over again: 1 v anted to weep 
'I’he letter slipped from m> lingers at last, and I buried 
my face in my hands. 

"Dtaiio. I say, dearie,” Matryona spoke 

“What is it?” 

“Look, I’ve swept all the cobwebs away; it’s fit lor a 
wedding feast or a partye if you’ve a mind lor one, it’s 
that clean.” 

I looked at Matryona. She was still a halt and hearty 
“young"’ old woman, but all of a sudden, 1 don’t know 
why, I fancied she was stopping ami senile, hci eves were 



204 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


lustreless and wrinkles creased her face. I don’t know 
why, but suddenly it seemed to me that my room, too, had 
grown old like Matryona. The ceiling and the walls were 
tarnished, everything had become dingy and the cobwebs 
hung thicker than ever. I don’t know why, but when 1 
looked out of the window, 1 fancied that the house op¬ 
posite had gjown decrepit and dingy as well, that plaster 
had chipped from the pillars, the cornices were black and 
. cracked, and the bright yellow walls were stained and 
piebald. 

Perhaps it was because the ray of sunshine, peeping out 
so unexpectedly, had hidden behind the rain-cloud again, 
that everything seemed to grow dingy before my eyes 
once more; or perhaps it was because the vista of all my 
life to come stretched befoie me so bleakly and so sadly, 
and I saw myself the way 1 am now, exactly fifteen years 
hence, an aged man, in the same old room, as lonely as 
ever, with the same old Matryona, who had not grown 
any blighter with the years 

But that T should brood over my wrongs, Nastenka, 
never! That I should ever mar your pure and blissful 
happiness with a cloud of sorrow, that I should ever bring 
madness into voui heart with a bitter reproach, or wound 
it with secret pangs of conscience and make it contract 
painfully m a moment of rapture, that 1 should ever crush 
a single one of those exquisite lloweis you wove into your 
dark cutis when you walked to the altar with him.... 
Oh never' Nevci 1 fa t your skits be always clear, let your 
sweet smile be biiclit and untroubled, may you for ever 
be blessed for that one moment of bliss and happiness you 
granted anothei, a lonely and grateful heart! 

Good Lord! A whole minute of bliss! Why isn't it 
enough, even for a lifetime■*... 





A FAINT HEART 
A Short Story 





Unclei the same loot, on the same fouith Horn, in the 
same apartment, there lived two young colleagues—Aiha 
dy Ivanovich Nefedevich and Vasya Shumkov.... The 
author naturally feels lie owes the leader an explanation 
why one of the heroes is tailed bv his name and patrony¬ 
mic and the other simply Vasya, ii only so that tins lattu 
lorm should not be dtemed indetoious or unduly familiar 
But then it would be necessary to begin by explaining and 
describing the rank, age, title, office, and even the pecu¬ 
liarities ol the heroes' characteis; and as there aie many 
writers who are wont to begin in just such a manner, the 
author of the present stoiy has resolved to stait with ac¬ 
tum from the very outset, foi the sole pui pose of being dif- 
fuent lioin the others (that is, because of his boundless 
vanity, as some perhaps will say). Flis forewoid thus com¬ 
pleted, he will begin. 

Shumkov came home after five that evening, on New 
Year’s Eve. Arkady Ivanovich, who was lying on his bed, 
woke up and squinted at his friend with half an eve. lie 
saw that Vasya was wearing his perfectly cut civilian 
liock-coat and an immaculate shirt-front. This, of couise, 
amazed him. ‘‘Now where could Vasya have been, dressed 
up like that? And he didn’t come home for dinner, either!” 
Shumkov had, in the meantime, lighted a candle, and 
Arkady Ivanovich guessed at once that his fiicnd was go 
ing to wake him up, accidentally, as it were. Indeed, Vasya 
cleared his throat twice, walked up and down the 100 m 
once or twice, and finally, as he stopped in the corner by 
the stove to fill his pipe, he let it slip through his fingeis 
on the floor, by sheer accident of course. Arkady Ivano¬ 
vich chuckled inwardly. 

‘'Vasya, you’ve been wily enough!” 



208 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“You’re not asleep, Arkasha?” 

“Really, I can’t tell for certain, but it seems to me that 
I’m not.” 

“Oh Arkasha! Hello, old chap! Well, brother! Well, 
brother! You’ll never guess what I’m about to tell you!” 

“I’m sure I won’t. I say, come here.” 

As if he had been expecting this, Vasya came up at once, 
though he was quite unprepared for any treachery on the 
part of Arkady Ivanovich. The latter gripped his hands 
very deftly, turned him round, pulled him down under 
and began to “strangle” his victim. This, evidently, gave 
Arkady Ivanovich, who loved a joke, an immense amount 
of pleasure. 

“Got you!” he shouted. “Got you!” 

“Arkasha! Arkasha! What are you doing! Let me go, 
for heaven’s sake let me go! I’ll mess up my frock-coat!” 

“I don't care; what do you want a frock-coat for? Why 
are you so ciedulous that you let yourself be caught? 
Speak up, where have you been, where did you dine?” 

“Arkasha, for heaven’s sake, let me go!” 

“Where did you dine?” 

“But that’s just what I want to tell you about!” 

“Well, tell me.” 

“Let me go first.” 

“Oh no, 1 won’t, 1 won’t let you go until you’ve told me.” 

“Arkasha! Arkasha! Don’t you see that I can’t, that it’s 
quite impossible!” cried Vasya, the feeble one, struggling 
to free himself from his foe’s strong clutches. “There are 
certain subjects, you know....” 

“What subjects?” 

“Well the kind that make you lose your dignity if you 
begin to talk of them the way we are now; it can’t be 
done; it will sound funny, and this matter is not funny 
at all, it’s very serious.” 

“Oh bother it if it’s serious! What’ll you think up next? 
Tell me something that’ll make me laugh, that’s what 
you’ve got to tell me; 1 don’t want to hear anything that’s 
serious; what sort of a ftiend would you be then? Answer 
me, what sort of a friend would you be, eh?” 

“Arkasha, I swear I can’t!” 

“None of your excuses.” 



A FAINT HEART 


209 


'I say, Arkasha!” Vasya began, trying with all Ins might 
to put as much dignity as he could into his speech while 
he lay pinned down on the bed. “Aikasha! I think I'll 
tell you, but... 

“Go on!” 

“Well, I’ve proposed!” 

Without another word, Aikady Ivanosich picked Yasva 
up in his arms like a child, in spite of the tact that Vusva 
was not a small man, but rather tall though lean and 
began to walk up and down the room, cariving him with 
gieat case and pietending he was rocking a baby. 

"Sec il 1 don’t swaddle you, you bndegioom von. lit 
kept saying. However, when he saw that Vasya wa 1 - King 
motionless in his arms without utteiing a woul, Aikady 
sobered up at once, realising that he had callied his j >kv 
too far. He put his fiicnd down in the middle ot the loom 
and kissed him on the diet kin a most sinttie and ti mails 
way. 

“You’re not angiy, Vasya!*” 

“Aikasha, listen... 

‘ Make up for New Year.' 

“i don’t mind, you know; but wliv aie \ou so tia/v, 
you scapegrace you! J’ve told you often enough, Aika 
slia, honestly you’ic not being funn\. not funny at all!” 

“Well but you’ie not angiy, are you.’’ 

‘Oh, I don’t mind; who am 1 ever angiy with.* But now 
you’ve really hurt me. don’t you see?” 

“How’ have 1 hurt you? How?” 

“1 was coming to ymu like a friend, with mv he.ui full, 
to unbosom myself to you, to tell you of my happiness.” 

“What happiness? Why don’t you tell me about it then?” 

“That proposed marriage of mine, you know',” Vasya 
leplied with resentment, for he was lealh somewhat in¬ 
fill iated. 

“You! You getting manied! Then ymi meant it’’ Ai- 
kasha roared at the top of his \okr. “No, nally . win, 
how is that? And the way he says it, with teais tieam 
ing from his eyes' Vasya, Vasyuk my dear, my deaust 
boy, don’t cry! You really mean it, do you?’’ and Aikad; 
Ivanovich threw his arms round Vasya again. 

“Now do you understand why l was so upset? Vasya 



210 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


said. “You are kind, you are my true friend, I know it. 
I came to you with my happiness, with this rapture in my 
soul, and suddenly I was forced to confess all the happi¬ 
ness in my heart, all this rapture, while struggling across 
the bed, losing my dignity. You do understand, Arkasha,” 
Vasya continued with a half-laugh, “my position made it 
grotesque; but in a way I did not belong entirely to my¬ 
self at that moment, I had not the right to make light of 
this matter, had 1? It’s a good thing you didn’t ask me 
her name then, I swear I’d sooner have let you kill me 
than answer you!” 

“But Vasya, why didn’t you speak up? You should have 
told me everything earlier, and then I wouldn’t have 
teased,” Arkady Ivanovich cried in genuine despair. 

“Oh come now, come! I just mentioned it. You know 
why I take it all so, don’t you—it’s because I have a kind 
heart. That’s why it makes me so sad that I wasn’t able 
to tell it the way I wanted to, to gladden you, to delight 
you, tell it properly, confess it to you decently. Really, 
Arkasha, I love you so, if it weren’t for you I believe I 
wouldn’t ever marry, or live in this world at all!” 

Arkady Ivanovich, exceedingly sensitive by nature, lis¬ 
tened to Vasya with tears and laughter both. Vasya was 
affected similarly. Once again they hugged each other and 
forgot their differences. 

“Now, how did it happen? Tell me about it, Vasya! 
You must forgive me, old chap, but I’m really stunned, 
absolutely stunned; I’m quite thunderstruck, honestly! 
But no, old chap, no, you’ve made it up, I swear, you’ve 
made it up, you’re fibbing!” Arkady Ivanovich cried and 
peered doubtingly into Vasya’s face, but seeing in it a 
glowing confirmation of his resolve to marry as soon as 
possible, he threw himself upon his bed and started turn¬ 
ing somersaults in his delight, so that the very walls shook. 

“Vasya, come and sit here!” he shouted, his buoyancy 
stilled at last. 

“I really don’t know how to begin, old chap, how shall 
I begin?” 

The two friends looked at each other in happy excite¬ 
ment. 

“Who is she, Vasya?” 




A FAINT HEART 


21 i 


"Artemyev ..uttered Vasya, his voice taint with joy, 

"No-o!” 

"Oh but I used to talk and talk to you about them, and 
then 1 stopped, and you never noticed it. Oh Arkasha, the 
elf ox t I had to make to conceal it from you; but 1 was 
afraid, afraid to put it into words! 1 was a!raid every¬ 
thing would fall through, and I’m in love, you know, Ai- 
kasha! Oh, Lord! Oh, Loid! Now this is what happened,” 
he went on to say, pausing and stammering in his agita¬ 
tion. “She had a fiance a year ago, and all of a sudden 
he was sent off somewhere; 1 knew him too, he’s really 
^ ood riddance. Well then, he stopped writing altogether 
he vanished completely. They waited and waited, wonder¬ 
ing what it could mean. Suddenly, tour months ago, he 
tame back bringing a wife with him and never set foot 
in their house. How rude! How mean! But then there’s 
no one to stand up for them. She wept and wept, poor 
girl, and there I went and fell in love with her . .. how¬ 
ever, I’ve been in love with her for a long time, I’ve al¬ 
ways been in love with her! And so I began to comfort 
hei, I called and called . .. and then, I really don’t know 
how it all came about, but she came to love me too; a 
week ago I felt 1 could contain myself no longci, I burst 
into tears, I wept and told her everything, that is, that I 
loved her—well, everything!... ‘I am ready to love }ou 
too, Vasily Petrovich,’ she said, ‘but I am a poor gill, do not 
play me false; I do not even dare love anyone.’ D’you 
sec, Arkady? D’you see?... We became engaged right 
away; 1 thought and thought, I thought and thought; I 
said, ‘How shall we tell your Mamma?’ And she said, ‘It 
is difficult now, wc must wait a little; she is afraid, she 
may not let me marry you now’; and she cried too. And 
1 . without consulting her, went and blurted it out to the 
old lady today. Lizanka fell on her knees bcfoie her. and 
so did I ... and she gave us her blessing. Arkasha, Ar¬ 
kasha, my dearest friend! We shall all live together. No, 
T shall never part from you for anything in the world!” 

“Vasya, no matter how I try I simply can’t believe it, 
honestly I can’t, I swear. Really, I keep fancying some¬ 
thing. ... Listen, how can it be that you are going to 
marry? How was it I didn’t know, eh? I’ll confess, Vasya, 



212 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


I was thinking of marrying too, old chap; but since you’re 
going to, it doesn’t matter! Well, I hope you’ll be happy, 
very happy!” 

“Oh Arkasha, I have such a light-hearted, such a deli¬ 
cious feeling now!” said Vasya, getting up and pacing 
excitedly up and down the room. “Isn’t it true? Isn’t it 
true? You do feel the same, don’t you? We’ll be poor, of 
course, but we’ll be happy; and it’s not a vain fancy either: 
our happiness is not taken out of a book, we shall really 
be happy, you know!” 

“Vasya, listen, Vasya!” 

“Yes?” Vasya said, stopping in front of Arkady. 

“There’s one thing I’m thinking of, but somehow I’m 
afiaid of bunging it up.... You must forgive me, but 
please dispel my doubts for me. What are you going to 
live on? You know I’m delighted that you are to be mar¬ 
ried, o' course, I’m delighted, I can hardly contain myself, 
but—what are you going to live on, tell me?” 

“Oh goodness gracious, really, Arkasha!” Vasya replied, 
looking at Nefedevich in profound amazement. “What’s 
the matter with you? The old woman Rerself didn’t have 
to think twice when I had put it all clearly to her. How 
do you think they’ve been living? They’ve five hundred 
a year to keep the three of them, you know; that’s all the 
pension they're receiving for the old man. There’s Lizan- 
ka, the old woman and a small brother, whose school fees 
they’re paying out of the same money, see how people 
manage? It’s only capitalists like you and me, you know. 
Why think of it, sometimes if it’s a good year, my income 
runs into as much as seven hundred!” 

“I say, Vasya, please don’t mind, I swear I mean it 
kindly, I’m only thinking how best not to spoil things for 
you, but what seven hundred? It’s only three.” 

“Three! And what about Yulian Mastakovich? Forgot¬ 
ten him, have you?” 

“Yulian Mastakovich indeed! But it’s not a certain 
thing, you know, old chap! It’s not like a fixed salary, 
where every ruble is like a true friend. Of course Yulian 
Mastakovich is, well, a great man, I respect him, I under¬ 
stand him even if his position is so high, and, upon my 
word, 1 like him, because he likes you and pays you for 




A. FAINT HEART 


213 


your work, whereas he could have had a clcik appoint¬ 
ed specially to him, instead of paying you the money, but 
you must see for yourself, Vasya.... And then again, 1 
agree a handwriting as good as yours couldn’t he found 
in the whole of St. Petersburg, I must concede it to you," 
Nefedevich concluded not without enthusiasm, “but what 
if, God forbid, you displeased him, what if he were dis¬ 
satisfied with you, what if his business came to an end, 
what if he took on someone else, why. any mmnbci of 
things might happen! You know, Yulian Mastakovich may 
be here one day and gone the next. Vasva. . . .*’ 

“Look here, Arkasha, the way you put it the ceiling 
might cave in on us now.” 

“Yes, of course, of course. 1 was just talking.” 

“No, listen to me, hear me out, now you sti, lie 
couldn’t part with me. No. just listen, listen to pit Y»u 
know 1 cairy r out his ordeis zealously, he’s so gmeious, 
\ou know, Aikasha, he gave me lifts siKei mbits lod«i>'' 

“Did lie really, Vasya.* Was it voui gialuil/?” 

“No fear! It was out of his own pocket. He savs, ‘Heic, 
you haven’t been receiving any money for almost five 
months now; take it if you like; thank you,' lie savs, ‘thank 
you. I’m pleased with you.' 1 give you my wort! 1 ‘Aflti 
all, you aren’t working for me for nothing,' he says Hon¬ 
estly! That’s exactly what he said! Tcais just ponied 
down my face, Arkasha! Heavens above'” 

“Tell me, Vasya, have you finished copying those 
papers?” 

“No ... I haven’t yet.” 

“Oh Vasya! My angel! What ha\e you done!” 

“Look, Arkady, it doesn't matter. l’\e still two clays. 
I'll finish.” 

“But why haven't you been doing it?” 

“Thcie you go, theic you go! You look so ilushed it 
wrings my soul and makes my heait ache 1 Oh well, you 
are always dampening my spiiits like that. Screaming 
‘he-elp’ Fight away! Just consider lor a moment, has any 
thing happened? Well, I ll finish it, l swear I will.” 

“And if you don’t?” Arkady cried, jumping up. “And 
he’s given you the money today! You’re intending to 
marry too ... oh my, oh my!” 



214 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“Don’t worry, don’t worry,” Shumkov shouted. “I’m 
settling down to it this very minute, don’t worry!” 

“How could you have neglected your duty so, Vasya 
my dear?” 

“Oh Arkasha! How could I sit still? The state I was 
in! Why, I could hardly keep to my chair in the office; 
I could hardly contain my feelings, you know.... Good¬ 
ness gracious! I’ll sit up all night now, and tomorrow 
night, and the night after that and I’ll finish it.” 

“Is there much left?” 

“Don't bother me, for heaven’s sake don’t bother me, 
keep quiet." 

Arkady Ivanovich tiptoed to his bed and sat down: 
then, suddenly, he sprang up only to sit down again, re- 
membeiing that he might distuib Vasya, although his agi¬ 
tation was making it veiy haul loi him to sit still, it was 
obvious that the news had quite oveiwhelmed him, and 
his first icaction of delight had not spent itself yet He 
glanced at Shumkov, the latter glanced at him, smiling 
and shaking his finger at him, and then fixing his eves 
upon his papcis with a dieadlul scowl*(as il the whojt 
success and pioductivity of his endea voids depended on it) 
It seemed that he, too, could not yet mastei his excitement, 
foi he kept changing his pens, fidgeting about in his chair, 
altering his position, and taking up his writing again; but 
his hand shook and icfused to obey him 

"Aikasha! I told them about vou,” he cried suddenly, 
as if he had only just lemembeied it 

“Have >ou?” Arkady cried. “And I was about to ask 
xou that—well ’ ’ 

“Oh yes, I'll tell vou everythin!? afterwards! See. it', 
my fault, honestlv, it quite slipped my mind that I wasn 1 
going to say anything until I’d written four pages, bur 
then 1 suddenly icmembcred about you and about them. 
You know I don’t seem able to write at all: 1 keep think¬ 
ing of you. . . ” Vasya smiled. 

Thev lapsed intd silence. 

“Ugh, what a rotten pen!” cried Shumkov, striking the 
table with his pen in disgust. He picked up another one. 

“Vasya! Listen! Just one word.” 

“What is it? Hurry up and let it be the last time.” 




A FAINT IIF.ART 


2 ir. 


“Is there much left?” 

“Oh dear!” Vasya winced as if there was nothing in 
this world more hateful and deadly than this question 
“A lot, an awful lot!” 

“You know, I have an idea.” 

“What?” 

“Never mind, go on with youi writing.” 

“But what is it? Tell me.” 

“It’s after six now, Vasya old chap!" 

Here Nefedevich smiled and gave Vasva a roguish 
wink that was at the same time .somewhat timid, foi be 
vvas not certain yet what Vasya's reaction to it would be 

“Well, what is it?” Vasya said, stopping his wilting 
altogether, looking straight into Aikady’s eves and even 
growing pale in his impatience. 

“D’you know what?” 

“Oh for heaven’s sake, what is it?" 

“D'you know what? You’re excited. \on won’t be able 
to do much . .. wait, wait, wait—1 know, 1 know—listen 1 " 
said Nefedevich, jumping up from his bed eagcilv and in¬ 
terrupting Vasya, set upon dismissing any objections the 
latter might raise. “First of all vou'\e got to calm down, 
you’ve got to pull youiself together, haven’t you? 

“Arkasha! Arkasha!” Vasya cried as lie spiting up fiom 
his chair. “I’ll sit up all night, honestly I will*” 

“Oh no, vou won’t! You'll only fall asleep tow aids 
morning.” 

“I shan't, I shan't fall asleep." 

“No, that won’t do, no; of course you’ll fall asleep, vis, 
go to sleep at five. At eight I'll call vou. It’s a holidnv 
tomorrow: you'll settle down and write all day ... and 
then the night and, by the wa\, is there much left fm you 
to do?” 

“Here, look! Look!” 

Vasya, trembling with joy and anticipation, showed his 
notebook. 

‘‘Here!” 

“I say, old chap, it’s not much, you know." 

“Arkasha dear, there’s more,” said Vasya, looking at 
Nefedevich very, very humbly,.as if it rested with him 
whether Vasya would be allowed to go out or not. 



216 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“How much more?” 

“Two ... little pages.” 

“Well then? Look here, we’ll finish it on time, we will, 
truly!” 

“Arkasha!” 

“Vasya, listen! This is New Year’s Eve, everyone’s 
spending it with their friends and families, you and I are 
the only homeless, orphaned ones. Ah, Vasenka!” Nefe- 
dcvich hugged Vasya and crushed him in his bear-like em¬ 
brace. 

“Ail ndv! That settles it!” 

“Vasvuk, I was just going to say it. You see, Vasyuk, 
you clumsy obi thing! Listen, listen! You know. . . .” 

Arkady paused with gaping mouth, deprived of speech 
foi joy. Vasya held him by the shoulders, stared into his 
eyes and moved his lips as if he wanted to finish the sen¬ 
tence for him. 

“Well?” Vasya said at last. 

“Present me to them today!” 

“Arkady let’s go there to tea! D’you know what? We 
won’t even stay to see the New Year in, you know, we’ll 
leave eailici.” Vasya cried with real animation. 

“'I'llat means two hours, no more, rio less!” 

“And then we part until after I’ve finished.” 

“Vasyuk!” 

“Arkady!” 

It took Arkady just thxee minutes to change into his 
fiock-coat. Vasya only tidied himself up, because in his 
zeal to settle down to work he* had quite forgotten to take 
his frock-coat olf when he came home. 

They hurried out into the street, one feeling happier 
than the other. Their way lay from the Petersburg Side 
to Kolomna. Arkady Ivanovich’s stride was brisk and 
energetic, his very walk making it obvious how delighted 
he was in Vasya’s good fortune and his ever mounting 
happiness. Vasya trotted along with shorter steps, but his 
bearing was not undignified; quite the contrary, he had 
never appeared in a more favourable light to Arkady 
Ivanovich. At that moment. Arkady Ivanovich actually ex¬ 
perienced a deeper respect for him, and Vasya’s physical 
defect, of which the reader does not yet know—Vasya was 


A FAINT HEART 


21/ 


a little lop-sided—which always amused deep felt him 
fond compassion in AiR.idv's kind In ail, now moved hi. 
to increasingly tender affection, winch V.is\a miter dl> 
w T ell deserved. Indeed, Aikadv Ivanov kh was r> ..<>v to 
weep for joy, but he controlled himsc If 

“Where are you going. Vasya J It s nearer this war " In 
cried, seeing that Vasya was about to turn do.vn \*o, 
ncsensky Prospekt. 

“Shut up, Arkasha, shut up!” 

“But it’s really nearer this way. Van a’ 

“Arkasha! D’you know' v hat . J ” V.is\a be,an with .. 
air of mystery, hrs voice faint with IrrpptiHs '> * 
know what. ,) I’d like to give Ia/anka a litth jut /‘it 

“What will it be?” 

‘There's a wonderful shop, Madame I.ttoims, on tin 
cot ner here.” 

“Really!” 

“A bonnet, old chap, a bonnet; I saw stub a s\ve t lutlc 
bonnet today; I inquited: they say the stvle is ealbd 'I t 
non Lescaut—it’s heavenly 1 It’s go* un-i nt>!./ - and 
if it’s not too expensive . . \ik.islu, tv/" d t< e / - p< o 

* I 

SI VC! 

“You’re the greatest poet of all. Vesva. t do dec law’ 
Come along then ” 

They quickened their pace to a run. and two wunut< •> 
later they entered the shop. Thev wue dki i»v t *•.!• I 
eyed Frenchwoman, with her hair dressed rn * *r. A wla. 
instantly, after her very fitst glance at tlm cast mu is. In - 
came as meiry and happy as thev w't.e, cv«n happier d 
that were possible. Vasva was ready to !• is- Mint i ana.' 
in his delight. 

“Arkasha!” he said in an undertone, glam n ■ /i/ a ea- 
sual way at all the beautiful and gorgeous drugs uVplos*. i 
upon little wooden stands on the shop s hie c table 
“Wonders! The beauty of it all, th< beauty 1 1 od ■>) iha* 
bit of sweetness over there, for instance, see it* he win. 
pered, indicating a \cry pretty bonnet, but not at all ills 
one he wanted to buy, for he had alrcadv made his choice 
lrom afar, and now he fastened his admiring ga/c on tin 
bonnet, the unsurpassable bonnet, display/cl on rlu other 
end of the table. The wav he stared would make one think 



218 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


that someone was about to steal it, or that the bonnet it¬ 
self might fly into the air, simply to elude him.. 

“That one,” said Arkady Ivanovich, indicating another 
bonnet, “that one is the best, I think.” 

“Good for you, Arkasha! All the honour to you for it; 
truly, I’m beginning to feel an extraordinary respect for 
your taste,” said Vasya, mischievously pretending to be 
sincerely moved by Arkasha’s choice. “Your bonnet is 
charming, but come here, will you!” 

“Is there a better one, old man?” 

“Take a look at this one!” 

“That one?” said Arkady doubtfully. 

But when Vasya, unable to restrain himself any longer, 
snatched it off the stand, from which it seemed to fly of 
its own volition as though welcoming such a good buyer 
after its long wait, and when all its ruches, bows, and 
laces began to rustle, a sudden cry of admiration burst 
forth from Arkady Ivanovich’s powerful chest. Even Mme 
Laroux who, maintaining her unquestionable supremacy 
and excellence in the matter of taste, had remained silent 
from sheer condescension while the choice of bonnets was 
under way, now rewatded Vasya with a radiant smile of 
approval, and everything about her—her look, her gesture 
and her smile—all said, “Yes! You have guessed it and 
you deserve the happiness awaiting you.” 

“You were just being coy, weren’t you now?” Vasya 
cried, all his affection now centred upon the charming bon¬ 
net. “You’ve been hiding on purpose, you little rascal, 
you darling!” And he kissed it, or rather the air that sur¬ 
rounded it, for he was afraid of touching his treasure. 

“Thus true worth and virtue conceals itself,” added Ar¬ 
kady delightedly, humourously repeating a sentence he 
had read that morning in one witty newspaper. “Well, 
Vasya, what now?” 

“Arkasha! Hurrah! Why, you’re witty too, today, you’ll 
cause a furore, as they call it, among the ladies, mark my 
words. Mme Laroux! Mme Laroux!” 

“What can I do for you?” 

“Dear Madame Laroux!” 

Mme Laroux glanced at Arkady Ivanovich and smiled 
indulgently. 



A FAINT HEART 


219 


“You can’t imagine how I adore you at this moment... 
allow me to kiss you ..and Vasya kissed the shopkeeper. 

She certainly had to summon all her poise for a mo¬ 
ment so as not to lose her dignity with a scamp like Vasya. 
But I assert that it was Mme Laroux’s innate, genuine 
affability and graciousness that prompted her to receive 
his ecstatic impulse the way she did. She forgave him, 
and how clever, how graceful was the attitude she adopted 
in this case! Could one be really angry with Vasya! 

“Mme Laroux, what is the price?” 

“Five silver rubles,” she answered with a smile, her 
calm restored. 

“And that one, Mme Laroux?” asked Arkady Ivano¬ 
vich, pointing to his choice. 

“That one is eight silver rubles.” 

“Oh but I say! I say! Why, you must agree, Mme La¬ 
roux, you must say which one is better, daintier, and 
sweeter, which one is more your style?” 

“That one is costlier, but your choice e'est plus coquet." 

“Well then, that is the one we are taking!” 

Mme Laroux took a sheet of very, very thin paper, 
wrapped the bonnet in it, and secured it, with a little pin. 
This seemed to make the paper even lighter and finer than 
it had been without the bonnet. Vasya picked it all up 
carefully, scarcely breathing, bowed to Mme Laroux, com¬ 
plimented her, and walked out of the shop. 

“I’m a viveur, Arkasha, I’m born to be a viveurl ” cried 
Vasya, breaking into a short, soundless, nervous laugh as 
he hurried along, giving a wide berth to the passers-by. 
suspecting one and 'all of deliberate intent to crush his 
precious bonnet. 

“Listen, Arkady, listen!” he began a minute later, and 
there was a ring of something solemn, something unutter¬ 
ably loving in his voice. “Arkady, I’m so happy, so happy!” 

“Vasenka! And I, I’m so happy, my dear boy!” 

“No, Arkasha, no, your love for me is boundless, I 
know; but you cannot sense even a hundredth part of what 
I feel just now! My heart is so full, Arkasha, so full! I am 
unworthy of this happiness! I can hear it, I can feel it! 
What have T ever done to deserve it,” he said in a voice 
that shook with suppressed sobs. “What have I done, tell 




220 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


me! Look at all the people, look how much sorrow there 
is, how many tears, how many humdrum days with never 
a holiday! And I! I am loved by such a girl, I ... but you 
will see her for yourself, you will appreciate that noble 
heart of hers yourself. I am of low birth, but now I have 
a rank and an independent income—my salary, that is. I 
was. born with a physical defect—my shoulders are slightly 
crooked. But look, she loves me as I am. And Yulian 
y r .fakovich, too, was so nice, so considerate, so polite to 
rm- todav. He seldom talks to me; he came up and said, 
’\vell, Vasya’ (honestly, that’s what he called me, just 
Vasya), ‘going on the spree during the holidays, eh?’ and 
he laughed, ‘it’s like this, Your Excellency,’ I said, ‘I 
have some work to do,’ and then I plucked up courage and 
sa'd, ’and perhaps I'll have a little pleasure, too, Your 
Excellency,'— 1 swear 1 said it. And then he gave me the 
money and added another word or two. I wept, honestly 
1 was reduced to tears, and I think he was moved, too, he 
patted mt on the shoulder and said, ‘That’s the way, 
V isya, von should always feel like this.’ ” 

1' ,r a second Vasya paused; Arkady Ivanovich turned 
away and wiped a tear with his fist. 

“And then, and then ...” Vasya went on, “1 have never 
said this to you before, Arkady ... Arkady! You make 
me so happy with your friendship, I wouldn’t be alive at 
all if it weren’t for you—no. no, don’t say a word, Ar¬ 
kasha! Let me shake your hand, let me thank you!” and 
again Vasya was unable to go on. 

Arkady Ivanovich wanted to hug Vasya then and there 
as the> were crossing the street but suddenly a shrill cry 
of “bey—look out 1 ” rang practically in their ears, and, 
frightened, they ran to the safety of the pavement. This 
was rather a relief to Arkady Ivanovich. He ascribed 
Vasya’s gushing avowals of gratitude to nothing but the 
singularity of the present moment. As for himself, he was 
chagrined. He felt that so far he had done so little for 
Vasya! He actually felt ashamed of himself when, Vasya 
began to thank him for the little he had done. But then 
there was a whole lifetime ahead, and Arkady Ivanovich 
breathed easier. 

Their hostesses had indeed given up waiting for them! 



A FAINT HEART 


221 


There was the proof—they were already having tea. But 
truly, an elderly soul is shrewder at times than a young 
one, and what a young one at that! Because Lizanka had 
insisted quite earnestly that he would not come: “He isn’t 
coming, Mamma, 1 can feel it in my heait he isn’t”; while 
her mamma kept saying that her heart was telling her quite 
the opposite, that lie was sure to come, that he wouldn't 
be able to stay away, that he would come running, that no 
one had any office duties at that hour, on New Yeai s 
Eve, too! And when Lizanka went to open the front door, 
even then she did not expect to see them—she could not 
believe her eyes, she was bicathless, licr heait fluttered 
suddenly like a captured little bird's, she blushed all over, 
she grew led like a cherry, which she resembled awful’v 
Good Lord, what a surprise! What a joyful “Oh!” escaped 
her lips! “You faithless one! You darling!” she ciied, 
flinging her arms around Vasya’s neck. But imagine her 
amazement, all her sudden embarrassment: diiectly be¬ 
hind Vasya, as if trying to hide behind his back, stood 
Arkady Ivanovich looking slightly abashed. It must be 
admitted that he was indeed awkwaid with women, very 
awkward, it even happened once that. . . . But ol that anon. 
However, you must consider his position too: there was 
nothing to laugh at; there he stood in the hall, in his ga¬ 
loshes. his topcoat and fur cap, which he made haste to 
pull off, bundled up in a most horrible way in the mtanest 
of yellow knitted mufflers, knotted behind for greater 
effect. All this had to be unwound, removed as quickly as 
possible, so that he could appear in a more favourable 
light, foi there is no one in the world who does not wish 
to present himself in the most favourable light. And then 
Vasya, annoying, impossible, though of course the same 
dear, kind Vasya, but leally an impossible, pitiless Vasya, 
cried, “Here, Lizanka, here’s my Arkady for you! What 
d’you think of him, eh? This is my best frit ud, embiacc 
and kiss him. Lizanka, give him a kiss in advance, when 
you know him better you’ll want to kiss him yourself.” 
Well then? Well then, I’m asking you, what could Ar¬ 
kady Ivanovich do? And so far he had only managed to 
unwind half the length of his muffler! Truly, sometimes 1 
feel actually ashamed of Vasya’s excessive enthusiasm; it 



222 


I'. DOSTOYEVSKY 


shows that he’s kind-hearted, of course, but ... it’s em¬ 
barrassing, it’s unnecessary! 

At last they both enteied. The old lady was overjoyed 
to make the acquaintance of Arkady Ivanovich: she had 
heard so much about him.... But she did not finish. A 
happy “Oh ’ which rang out in the room, made her break 
off in the middle of a sentence. Oh joy! Lizanka was stand¬ 
ing before the bonnet so unexpectedly levcaled by the 
wrapping, her pretty hands clasped most naively, and her 
lips smiling, smiling so.... Oh my goodness, why couldn’t 
Mine Laioux have had an even better bonnet to oiler! 

But, good Lord, where could you find a better bonnet? 
That’s really too much! Where will you find a better one? 
I mean it quite seriously. And I should even say that this 
lovers’ ingratitude makes me quite indignant, it actually 
grieves me a little. But look for yourselves, look, what 
could be better than this darling of a bonnet? Do look. . . . 
But no, no, my complaints aic uncalled foi: they all agice 
with me now: it was nothing but a momentary delusion, 
a daze, a lever ol emotion; 1 am willing to forgive them. 
But then look ... you must loigive me, I'm* still on the 
subject of the bonnet; it’s a tulle one, feather-light, a 
wide cerise ribbon, draped with lace, set in between the 
nown and the ruching, with two ends of the ribbon, long 
and wide, coming down at the back; they'll fall on the 
neck, a little lower than the nape. . . Only the bonnet 
itself has to be worn further back on the head; do look; 
do look and tell me now . . . Oh but I see, you’re not 
looking 1 ... You don’t seem to mre! You're gazing in 
another direction. You are watching two great, pearl-like 
teardrops suddenly gather in a pair of coal-black eyes, 
quiver a moment on the long eyelashes, and then drop 
into the airy froth which, rathei than tulle, is what Mme 
Laroux’s work of art is made of. . .. And 1 fell aggrieved 
again: it's almost as if the teais were not quite for the 
bonnet!. .. Oh no! In my opinion, a thing like that should 
be given in cold blood. Only then can it be duly appreciat¬ 
ed. I’m all for the bonnet. I must confess! 

They sat down—Vasya next to Lizanka, and the old 
lady next to Arkady Ivanovich: they conversed and Ar¬ 
kady Ivanovich acquitted, himself well. I gladly give him 




A FAINT HEART 


223 


the credit. Indeed, I hardly expected it of him. After a 
word or two about Vasya, he managed to turn the con¬ 
versation most adroitly to Yulian Mastakovich, his bene¬ 
factor. And he spoke so cleverly, that in truth, the sub¬ 
ject did not wear thin in a whole hour. The wisdom, the 
tact with which Arkady Ivanovich touched upon certain 
of his peculiarities, which directly or indirectly concerned 
Vasya, was worth watching. But then the old lady was 
charmed, truly charmed; she herself admitted it, she made 
a point of calling Vasya aside and telling him that his 
Inend was a splendid, a most courteous young man, and 
what was more, such a serious, sedate young man Vasya 
all but burst out laughing with the blessedness oi it all. 
He remembeied how the sedate Aikasha had wustled 
with him on the bed not half an hour ago! The old lady 
then made a sign to Vasya and told him to follow her 
quietly and stealthily into the other room. It must be said 
that she was acting a little meanly towaids Lizanka: she 
was betiaying her trust from the fullness of her heart, of 
course, when she let Vasya steal a look at the gift which 
Lizanka was making him for New Year. This was a wallet, 
embroidered with beads and gold thread, and beautifully 
designed: there was a deei on one side, a veiy lifelike deet, 
running very swiftly and so natuially, so well! The other 
side porttayed a well-known general, perfectly done too, 
and finished off to quite a good likeness. There’s no need 
for me to speak of Vasya’s delight. Meanwhile, the mo¬ 
ment was not wasted in the sitting-ioom either. Lizanka 
straightaway appioached Aikady Ivanovich. She took both 
his hands in heis, she thanked him foi something and fi¬ 
nally Arkady Ivanovich understood that the matter con- 
eerned the veiy same piecious Vasya. Indeed, Lizanka 
was deeply moved: she had heaid that Arkady Ivanovich 
was such a true fiiend to her betrothed, that he was so 
fond of him, watched over him so, guided him at every 
step with salutary advice, that really, she, Lizanka, could 
not but thank him, could not contain her feeling of gra¬ 
titude, and hoped that Arkady Ivanovich would grow to 
love her too, if only half as much as he loved Vasya. 
Then she went on to ask him whether Vasya was taking 
good care of his health, she voiced certain misgivings 




224 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


about his peculiarly excitable temper, his imperfect know¬ 
ledge of people and life, and said that she would look 
after him religiously, she would cherish him and watch 
over his destiny, and that she hoped Arkady Ivanovich, 
far from abandoning them, would even make his home 
with them. 

“The thiec of us will be like one!” she cried in very 
naive elation. 

But it was time they left. They were of course urged 
to stay, but Vasya declared quite firmly that they could 
not. Arkady Ivanovich seconded his avowal. They were 
naturally asked whv, and it was immediately disclosed 
that there was a piece of work entrusted to Vasya by 
Yulian Mastakovich, an urgent, important, and horrible 
job, which had to be submitted the day after tomorrow 
m the morning, and that far from being finished, it was 
hopelessly behindhand. Mamma gasped when she heard 
of this, while Tizanku was frankly upset and alarmed and 
actually drove Vasya away. Their parting kiss did not 
suffer lor it at all: il was shorter and swifter, but lor all 
that—warmer and harder. 

They parted at last, and the two friends hastened home. 

The minute they found themselves out in the street, they 
began with one accord to confide their impressions to 
each other. But this was as it should be: Arkady Ivano¬ 
vich was in love, head over heels in love with Lizanka! 
And who was a better confidant for this than Vasya, the 
luckiest of mortals himself? That was what lie did: with¬ 
out a qualm he instantly confessed it all to Vasya. Vasya 
thought it teiribly amusing and was awfully glad, and 
even lemarked that it was all for the better, that now 
they'd be closer friends than ever. “You've lead my 
thoughts, Vasya,” Arkady Ivanovich said. ‘‘Yes! I love 
her as I love you! She will be my guardian angel as well 
as yours, for your happiness will shed a radiance upon 
me too, and warm me with its rays. She will be mistress 
of my fate too, Vasya: my happiness will be in h^r hands, 
let her command both you and me alike. Yes, my friend¬ 
ship for you is my friendship for her. You two arc inse¬ 
parable for me now; only now I shall have two beings 
like you instead of one.. ..” Arkady broke off, overwhelmed 



A FAINT HEART 


225 


with emotion, while Vasya was shaken to the depths 
of his soul by his friend’s words. Never had he expected 
to hear words like these from Arkady! He was not an 
eloquent speaker at all, neither was he fond of dreaming; 
and yet now he instantly began to weave the gayest, the 
brightest, and the most blissful of day-dreams! “Oh, how 
I’ll look after you both, how I shall cherish you,” he spoke 
again. “First of all, Vasya, I shall stand godfather to all 
your children, every single one of them, and secondly, 
Vasya, we’ve got to think of the future. We must buy 
some furniture, rent a Hat, so that she and you and I should 
all have our private cubby-holes. You know, Vasya, I’ll 
go and take a look at the ‘To Let’ signs tomorrow. Three 
... no, two rooms, we don’t need more. Come to think 
of it, I was talking nonsense earlier today, Vasya, we’ll 
have enough money, never fear! The minute I glanced 
into her pretty eyes I knew at once that we’d have 
enough. Everything for her! Phew, how hard we'll work! 
Now, Vasya, we can risk it and rent a flat for, say, twen¬ 
ty-five rubles. A flat means everything, old chap! In good 
rooms . .. you know, a man feels light-hearted and his 
dreams are blissful! And secondly, Lizanka will be our 
common treasurer, not a kopek wasted! D’you think I’d 
ever drop into a bar now? What do you take me for? Not 
on your life! And then we’ll get a raise, we’ll receive gra¬ 
tuities, because we’ll work with zeal. My, how hard we'll 
work! We'll plough through it like oxen! Just think now,” 
and Arkady Ivanovich’s voice grew faint with rapture, “a 
sudden windfall of some twenty-five or thirty rubles!... 
You know every gratuity will mean a bonnet, or a scarf, 
or stockings, or something! She simply must knit me a 
muffler, look how wretched mine is—yellow, disgusting, 
the unpleasantness it caused me today! And you're a good 
one, too, Vasya, presenting me while 1 stood with that 
yoke on my neck ... but that’s not the point at all! It’s 
this: you sec, I’m taking it upon myself to provide all the 
flat silver!. I’m bound to make you a little gift, you know, 
it’s an- honour, it’s a question of self-esteem! My gratuity 
won't run away from me, will it, they wouldn’t give it to 
Skorokhodov instead; no chance of the money going stale 
in that bird’s pocket! Look here. I’ll buy you some silver 



226 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


spoons and some good knives—not silver ones, but the 
very best knives, and a waistcoat, that is the waistcoat is 
for me, I’ll be your best man, you know! Only you’ve got 
to try hard now, take hold of yourself, I’ll stand over you 
with a stick tonight and tomorrow night, all night long. 
I’ll work you to death, but you must finish it! Get it 
finished quickly! And then we’ll go out for the evening 
again, and we’ll both be happy. We’ll take a fling at 
lotto! We’ll sit together of an evening—my, what fun! 
Oh bother, what a pity I can’t be a help to you. I’d gladly 
sit down and write it all, all of it for you. Why don’t 
you and I write the same hand?” 

“Yes,” said Vasya, “yes, I must hurry. It must be about 
eleven now, 1 think. I must hurry.... To work!” and say¬ 
ing this, Vasya, who all this time had either been smiling 
or breaking into this effusion of good-will with some 
eager remark and, in short, had been displaying the most 
wholehearted animation, suddenly grew subdued and si¬ 
lent, and started down the street almost at a run. It seemed 
that some oppressive thought had suddenly turned his 
llaming mind to ice, and his heart had suddenly cringed. 

It quite worried Arkady Ivanovich: his anxious ques¬ 
tions elicited hardly any replies from Vasya, who only 
tossed back a word or two, or an exclamation which was* 
often irrelevant. 

“But, Vasya, what’s wrong with you?” he shouted at 
last, barely managing to keep up with Vasya. “Can it be 
worrying you so?” 

“Oh stop babbling, there’s a good chap,” Vasya replied 
in some annoyance. 

“Come, Vasya, don’t lose heart,” Arkady broke in, “why. 
I've seen you write much more in a shorter time ... why 
worry? You’ve just got a gift for it! If it comes to that, 
you can even try and write faster. They’re not going to 
have it lithographed for calligraphy books you know! 
You’ll manage! The only thing is you’re excited and pre¬ 
occupied now, and the work will go slower for it.” 

Vasya muttered something under his breath, and the 
two ran home in nervous haste. 

Vasya sat down to his work at once. Arkady Ivano¬ 
vich, his excitement subdued, quietly undressed and lay 


A FAINT HEART 


22.7 


down on his bed, keeping his eyes fixed on Vasya all the 
while. A strange fear took possession of him. “What’s the 
matter with him?” he asked himself as he watched Vasya’s 
blanched face, his glittering eyes and the anxiety which 
showed in his every gesture. “1 lis hand is shaking too ... 
oh bother, really! Perhaps I should advise him to go to 
bed for an hour or two? At least he'd sleep off his agita¬ 
tion.” Vasya had just then finished a page and, raising 
his eyes, glanced at Arkady, but he dropped his eyes at 
once and picked up his pen again. 

“I say, Vasya,” Arkady Ivanovich said all of a sudden. 
“Wouldn’t it be better if you had a little nap? Look, you’re 
quite feverish.” 

Vasya looked at Arkady with annoyance, even anger, 
and made no reply. 

“Listen Vasya, what arc you doing to yourself?” 

Vasya responded at once. 

“Maybe we should have some tea, Arkasha?” he said. 

“Why? What for?” 

“It will brace me up. I don’t want to sleep, no. I shan’t 
sleep! I’ll keep on writing. I’d rest a little at tea, and things 
would go easier.” 

“Smart of you, Vasya old chap, marvellous! You said 
the very words: I was going to suggest that you take a 
rest. But why didn’t I think of the tea myself? Only you 
know what? Mavra won’t get up, she won’t wake up for 
anything.” 

“Hm.” 

“Rubbish! Never mind!” cried Arkady Ivanovich, jump¬ 
ing down from his bed in his bare feet. “I’ll put the sa¬ 
movar on myself. It won’t be the first time, will it?” 

Arkady Ivanovich hurried to the kitchen and busied 
himself with the samovar. In the meantime Vasya kept 
on writing. Arkady Ivanovich went so far as to dress and 
run to the baker’s shop, so that Vasya could fortify him¬ 
self for the night’s work. A quarter of an hour later the 
samovar was on the table. They sat down to tea, but con¬ 
versation flagged. Vasya was still preoccupied. 

“I must go the rounds and pay my New Year respects 
tomorrow...” Vasya said at last, as though recalling him¬ 
self to the present. 




228 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“You needn’t go at all.” 

“No, old chap, 1 must,” said Vasya. 

“But I’ll sign your name for you everywhere ... why 
should you go? You’d better do your work tomorrow. 1 
told you you ought to stay up till about five in the morn¬ 
ing, and then you could go to sleep. Think what a sight 
you’ll look if you don’t! I’d rouse you at eight sharp.” 

“But will it be all right for you to sign my name?” said 
Vasya, half-inclined to agree. 

“Why not? Everyone does it!” 

“I’m afraid, really.” 

“But what are you afraid of? What?” 

“It doesn’t matter with the others, you know, but Yulian 
Mastakovich, he’s my benefactor, Arkasha. What if he 
notices it’s a different hand?” 

“He’d notice! Bah! You are a one, Vasyuk! How could 
he possibly notice it? Don’t you know I can sign your name 
ever so w'di and I make the same curlicue, honestly 1 
do! Come now, how could anyone know the difference *" 

Vasya said nothing and hurried through his tea.... 
Then he shook his head in doubt. 

“Vasya, my dear! Oh if we can only do it! Vasya, but 
what is it 11 You’re really fiightcning me! I) you know 1 
shan't go to be.l now, Vasya, I shan't go to sleep. Show 
me, is there much left?” 

Vasya gave him such a glare that Arkady Ivanovich’s 
heart sank and he could not go on with what he had 
meant to say. 

“Vasya! What is the matter? What is it? Why do you 
look like that?” 

“Arkady, 1 really think I’ll go and pay my respects to 
Yulian Mastakovich tomonow.” 

“Well, perhaps you should,” Arkady said, staring at 
him in an agony of suspense. “Listen, Vasya, write faster; 
I wouldn’t advise vou ill. 1 swear I wouldn’t! Remember 
how often Yulian Mastakovich himself said that the thing 
he liked best about your penmanship was its legibility. It’s 
only Skoroplyokhin, you know, who wants it to be distinct 
and beautiful as well, like a calligraphy book, so he might 
pinch the paper somehow afterwards and take it home for 
his children to copy; as if he couldn’t buy them some 




A FAINT HEART 


229 


copybooks, the fool! And as for Yulian Mastakovich, all 
he says, all he demands is: legibility, legibility and legi¬ 
bility! What more do you want? Really, Vasya, I don’t 
know how to talk to you any more.... I’m becoming 
frightened.... You’re killing me with your despondency. ’ 

“Never mind, never mind!” Vasya uttered, and fell back 
in his chair in exhaustion. Arkady was alarmed. 

“D’you want some water? Vasya! Vasya!” 

“Don’t worry, don’t,” Vasya said, pressing his hand. 
“I'm all right; I only felt a sort of sadness, Arkady. I 
can’t even tell why. Listen, do talk of something else, 
don't remind me... 

“Compose yourself, lor heaven's sake compost your¬ 
self, Vasya! You’ll finish it, honestly you will! And even 
if you don’t, what matter? It’s not a crime, you know!” 

“Arkady,” said Vasya with a look so wrought with 
meaning that Arkady felt positively frightened, for never 
before had Vasya been so dreadfully upset. “If I weie 
a'one, as before.... No, that’s not what I wanted to say 
I keep wanting to tell you, to confide in you like a friend. 
However, why should I worry you? You see, Arkady, some 
ate capable of great things, and others do their little 
bit like me. Now supposing you were expected to show 
gratitude and appreciation and you were unable to do it 1 *’’ 

“Vasya! I don’t understand you at all!” 

“I've never been ungrateful,” Vasya continued softly, 
as though deliberating with his own self. “But if I cannot 
express all I feel, it’s as tf ... it will seem that I'm realh 
ungrateful, Arkadv, and it’s killing me!” 

“Oh come, come! Surely all your gratitude does not 
hinge on whether \ou finish your work on time or noP 
Think what you’re saying, Vasya! 1s that the only pi oof 
of gratitude?” 

Vasya said no more and suddenly gave Arkady a clear- 
eyed stare, as if all his doubts had been dispelled by this 
unexpected reasoning. He even smiled, but instantly as¬ 
sumed the same pensive expression again. Arkady was 
quite overjoyed, interpreting this smile as the end of all 
his fears, and the anxious expression that reappeared on 
Vasya’s face as his determination to take the better course. 

“Well, Arkasha, when you wake up taki a look at me." 




230 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


Vasya said, “there’ll be the devil to pay if I fall asleep; 
and now I’ll settle down to work.... Arkasha?” 

“Yes?” 

“No, it’s nothing, I only wanted ... I wanted....” 
Vasya sat down and said no more. Arkady went to bed. 
Neither of them uttered a word about their visit of Kolom¬ 
na. It may be that both of them felt slightly guilty, aware 
that their little spree had been untimely. Arkady Ivano¬ 
vich soon fell asleep, still gtieving over Vasya To his sur¬ 
prise he awoke when it was just past seven. Vasya was 
asleep in his chair, pen in hand, looking pale and exhaust¬ 
ed; the candle had burnt out Mavra could be heard fuss¬ 
ing with the samovar in the kitchen 
“Vasya! Vasya*” Arkady shouted in alarm “When did 
you go to sleep?” 

Vasya opened his eves and jumped up 
“Goodness*” he gasped “I dropped otf in my chair!” 
He pounced on his papers at once—they weie in ordei 
there was neither ink nor candle grease blots on them. 

“I suppose I must have dropped off at ab«ut six,” Vasya 
said. “How cold it is at night* Let’s have some tea and 
then I’ll resume ” 

“Do you feel better now 

“Yes, yes. 1’n all right. I’m all right 

“Happy New Year. Vasya old chap!” 

“Happy New Year, my dear!” 

Thc\ embraced Vasya’s chin quiveied and tears rose 

to Ins eyes. Arkady Ivanovich was silent; he v/as ieeWny 


9 aJ; thev hun red through their tea 
“ Arkady! I’ve m.t'h up wv wind. I'll go to Yuh.ir Mi' 
takovich myself.’ 

“But be won’t notice, you know ” 

“VAy conscience won’t let me be, old chap ” 

But it S tor him you’re sitting here, it’s tor him you’re 
worrying yourself sick . come now* You know, old 
chap, I’ll drop in there today.” 

sya asked. 

1*11 wish them a happy New Year 

rlf - 

I’ll stay here; I see 
’m busy working. I’m 




A FAINT HEART 


2.31 


not just idling my time away! Wait a moment, I’ll quickly 
write a note.” 

“Go ahead, you’ve got plenty of time, you needn’t hu) 
ry. I still have to wash and shave and brush my coat 
Well, Vasya old chap, we are going to be pleased and 
happy! Embrace me, Vasya!” 

“Oh if only....” 

“Does Mr. Shumkov live here?” a child’s voice sounded 
from the staircase. 

“lie does, dearie, he does,” Mavra said as she admit¬ 
ted the visitoi 

“Who’s that? What is it?” cried Vasya, leaping from 
his chair, and dashing into the hall. “Petenka, you 1 ” 

‘ Good morning. I have the honour of wishing you a 
happy New Year, Vasily Petrovich,” said a prettv little 
hoy of ten or so, with his dark hail done up in ringlets. 
“Sister sends you her regards and Mamma too, and sistei 
told me to kiss you foi her.” 

Vasya swune the messenger up into the air and planted 
a long, honeyed and ecstatic kiss on his lips, which wen 
so very much like Li7anka's. 

“Kiss him, Arkady!” he said, handing Petya over to \i - 
kady, and the boy, without touching the floor, passed on 
into the powerful and eager arms ot Arkady I\ano\irh 

“Oh you darling boy, would you like some tea?” 

“Thank you kindly. We’ve had tea already We eol 
up early lodav. They’ve gone to morning smite Sister 
spent two houis curling my hair and pomading i*, washing 
my face and mending my tiousei because \ tbevs 
yesterday playing in the street with Gashka: wc wue \iVu\- 
:ng snowballs."’ 

Wrll. Well Will'" 


V’d *M' d>, ,i 

1,1 ’> "< t , ’ ,, 

vi 1 1 • fi' , < ' 

* '* I <1 > N > . I 


11 > hi 

*i>( i 


’ l J " 1 < .uftit'u , 

u> death Jtnti 

' * Vw J 

* ' * ' i* 




232 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“It will be finished! It will! Just tell her so: it will, I’ll 
definitely finish it, my word of honour!” 

“Yes and ... oh! I’d almost forgotten. Sister sent you 
a little note and a present, and I went and forgot all 
about it!” 

“Good Lord! Oh you darling boy! Where ... where is 
it? Heie we are! Look what she’s written me. The dar¬ 
ling sweetheart! You know, yesterday I saw a wallet she 
was making me, but it’s not quite finished and so she says 
she’s sending me a lock of her hair, and the other thing 
will come later. Look, Arkasha, look!” 

And Vasya, incoherent with happiness, showed Arka¬ 
dy Ivanovich a lock of the richest, blackest hair in the 
world; then he kissed it passionately and put it away into 
his breast pocket, closest to his heart. 

“Vasya! I’ll have a locket ordered foi it!” Arkady Iva¬ 
novich said with resolution. 

“And we’ic goine to have roast veal, and then tomor- 
iow we’ll have btains: Mamma is going to make some 
biscuits . . and there won’t be any porridge,” said the 
boy, pausing to think how best to conclude his narrative. 

“Mv, what a pretty little boy!” Arkady Ivanovich cried. 
“Vasya, you’re the luckiest of mortals!” 

l ire boy finished his tea, took Vasya’s note, received a 
thousand kisses, and departed feeling as happy and jolly 
as ever. 

“Well, old chap,” said Arkady Ivanovich with relief, 
“see what luck, see? Everything's lor the best, don’t 
grieve, don’t lose heart, go straight ahead! Finish it, 
Vasya, finish it! I’ll be back at two, I’ll call on them first 
and then on Yulian Mastakovich.” 

“Well good-bye, old chap, good-bye. Oh if only!... 
V«r> well then, go on,” said Vasya, “and I have definite¬ 
ly decided against going to Yulian Mastakovich’s.” 

“Good-bye!” 

“Wait, wait a minute. Tell them ... well, tell them 
whatever you sec lit. Kiss her ... and tell me ali about it 
afterwai ds, my dear chap, all about it.” 

“Now then, now then—everyone knows how you feel! 
It’s happiness that’s upsetting you so! The unexpectedness 
of it ... you’ve not been yourself since yesterday. You 




A FAINT HEART 


233 


haven’t yet recovered from yesterday’s emotion. Well, 
enough! Pull yourself together, Vasya dear! Good-bye! 
Good-bye!” 

The friends parted at last. All that morning Arkady 
Ivanovich was preoccupied and thought of nothing but 
Vasya. He knew his weak, impressionable character. “Yes, 
it’s his happiness that has upset him so, I wasn’t mis¬ 
taken,” he told himself. “Good Lord! He’s even driven 
me to despondency! The tragedy he makes of trifles! Good-* 
ness, what a hothead! Ah, he must be rescued! He must 
be rescued!” muttered Arkady Ivanovich, apparently un¬ 
aware that in his own heart he had already magnified their 
small family troubles—insignificant in effect—to a cala¬ 
mity. It was already eleven by the time he reached Yuli¬ 
an Mastakovich’s house to add his modest name to the 
long list of deferential persons who had, in the entrance 
hall, signed their names on a sheet of paper smeared with 
ink and scribbled all over. But great was his surprise 
when Vasya Shumkov’s own signature flashed before his 
eyes. It amazed him. “What’s happening to him?’’ he 
thought. Arkady Ivanovich, so buoyant with hope a little 
while before, felt low-spirited as he went out. Indeed, 
calamity was approaching, but from where? What cala¬ 
mity? 

He arrived in Kolomna in a gloomy frame of mind, his 
attention wandered at first, but after a talk with Lizanka 
he felt genuinely frightened for Vasya, and tears stood 
in his eves when he reached the street. He started home¬ 
wards at a run, and on the Neva came face to face with 
Vasva. He was running too. 

‘‘Where are you off to?” Arkady Ivanovich shouted. 

Vasya stopped in his tracks like one caught red-handed 
in a crime. 

“I just came out, old man, I wanted to take a little air.” 

“So you couldn’t stand it, you were going to Kolomna, 
eh? Oh. Vasya, Vasya! Now why did you have to go to 
Yulian Mastakovich’s?” 

Vasya said nothing; then he waved his hand and said: 

“Arkady! I don’t know what’s happening to me! I....” 

“Come, Vasya, come! I know what it is. Compose your¬ 
self! You’re still excited and upset after yesterday! Really, 




234 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


is it so hard to endure? Why, everyone loves you, every¬ 
one is doing his best for you, your work is getting on, 
you’ll finish it, you’re sure to finish it, I know; you’ve 
been fancying something, you’ve got some sort of horrors.” 

“No, it’s nothing, nothing.” 

“Remember, Vasya, remember how it was with you; 
remember when you received your first rank in the serv¬ 
ice, you doubled your zeal front happiness and gratitude 
'and for a whole week did nothing but ruin your work. 
It’s the same thing now.” 

“Yes, yes, Arkady, only it’s different now, it’s not that 
at all.” 

“But look heie, how is it different? Perhaps the work 
is not urgent at all, and you’re killing yourself over it....” 

“It’s all right, it’s all right, come along.” 

“So it’s home you’re going and not to Kolomna?” 

“Yes, old man, for how can 1 show myself there? I’ve 
changed my mind. I just couldn’t stand it alone without 
you, but now that you’re with me, I’ll settle down to 
write. Let’s go!” * 

They walked on in silence for a while. Vasya hurried. 

“Why don’t you ask me any questions about them?” 
Arkady Ivanovich said. 

“Oh' yes! Well, Arkasha dear, tell me!” 

“Vasya, you're not like yourself at all!” 

“Never mind, never mind. Tell me everything, do, Ar¬ 
kasha!” Vasya begged, as if he wished to evade further 
explanations. Arkady Ivanovich sighed. He felt utterly at 
a loss as he looked at Vasya. 

Vasya actually brightened up as he listened. He even 
grew communicative. They had dinner. The old lady had 
given Arkady Ivanovich a pocketful of biscuits, and the 
two friends cheered up as they sat munching them. Vasya 
promised to go to sleep after dinner, so that he might sit up 
all night. He really did go to bed. Arkady Ivanovich had 
that morning received an invitation to tea with someone 
whom he could not possibly refuse. The friends parted. 
Arkady promised to be back as soon as possible, perhaps 
as early as eight o’clock. The three hours he stayed away 
from home seemed like three years to him. At last he man¬ 
aged to tear himself away and hurried back to Vasya. He 


A FAINT HEART 


235 


found the room in darkness: Vasya was not at home. He 
asked Mavra. Mavra said that he had been writing all 
the time and had not slept a wink, then he had started 
pacing the floor, and an hour earlier had dashed out, say¬ 
ing he’d be back in half an hour, “ ‘And when Arkady 
Ivanovich returns,’ he said, ‘you tell him that I"ve gone 
• for a walk,’ and he said that three or maybe four times,” 
Mavra concluded. 

“He’s at the Artemyevs!” Arkady Ivanovich thought 
and shook his head. * 

A minute later, he jumped up, sudden hope exhilarat¬ 
ing him. He must have simply finished, that’s what it was, 
he thought. He couldn’t bear it and rushed there. But on 
second thought, no! He would have waited for me. I’ll 
take a look at what he’s got there! 

He lit a candle and eagerly made for Vasya’s table. The 
work was progressing and there did not seem to be very 
much left. Arkady Ivanovich was about to investigate fur¬ 
ther, when Vasya suddenly walked in. 

“Oh! You here?” he shouted, starting with fright. 

Arkady Ivanovich made no response. He dreaded ask¬ 
ing Vasya. The latter looked down without saying any¬ 
thing and began to sort out his papers. At last their glances 
met. Vasya’s eyes had such a pleading, imploring, and 
crushed look in them, that Arkady was startled. His heart 
trembled and overflowed with emotion. 

“Vasya, my dear brother, what’s the matter with you? 
What is it?” he cried, rushing towards him and clasping 
him in his arms. “Tell me everything! I don’t understand 
you or the cause of your distress; what is it, you poor mar¬ 
tyr? Tell me the whole truth. Surely, it can’t be this alone!” 

Vasya clung to him and could not utter a word. His 
breath caught in his throat. 

“Come, Vasya, come! Well, if you can’t finish, what of 
it? I don’t understand you. Tell me what’s tormenting 
you? You see, for your sake I’ll.... Oh my God, my God!” 
he strode about the room as he talked, clutching at any¬ 
thing that came his way as though seeking an instant re¬ 
medy for Vasya. “I’ll go myself to see Yulian Mastako- 
vich tomorrow, I’ll ask him, I’ll plead with him to give you 
another day’s grace. I’ll explain everything to him, every- 



236 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


tiling, if this is all that’s causing you so much pain.” 

“God forbid!” cried Vasya, turning chalk-white. He 
all but fainted. 

“Vasya! Vasya!” 

Vasya came to himself. His lips were trembling, he 
tried to say something but only pressed Arkady’s hand 
silently and convulsively. His hand was cold. Arkady 
stood before him, filled with anxious and painful expec¬ 
tation. Vasya raised his eyes to him again. 

“Vasya, good heavens, Vasya! You’re breaking my heart, 
my friend, my dear friend.” 

Tears gushed from Vasya’s eyes; he threw himself on 
Arkady’s breast. 

“I’ve deceived you, Arkady!” he said. “I’ve deceived 
you: forgive me, forgive me! I’ve betrayed your friend¬ 
ship!” 

“Why Vasya, what is it? What could it be?” Arkady 
asked, quite terrified. 

“Theie! 

And with a gesture of despaii, Vasya pulled out a 
drawer and Hung on to the table six great Thick note¬ 
books, .sinolai to the one he was copying. 

“What’s that?” 

' This is what I’ve got to finish by the day after toinor- 
iow. I haven’t even done a quarter of it. Don’t ask me ... 
don’t ask me how it happened!” Vasya went on, turning 
at once to the subject that was tormenting him so. “Ar¬ 
kady. my friend! I myself don't know what I was about! 
I seem to be coming out of a dream! I’ve wasted a whole 
thiee weeks, I kept on . 1 .. . kept going to see her. My 
heait was aching, I was in torment ... from uncertainty 
.. and 1 could not write. I never even gave it a thought. 
And only now that happiness is dawning for me, have I 
awakened.” 

“Vasya,” Aikad> Ivanosich said firmly. “Vasya, I shall 
save you. I understand it all. It is not a jesting matter. 

I shall save you! Listen, listen to me. I’ll go and sec Yu¬ 
lian Mastakovich tomorrow. Don't shake your head, listen! 
I’ll tell him the whole story; allow me to do it my way ... 
I’ll make it clear to him ... I’ll go to any lengths! I’ll tell 
him how stricken you are, how tormented.” 



A FAINT HEART 


237 


“Do you know that you’re killing me even now?” Vasya 
brought out, his blood freezing from fright. 

Arkady Ivanovich turned pale, but he pulled himself 
together and abruptly burst out laughing. 

“Is that all? Just that?” he said. “Why, Vasya, Vasya, 
aren’t you ashamed of yourself? Now listen to me. I know 
I’m hurting you. But you see, I understand you. I know 
what you’re going through. Good heavens, we’ve been 
lodging together for five years now, you know! You are 
kind and gentle, but you’re weak, inexcusably weak! You* 
know, even Lizaveta Mikhailovna has noticed it already. 
\nd besides, you’re a dreamer, and that’s not good either, 
you know. You might go off your head, old chap. Listen, 

I know what you’d like. For instance, you’d like Yulian 
Mastakovich to be beside himself with joy and perhaps 
even give a ball in his delight that you are about to marry. 
Wait now, wait! You’re frowning. You see you’re up in 
arms for Yulian Mastakovich at my very first word! I’ll 
leave him alone. I, too, respect him as much as you do, 
you know. But you can’t convince me to the contrary or 
foibid me to think that you’d like there to be no unhappy 
souls in the world when you are about to marry. You must 
confess, old chap, that you’d like me, your best friend, to 
suddenly come into a hundred thousand lubles, you’d like 
all the enemies in the world, whoever they may be, to 
suddenly make up their differences for no reason at all, 
embrace one another in the middle of the street fiom hap¬ 
piness, and maybe even come to your flat to visit you! Oh 
my friend! My dear! I’m not making fun of you, it’s all 
true; you revealed something like this to me in different 
ways a long time ago. Because you yourself are happy, 
you’d like everyone, absolutely everyone, to become happy 
all at once. You're finding it painful and difficult to be 
happy alone! That is why you’re striving with all your 
might to be worthy of your happiness, and perhaps ease 
your conscience by performing some valorous deed. And 
so I do understand your readiness to torment yourself be¬ 
cause in a case where you should have shown your zeal 
and your cleverness ... well, perhaps your gratitude, as 
you put it, you have suddenly been remiss. You’re feeling 
bitterly sorry at the thought that Yulian Mastakovich will 




238 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


frown and even grow angry when he sees that you have 
failed to justify the hopes he placed in you. It pains you 
to think that you will hear lepi caches lrom the one yuu 
consider your benefactoi—and at a moment like this, too! 
When your hcait is brimming over with joy, and you 
don’t know on whom to lavish your gratitude. It’s so, isn’t 
it? Isn’t it?” 

Arkady Ivanovich, whose voice shook at these last 
words, fell silent and took a deep breath. 

Vasya gazed fondly at his friend. A smile flitted across 
his lips. And, indeed, the promise of hope seemed to light 
up his features. 

“Well then, listen to me,” Aikady took up again, moie 
hopefully inspiicd still. “We don’t want to let you lose 
favour with Yulian Mastakovich, do we, my dear boy? Is 
that the pioblcm? If it is, then I," said Aikady, spiinging 
to his feet, “I shall sacrifice myself for you. I shall go to 
Yulian Mastakovich tomorrow. Don’t argue with me' 
Vussa. you’ie making a crime out of your lapse But Yu¬ 
lian Mastakovich is magnanimous and merciful, and then 
fit’s not like you! Vasya, lie'll hear us out a ltd he’ll pull 
us out of oui Doubles. Are you reassured now?” 

Vasya, with tears in his eyes, pressed Arkady’s hand. 

“Don't woiry, Arkady, don’t,” he said, “the matter is 
settled I haven’t finished, so whal matter? I haven't, and 
that’s all *fietc is to it. And thcic's no need foi you to go. 
1 II tell him evei>thing myself. I’ll go to see him myself. 
I've calmed down. I’m quite composed, but please don’t 
gn .. and listen .. ” 

“Vasva, oh mv deal fiiend!” Aikady Ivanovich shouted 
loyfullv. 1 was only repeating your own words. I’m glad 
you've pulled yourself together and thought better of it. 
But no matter what happens to you, no matter what, re¬ 
member that I'm with you* I see you’re in anguish lest 
I say something to Yulian Mastakovich—I won’t, I won’t 
tell him anything, you'll tell him yourself. Now then you’ll 
go tomorrow . .. oi no, you won’t, you’ll stay at home and 
write, you see? And I’ll go and find out what sort of oom- 
mission this is, whether it’s urgent or not, whether it’s got 
to be finished on time, and what the consequences will be 
if you are late in delivering it. And then I’ll hurry to you 



A FAINT HEART 


239 


See? See? There is a glimmer of hope; now imagine the 
commission is not urgent—we can win through, you know. 
Yulian Mastakovich may not say anything, and then the 
situation will be saved.” 

Vasya shook his head doubtfully. But his grateful gaze 
never left his friend’s face. 

“Enough, enough! 1 feel so weak, I’m so tired,” he 
spoke breathlessly. “I don’t want to think about it either. 
Come, let us talk of something else. You see, 1 don’t think 
I’ll do any more now, I’ll just finish a page or two to ' 
break off at a good place. I say ... I’ve long been want¬ 
ing to ask you: how is it you know me so well?” 

Tears dropped from Vasya’s eyes onto Arkady’s hand. 

“Vasya, if you knew how much I love you, you wouldn’t 
ask me that, no!” 

“No, no, Arkady! I don’t know because ... because I 
don’t know why you have grown to love me so! Oh Ar¬ 
kady, do you know that your \ery love was killing me? 
D’you know the times that I shed tears, especially when 
I went to bed and thought of you (for l always think of 
you when I go to sleep), and my heart was wrung because, 
because ... well, because vou loved me so, and there was 
no way I could express my feelings, no way to thank 
you.” 

“See what you're like, Vasva, sec? Look how upset you 
are now,” said Aikady, remembering the episode in the 
street the day before. His heart bled. 

“Come, Arkady, you want me to compose myself, where¬ 
as I’ve never been so happy and calm in my life! D’you 
know ... Listen, I’d like to tell you everything, but I’m 
always afraid of distressing you.... You’re for ev»*r dis¬ 
tressing yourself and shouting at me, and it frightens 
me ... look at the way I’m trembling now! I don’t know 
why. Now this is what I’d like to tell you. It seems to me 
I didn’t know myself before, no! And I only came to 
know everyone else yesterday. My sense of feeling and 
appreciation was deficient, Arkady. My heart ... was hard 
within me. Look, it occurred to me that I have never done 
a kindness to anyone in the world, to no one at all, be¬ 
cause I was incapable of doing it—my very appearance 
is unpleasant. And yet everyone has been kind to me! 



240 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


First of all—you! As if I didn’t see it. But I only kept 
silent, that’s all!” 

“Vasya, don’t!” 

“Why not, Arkasha. 1 * Why not? I’m just...” Vasya 
spoke with difficulty through his tears. “I told you about 
Yulian Mastakovich yesterday. You know as well as I 
do how stiict and stern he is, he’s even found fault with 
you more than once, and yet with me he was cheerful 
and affectionate yesterday, and he revealed to me the 
kindness of his heart which he so sensibly conceals from 
everyone.” 

"There you are, Vasya* It only goes to show that you 
deserve your happiness.” 

“Oh Arkasha! How much I wanted to finish all this 
work! No, 1 know I’ll wreck my own happiness! I have 
a premonition. Oh no, not because of this,” Vasya said, 
intercepting the oblique look Arkady gave the stacks of 
urgent work lying on the table, “that’s nothing, it’s just 
a lot of paper ... rubbish! That’s a settled matter. I ... 
Arkasha, 1 was there today, at their place. I didn’t go in, 
you know. I felt depressed and bitter! I only stood out¬ 
side their door for a while. She was playing the piano, I 
listened. You sec, Arkady,” he said, pitching his voice 
low, “1 did not have the (outage to go in." 

"I say, Vasya, what’s wiong with you 1 * Why do you 
look at me like that?” 

“What? Oh, nothing! I feel tather faint, my legs are 
shaking; it’s because I sat up all night. Now everything 
is going green before my eyes. It’s here, here... 

He piessed his hand to his heart. He fainted. 

When Vasya regained consciousness, Arkady was ready 
to take forcible measures. He tried to make him go to bed, 
but Vasya refused absolutely. He cried, he wrung his 
hands, he wanted to write, he was resolved to finish his 
two pages. Not to provoke him further, Arkady allowed 
him to do so. 

“You see,” Vasya said, settling down in his chair, ‘you 
see I have an idea too. There is hope.” 

He smiled at Arkady and his pale face actually seemed 
to light up with a ray of hope. 

“Listen: I won’t take it all to him the day after tomor- 




A FAINT HEART 


241 


row. I’ll lie about the rest, I’ll tell him it got burned, or 
wet, or lost ... or that 1 haven’t finished it, 1 cannot tell 
a lie. I’ll explain it all to him myself, you know what? I’ll 
explain everything to him, I’ll say it was this way, I 
couldn’t ... I’ll tell him about my love; after all he’s 
only been married a short while himself, he’ll under¬ 
stand. Needless to say I’ll go about it in a deferential and 
quiet way; he’ll see my tears, they’ll move him.” 

“Yes, of course, go to him, go and explain ... and 
there’s no need to cry at all! What for? Really, Vasya, 
you’ve quite frightened me too.” 

“Yes, I’ll go, I’ll go. And now, let me write, let me 
write, Arkasha. I'll do no harm, just let me write!” 

Arkady threw himself on the bed. He did not trust 
Vasya, he did not trust him at all. Vasya was liable to 
do anything. But to go and seek forgiveness—for what? 
How? That was not the point. The point was that Vasya 
had failed to perform his duty, that Vasya felt guilty 
towards himself, he felt he was being ungrateful to his 
lucky stars, he was crushed and stunned by his happiness 
and considered himself unworthy of it, that he had merely 
found a pretext for harping on his unworthiness, and that 
he had not yet recovered from his surprise of yesterday. 
“That’s what it is!” Arkady Ivanovich thought. “He must 
be saved. He must be reconciled with himself. He’s sing¬ 
ing his own requiem.” He thought and thought and made 
up his mind to go to Yulian Mastakovich at once, as soon 
as it was morning, and tell him everything. 

Vasya was sitting and writing. Arkady Ivanovich, worn 
out, lay down in order to think the matter over again, 
and when he awoke it was almost daylight. 

“Oh hell! Again!” he cried as he looked at Vasya, who 
was busy writing. 

Arkady rushed to him, grasped him in his arms and 
forcibly put him to bed. Vasya smiled, his eyes closed 
from weakness. He could hardly talk. 

“I meant to go to bed,” he said. “D’you know. Arkady, 
I have an idea: I’ll finish. I’ve made myself hurry. I could 
not have sat up longer. Wake me up at eight.” 

His words trailed off and he fell into a dead sleep. 

“Mavra!” Arkady Ivanovich whispered to Mavra who 




242 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


came in with their tea. “He asked to be called in an hour. 
Most definitely no! Let him sleep ten hours if he wants to, 
understand?’’ 

“1 understand, sir, 1 do.” 

“Don’t make dinner, don’t bother with the firewood, 
don’t make a sound or there’ll be trouble! If he asks about 
me, tell him I’ve gone to the office, understand?” 

“I understand, sir, I do; let him sleep his fill, what’s 
it to me? I like my masters to sleep well, and I take good 
caie ol my inasteis' things, too. That cup 1 broke the other 
day, the one you scolded me for, it wasn’t me, it was the 
cat that did it; I don’t know how she did it; off with you, 
you blasted cat, 1 said.” 

“Sh! Shut up, shut up!” 

Aikady Ivanovich showed Mavra out into the kitchen, 
demanded the key of the door and locked her in. After 
that he went to his office. On the way there he thought of 
the best way to approach Yulian Mastakovich, wonder¬ 
ing whether it would be fitting and not too audacious of 
him. He felt timid when he i cached the office, and timid¬ 
ly inquiicd if His Excellency was in; he wjft told that he 
was not, and would not come in that day. Arkady Ivano¬ 
vich wanted to go to his residence at once, but it occurred 
to him most opportunely that if Yulian Mastakovich had 
not come to the office, he must be engaged in some press¬ 
ing business at home. Aikady Ivanovich remained at the 
office. 'I he horns dragged on interminably. He suirepti- 
tiously tiied to gather infounation about the work entrusted 
to Shumkov. But no one knew anything about it. All they 
knew was that Yulian Mastakovich charged him with 
special commissions, but what exactly they were, no 
one could tell. At last the clock stiuck three and Arkady 
Ivanovich rushed home. One of the clerks stopped him in 
the hall and told him that Vasily Petrovich Shumkov had 
come in some time after twelve and asked whether Ar¬ 
kady Ivanovich was there and whether Yulian Mastako¬ 
vich had come. On hearing this, Arkady Ivanovich hired 
a carriage and drove to his flat, beside himself with alarm. 

Shumkov was in. He was pacing the floor in extreme 
agitation. On seeing Arkady Ivanovich he tried to pull 
himself togethei and compose himself, and hastened to 




A FAINT HEART 


243 


conceal his agitation. He sat down to his work in silence. 
It seemed he wanted to evade his friend’s questions, he 
was vexed by them and was determined to keep to him¬ 
self some decision he had come to, for even friendship 
could no longer be relied on. This astonished Arkady and 
his heart was rent with a distressing, piercing pain. He 
sat down on his bed and opened a book at random, never 
taking his eyes off his poor friend. But Vasya remained 
stubbornly silent, he went on writing and did not look 
up. This continued for several hours, and Arkady’s an¬ 
guish rose to a pitch. At last, at about ten o’clock, Vasya 
raised his head and lixed a dull, stony look on Arkady. 
Arkady did not move. Two or three minutes went by 
Vasya remained numb. “Vasya!” Arkady cried Vasya did 
not respond. “Vasya!” he called again, spiinging from his 
bed. “Vasya, what’s the matter with vou? What is it?” 
he cried, running to him. Vasya raised his head and once 
again fixed the same dull, stony staie on him. “He’s got 
the palsy!” Arkady thought, shaking with lear. He grabbed 
the water jug, propped Vasya up higher in the chaii. 
poured some water on his head, moistened his temples, 
and rubbed his hands between his own. Vasya came back 
to his senses. “Vasya! Vasya!” Arkady cried out, no longer 
checking his tears. “Vasya, don’t wreck your life, remem¬ 
ber! Remember!” He could not go on and only held him 
close in his arms. Some painful emotion passed across 
Vasya’s face; he rubbed his forehead and clutched at his 
head as if afraid it might burst. 

“I don’t know what’s wrong with me!” he said at last. 
“I think I’ve overstrained myself. Oh well! Come, Arkady, 
don’t take on so, don’t!” he repeated, looking at Arkady 
with sad, tired eyes. “What’s there to worry about? 
.Come!” 

“Vasya, you comforting me!” Arkady cried, his heart 
breaking. “Vasya,” he said at last, “lie down, .try to sleep 
a little, ehj* Don’t torment yourself needlessly. You’ll get 
down to your work again afterwards.” 

“Yes, yes,” Vasya kept saying, “have it your own way. 
I’ll lie down; all right; yes, you see 1 was going to finish 
it but I’ve changed my mind now, yes...."’ 

Arkady drew him towards the bed. 





1'. DOS I OYKVSKY 


244 


“Listen, Vasya," he said firmly, “we've got to settle 
this matter once and for all! Tell me, what’s preying on 
your mind?” 

“Oh!’’ Vasya waved a limp hand and turned his face 
away. 

“Come, Vasya, come! You must tell me! I don’t want 
to be your murderer: I can't remain silent any longer. You 
won’t be able to fall asleep unless you've told me first, I 
know." 

“As you like, as you like,'’ Vasya said enigmatically. 

“He's giving in,” thought Arkady Ivanovich. 

“Take my advice, Vasya,” he said, “remember what I 
said to you, I’ll save you tomorrow, I'll settle your fate 
for you tomonow! Oh, but what am 1 saying: fate! You 
have frightened me so, Vasya, that I’m beginning to speak 
the way' you do. Fate, indeed! It's sheer rubbish, non¬ 
sense! You don't want to lose Yulian Mastakovich's fa¬ 
vour 01 —if you like to put it that way—his affection, that's 
what it is! And you won’t lose it, you'll sec I .. . 1. . ..” 

Arkady Ivanovich would have talked mueh longer, but 
Vasya cut him short. He raised himself in bed, hugged 
Arkady and kissed him. 

“Don’t,” he said faintly, “don't! Don’t say any more!” 
And he turned his face to the wall again. 

“Oh God!” Arkady thought. “Oh God! What is it? 
He's utterly lost; what has he decided to do? He’ll kill 
himself!” 

Arkady looked at him in despair. 

“If he fell ill,” Arkady was thinking, “it would be for 
the better perhaps. His anxiety would pass with his illness 
and by then the matter would have been settled most sa¬ 
tisfactorily. Oh, but I’m raving! Oh, good God in heaven!” 

Meanwhile, Vasya seemed to have fallen into a do/c. 
Arkady Ivanovich was relieved. “A good sign,” he thought. 
He decided to sit up with Vasya all night. Vasya was 
restless, he tossed and turned, jerked up nervpuslv, and 
opened his eyes for a moment. At last his fatigue got the 
better of him; he seemed to be fast asleep. It was about 
two in the morning; Arkady Ivanovich dozed off in his 
chair, with his elbow resting on the table. 

His sleep was fitful and strange. He fancied that he 




A FAINT HEART 


245 


was not asleep at all and that Vasya was lying on the 
bed as before. But how odd! It seemed to him that Vasya 
was pretending, that he was actually deceiving him, that 
there he was cautiously getting up, watching him with nar¬ 
rowed eyes, and was stealing towards the table. A sear¬ 
ing pain pierced Arkady’s heart; it wounded, saddened, 
and distressed him to see that Vasya no longer trusted 
him, that he was holding something back from him. He 
tried to call to him, to clasp him in his arms and carry 
him back to bed. But Vasya cried out, and it was his dead 
body he was bearing back to bed. Cold beads of sweat 
stood out on Arkady’s brow, his heart beat wildly. He 
opened his eyes and was wide awake. Vasya was sitting 
at the table, writing. 

Not believing his senses, Arkady glanced at the bed: 
Vasya was not there. Arkady sprang to his feet in alarm, 
still under the influence of his dream. Vasya never stirred. 
He kept on writing. To his horror, Arkady suddenly 
noticed that there was no ink on the pen Vasya was run¬ 
ning over the paper, that the pages he was turning over 
were perfectly clean, and he was hurrying, hurrying to 
cover the pages, as if he were performing his task with 
great efficiency and success. “No, it isn’t the palsy,” Ar¬ 
kady Ivanovich thought, and his whole frame shook. 
“Vasya, Vasya, speak to me!” he shouted, gripping Vasya’s 
shoulder. But Vasya remained silent and continued writ¬ 
ing with his dry pen. 

“At last I am writing faster,” he muttered, without look¬ 
ing up at Arkady. 

Arkady caught Vasya’s hand and pulled away the pen. 

Vasya groaned. He dropped his hand and raised his 
eyes to Arkady, then he brushed his hand across his fore¬ 
head with a gesture of weary vexation, as if he wanted to 
push away some heavy, leaden weight that was bearing 
down upon his entire being, and then he dropped his 
head on ljis breast, slowly and pensively. 

“Vasya! Vasya!” Arkady Ivanovich cried in despair. 
“Vasya!” 

A minute passed before Vasya looked up at him. His 
large blue eyes were filled with tears, and his wan, gentle 
face expressed infinite anguish. He whispered something. 



246 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“What? What did you say?” Aikady cried, bending 
over him. 

“What have I done? What have I done to deserve it?” 
Vasya was whispering. “What for? What have I done to 
deserve it?” 

“Vasya! Speak to me! What’s frightening you, Vasya, 
what is it?” Arkady cried, wringing his hands in despair. 

“Why are they sending me into the army?” said Vasya, 
looking straight into his friend’s eyes. “What for? What 
have I done?” 

Aikady’s hair stood on end: he refused to believe it. 
He was utteily crushed. But in a minute he recovered 
“It’s nothing, it will pass,” he said to himself, his face pale 
and his bloodless lips tiembling. He hastily put on his 
clothes. He wanted to run and fetch a doctor. Suddenly 
Vasya called to him; Arkady darted to him and held him 
close, like a mother whose child is being torn away from 
her. 

“Arkady, Arkadv, don't tell anyone! You hear me, it’s 
my own misfortune' Let me be the only one To suffer.” 

“Why Yasva, collect yomself, think what you’re say- 

mg! 

Vasva sighed, and Rais slmvly couiscd down his cheeks. 

“But why should they kill her? For what? How is she 
fo blame'*” he muttered in a tortuicil, he ait-icnding voice. 
‘It s my crime, my crime!.. 

He was silent a moment. 


"Good-bye. my beloved! Good-bye, my beloved!” be 
whisptird, shaking bi^ poor bead Arkady shuddered, 
started, and turned to iush out {or the doctor. “Let’s go* 
U * *ame! Vasya cried, amused by Arkady’s sudden move¬ 
ment. Let us go, old chap, let s go; 1 am ready! You take 
n>c . there! he hxoke off and glanced at Arkadv witli a 
|nd mistiustful look. 

How me, for heaven’s sake! Wait for 
minute. I’ll come back to you at 
cried, losing his head too. He 
hurried for the doctor. Vasya 
Was mrs'k and quiet, and only his 
speratc sort oi resolve. Remcmhei ing 
_ * tying on the fable, Arkady came back, 


A FAINT HEART 


247 


pocketed it, looked at his poor friend for the last time, 
and rushed out of the flat. 

It was after seven. The morning sun had long since 
driven the darkness from the room. 

He couldn’t find a doctor. He ran about lor a whole 
hour. All the doctors whose addresses he learned from 
the janitors whom he approached to ask if there wasn’t a 
doctor living in the house had already left on their morn¬ 
ing calls or had gone about their own affairs, fie only 
found one doctor who was receiving patients at this hour. 
But he first questioned the servant who announced Nefe- 
devich in great detail: who had sent him, who and why, 
and what was his complaint, and he even asked what this 
early visitor of his looked like? And as a lesult he said 
he could not receive him, he was too busy to go out on a 
call, and that patients of this sort should be taken to the 
hospital. 

Arkady, stricken and astonished, never expecting his 
efforts to end this way, gave up everything, all the doctors 
in the world, and hurried home, keyed up with anxiety for 
Vasya. He rushed into the flat. Mavra, completely unruf¬ 
fled, was sweeping the floor, chopping firewood, and ga¬ 
ting ready to light the stove. He ran into the room—there 
was no trace of Vasya: he was gone. 

“Where? Where woidd the poor fellow go’ ,r ’ Arkady 
wondered, his blood running cold from lcar. He asked 
Mavra: she knew nothing, had seen nothing, and had not 
even heard him go out, bless him. Nefcdcvich rushed to 
Kolomna. Heaven knows whv it occurred to hint that Va¬ 


sya might be there. 

It was already after nine when he arrived theic. Thev 
were surprised to set him, but they knew nothing at all. 
He stood before them, alarmed and distressed, and asked 


them where Vasya was. The old ladv’s legs ^ve way: 
she collapsed on to the sofa. Lizanka, shaking with alarm, 
wanted him to tell her wind had happened. What was 
there to tell? Arkady Ivanovich put them off with a story 

°r s P ur of the moment, which thev did 
not believe of course, and hurried .twav, leaving them 
an d stricken He made haste to reach his 
ce on ime and let them know, so that steps cuuld be 




248 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


taken as soon as possible. It struck him that perhaps Vasya 
was at Yulian Mastakovich’s. That was most probable! It 
had occurred to him before he ever thought of the Artem¬ 
yevs. He ordered the driver to stop as he went past His 
Excellency’s home, but instantly told him to drive on. 
He decided to try and find out if anything was known at 
the office and then, if Vasya hadn’t been there, he would 
present himself to His Excellency, at least as one making 
a report about Vasya. Somebody would have to make the 
report, anyway! 

The minute he entered the hall he was surrounded by 
the younger of his colleagues, mostly his equals in rank, 
and plied with questions about Vasya. All of them spoke 
at the same time, saying that Vasya had gone out of his 
mind, his mania being that they were going to send him 
into the army because he had been remiss in his duties. 
Arkady Ivanovich answered right and left, or, I should 
say, he gave no one a definite answer, and pressed on to 
the inner rooms. On the way he learnt that Vasya was 
with Yulian Mastakovich, that everyone nad gone in 
theie and that Hcspcr Ivanovich was there too. This 
made him pause. One of his superiors asked him where he 
was going and what he wanted. Without distinguishing the 
speaker’s face, he mumbled something about Vasya and 
walked straight towards the room. He could hear Yulian 
Mastakovich’s voice coming from within. “Where are you 
going?” someone asked him at the very door. Arkady Iva¬ 
novich almost lost courage: he was about to turn back, 
when suddenly he saw his poor Vasya through the half¬ 
open door. He pushed it wide open and went in. Confu¬ 
sion and bewilderment reigned in the room, because Yu¬ 
lian Mastakovich, it seemed, was deeply distressed. The 
more important of the gentlemen stood close beside him, 
discussing the matter and arriving at no decision what¬ 
ever. Vasya stood apart. Arkady’s heart sank when he 
looked at him. Vasya stood rigidly at attentioil, his face 
pale and his head held high. He was staring straight into 
the eyes of Yulian Mastakovich. Nefedevich’s arrival was 
noted instantly, and someone who knew that the two 
lodged together, informed His Excellency of the fact. Ar¬ 
kady was taken up to him. He looked at Yulian Masta- 



A FAINT HEART 


249 


kovich, prepared to answer all the questions put to him, 
but when he saw the sincere pity written on his face, Ar¬ 
kady burst into shuddering sobs like a child. Indeed, he 
did more: he seized his superior’s hand and raised it to 
his eyes, drenching it with his tears, so that Yulian Mas- 
takovich himself was obliged to pull it hastily away, shake 
it and say, “Enough now, young man, enough, I see that 
you have a good heart.” Arkady sobbed and threw beseech¬ 
ing glances at all those present. He believed that every¬ 
one felt brotherly love for his poor Vasya, that all of them 
woe in torment too and were weeping for him. “But what 
caused it, why did this happen to him?” Yulian Mastako- 
vich asked. “Why did he go out of his mind?” 

“From gra-grati-ti-tude!” was all Arkady Ivanovich 
could utter. 

His answer puzzled everyone, and, indeed, it seemed 
a strange and incredible thing: how could a man possibly 
go out of his mind from gratitude? Arkady explained as 
best he could. 

“Good Lord, what a pitv!” Yulian Mastakovich spoke 
at last. “And the work entrusted to him was neither im¬ 
portant nor very urgent. A life wrecked lor no reason 
at all! Oh well, take him away!" Whereupon Yulian Mas¬ 
takovich turned to Arkadv Ivanovich once more, and asked 
him to tell the whole story again. “He asks,” he said, in¬ 
dicating Vasya, “that a certain girl should not be told 
about this; who is she, his liancic J ’ 

Arkady began to explain the situation. Meanwhile, 
Vasya seemed preoccupied with some thought, he seemed 
to be making a strenuous effort to recollect something im¬ 
portant and essential, which was just what was needed 
at the moment. Now and then he gazed about him with 
a look of suffering in his eyes, as though hoping that some¬ 
one would remind him of what it was he had foi gotten. 
His eyes came to rest on Arkady 7 Ivanovi* h. Suddenly, a 
glimmer of hope seemed to light in them, he staited, and 
marched three paces, left foot forward, as smartly as he 
could, even clicking the heel of his right foot, like a sol¬ 
dier coming to attention to answer an officer s summons. 
Everyone watched and waited foi what was to come next. 

“I have a physical defect, Your Excellency, 1 am short 



250 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


and weak, I am not fit for military service,” he jerked 
out the words. 

At this, everyone in the room felt his heart wrenched, 
and even Yulian Mastakovich, for all his firmness, was 
moved to tears. “Take him away!” he said with a wave 
of his hand. 

“Marching orders!” Vasya said in an undertone and, 
turning sharply on his heel, marched out of the room. All 
the gentlemen who felt concern for his predicament rushed 
after him. Arkady pressed close behind the others. They 
seated Vasya in the waiting-room, in anticipation of the 
ambulance to come and take him away to the hospital. 
He sat in silence and appeared to be greatly preoccupied. 
He nodded to those he recognised as though he were bid¬ 
ding them good-bye. He kept glancing at the door, pre¬ 
pared to hear the word “go”. A crowd of people surround¬ 
ed him in a close circle: all shook their heads and all 
lamented his fate. Many were amazed by Vasya’s story, 
which was common property by then. Some discussed it, 
others pitied and praised Vasya, who was sdfch a modest 
and quiet young man, they said, and was so promising; 
they went on to say how hard he had tried to study, what 
an inquisitive mird he had, and how he had striven to 
improve himself. “He rose above his low station in life 
by his own effort,” someone observed. Yulian Mastako- 
vich’s attachment to Vasya was spoken of with feeling 
Explanations were offered by some why the fear of being 
sent into the army had entered Vasya’s mind and dei anged 
it. They said that the poor chap had until just recently 
belonged to the class liable for military service, and had 
only been promoted to his first rank through the media¬ 
tion of Yulian Mastakovich, who was appreciative of his 
giftedness, obedience, and rare meekness. In short, opin¬ 
ions and comments were varied and many. One of Vasya’s 
colleagues, a very short man, stood out particularly among 
the overwhelmed. And it wasn’t that he was so very young 
either, he must have been about thirty. But he was as 
white as a sheet, his whole body trembled, and he smiled 
a strange sort of smile—for the reason, perhaps, that a 
shocking affair or scene of horror is apt to appear frighten¬ 
ing and at the same time rather fascinating to a mere on- 





A FAINT HEART 


251 


looker. He kept running around the circle of gentlemen 
surrounding Vasya, and being a short little man, he would 
stand on tiptoe, clutch at the coat buttons of all and 
sundry—that is, all those he had a right to clutch—and 
repeat over and over again that he knew the reason for 
all this, that it was not a trilling sort of mattci at all but 
rather a grave one, and that something had to.be done; 
then he’d rise up on tiptoe again, whisper into his listener’s 
ear, nod his head once or twice, and run on again. Every¬ 
thing was over at last: a doctor and an orderly arrived 
from the hospital, they went up to Vasya and told him 
it was time to go. He jumped up hastily and followed 
them out. He kept glancing back over his shoulder: he was 
searching for someone with his eyes. “Vasya! Vasya!” 
Arkady Ivanovich cried out, sobbing. Vasya stopped, and 
Arkady managed to force his way through to him. They 
rushed into each other’s aims for the last time, and clung 
together in a tight embrace. It made one sad to look at 
them. What chimera of grief was wrenching the teais 
from their eves! Why were they crying? What was this 
disaster? Why had they not understood each other?... 

“Here, here, take this! Keep it for me,” Shumkov said, 
thrusting a folded piece of paper into Arkady’s hand. 
“They’ll take it from me. Bring it to me afterwards, 
please; keep it for me....” Vasya did not finish, someone 
called him. He ran hurriedly down the stairs, nodding to 
everyone, saying good-bye There was despair in his ex¬ 
pression. At last they settled him in the ambulance, and 
drove off. Arkady quickly unfolded the paper: in it was 
Liza’s lock of black hair, which Vasya never parted with. 
Stinging tears gushed from Arkady’s eves: “Ah, poor 
Liza!” . 

His office houis over, he set out for Kolomna. What 
happened there is beyond description. Even Petva, little 
Petya, without quite understanding what had become of 
good, kind Vasya, went into a corner, coveied his face 
with his h’ands, and sobbed from the depths of his voung 
heart. It was already dusk when Arkady started back for 
home. As he approached the Neva he paused for a minute 
and gazed intently down the livei, into the ioggv distance, 
hazy with. fror* and suddenly Hushed with the last 



252 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


crimson glow of the blood-red sun which was slowly sink¬ 
ing beyond the misty horizon. Night was descending upon 
the town, and in the parting reflection of the sun the whole 
expanse of the Neva—boundless, and swollen with the fro¬ 
zen snow—scintillated with a myriad sparks scattered by 
the silvery needles of hoar-frost. The temperature must 
have dropped to twenty below. Frozen steam rose from 
the hard-ridden horses and from the hurrying pedestrians. 
The thin air quivered with the slightest sound, and co¬ 
lumns of smoke uncoiled like giants from all the roof¬ 
tops on both sides of the river and streamed upwards in 
the cold sky, twining and untwining as they rose, and it 
seemed that new buildings were appearing above the old, 
a new city was taking shape in the air. In this hour of 
twilight it seemed that all this world with all its inha¬ 
bitants, the strong and the weak, with all their dwellings, 
be they the asylums of the paupers or the gilded palaces— 
the solace of the mighty of this world—was like a phan¬ 
tasm, magic and illusory, a dream which would vanish 
momentarily and fade away in vapour towards the dark 
blue sky. Strange thoughts haunted poor Vasya’s bereaved 
friend. He started, and a hot rush of blood, rising sudden¬ 
ly from some powerful and never experienced emotion, 
flooded his heart. It seemed that only now he was able 
to understand all this disaster and what had driven his 
poor Vasya, who could not bear his happiness, out of his 
mind. His lips quivered, his eyes flashed, he paled, and 
in that moment he seemed to pierce the veil into a new 
beyond... . 

He grew melancholy and gloomy and lost all his cheer¬ 
fulness. He came to loathe his old flat and moved into 
another one. He could not go to Kolomna, nor did he wish 
to. Two years later he met Lizanka in church. She was 
already married, and behind her walked a wet-nurse, 
carrying a baby. They talked, and for as long as possible 
they tried to put off mentioning the past. Liza, told him 
she was happy, she was not poor, her husband was a good 
man and she loved him. But suddenly, in the middle of 
her speech, her eyes filled with tears, her voice grew faint 
and, turning away, she sank on her knees on the parvis, 
to hide her sorrow from the world.... 





A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 
A Short Story 








Tl:is unfortunate incident occurred just when theie be¬ 
gan, with such irrepressible clan, such a naive and touch¬ 
ing impulse, the renaissance of our dear mother country, 
and the minds of all her valiant sons were fired with new 
hopes and a desire for new destinies. One clear frosty 
winter night, the hour being past 11 o’clock, three highly 
lespectable gentlemen sat in a comfortably, even luxuri¬ 
ously furnished room in a certain excellent two-storey 
mansion on the Petersburg Side, engaged in weighty and 
lofty converse on a most interesting topic. All three gen¬ 
tlemen had the rank of General. They were seated around 
a small table, each in a fine cushioned armchair, quietly 
and comfortably sipping champagne as they conversed. 
The bottle was on the table, in a silver bucket half full 
of ice. The host, Privy Councillor Stepan Nikiforovich 
Nikiforov, a confirmed bachelor of sixty-live, was celebrat¬ 
ing both his installation in the house he had just purchased, 
and his birthday, which happened to coincide and which 
he had never before celebrated. It was not much of a cele- 
biatiun, of course. As we have already seen there were 
only two guests, both of them former colleagues anu su¬ 
bordinates of Mr. Nikiforov and both of them Councillors 
of State—their names were Semyon Ivanovich Shipulenko 
and Ivan Ilyich Pralinsky. They had arrived at about 
nine for tea, and then had started on the champagne, 
knowing that at half past eleven sharp they would have 
to go home, for their host liked to keep regular hours. A 
few words about him—he had started on his career as a 
humble, hard-up official, had calmly drudged for forty- 
five years, perfectly aware of the rank which he would 
attain, had not the slightest intention of aiming for the 



256 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


stars in heaven, though he had already been decorated 
with two, and in particular was not fond of coming out, on 
any subject whatever, with his private opinion. He was 
honest, that is to say, he had never found it necessary to 
do anything particularly dishonest; he was a bachelor, 
from sheer selfishness; he was no fool, though he did not 
make a display of his intelligence; most of all he hated 
disorderliness and enthusiasm, which latter he considered 
moral disorderliness, and towards the end of his litc had 
become completely immersed in the delicious, indolent 
comfort of his existence and in his solitude. He did some¬ 
times visit people of the better sort, but from his youth 
had always disliked entertaining in his own home, and 
of late, when he did not play grand patience, contented 
himself with the company of his clock, imperturbably 
listening for evenings on end to its ticking under the glass 
dome on the mantelpiece. In appearance he was perfectly 
respectable, he was clean-shaven, did not look his age, 
was well preserved, and gave promise of living a long 
time yet; and he behaved in the most gentlemanly man¬ 
ner. His post was a fairly comfortable one, requiring him 
to attend sessions and sign some kind of papers. In a word 
he was considered an excellent man. He had only one 
passion, or, rather, one ardent desire—to possess a house 
of his own. and a real gentleman’s house, not just a solid 
dwelling. This desire was at last fulfilled, he had chosen 
and purchased a house on the Petersburg Side, rather far 
out, it is true, but a house with a garden, and, what is 
more, this house was extiemely elegant. The new owner 
reasoned that the further out he lived, the better, since 
he was not iond of receiving guests in his home, and for 
visits and going to his office he had a fine chocolate-co¬ 
loured carriage to seat two, a coachman named Mikliei, 
and a pair of small but sturdy and handsome horses. All 
this was the fruit of forty years of niggling economy, and 
he could therefore rejoice in it wholeheartedly. That is 
why, having purchased the house and moved in, Stepan 
Nikiforovich felt such content in his tranquil heart that 
he actually invited guests on his birthday, a date he had 
hitherto carefully concealed from his most intimate 
friends. As a matter of fact he had certain views in regard 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


257 


to one of his guests. He himself only occupied the top 
storey of his house, and he needed a tenant for the lower 
storey, which was laid out in exactly the same way. Ste¬ 
pan Nikiforovich quite counted on Semyon Ivanovich 
Sliipulenko, and had twice turned the conversation to this 
subject during the evening. But Semyon Ivanovich would 
not commit himself. He, too, was a man who had carved 
out his career slowly and laboriously; he had black hair 
and whiskers, and there was something permanently, 
jaundiced in his countenance. He was married and a mo¬ 
rose stay-at-home, keeping his family in perpetual terror, 
attending to his duties with the utmost confidence, and 
also perfectly aware of the rank he would attain, and, 
still better, of what he would never attain. He had a 
good post and he held it fast. He regarded, not without a 
certain rancour, the new era just beginning to dawn, but 
it did not cause him any particular alarm. He was con¬ 
fident in himself and listened to Ivan Ilyich Pralinsky’s 
harangues on the new topics with a sneer. By now, it 
should be remarked, they were all a little light-headed, 
and Stepan Nikiforovich himself condescended to enter 
into a slight argument with Mr. Pralinsky about the new 
era. We must now say a few words about His Excellency 
Mr. Pralinsky, especially since it is he who is the hero in 
this story. 

Councillor of State Ivan Ilyich Pralinsky had only been 
called Your Excellency these last four months, in a word, 
he was a newly fledged General. In years, too, he was 
young, not more than forty-three, and he looked, and liked 
to look, still younger. He was a tall handsome man who 
took pride in his clothes, wore his star with the utmost 
savoir faire, affected a few aristocratic tricks of manner 
acquired in his childhood, and, while remaining a bache¬ 
lor, dreamed of a wealthy, perhaps even an aristocratic 
bride. He still indulged in dreams, though he was far 
from stupid. He was inclined to hold forth, and liked to 
assume parliamentary poses. He came of a good family, 
w&s a General’s son, and something of a fop. In his early 
childhood he wore velvet and cambric, and went to an 
aristocratic school; and though he did not gain much 
knowledge theie, he did well in his office, and rose to 



258 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


tlie lank of General. Ilis supcriois considered him an able 
man, and even placed hopes in him. But Stepan Nikiforo¬ 
vich, under whose aegis he had begun his career and con¬ 
tinued it almost to the rank of General, had never con¬ 
sidered him a paiticularly efficient man, and placed no 
hopes in him whatever. It pleased him, however, that Ivan 
Ilyich came of a good family, possessed property—that is 
to say, a large stone mansion managed by a steward— 
was related to some not undistinguished persons, and, in 
addition, had a good presence. In his heart Stepan Niki¬ 
forovich censured him for his excitable imagination and 
his fi ivolity. Ivan Ilyich himself sometimes felt that he 
was oversensitive, perhaps even touchy. Every now and 
then he had unaccountable fits of sickly remorse as if 
there weie something about which he should feel slightly 
conscience-stricken. With bitterness and secret pangs, he 
then admitted to himself that he had not really soared 
so high as he liked to think. At such moments he became 
quite despondent, especially when his piles were giving 
him tiouhic, and then he alluded to his life as*wne exis- 
tenu immquic , and even ceased to believe (quite private¬ 
ly. of corn sc; in his parliamentary gifts, calling himself 
a parlour and a phrascur; but while this was of course 
highly creditable, it did not m the least prevent him, half 
an hour later, liom throwing out his chest, cheering up, 
and assuiing himself still more resolutely and arrogantly 
than befoie, that he would show his mettle yet, and that 
he would be not only a high olhcial, but a statesman too, 
and one whom Russia would long remember. Sometimes 
he actually had \isions of monuments. All this goes to 
show 7 that Ivan Ilyich aimed high, while hiding deep in 
his heart, with certain misgivings, his vague dreams and 
aspirations. In a word, he was a good man. a poet at 
heait. During the last few ycais, moments of morbid disil¬ 
lusionment had begun to visit him with increasing fre¬ 
quence. He grew extremely irritable and suspicious, and 
was ready to regard the slightest opposition as an insult. 
But the new spiiit in Russia instilled great hopes in him. 
His promotion to the rank of General confirmed them. He 
took heart; he held his head high. He began to talk a 
great deal and most eloquently, on the very latest topics, 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


259 


all of which he took up with remarkable rapidity and 
zeal. He sought opportunities of speaking, went about the 
town, and in many places earned the reputation of a des¬ 
perate liberal, which he found immensely flattering. On 
this particular evening, after three or four glasses of 
champagne, he was in great form. He was seized by a 
desire to make Stepan Nikiforovich, whom he had nol 
seen for a long time and whom he had always respected 
and even submitted to, change his views on all points. # 
For some reason he considered Stepan Nikiforovich a* 
retrograde, and attacked him with the utmost ardour. Ste¬ 
pan Nikiforovich, who made hardly any attempt at de¬ 
fending himself, only smiled craftily, though the subjet I 
interested him. Ivan Ilyich worked himself up and in thf 
heat of what he imagined to be a discussion, turned more 
often than he should have to his glass. Whenever he took 
a diink, Stepan Nikifoiovich picked up the bottle and 
filled up his guest s glass, and lor some reason I\an Ilyich 
begen suddenly to take umbrage at this, especially since 
Semyon Ivanovich Shipulenko loi whom he had a great 
contempt, and whom, moreover, he feared lor his cyni¬ 
cism and malevolence, maintained a most insidious silence 
beside him, smiling more frequently than was strictly 
needed. “They think my arguments puerile, 1 believe," 
flashed through the head of Ivan Ilyich. 

“No. It’s time, it’s high time,” he continued eagerly. 
“We have let it go on too long, and in my view humane¬ 
ness is the great thing. Humaneness to subordinates, 
remembering that they, too, are human beings. Humane¬ 
ness will save everything and put everything right.” 

A snigger came from Semyon Ivanovich. 

“But what are you upbrading us so severely for?" ob¬ 
jected Stepan Nikiforovich at last, with a couitcous smile. 
“I confess, Ivan Ilyich, that 1 still can't quite make out 
what you are trying to tell us. You recommend humane¬ 
ness. That means love for one’s fellow man, doesn’t it?" 

“Well, yes, love for one’s fellow man if you like. I....’’ 

•“Just a minute! As far as I can judge it is not a matter 
of this alone. Love of one’s fellow creatures has always 
been commendable. But the teform will not confine itself 
to that. Questions regarding the peasantry, legal, econom- 



260 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


ic, moral and ... and_any number of others have 

arisen, and taken all together, all at once, they may cause 
great ... er ... waverings. That is what makes us anx¬ 
ious, and not just humaneness....” 

“Oh yes, it goes deeper than that,” remarked Semyon 
Ivanovich. 

“I understand that very well, and allow me to remark, 
Semyon Ivanovich, that I would not yield to you in pro¬ 
fundity of understanding,” said Ivan Ilyich caustically, 
his tone unnecessarily harsh. “I will, however, make so 
bold as to inform you, too, Stepan Nikiforovich, that you 
do not quite understand me.” 

“I do not.” 

“And yet I maintain and everywhere promote the idea 
that humaneness, especially humaneness to subordinates, 
from the official to the clerk, fiom the clerk to the yard¬ 
man, from the servant to the muzhik—humaneness, I say, 
might become, as it were, the cornerstone of future reforms 
and the renewing of things in general. Why? Because! 
Take this syllogism—I am humane, therefore I ftm loved. 
I am loved, consequently I am trusted. I am trusted, con¬ 
sequently I am believed in. I am believed in, consequently 
1 am loved—that is to say, 1 mean, if people believe, then 
they will believe in ihe reform, they will understand, so 
to speak, the essence of the thing, they will embrace one 
another morally, so to speak, and decide everything fra¬ 
ternally, thoroughly. What are you laughing at, Semyon 
Ivanovich? Haven’t I made myself clear?” 

Stepan Nikiforovich silently raised his eyebrows. He 
was astonished. 

“I’m afraid I must have had a drop too much,” re¬ 
marked Semyon Ivanovich caustically, “and am therefore 
a bit slow in the uptake. A temporary aberration, no 
doubt.” 

Ivan Ilyich winced. 

“We shan’t be able to keep it up,” said Stepan Nikt- 
forovich suddenly, after slight reflection. 

“What d’you mean we shan’t be able to keep it up?” 
asked Ivan Ilyich astonished at Stepan Nikiforovich’s un¬ 
expected and abrupt remark. 

“We just won’t be able to keep it up.” Stepan Nikifo- 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


261 


rovich appaiently had no desire to go into explanations. 

“You’re not thinking about new wine and old bottles, 
are you?” retorted Ivan Ilyich with a shade of irony. “Oh, 
no, sir, I will answer for myself.” 

Just then the dock struck half past eleven. 

“I suppose it is time we went,” said Semyon Ivanovich, 
making as if to rise from his chair. But Ivan Ilyich fore¬ 
stalled him, springing up quickly and taking his sable cap 
from the mantelpiece. He looked a little olfended. 

“Well, Semyon Ivanovich, will you think it over?” said* 
Stepan Nikiforovich, seeing his visitors out. 

“About the apartment, you mean? I will. I’ll think it 
over.” 

“And when you have made up your mind, let me knov 
as soon as possible.” 

“A business matter, I take it?” remarked Mr. Pralin- 
sky, with a kind of obsequious courtesy, and playing with 
his cap. He felt left out, ignored. 

Stepan Nikiforovich raised his brows, but said noth 
ing, as if to show that he had no wish to delav his gue'ts. 
Semvon Ivanovich hastily took his leave. 

“Oh. very well, then . . . since you don’t understand 
common civility,” Mr. Pralinsky thought to himself, and 
held his hand out to Stepan Nikiforovich almost defiantly 

Once in the hall Ivan Ilyich wrapped his expensive and 
light fur-lined coat round him. trying to look as if he did 
not notice Semyon Ivanovich's worn racoon and tlicv both 
started down the stairs. 

“The old fellow seems to have taken offence,” said Is an 
Ilyich to the silent Semvon IvanoviHh. 

“Oh, no—what makes you think that?" ttplted the latter 
coldly and placidly. 

“Flunkey!” thought Ivan Uvich. 

They went out on to the porch. Semvon Ivanovich's 
sleigh, drawn by an uncomely grey stallion, wrs brought 
r ound. 

“What the devil! What on earth has Ttifon clone with 
my carriage?” cried Ivan Ilyich not seeing his cariiage 
anywhere. 

He looked here and there, but there was no carriage. 
Stepan Nikiforovich’s footman knew nothing about it. 




262 


F DOSTOYEVSKY 


They asked Varlam, Semyon Ivanovich's coachman, who 
told them that Ivan Ilyich’s coachman and carriage had 
been there all the time, and now they weren’t there any 
more. 

“Most unfortunate!” said Mr. Shipulcnko. “Can I give 
you a lift?” 

"Those scoundrelly servants!” cried Mr. Pralinsky in a 
tage. “Asked leave to go to a wedding, the hound, here 
on the Petersburg Side, some crony of his getting mar¬ 
ried, confound her. I stiictly forbade him to go away. And 
now I’m ready to wagei that’s where he’s gone.” 

“He has,” said Varlam, “that’s where he went. He 
piomised to be back in a minute, he said he’d be were by 
the time you came out.” 

“Theie you are! I was sure of it! I’ll give it to him!” 

“Better send him to the police station for a good Hog¬ 
ging. Then he'll do what he’s told,” said Semyon Ivano¬ 
vich, di awing up the carriage rug. 

“Please don’t trouble, Semyon Ivanovich 1 ” 

‘ Just as you like, I can easily take you along.” 

“Good-bye, meui\" 

Semyon Ivanovich drove off and Ivan Ilyich walked 
awav o\ei the wooden pavement, feeling badly rufHed 


‘ I’ll give it to you, you lascal! I’ll go on foot to spite 
>ou, to make you feel it, to frighten vou! He’ll come back 
and discover his master has gone on foot, the scoundrel!” 

Ivan Ilyich had never before given way to his temper 
like this, but he really was furious, besides his head was 
going jound. He was not a drinking man, and a mere five 
or six glasses affected him immediately. But it was a beau¬ 
tiful night, frosty and unusually quiet and windless. The 
sky was clear and starry. The light of the full moon flooded 
the earth with a muted silvery sheen. It was so pleas¬ 
ant to be out that Ivan Ilyich after the first fifty pates 
almost forgot his mishap. A sensation of extraordinary 
well-being stole over him. When people are a little drunk 
their mood keeps changing. He even found some charm 
in the shabby little wooden houses lining the deserted 
street. 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


263 


“After all, it’s a good thing I went on foot,” he told 
himself, “it’ll be a lesson for Trifon, and for me it's a 
pleasure. I ought to walk more. I'm sure to find a dioshky 
on Bolshoi Prospckt. What a lovely night! And just look 
at all these little houses! Probably that’s where the small 
fry live, clerks ... perhaps tradesmen. Oh, that Stepan 
Nikiforovich! And what retrogrades they all are, the old 
fogies! Fogies— e'est le ?not. Still, he’s a clever chap. He 
has that bon sens, that sober practical comprehension of 
things. But, oh, those old men, those old men! They lack 
that w hat’s-its-name—never mind, they lack it.‘We shan't 
be able to keep it up’—what did he mean by that? He 
even paused to think before saying it. He didn’t quite un¬ 
derstand me, by the way. How could anybody help under¬ 
standing? Harder not to understand than to understand. 
The great thing is that I am convinced, profoundly con¬ 
vinced. Humaneness . . . love of one's fellow man. Restore 
human beings to themselves ... revive their sclf-icspecl 
and then . .. start afresh with ready-made mateiial. (Hear 
enough, I think. Yes, sir! Be so kind. Your Excellency, as 
to accept the syllogism—we meet a clerk, for example, 
some poor, oppressed clerk. Well ... who are you? The 
answer: so and so, such and such a clerk. Do you work? 
I do. Do you wish to be happy’’ I do. What do you requiie 
to make you happy? This and that. Why* Because . .. 
and the man understands me before I have said half a 
dozen words. The man is mine, the man is caught, so to 
speak, in the net, and I can do what I like with him, for 
his own good, I mean. That Semyon ivanovich is a bad 
lot. Very unpleasant phiz. . .. ‘Have him flogged!’ He 
said it to annoy me. Oh, no, you don't—flog him yourself. 
I shan’t! I will shame Trifon with words, with reproaches. 
I will shame him, and he’ll feel it, you’ll see. As for the 
rod, hm, an as yet unsolved problem, hm.... What about 
going to Mademoiselle Emcrans? The devil—this accursed 
wooden pavement!” he cried, suddenly losing his footing. 
“And this is the capital! Enlightenment! I might have 
brokeh my leg. Hm. I detest that Semyon Ivanovich—a 
nasty phiz he has. It was he who giggled when I said 
‘morally embrace’. Well, and if they do, what’s it to you? 
I shan’t embrace you —sooner a muzhik.... If I meet a 



264 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


muzhik I shall stop and speak to him. Of course I was 
drunk and perhaps I didn’t express myself properly. Per¬ 
haps I'm not expressing myself properly now, either. Hm. 
I’ll never drink again. You talk too much, and the next 
day you wish you hadn’t. And I can walk straight.... 
And, they're all scoundrels anyway, every one of them!’’ 

Thus argued Ivan Ilyich in broken disconnected phras¬ 
es, as he continued to stride along. The fresh air had a 
sobering effect on him. Another five minutes and he 
would have calmed down and felt inclined for sleep. But 
suddenly, within a very few paces of the Bolshoi Prospekt, 
he caught the sound of music. He looked round. On the 
other side of the street in an extremely dilapidated 
wooden house, only one storey high but very long, there 
were sounds of merriment, fiddles scraping, a double-bass 
booming, and a flute shrilling out the tune of a gay quad¬ 
rille. In front of the windows there was a small crowd, 
mostly women in padded cloaks with kerchiefs on their 
heads, straining to sec something, however little, through 
the chinks in the shutters. Obviously it was a*jolly party. 
The stamping of the dancers’ feet could be heard from 
the opposite side of the road. Ivan Ilyich noticed a po¬ 
liceman not far away and went up to him. 

“Whose house is that, my good man?” he asked, open¬ 
ing his expensive coat just enough for the policeman to 
see the important Order on his breast. 

“Civil servant Pseldonimov's, he's a registrar,” replied 
the policeman, drawing himself up. He had at once no¬ 
ticed the sign of distinction. 

“Pscldonimov? Ha’ Pseldonimov! What’s going on? 
Is it his wedding?” 

“Yes, Your Excellency, he’s marrying the titular coun¬ 
cillor's daughter. Mlekopitayev, titular councillor—used 
to serve on the Municipal Council. The house goes with 
the bride.” 

“Ah, so the house is Pseldonimov’s now, aqd not Mle- 
kopitayev’s.” 

“Pseldonimov’s, Your Excellency. It used to be Mleko- 
pitayev’s and now it’s Pseldonimov's.” 

"Hm. 1 ask you this, because I am his chief. I’m a Ge¬ 
neral in the office where Pseldonimov works.” 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


265 


“At your service. Your Excellency!” The polio-man 
drew himself up still straiglitci. hut I\ an i 1 y i<~h scorned 
to be lost in thought. He stood there, thinking. 

Yes, Pscldonimov really worked in liU department, in 
his own office. He remembeicd now. He was a petty of¬ 
ficial with a salary of about ten lubles a moi.ti Mr Pra- 
linsky had taken over the office quite lecently, and could 
hardly be expected to know everything about all his 
subordinates, but Pseldonirnov he remembered, picmelv 
on account of his name. It had struck him the fust t>oie 
he came across it, so that even then he had cast a tonie 
than ordinarily curious glance at the ownct of such a 
name. Now he remembered him, a very v oung man with 
a long aquiline nose, tufty flaxen hair, very lean and ill 
nourished, in an impossible uniform and tiouseis that 
were shabby to the point of indecency He icmemhered 
how < ven then the thougl < had passed dm ><gh his mind - 
should he not assign the poor wretch a ten-iuble note for 
the holiday, to get himself something to cut:* But simc the 
poor fellow’s face was so verv unprepossessing and it. ex¬ 
pression so very unpleasing, incapable of arousing anv 
feeling but disgust, the kind intentions had somehow 
vanished into thin ah. and Pscldonimov remained unre¬ 
warded. All the greater had been the astonishment of 
Ivan Uvich when this same Pscldonimov. not moic than 
a week ago, came to ask permission to cet married Ivan 
Ilyich remembered that he had had no time to look into 
the matter thoroughly and that the qutstion of the wed 
ding was decided hastily and superf ialiv And vet he 
remembered quite cleatly that Pseld mimov was 10 ge< 
a wooden house and four hundred rubles in cash with his 
bride; he had been stmek by the ciicumstancc at the time. 
He even remembered making some playful uniatk at the 
amusing conjunction of the names, both so odd—MLkopi- 
tayev and Pseldonirnov. He remembered it all vividly. 

Remembering, he fell deeper and u"< ( ier into thought. 
It is common knowledge that long arguments sometimes 
pass through our minds in a flash, in the form of sensa¬ 
tions, without being translated into ordinary, not to men¬ 
tion literary, language. We will, however, endeavour to 
translate all these ■'ensations of our hero and offer the 



LOG 


r nos 10^ i \ sky 


icadei at least tile (ssdm ol them all that was must im- 
poitaut and o mpi ehc iisiblc in tlum 1 01 many of mil 
sensations, wlun tianslated into oidmaiv language sound 
e|iiitr meiedible I hat is win t he \ ne\ei emcigc into the 
daslight though exemme exponents them "I he* sen 
satmns and thoughts oi Kan llvich weic somewhat dis- 
< ounce fed Rut then we know the leason foi this 

Well, now 1 it Hashed thioimh Ins mind ‘We d ) noth 
ing hut till* .aid talk, and when it comes to deeds, we 
simplv thumb om noses I,ike this same Psr Idommox foi 
example H< lias just utumul liom the steps of the altai, 
agitated hopeful impatient taste of conjugal blis^ 

It is one ol the happiest da\s of Ins hie now In is en 
te’t lining his guests gmng i least humhh p<»«>i hut 
clueiful, p)\ous eoidi il Well now if he could know that 
it tins v t) \ moment 1 1 Ins elm I hispuneipal am stand 

ills, outv de h, ho * 1 1 stv nine, to his music 1 Now teal- 

p- wliit would In (h» J What would he do it I weic to 
w 1 1k ^tiaight m ) \t lust «*l eouise he d In taken abaci-, 
In d t>e ahnost ^tipoud Puhip*> Id he inliu<Hng nps* f 
tnu c\ci)thing ^ es tha* s how it would he if am 
(/the l (icmiai weic to walk in, hut not me that’s just 
it- amone else hut not me 

4 Well, ^tc pan NiKilo*ovnh sou didn’t umh island me, 
\ou see- luie s an example foi eon uadv to hand* 

4 On \es* \\ e’u alwavs shouting about humaneness, 
hut we it incapable of heioistn, of leal fc*tls What do 
I m< m !)\ heioisuK ^imph this gnen the picscnt itla 
lions between all membeix of sncietx, foi me, mr , to go 
aftei midnight to the wedding of a suhoidinatc a icgistiai, 
with ten mbits a month, whv, iliat would he madness, 
utfti confusion of ideas flic last da\ of Pompeii chaos 1 
No one would undtistand it Stepan \ikifoio\ leh will not 
undeistand it to his dying clav Whv he said we shan t 
he able to keep it up Ye>, hut that’s you, old folk, paia- 
K tics and ictiogiades 111 keep it up 1 I’ll turn the last day 
of Pompeii into a da\ of bliss foi my suboidinate, an 
appaicnllv cia/v aet into a noimal, patiiarchal, elevated 
and ethical one. IIow J f ike this* Kindly listen* 

“Will, then let us suppose I cntei They aic 
astonished, the dancing stops, they stale at me, they 



A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDEN T 


267 


retreat a step. Very well, but here I do mv bit. I go straight 
up to the terrified Pseldonlmov with the most benevolent 
smile and say, in the simplest possible words: ‘lt‘s like 
this, you see, I was visiting His Excellenev Stepan Niki¬ 
forovich. He lives quite near here, you probablv know the 
address.’ Well, and then I’ll tell him in humorous terms 
of Trifon’s truancy. From Tiifon I'll go <>n to a description 
of my walk. ‘Well, I hear music, question the policeman, 
and learn that you are getting mat ri< d. Whv not go to 
my subordinate’s house, I think to myself, and see how 
my clerks make merry and ... get mat tied You won’t 
drive me away, I suppose P’ Di ive me aw.iv* What a word 
for a subordinate. Drive me away—not like lv f I think 
he’ll go mad, rush headlong to seat tm in an unmhair 
tremble with admiration, too outcome, at fiist to take it 
all in*. 

“Now what (ould be simple 1 01 ipok cK guilt than such 
an act! What have I come fot ’ 1 hat's anothn question' 
That is, so to say, the ethical side of the matte i. And 
that’s the whole bcautv of it! 

"flm! What was I thinking about ’ 

‘Oh, yes ... well, of couise, thcv’ll sc .a n - with the 
most important guests, some titular counc'dloi. or a lela 
tive, some retired captain with a l.d nose. . tingnl de 
scribes those types marvellously. Well, of r.»u'‘e I am in 
troduced to the bride, 1 pay her a compliment, t mom age 
the guests. I beg them not to ne shv, to make menv. to go 
on dancing, I joke, laugh, in a word. 1 am emi d and 
charming. I am always genial and charming uh*n I am 
pleased with myself. Hm. But of cruise just now l am 
a little tipsy . .. not drunk of course, but a little ... 

“Naturally, as a gentleman 1 treat them as equals, and 
by no means demand any special signs . . but morallv, 
morallv, that’s another question. They will understand and 
appreciate ... my act will bring out all the magnanimity 
in them. . . . Well. I’ll stay about b., 1 ' an hour -say an 
hour. I’ll leave, of course, just before suppu, they will 
bustle about, implore me, bow to the ground, but I will 
only drink one glass, congratulate them, and leave be¬ 
fore supper. ‘Business!’ I'll say. And the moment I utter 
the word ‘business' all their faces will become respect- 




268 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


fully crave. By this I give them a gentle hint that there 
is a great difference between them and me. All*the differ¬ 
ence in the woild! Not that I wish to give this impres¬ 
sion, hut it is necessary_even in the moral sense it is 

essential, whatever anyone says. I will smile, perhaps I’ll 
even laugh, and then everyone will cheer up. Say some¬ 
thing playful to the bride again. Hm—I know what I’ll 
say—l il hint that I shall come again in exactly nine 
months in the capacity of godfather, ha-ha! No doubt 
slit'll bung fo»th punctually. They multiply like rabbits. 
Well, they’ll all laugh, the bride will blush. I kiss her 
on the forehead with great feeling, even give her my bless¬ 
ing and .. and tomorrow my feat will be known at the 
offict Tomorrow I am again severe, tomorrow 1 am 
again exacting, inexouble, in fact—but now everyone 
kn »ws flic soit of man I am They have seen into mv soul, 
they know my value. ‘He is a stiict chief, but he is really 
an angel,' they will say. And so I have gained a victory. 
1 have scored bv a paltry act which would never have 
oiiic into your head. They aie mine now. I am their 
lather, they are my children. .. Now then. Your Ex- 
lelbncy, Stepan Nikilorovich. see if you can do a thing 
i’ke that! 

‘Do you realise, do vou understand, that Pscldonimov 
wdl tell his child) en how the General himself made merrv, 
how h< actually drank at then father’s wedding? And 
those children will tell tin ir children, who will tell their 
prandr trldien, as an anecdote hallowed by tradition, how 
a hi/h oilicial, a statesman (and by that time I shall be 
h 4 h these things) honoured their father ... and so on and 
so forth Whv, 1 shall be raising the abased, morally 
speaking, 1 shall be giving him back to himself. Why, 
lie gets ten rubles a nnrith! And if I do this five times, 
ten times, or something like it, then I shall gain universal 
popularity.... It will imptess itself on the hearts of all, 
and there’s no knowing what might come of, it, of that 
populai ity 1 ” 

Thus, or almost thus, aigued Ivan Ilyich. (What will 
not a man sometimes say to himself, gentlemen! Especial¬ 
ly if he is in a somewhat eccentric state of mind.) All 
these considerations flashed through his mind in less than 




V MOST UNFORTUNATE I NCI DENI' 


2C9 


a minute, and it goes without saying that he might have 
contented himself with these trivial meditations and, men¬ 
tally putting Stepan Nikiforovich to shame, have gone 
quietly home and laid himself down to sleep. And he 
would have done well! But the whole misfortune lay in 
the fact that the moment was one of eccentricity. 

As ill luck would have it, just at that very moment the 
smug faces of Stepan Nikiforovich and Semyon Ivano- 
vidh rose before his inflamed imagination. 

“We shan’t be able to keep it up,” reiterated Stepan 
Nikiforovich smiling condescendingly. 

“Hee-hee-hee!” echoed Semyon Ivanovich, with his 
most unpleasant smile. 

“We’ll see if we can’t keep it up!” said Ivan Ilyich 
resolutely, the blood rushing into his cheeks. He stepped 
off the pavement and strode firmly across the street to 
the house of his subordinate, the registrar Pseldonimov. 


Led on by his evil star, he passed boldly through the 
open wicket gate, scornfully kicking away the small shaggy 
mongrel which, more for the look of the thing than in real 
earnest, threw itself at his ankles with hoarse barks. He 
walked up the board path to a closed porch, which jutted 
out into the yard like a sentry-box, and ascended three 
dilapidated wooden steps to the tiny entry. Somewhere in 
a corner there burned a tallow candle-end or a night light 
of some sort, but this did not pi event Ivan Ilyich from 
plunging his left foot, galosh and all, in a meat jelb r , set 
outside to cool. Ivan Ilyich bent down and, his curiosity 
aroused, noted that there were two other dishes there con¬ 
taining aspic or something, and two moulds as well—blanc¬ 
mange probably. For a moment he was taken aback by the 
sight of the wrecked meat jelly, and for the merest fraction 
of a second the thought came into his head: wouldn’t it be 
better to beat an instant retreat? But he decided that this 
would be*cowardly. Arguing that no one had seen him or 
would dream of suspecting him, he quickly wiped his ga¬ 
losh to destroy the traces, groped for the felt-covered door, 
apened it, and found himself in the tiniest of enti ance halls 
()ne half of it w *s literally heaped with overcoats, mantles, 



270 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


cloaks, capes, hats, bonnets, mufflers, and galoshes. In the 
oilier half the musicians were established—two fiddles, a 
flute and a double bass—four men altogether, picked up, 
of course, in the sheet. They were sitting at an unpainted 
deal table on which burned a solitary tallow candle, play¬ 
ing for all they were worth the last figure of a quadrille. 
Through the open door into the next room could be seen 
the (lancers in a haze of dust, tobacco smoke, and fumes. 
A kind of frantic gaiety prevailed. There were guffaws of 
laughter, shouts and squeals. The gentlemen stamped like 
a cavalry squadion. Over this infernal din rose the com¬ 
mands of the master of ceremonies, who seemed to be quite 
at home and extumely lice and easy. “Gentlemen in 
the middle, (hain dcs dames , balatuez ,” et cetera. Ivan 
11 > ich relieved himself of overcoat and galoshes in 
some trepidation and holding his hat in his hand 
went into the room. He no longer reasoned about any¬ 
thing. 

Just at Inst nobody noticed him, all being absorbed in 
dancing the quadrille to the end. He stood there as if 
stunned, and could make out nothing in the crush. Ladies’ 
dresses and >oung men with cigaiettes betweeif their teeth 
uhilled past ... a lady's sky-blue scarf flew past and 
brushed against the tip of Ivan Ilyich’s nose. A medical 
student, his hair streaming wildly, rushed after the lady, 
jostling Ivan Ilyich roughly as he passed. An officer as 
tall as a church steeple flashed past. Someone screamed, 
“Oh, Pseldy dear!” in an unnaturally shrill voice, Hying 
by and stamping in time with the lest. T he lloor felt sticky 
to Ivan Ilyich s feet—it must have been polished with wax. 
Theie weie up to thirty guests in the room, which was by 
no means a small one. 

Annthci minute and the quadiille came to an end, and 
what Ivan Ilyich had imagined, what he had (beamed 
about while still outside the house, came to pass almost 
immediately. A kind of hum, a strange whisper, swept 
over the guests and the danceis who had not yet recovered 
their bieath, nor wiped the sweat from their faces. All 
eyes, all laces turned swiftly towards the newly arrived 
guest. The moment alter, all instantly backed away, tug¬ 
ging at the clothes of those who had not yet noticed him 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


271 


and calling llicm to order. And these, too, looked round 
and immediately backed with the rest. Ivan Ilyich was 
still standing in the doorway, not having advanced a step, 
while between him and the guests a bigger and bigger 
space was cleared, littered with innumerable bonbon 
wrappings, scraps of paper, and cigarette stubs. Suddenly 
a young man in a frock-coat with untidy flaxen hair and 
a hooked nose stepped timidly on to this space. He ad¬ 
vanced with drooping shoulders, gazing at the unexpected 
guest exactly as a dog gazes at its master when called t& 
be kicked. 

“How d’you do, Pscldonimov—know me?’’ said Ivan 
Ilyich, and immediately felt that he had said a stupid 
thing. He felt, too, that he was perhaps at that very mo¬ 
ment making the most appalling blunder. 

“Y-y-y-our Excellency!” murmured Pscldonimov. 

“Ah-ha! 1 have come to you quite by chance, as you 
will probably realise yourself... 

But Pscldonimov was apparently in no state to realise 
anything whatever. He stood there, his eyes bulging in the 
most appalling perplexity. 

"Well, I suppose you won’t drive me away—whether 
you like it or not, receive the guest!” continued Ivan 
Ilyich, feeling unpardonably weak with embarrass¬ 
ment, and trying vainly to smile, while the idea of brin¬ 
ging in the story of Stepan Nikiforovich and Trifon be¬ 
came more and more impossible. But Pseldonimov, to 
make matters still worse, did not recover from his para¬ 
lysed state, and went on staring with an utteily imbecile 
air. 

Ivan Ilyich winced, feeling that if he allowed things to 
go on like this another moment, the situation would be 
altogether desperate. 

“I’m afraid.... Perhaps I’d better go!” he brought out 
faintly, and a muscle twitched on the right side of his 
mouth. 

But Pseldonimov had already recovered his senses. 

“Oh, Your Excellency ... an honour ...” he murmured, 
with a hurried bow. “Won’t you sit down?” And finally 
recovering from his amazement he motioned with both 
hands towards the sofa, where the table usually stan- 




272 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


ding beside it had been moved to make room for the 
dancers. 

With a feeling of relief Ivan Ilyich sank on to the sofa. 
Someone immediately dashed up and moved the table back 
to the sofa. Ivan Ilyich looked round and observed that 
he alone was seated, and that all the others, even the 
ladies, were standing up. A bad sign. But the time to men¬ 
tion this, to encourage, had not yet come. The guests were 
still retreating, and the only one standing beside him was 
the half-crouching Pseldonimov, Still unable to understand 
anything and not smiling at all. In short, it was very un¬ 
pleasant. At that moment our hero endured such agony 
that his idealistic excursion in the spirit of Harun al 
Rashid might in truth be considered a feat. But suddenly 
a small figure appeared beside Pseldonimov and began 
bowing. To his inexpressible pleasure, nay, to his delight, 
Ivan Ilyich recognised his head clerk Akim Petrovich Zu- 
bikov, a man with whom of course he was not acquainted 
outside the office, but whom he knew for an efficient and 
close-mouthed oilicial. Ivan Ilyich rose at once and held 
out his hand to Akim Petrovich, his whole hand, not just 
two fingers. The latter took the hand in both hi? with an 
air of profound respect. The General was jubilant. The 
situation was saved. 

For this made Pseldonimov, so to speak, no longer a 
second, but a third fiddle. Ivan Ilyich could address his 
story directly to the head clerk, of necessity treating him 
as an acquaintance, and that a close one, leaving Pseldo¬ 
nimov to hold his tongue and tremble from sheer rever¬ 
ence. Thus the proprieties would be observed. And the story 
must be told. Ivan Ilyich felt that. He could see that 
everyone was expecting something, that even the domes¬ 
tics were crowding into the two doorways, almost scrambl¬ 
ing on to one another’s shoulders, so as to see and hear. 
It was too bad that the head clerk, in his obtusencss, was 
still standing. 

“Why don’t you ...” blurted out Ivan* Ilyich, 
awkwardly indicating a place beside him on the 
sofa. 

“Oh, no! I’ll sit here,” and Akim Petrovich quickly sat 
down on a chair which Pseldonimov, who remained 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


273 


persistently standing, leaned forward to thrust beneath 
him. 

“Fancy, now!” began Ivan Ilyich, addressing himself 
exclusively to Akim Petrovich in a voice which, though 
shaky, was now quite free and easy. He drawled out his 
words, stressing every syllable, slurring his vowels, behav¬ 
ing, in a word, as he fully admitted to himself, in the 
most affected manner. He could not help it, he seemed 
to be impelled by some external force. He lealised a 
great deal at that moment, and the realisation wal 
agony. 

“Fancy, now. I’ve just come from Stepan Nikiforovich 
Nikiforov, you’ve probably heaid of him—he’s a Privy 
Councillor. On that—er—commission... 

Akim Petrovich bent his whole body loiward iexpect - 
fully, as if to say: Who hasn’t heard ol him:* 

“He’s your neighbour now,” continued Ivan Ilyich, 
addressing Pseldonimov for the sake of decorum and to 
show that he was quite at ease, but turning away hastily 
on reading in Pseldonimov s eyes his utter indilfeience to 
this. 

“The old fellow, as you know, lias dreamed all his life 
of buying a house.... Well, and so he bought one. And 
a very nice little house, too. Yes—and it happens to be his 
birthday today, and you sec, he never celebrated it before, 
lie even concealed it from us out of stinginess—h i ha! But 
this time he was so pleased with his new house that he 
invited me and Semyon Ivanovich—Shipulenko. you 
know.” 

Akim Petrovich bent forward again with inexpressible 
zeal. Ivan Ilyich cheered up a little. He had begun to be 
afraid that the head clerk had guessed that His Excellency 
was for the moment in dire need of his support. And noth - 
ing could be worse than that. 

“Well, there we were, the three of us, champagne on 
the table, talking about business. You know, one thing and 
another.*... All sorts of problems. We even had a sort of 
argument... ha-ha!” 

Akim Petrovich raised his brows respect!ully. 

“But that’s not the point. I took leave ol him, at last, 
the old fellow's very regular in his habits, goes to bed 



274 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


early, you know, in his old age. I go out ... my Trifon’s 
nowhere to be seen! I am quite annoyed, and ask: ‘Where 
has Trifon taken the carriage?’ It appears that, hoping 1 
would stay later, he had gone off to the wedding of some 
crony or sister of his_God alone knows who! Some¬ 

where here on the Petersburg Side. And he took the 
carriage along, while he was about it.” Again the General 
looked towards Pseldonimov for the sake of propriety. The 
latter writhed beneath his glance, but this was not how 
{he General had wanted him to behave. “No real sym¬ 
pathy, no*heart,” flashed through his mind. 

“Indeed!” exclaimed Akim Petrovich, in profound 
amazement. A low hum of surprise ran through 
the crowd. 

“Imagine my situation_” (Ivan Ilyich glanced 

towards the assembled guests.) “Nothing for it, I go on 
foot. I’ll stroll up to Bolshoi Prospekt, I think, and there 
I’ll find a droshky, ha-ha!” 

“Hee-hee!” echoed Akim Petrovich respectfully. Again 
a hum, this time of merriment, in the crowd. At that 
moment the chimney of a lamp in a wall bracket burst 
with a loud report. Someone rushed forward eagerly. Psel¬ 
donimov started and looked sternly at the lamp, but 
the General took no notice, and everyone breathed 
freely. 

“On I go—and it’s such a fine, still night. Suddenly I 
hear music, stamping, people dancing. I go up to the 
policeman—it’s Pseldonimov’s wedding, he says. Well, 
well, the whole Petersburg Side knows you are giving a 
ball, eh? Ha, ha!” he suddenly turned to Pseldonimov 
again. 

“Hee-hee! Quite right!” responded Akim Petrovich. 
The guests stirred again, but the most embarrassing 
thing of all was that Pseldonimov, though he bowed 
again, still did not smile, just as if he were made of 
wood. 

“Is he a fool, I wonder?” thought Ivan Ilyich. “If only 
he’d smile, the ass! We’d get on swimmingly.” Impatience 
seethed within him. “So 1 thought to myself: Why 
shouldn’t I go and see my subordinate, I don’t suppose he’ll 
drive me away—like it or not—receive the guest! You 




>\ MOST UNI OR'I UNA IE lNUDl’N'I 


must excust me, you know If I'm in the way. I'll go.... 

I only just looked in. . . 

The guests weie giaduully coming to life. Akim Petio- 
vich assumed an ecstatic aii as if to say: How could Youi 
Excellency be in the way.-* All the guests stiircd and began 
to show the Inst signs ol ease. Almost all the ladies were 
sitting down. A good sign, that. The bolder ones among 
them were fanning themselves with theii handkerchiefs. 
One, in a worn velvet gown, purposely made some loud 
remark. The officer she addiessed meant to answer he* 
still louder, but since no one else was speaking loudly, he 
changed his mind. The men, mostly clerks and a few' 
students, exchanged glances, as if urging one another to 
relax, began coughing, and even moving a step or two in 
various diicctions. As a matter of fact, nobody felt parti¬ 
cularly shy, but they weie all awkward, and most of them 
clieiished feelings of secret hostility lor the peison who 
had buist in upon them to spoil their merriment. The 
officer, ashamed ot his cowaidice, began edging his way 
to the table. 

‘Look here, my good man. allow me to ask y r our name 
and patronymic.^” Ivan Ilyich inquired of Pseldo- 
nimov. 

“Porfiry Petrovich, Your Excellency,” he rephed, his 
eyes bulging, baiking out the words as if he weie answei- 
ing a drill-seigeant. 

“Aien’t you going to introduce me to your bride, Porlnv 
Petrovich.'' Take me to her.” 

And he made as if to get up, but Pscldonimov rushed 
headlong into the drawing-]oom. The bride had been 
standing in the doorway, but as soon as she heard her 
name, she hid. A moment later, Pseldonimov led her up 
by the hand. Everyone made way for them. Ivan Ilyich 
rose solemnly and turned to her with a most courteous 
smile. 

“Very glad to meet you, very,” he said with a giacious 
inclination of his head. “Especially on such a day....” 

He smiled archly. The ladies were pleasantly agi¬ 
tated. 

“ CharmantV ’ gasped the lady in the velvet gown. 

The bride was a match for Pseldonimov. She was a thin 



276 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


little lady, not over seventeen years of age, pale, with a 
tiny face and a shaip little nose. Her small eyes, darting 
from side to side, showed not the least embarrassment, on 
the contrary, there was a keenness tinged with malice in 
their expression. Pseldonimov must have chosen her for 
her looks. She wore a white muslin dress with a pink lin- 
ing. Her neck was stringy, her body birdlike, her bones 
prominent. She could not say a single word in answer to 
the General’s greeting. 

“Why, she's very pretty!" he continued under his breath 
as if speaking to Pseldonimov alone, but loud enough for 
the bride to hear. But Pseldonimov answered not a word 
to this cither, and this time did not even bow. Ivan Ilyich 
thought he could discern something cold and secretive in 
his eyes, something calculating and sinister. However, at 
all costs, his heart must be touched. That was what Ivan 
Ilyich ha 1 come for, alter all. 

“What a couple!" he thought. “And yet...." 

And be again turned to the bride, now seated on the 
sofa beside him, but to the two or three questions he put 
to her he received only a yes or a no, and not «ven that 
quite clearly. 

“11 she d only blush," he said to himself, “then I could 
begin to joke. As it is, my position is an impossible one." 
Akim Petrovich, too, as if to spite him, kept silence, and 
though this was of course mere stupidity on his part, still 
it was inexcusable 

“Ladies and gentlemen. I hope I am not spoiling youi 
pleasure!" he exclaimed to the room at large. He felt the 
palms of his hands wci c sweating. 

“Oh. no! Don’t woiry about that, Your Excellency! 
We’ll start again in a minute, we’re just ... cooling 
down,” replied the officer. The bride glanced at him with 
approval. The officer was by no means old, and wore the 
uniform of some legiment or other. Pseldonimov still stood 
there, bending forward, and his hooked nose seemed to 
stand out still more prominently. He stood listening and 
looking, like a footman with an overcoat in his hands, 
waiting for the end of his master’s farewells. Ivan Ilyich 
himself made this comparison. He began to lose his head, 
to feel awkward, terribly awkward, as if the ground were 



A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


277 


slipping from under his feet, as if he had got into a place 
from which it was impossible to extricate himself, and had 
to grope in the dark. 

Suddenly everyone made way for a stout, rather short 
woman, no longer young, dressed with no pretensions to 
gentility, but in her best, a great shawl pinned at her 
throat, and wearing a rap, to which she was obviously 
unaccustomed. She was carrying a small round tray on 
which stood a bottle of champagne, opened, but as yet 
untouched, and two glasses—neither more nor less. The 
bottle was evidently intended for only two guests. 

The elderly woman went straight up to the General. 

“Begging Your Excellency’s pardon,” she said, bowing. 
“But since you have deigned to do my son the honour of 
coming to his wedding, kindly do not refuse to drink the 
health of the happy couple.” 

For Ivan Ilyich she came as a deliver* * She was by no 
means an old woman, not more than forty-live or forty-six 
years of age. But she had such a good-natured, rosy, frank, 
round Russian countenance, her smile was so good- 
humoured, she bowed with such simplicity, that Ivan 
Ilyich almost cheered up and began to hope. 

“So you are the parent of your son?” he said, rising 
from the sofa. 

“The parent, Your Excellency,” mumbled Pseldonimov, 
craning his long neck and once more sticking out his nose. 

“Ah! Very glad to make your acquaintance, very glad!” 

“Do take a glass, Your Excellency!” 

“With the greatest pleasure!” 

The tray was put down, Pseldonimov sprang to 
pour out the wine. Ivan Ilyich, still standing, took a 
glass. 

“I am exceedingly glad, exceedingly glad, of this oppor¬ 
tunity,” he began, “to ... to ... express my ... in a word, 
as your superior ... I wish you, Madame” (he turned to 
the bride) “and you, my friend Porfiry, I wish you all 
prosperity and a lifetime of happiness.” 

He swallowed the contents of the glass, the seventh he 
had drunk that evening, with unction. Pseldonimov’s look 
was grave, not to say morose. The General was beginning 
to hate him painfully. 



278 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“And that lanky fellow,” he thought, glancing at the 
officer, “hanging about .. . why on earth doesn’t he shout 
hurrah or something? Everything would begin to go 
smoothly then.” 

“And won't you drink their health, too, Akim Petro¬ 
vich?” added the elderly woman, turning to the head 
clerk. “You are his chief, he is your subordinate. Look 
after my son, I beg you as a mother. And in future, 
dear Akim Petrovich, do not forget us, you are a good 
man.” 

“How delightful these old Russian women are!” thought 
Ivan Ilyich. “She’s cheered everyone up. I’ve always loved 
the people....” 

Just then another tray was brought up to the table. It 
was brought by a girl in a rustling, as yet unlaundcred 
chintz dress, draped over a crinoline. The tray was so 
huge, she could hardly get her arms round it. On it stood 
innumerable plates containing apples, bonbons, jujubes, 
walnuts, and so on. Till this moment the tray had stood in 
the drawing-room lor all the guests, principally for the 
ladies 1’ut now it was put clown before the*General 
alone 

“I hope Your Excellency will not scorn our humble re¬ 
freshments,” said the elderly woman, bowing. 

“Oh, come!” said Ivan Ilyich, selecting a walnut, 
not without pleasure, and cracking it between his fin¬ 
gers. He had made rtp his mind to be democratic to the 
last. 

Suddenly the bride giggled. 

“Yes, Madame?” asked Ivan Ilvich with a smile, de¬ 
lighted at the sign ot lift 

“Oh, it’s only Ivan Konstantinovich, sir, he says such 
funny things,” she replied, dropping her eyes. 

The General had already noticed a very good-looking, 
fair-haired youth, sheltering himself behind the back of 
the sofa, and whispering to Madame Pseldonimov. The 
youth rose to his feet. He was evidently very shy and verv 
voung. 

“I was telling her about the dream-book, Your Excelhn- 
cy,” he muttered half-apologctically. 

“What dream-book?” asked Ivan Ilyich indulgently. 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


279 


“There’s a new dream-book, a literary one. 1 told her 
that if one dreams of Mr. Panaycv, it means one will spill 
coffee on one’s shirt-front.” 

“How naive!” thought Ivan Ilyich irritably. The young 
man, though he had blushed violently while speaking, was 
unutterably glad to have been able to drag in his Pa- 
nayev.* 

"Yes, yes, T’ve heard about it,” responded His Excellen¬ 
cy, 

J 

“Oh, but there’s a better one,” said a voice quite close 
to Ivan Ilyich. "A new dictionary is coming out and they 
say Mr. Krayevsky will contribute an aiticle on Alfaa- 
ki ... and ... on ablichilchiaya*'' literature.” 

This lemark came from a young man who was not a bit 
shy, but on the contrary, inclined to be familial Il<- wok 
gloves and a white waistcoat and held bis hat in his hand. 
He did not dance, but looked on superciliously, lor he was 
a contributor to the satirical magazine 7 he Biantf , and set 
the tone, having come to the wedding quite by chance, in¬ 
vited as an honoured guest bv Pseldonimov. the young 
men having made friends the year befoie, when they had 
starved together "in corners” let by a certain German 
woman. This youth did not mind a drink of vodka, and 
kept retreating to a certain back room, the wav to which 
ivervone knew. The General took an instant dislike to 
him. 

“And the joke is, Your Excellency,” suddenh interrupt¬ 
ed the fair-haired youth who had told the storv about the 
spilling of coffee, and whom the journalist in the white 
waistcoat was regarding with detestation, “that the writer 
pretends Mr. Krayevsky can’t spell and thinks oblit hitrf- 
naxa is spelt with an a." 

But the fair-haired youth could hardly get to the end 
of his sentence. The look in the General’s eyes showed that 


* The reference is to ‘The Dream-Book of Modern Russian Lite 
tature”, a parody on the editors of the progressive Sovtetnrnmk. 
Nckiasov and Panavcv, circulated in manuscript by the author, the 
poet Shcherbin ( 1821 - 68 ) — Ed. 

A misspelling of obluhitelnaya —a<cusatoi y Thu- an illiterate 
English compiler might list the words engine and ingenious under 
the letter e. — Ed. 



280 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


he had heard all this long ago, and that this very fact was 
embarrassing to him. The young man was covered with 
confusion. He slipped out of sight as soon as he could, and 
for the rest of the evening was extremely melancholy. The 
bold contributor to The Brand took his place, coming 
nearer, and evidently intending to take a seat quite close 
to the General. Such familiarity struck Ivan Ilyich as a 
little too much. 

“But tell me now, Porfiry,” he began, just for the 
sake of saying something, “I’ve been wanting to ask you 
for a long time, why are you called Pseldonimov and 
not Pseudonimov? Your name must surely be Pseudo¬ 
nimov.” 

“I cannot give you precise information as to that, Your 
Excellency,” leplied Pseldonimov. 

“When his father first entered the service they probably 
muddled up the papers, and so now he remains Pseldoni¬ 
mov,” explained Akim Petrovich. “It does happen.” 

“That's it!” said the General eagerly. “That’s it, of 
course! For, judge for yourself—the name Pseudonimov 
comes from the literary word pseudonym. And Pseldoni¬ 
mov means nothing, you know.” 

“It arises from ignorance,” added Akim Petrovich. 

“What do you mean exactly by ignorance?” 

“The Russian people. They sometimes change letters 
from ignorance. And sometimes they pronounce names in 
their own way. For instance, they say nivalid instead of 
invalid.” 

“I see, nivalid, ha-ha-ha!” 

“They say mumber, too. Your Excellency!” burst out 
the tall officer, who had long been itching to distinguish 
himself. 

“What d’you mean mumber?” 

“Mumber, instead of number, Your Excellency.” 

“Ah, mumber instead of number. Very good, ha-ha-ha!” 
Ivan Ilyich was forced to giggle for the officer too. 

The officer straightened his tie. 

“And another thing they say...” began the journalist, 
but Ivan Ilyich chose not to hear: after all, he couldn’t 
giggle for everyone. 

Ivan Ilyich looked at him severely. 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


281 


“What are you butting in for,” Pseldonimov whispered 
to the contributor. 

“I’m only talking! Can’t I talk?” whispered back the 
other, but he held his tongue and went out of the room in 
a secret fury. 

He went straight to the attractive back room where two 
sorts of vodka, salt herring, pressed caviare, and a bottle 
of strong sherry from the national cellar had been placed 
for the benefit of the men, who danced at the very begin¬ 
ning of the party, on a small table covered with an embroi¬ 
dered Yaroslavl table-cloth. He was pouring himself out 
some vodka with wrath in his heart, when suddenly the 
medical student with the untidy hair, the best dancer at 
Pseldonimov’s ball, who knew the cancan, too, rushed in. 
He seized the decanter greedily. 

“They’re going to begin!” he said, helping himself hasti¬ 
ly. “Come and look! I’m doing a solo on my hands and 
after supper I’ll risk doing the fish-dance. It’s really very 
appropriate for a wedding. A kind of friendly hint to Psel¬ 
donimov, so to say. Cleopatra Semyonovna’s a darling, 
you can risk anything with her.” 

“He’s a retrograde,” replied the contributor morosely, 
drinking up. 

“Who’s a retrograde?” 

“Why, that bigwig they put the sweetmeats in front of. 
A retrograde, I tell you!” 

“Oh, you go on,” muttered the student and rushed out 
of the room to the strains of the ntournelle. 

Left to himself, the contributor poured out another glass 
for courage and independence, drank it up. and took a 
snack, and never had Ivan Ilyich, Councillor of Stat„. 
acquired a more bitter enemy, or one more implacably 
bent on revenge—especially after a glass or two of vodka 
—than the contributor to The Brand he had taken such a 
dislike to. Alas! Ivan Ilyich never suspected anything of 
the sort. And there was another most impottant circum¬ 
stance which he never suspected, but which had its influence 
on all further relations between the guests and His 
Excellency. The fact of the matter was that though he had 
given what he considered a plausible and even detailed 
explanation of his presence at his subordinate’s wedding, 



282 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


this explanation had not really satisfied anyone, and the 
guests were still embarrassed. And then suddenly all was 
changed as if by magic. Everyone felt at ease again and 
was ready to make merry, to laugh, to squeal, and to 
dance, just as if the unexpected guest were not in the 
room at all. The reason for this was the rumour, the whis¬ 
pered information, which had in some inexplicable fashion 
got about that this guest was really a bit ... well, tipsy. 
And although at first it sounded like the most atrocious 
slander, it gradually gained credence so that suddenly the 
whole thing became perfectly clear, and everyone had 
an extraordinary sensation of freedom. At that very 
moment the quadrille began, the last before supper, in 
which the medical student had been so impatient to take 
part. 

Ivan Ilyich had just made up his mind to speak to the 
bride again, intending this time to conquer her by some 
apt pun, when the tall officer flew up to her and went 
down on one knee. She immediately jumped off the sofa 
and fluttered awav with him, to take her place in the 
ranks of the quadrille. The officer did not t ven*apologise, 
and she did not so much as cast a glance at the General— 
she actuallv seemed glad to be rid of him. 

“After all, she’s well within her rights,” thought 
l\au Ilyich, “and one can’t expect them to have man- 
neis ” 

“Hm, Don’t stand on ceremony with me. Porfiry, old 
man,” he said, turning to Pseldonimov. “Perhaps you have 
something to—see to—or—please don’t mind me.” (“What 
does he think he’s doing—standing on sentry duty beside 
rae^” he added to himself.) 

Pseldonimov’s long neck and piercing stare had become 
intolerable to Ivan Ilyich. In a word, all this was not a bit 
as he had pictured, though he was far from admitting 
this yet. 


The quadrille began. 

“Allow me, Your Excellency:’” asked Akim Petrovich, 
holding the bottle respectfully in his hands, ready to tilt 
it over His Excellency's glass. 



A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


283 


‘‘I-I-I really don’t know whether... 

But Akim Petrovich was already pouring out the cham¬ 
pagne with an expression of beatific radiance. Having 
filled the glass he poured some out for himself, furtively, 
thievishly, writhing and shrugging, with this difference, 
that he only filled his own glass up to the last half-inch, 
this seeming to him somehow more respectful. Seated 
beside his immediate superior, he felt like a woman in 
labour. And he could find nothing to talk about. It was 
manifestly his duty to entertain His Excellency, since he 
had the honour to bear him company. The champagne 
afforded a pretext, and besides His Excellency liked to 
have him pour out wine for him, not for the sake of the 
champagne itself, which was tepid and, of course, beastly, 
but simply for the moral satisfaction. 

“The old chap wants to drink himself, ’ thought Ivan 
Ilyich, “and he doesn’t dare unless I do. Why not let 
him... . Besides it would be absurd not to drink, with the 
bottle standing between us.” 

He took a sip, and this seemed better than sitting there 
doing nothing. 

“I am here.” he began, spacing out and stressing 
his words. “I am hcie, so to say, by chance, and of 
course some may consider .. . that it ... is ... so to say, 
not quite proper for me to be present at such an . . . 
assembly ” 

Akim Petrovich said nothing, only listened with timid 
curiosity. 

“But I hope you will understand why I am here—it 
wasn't really to drink that I came, you know. Ha-ha!” 

Akim Petrovich would have liked to giggle with His 
Excellency, but for some reason could not, and onto more 
found nothing consoling to say. 

“I am here—to, so to say, to encourage—to show, so to 
say, the moral, so to say, aims,” continued Ivan Ilyich, 
vexed at Akim Petrovich’s obtuseness, and suddenly fell 
silent himself, after noticing that the unfortunate Akim 
Petrovich was lowering his eyes with a guilty air. The 
General, in some confusion, hastened to take another sip 
from his glass, and Akim Petrovich, as if his salvation lay- 
in this, seized the bottle and filled up the glass. 




284 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“You haven’t very many resources,” thought Ivan 
Ilyich, looking severely at the unfortunate Akim Petrovich. 
The latter, feeling the strict gaze of the General on his 
face, resolved not to say another word and not to raise his 
eyes. They sat on thus, vis-a-vis for two more minutes, 
two agonising minutes for Akim Petrovich. 

A word or two about Akim Petrovich. He was as meek 
as a lamb, a man of the old school, reared in servility, and 
yet he was a worthy, not to say high-minded man. He was 
' a Petersburg Russian, that is, his father and his father’s 
father had been bom and bred in Petersburg, had served 
there, and had never left the town. This is a very special 
class of Russians. They have not the slightest inkling of 
what is going on in Russia, and this ignorance causes diem 
no concern. All their interests are confined to Petersburg, 
and, first and foremost, to the office they work in. All their 
worries concern preference for penny stakes, small shops, 
and their monthly wage. They know nothing of Russian 
customs and Russian songs, except Luchinushka , and that 
only because itinerant organ-grinders play it in the streets. 
There are, moreover, two important and invariable fea¬ 
tures by which you can immediately distinguish a real 
Russian from a Petersburg Russian. The first consists in the 
fact that all Petersburg Russians without exception say 
“Academic Gazette” and never “Petersburg Gazette”. The 
second, equally important, is that your Petersburg Russian 
never uses the word breakfast, but always says Fruhsliick, 
with special emphasis on the frith. By these two essential 
distinguishing features you may always know them. In a 
word, this is a docile type which has finally crystallised 
during the past thirty-five years. Not that Akim Petrovich 
was by any means a fool. If the General had asked him 
about something within the sphere of his knowledge, 
he would have replied, and kept up the conversation, 
but it was improper for a subordinate to ask such 
questions, though Akim Petrovich was dying to know 
something more about His Excellency's present inten¬ 
tions. 

Meanwhile Ivan Ilyich grew more and more thoughtful 
plunging into a sort of vortex of ideas. In his abstraction 
he kept taking sips from his glass the whole time, scarcely 


A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


285 


noticing that he did. And Akim Petrovich kept zealously 
filling up his glass. Neither spoke. Ivan Ilyich had begun 
to watch the dancing, which all of a sudden attracted his 
special attention. There was a certain detail which quite 
astonished him. 

The dancing was becoming very abandoned. The dan¬ 
cers threw themselves into it in the most single-minded 
manner, determined to enjoy themselves to the point of 
frenzy. Few of the men were expert dancers, but the 
clumsy ones stamped so violently that they could be taken * 
for experts. The officer distinguished himself especially. 
He was particularly fond of figures in which he danced 
alone, a solo as it were. Here, his writhings were really 
remarkable—he stood straight as a pole, and then sudden¬ 
ly bent over sideways, as if he were going to fall; but the 
next moment he as suddenly bent over to the opposite 
side, forming an equally sharp angle to the floor. He pre¬ 
served the utmost gravity of countenance, dancing in the 
full conviction that everyone was admiring him. Another 
cavalier fell asleep opposite his partner immediately after 
the first figure, having drunk his fill before the quadrille 
began, so that the lady was obliged to dance alone. The 
young registrar dancing opposite the lady with the blue 
scarf repeated the same trick again and again in all the 
five quadrilles that had been danced during the evening. 
Standing a little back from the lady, he caught the ends 
of her scarf and, while changing partners, seized the 
opportunity to shower a score or so of kisses upon it. The 
lady herself floated on before him, pretending not to 
notice anything. The medical student really did perform 
a solo on his hands, evoking wild enthusiasm, stamping 
and squeals of pleasure. In a word, the utmost freedom 
prevailed. Ivan Ilyich, whom the wine had affected, was 
just going to smile, when a bitter doubt began gradually 
to invade his soul. Of course he wanted them to be them¬ 
selves, to feel at their ease. He had craved, yes craved, 
this atmosphere of familiarity and ease when they had all 
backed away from him, but now this familiarity was 
beginning to exceed all bounds. One lady, for example, in 
a worn blue velvet gown bought at fourth-hand, pinned 
up her skirt in the sixth figure, so that it looked as if she 



28 G 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


wort* bloomers. It was that very Cleopatra Semyonovna 
with whom one could risk anything, according to her 
partner the medical student. Of the medical student it 
could only be said that he was a veritable Fokine. But 
what did it all mean? First they back away, and then they 
suddenly become so Iree. Nothing reprehensible of course, 
but the transition had been rather abrupt. He felt a fore¬ 
boding. They seemed to have forgotten the very existence 
of Ivan Ilyich. Of course he was the first to laugh and 
‘even lisked applauding. Akim Petrovich giggled respect¬ 
fully in unison with him, with obvious satisfaction, not for 
a moment suspecting that His Excellency was already 
nursing a new grudge in his heart. 

"You dance very well, young man,” Ivan Ilyich felt 
impelled to say to the student who came past, as the 
quadrille finished. 

The student turned sharply towards him, grimaced, 
and. bringing his face impeltinently neai His Excellency’s, 
crowed like a cock at the lop of his voice. 'This was too 
much. Ivan Ilyich rose from the table. Despite this, a 
voile) of uniestiaincd laughter followed, fT>r the (lo¬ 
wing was so very natutai and the trick had been so unex¬ 
pected. Ivan Ilyich was still standing there in bewilder¬ 
ment, when Pseldonimov lumself came bowing up to him 
invitin'* him to tne supper table. Behind him came his 
mothci. 

"(mod sii . . Your Excellency ...” she said bowing, 
do us the honom, do not scorn our humble repast.” 

"I ... 1 uallv don't know ..." began Ivan Ilyich. “It 
wasn't foi that 1 came . . . 1 . . . was just thinking of tak¬ 
ing my leave.. . .” 

He really did have his cap in his hand, indeed, at that 
very moment he had vowed to himself that whatever hap¬ 
pened he would go and that nothing would make him stay, 
and—and he stayed. A minute later he was heading the 
ptocession to the table. Pseldonimov and his mother went 
ahead and cleared a way for him. He was seated in the 
most honourable place and again an unsealed bottle of 
champagne appealed next to his plate. There were snacks 
on the table—herring and vodka. He stretched out his 
hand, poured himself out a big glass of vodka and drank 



A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


287 


it down. He was not used to drinking vodka. He felt as 
if lie were rolling downhill, faster, laster. faster, he knew 
lie must stop, hold on to something, but there was nothing. 

His situation was becoming more and moie eccentric. 
Indeed, there was something fatefully ironic in it. In the 
space of a single hour God knows what had happened to 
him. When he entered the house he had, so to speak, 
opened his arms to the whole of mankind and all his sub¬ 
ordinates, and in less than an hour he was forced to admit* 
with grief in his heart, that he detested Pseldonimov and 
cursed him, his wife, and his wedding. And this was not 
all—he could see by Pseldonimov's face, by his eyes alone, 
that he detested him no less, that his look all bui said: 
"To hell with you, damn you! Gan't you get olf my 
neck?" All this Ivan Ilyich had long read in Pseldonimov . 
glance. 

Even now, as he sat down at the table, Ivan Ilyich 
would rather have had his hand cut off than admit, even 
to himself, that this was how matters rcallv stood. The 
moment had not yet come, there was still a certain moral 
balance. But his heart, his heart ... it ached. It longed for 
freedom, air, rest. You see, Ivan Ilyich was ically too 
kind-hearted. 

He knew very well that he should have left long ago, 
not simply left, but fled for his life, lie knew that things 
had turned out not a bit as he had dreamed they would 
out in the street. 

“What did 1 come lor ;> Was it to eat and drink?" he 
asked himself taking a bite of herring. 

His thoughts took an almosj cynical turn. A momentary' 
irony at the expense ol his own feat stirred within 
him. lie even began to wonder what, after all, be did 
come for. 

“But how was 1 to leave? To go without finishing it 
would have been absurd. What would they' say? They 
would sav 1 had been haunting improper places. That's 
how it will appear if I don’t linish it. What, for example, 
would Stepan Nikiforovich. Semy'on Ivanovich, all those 
people at the office, those Shcmbels and Shubins sav 
tomorrow (for it will surely get about)? No, 1 must leave 
in such a manner that everyone should understand what I 



288 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


came for. I must make the moral purpose evident.” But 
the opportunity to do so did not present itself. “They don’t 
even respect me,” he continued. “What are they laughing 
at? They’re so unembarrassed, they seem so callous. Yes, 
I have long suspected the younger generation of callous¬ 
ness. I must stay at all costs! They’ve finished with their 
dancing and now that they’ve all gathered round the table 
I can mention problems, reforms, the greatness of Rus¬ 
sia. ... I’ll win them over yet! 1 will! Perhaps nothing is 
lost, yet... perhaps, it’s always like that in real life. How 
am I to make a beginning, to win them over? What 
method should I employ? I am bewildered, quite bewil¬ 
dered ... and what do they want, what do they demand? 
I see they’re laughing over there. Gan it be at me, dear 
God? But what do 7 want? Why am I here? Why don’t 
I go? What am I trying to achieve?” With these thoughts, 
something like shame, profound, intolerable shame ate 
deeper and deeper into his heart. 

But everything took its course, one thing after another. 

Precisely two minutes after he had sat down to table, a 
frightening thought took hold of his entire being. He sud¬ 
denly realised that he was terribly drunk, and not as he 
had been before, but hopelessly drunk. The cause of this 
was the glass of vodka following on the champagne, with 
immediate effect. He felt in his very being that he was 
falling into the last stages of weakness. He had a momen¬ 
tary access of Dutch courage, but his conscience gave him 
no peace, incessantly crying: “It’s bad, it’s very bad, it’s 
simply disgraceful!” Of course the wavering drunken 
thoughts could not remain for any time at one point; two 
sides suddenly formed within him, so vividly as to be 
almost palpable. In one were bravado, the desire to con¬ 
quer, to overcome obstacles, and the desperate certainty 
that he would yet attain his purpose. In the other, there 
was a nagging pain in his heart and a feeling that some¬ 
thing was sapping his heart’s blood. “What will people 
say? How will it all end? Tomorrow, oh, what will 
tomorrow bring?” 

Up till then he had been dimly aware of the fact that 
he had enemies amongst the guests. “That’s probably be¬ 
cause I was drunk when I came,” he told himself in an- 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


289 


guished doubt. And now to his horror he discovered, from 
certain indubitable signs, that he really did have foes at 
the table, that there could no longer be the slightest doubt 
about it. 

“And what have I done to antagonise them?” he asked 
himself. 

Around this table were seated all of the thirty guests, of 
whom several were already more than half-seas over. The 
others bore themselves with an air of careless, malicious 
independence, shouting, talking all together, proposing 
inappropriate toasts, and tossing pellets of bread at the 
ladies, who in their turn tossed them back. One man, an 
insignificant individual in a greasy frock-coat, fell off his 
chair the moment he sat down, and remained on the floor 
throughout supper. Another was determined to get on to 
the table and make a toast, and his premature enthusiasm 
was only moderated by the officer’s hanging on to his coat¬ 
tails. The supper was a perfect medley of dishes, despite 
the fact that a chef, the serf of some general, had been 
hired. There were tongue and potatoes, meat jelly, cutlets 
and green peas, and, finally, a goose, with a blancmange 
to end up with. The drinks included beer, vodka, and 
sherry. A bottle of champagne stood beside the General’s 
plate, from which he was forced to fill Akim Petrovich’s 
glass, too, for the latter did not venture to extend his 
functions to the supper table. Cheap wine, or whatever 
they could lay their hands on, had been allotted to the 
rest of the guests for drinking toasts. The table itself was 
composed of a number of small tables placed on end, 
including even a card table, covered with odd table-cloths, 
one of which was a patterned Yaroslavl cloth. The ladies 
and gentlemen were seated alternately. Pseldonimov’s 
mother would not sit down to table, and bustled about, 
giving orders. But there now appeared a sinister female 
who had not before shown herself, wearing a dress of 
reddish silk, a kerchief bound over a swollen cheek, and an 
extremely tall cap. She turned out to be the bride’s mother, 
who had at last allowed herself to be persuaded to emerge 
from the back room for supper. Till now she had not 
appeared owing to her irreconcilable hostility to Pseldoni¬ 
mov’s mother; but of this anon. She cast a disagreeable, 




290 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


not to say sarcastic look at the General, and evinced not 
the slightest desire to be introduced to him. Ivan Ilyich 
found this apparition extremely suspicious. But there were 
several other suspicious characters who inspired him with 
instinctive misgivings and anxiety. It even looked as if 
they were hatching a plot amongst them—against none 
other than Ivan Ilyich. At any rate that is how it seemed 
to him, and as the supper went on he became more and 
more convinced of it. The most suspicious of all was a 
bearded gentleman, apparently an artist of sorts; he kept 
looking from Ivan Ilyich to his neighbour and whispering 
in the latter's ear. Another guest, a student, though hope¬ 
lessly diunk, also showed certain suspicious signs. There 
was something that boded no good about the medical 
student, too. Even the officer was not quite reliable. But 
it was the contributor to 7 he Brand who glowed with 
paiticulai and the most conspicuous hatred. He sat sprawl¬ 
ing in his chair so insolently, looked around him so arro¬ 
gantly, snoitcd with such an independent air. The other 
guests did not pav much attention to the contributor, who 
had only had fmu veises piinted in ‘I hi Brand and be¬ 
come a hbeial on the strength of that; indeed they 
olniously disliked him; but when a pellet of bread sud- 
denls fell quite close to Ivan Ilyich he could have sworn 
that the culpiit was none othei than the contributor to 
l he Biand. 

All this, of course, a ffecied him in the most deplorable 
manner. 

han Ilyich made yet another extremely painful obser¬ 
vation: he was beginning to pronounce his words indistinct¬ 
ly and with difficult), and though there was a great deal 
he wanted to say, his tongue would not obey him. And a 
little later he fell to woolgatht ring, and, worst of all, snort¬ 
ing and laughing for no apparent reason, when there was 
nothing at all to laugh about. This phase passed soon after 
yet another glass ot champagne which, though Ivan Ilyich 
had poured it out himself, he had not at first intended to 
drink, and then suddenly drank up as if by accident. After 
this, he felt almost like crying. He could see that he was 
falling into the most eccentric sentimentality Once again 
he was moved by love, love for all, even Pseldonimov, 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


291 


even the contributor to The Brand. All of a sudden he 
wanted to embrace them all, to forget everything’, to be 
friends with everyone. More—he wanted to open his heart 
to them, to tell them everything—what a nice kind man he 
was, and how talented, how aseful he could be to his 
country, how he could amuse thr fair sex and, above all, 
how progressive he was, how well-intentioned towards 
everyone, down to the very lowest; and finally, to reveal 
frankly to them all the motives impelling him to appear 
uninvited at Pseldonimov’s house, to diink a couple of 
bottles of champagne there, and gladden him by his pre¬ 
sence. 

“Truth, sacred truth—above all, frankness! I will reach 
their hearts through my frankness. They will believe me. 
I am sure they will. Now they cast hostile glances at me, 
but when I tell them everything, I shall conquer them irre¬ 
sistibly. They will fill their glasses and drink n.v health 
with shouts of enthusiasm. The officer, I am ceitain of that, 
will break his glass against his spur. They may even shout 
‘hurrah!’ Even if they should wish to toss me in the hussar 
manner, I should offer no objections, it would be a very 
good thing, indeed. I will kiss the bride on the forehead, 
she’s a sweet little thing. Akim Petrovich is a very good 
man, too. Pseldonimov will, of course, improve in time. He 
lacks the polish of high society, so to say.... And though 
the whole of the new generation larks that spiritual 
delicacy, still I’ll ... I’ll speak to them of the present 
mission of Russia among the other European powers. I 
will touch on the peasant question, too, yes, and ... and 
they will all love me, and 1 shall make a glorious depar¬ 
ture!” 

These dreams were of course very pleasant, but the 
sudden discovery in himself, amidst all these rosy hopes, 
of an unexpected tendency to spit, was not so pleasant. 
Spittle suddenly began to spurt from his mouth quite 
against his will. He first became aware of this when he 
noticed that he had bespattered Akim Petrovich’s cheek 
and that Akim Petrovich, out of deference, had refrained 
from wiping off the spittle immediately. Ivan Ilyich picked 
up his napkin and wiped it away himself. But the next 
minute this struck him as so ridiculous, so far beyond the 



292 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


bounds of common sense, that he fell silent, absorbed in 
astonishment. Akim Petrovich had had quite a lot to drink 
himself, but he was obviously perplexed. Ivan Ilyich now 
realised that for the last quarter of an hour he had been 
speaking to Akim Petrovich on the most interesting 
subject, and that Akim Petrovich, listening to him, seemed 
not only embarrassed, but actually afraid of something. 
Pseldonimov, who was sitting next but one to him, was 
q.1 so craning his neck towards him, his head on one side, 
listening with the most disagreeable expression on his face. 
He actually seemed to be watching him. Casting a glance 
over the guests, Ivan Ilyich obseived that many of them 
were looking straight at him and laughing. Strangest of 
all, this did not embarrass him in the least, quite the con¬ 
trary. He took another sip from his glass and began to 
hold forth for all to hear. 

“1 have just been saying, gentlemen!” he began, as 
loudly as he could, “I have just been saying to Akim Pet¬ 
rovich that Russia, yes ... Russia ... in a word, you 
understand what I am trying to say ... it is njy profound 
conviction that Russia is now going through ... humane¬ 
ness.” 

“Humane-ane-ness 1 ” came from the other end of the 
table. 

“Hoo-hoo!” 

“Boo-boo!” 

Ivan Ilyich hung file. Pseldonimov rose from his chair 
and looked up and down—who had shouted? Akim Petro¬ 
vich shook his head furtively as if to bring the guests to a 
sense of shame. Ivan Ilyich did not fail to observe this, but 
suffered it in silent e. 

“Humaneness!” he continued insistently, “and only a 
short time ago .. . yes, a very short time ago I said to Ste¬ 
pan Nikiforovich-Yes ... that ... that the renewal, so 

to say, of things....” 

“Your Excellency!” came in a loud voice from the other 
end of the table. 

“Your servant!” replied Ivan Ilyich, stopping short and 
trying to see who had called to him. 

“Nothing at all, Your Excellency, 1 got carried away, 
proceed ... proceed,” said the same voice. 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


293 


Ivan Ilyich winced. 

“The renewal, so to say, of those very things... .” 

“Your Excellency!” shouted the voice again. 

“Yes, sir!” 

“Good day to you!” 

This was too much for Ivan Ilyich. He broke off in the 
middle of a sentence and turned on the disturber of the 
peace. This was a very young student, extremely tipsy, ob¬ 
viously a most suspicious character. He had been yelling 
for some time, and had even broken a glass and two plates, 
declaring that it was the thing to do at a wedding. At the 
moment when Ivan Ilyich turned on him the officer was 
sternly admonishing the brawler. 

“What are you yelling for? You ought to be turned out, 
that’s all!” 

“I didn’t mean you, Your Excellency, I didn’t mean you, 
Your Excellency, I didn’t mean you! Go ahead!” shouted 
the tipsy schoolboy, lolling back in his chair. “Proceed! 
I’m listening and I’m very, very pleased with you! Most 
praiseworthy! Most praiseworthy!” 

“Drunken brat!” whispered Pseldonimov. 

“I can see he’s drunk, but....” 

“I was telling him a very amusing story, Your Excellen¬ 
cy,” began the officer, “about an ensign from our platoon 
who spoke to his officer just like that. And now he’s try¬ 
ing to imitate him. Whatever the officer said, he kept 
shouting ‘Praiseworthy! Praiseworthy!’ He was discharged 
from the service for it ten years ago.” 

“What ensign was that?” 

“He was in our platoon, Your Excellency, he went mad 
on the word ‘praiseworthy’. First they tried kindly mea¬ 
sures, and then they put him under arrest. The officer 
admonished him like a father, and he kept answering 
‘Praiseworthy, praiseworthy’. And strange thing—he 
was a brave officer, over six foot tall. They meant to 
have hiip court-martialled, but then they saw he was 
crazy.” 

“He’s only a schoolboy—one can treat skylarking indul¬ 
gently ... for my part I am ready to forgive....” 

“There was a medical examination, Your Excel¬ 
lency.” 


294 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“What! Did they a-nat-o-mise him?” 

“Heavens no! He was perfectly alive.” 

A loud and almost general burst of laughter broke out 
among the guests, who had up till now behaved decently 
enough. Ivan Ilyich was furious. 

“Gentlemen, gentlemen!” he shouted, at first hardly 
even stammering. “I am quite in a position to comprehend 
that a living man is not dissected. I supposed that in his 
madness he was no longer alive ... I mean, he died ... I 
mean, I wanted to say . . you don’t love me ... and yet 
I love you all . .. yes, 1 even love Por-Porfiiy. I demean 
myself by saying this. . 

At this juncture a huge drop of saliva spurted from the 
lips of Ivan Ilyich, bespattering the table-cloth in the most 
conspicuous place. Pseldonimov rushed to wipe it up with 
his napkin. This last misfortune utterly crushed Ivan 
Ilyich. 

“Gentlemen, this is too much!” he cried in despaii. 

“When a man's drunk. Your Excellency ...” ventuicd 
Pseldonimov once again. 

“Porfiry’ 1 see you . . all of you .. yes, I say, I 
hope .. yes, I call upon everyone to say ... how have I 
lowered myself in your eyes?’’ 

Ivan Ilyich wa i almost in tears. 

“Oh, Your Excellency!” 

“Poihty, l ask you . . tell me if I came . .. yes ... yes, 
to your wedding, had 1 no purpose? I wished to elevate 
morally . . 1 wished you all to he moved. I ask you all— 
have I or have I not lowered myself very much in your 
eyes?” 

Dead silence ensued. Think of it—dead silence, and in 
icply to such a critital question! “Now, why, why couldn't 
they cry out at such a moment?” flashed through His 
Excellency’s head. But the guests only exchanged glances. 
Akim Petrovich seemed more dead than alive and Pseldo¬ 
nimov, dumb with terror, stood repeating to himself the 
same awful question that had been worrying fiim for a 
long time: 

“What will become of me after this, tomorrow?” 

Suddenly the contiibutor to ‘Ihe Brand already very 
drunk though up till now maintaining a morose silence, 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


295 


turned straight to Ivan Ilyich and, his eyes flashing, 
answered him on behalf of the whole company. 

“Yes,” he cried in a voice of thunder, “yes, vou have 
lowered yourself, yes, you are a retrograde—retro¬ 
grade!” 

“You forget yourself, young man! Whom you arc 
addressing?” cried Ivan Ilyich furiously, once more jump¬ 
ing up in his place. 

“You! And in the second place I am not a young 
man ... you came here to show off and seek popula- * 
i ity.... 

“Pseldonimov—what’s the meaning of this?” cried Ivan 
Ilyich. 

But Pseldonimov, after leaping to his feet, was too hor¬ 
rified to move and knew not what to do. The guests ail 
seemed to be frozen to their seats. The artist and the stu¬ 
dent cried: “Bravo! Bravo!” 

The contributor continued shouting in irrepressible 
fury: 

“Yes, you came to boast of your humaneness! You inter¬ 
rupted the general gaiety. You drank champagne without 
thinking that it is too expensive for a clerk earning ten 
rubles a month, and I suspect that you are one of those 
superiors who have a taste for the young wives of their 
subordinates! More—I am convinced you are a sup¬ 
porter of redemption payments. You are, you arc, you 

■ »» 

are! 

“Pseldonimov! Pseldonimov!” cried Ivan Uvich, stietch¬ 
ing out his hands towards him. Every word of the contri¬ 
butor’s was like a knife in his heart. 

“One minute, Your Excellency, please don’t be dis¬ 
tressed!” Pseldonimov cried resolutely, jumped at the con¬ 
tributor, seized him by the coat collar, and dragged him 
away from the table. No one could have expected such 
physical strength from the skinny Pseldonimov. But the 
contributor was extremely drunk and Pseldonimov was 
quite sober. He punched his guest on the back a few times 
and pushed him out of the room. 

“Scoundrels—every one of you!” shouted the contribu¬ 
tor. “I’ll pillory you all tomorrow in The Brandi" 

All leaped to their feet. 



296 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


Pseldonimov, his mother, and a few of the guests crowd¬ 
ed round the General with cries of: “Your Excellency! 
Your Excellency! Take no notice, Your Excellency!” 

“No, no!” cried the General. “I am crushed—I came—I 
came here, so to say, to baptise ... to bless. And this is 
what I get for it.” 

He sank into his chair as if unconscious, dropped his 
hands on the table, and leant his head on them, right in a 
plate of blancmange. It would be vain to attempt to 
describe everyone’s horror. A minute later he rose, evi¬ 
dently desiring to go, swayed, caught his foot in the leg 
of the chair, fell flat on the floor, and snored. 

This does happen to abstainers who take too much. To 
the very last moment they preserve their consciousness 
and then suddenly drop like a felled tree. Ivan Ilyich lay 
on the floor, dead to the world. Pseldonimov clutched at 
his hail and stood as if petrified. The guests began hur¬ 
riedly dispersing, discussing the occurrence. It was about 
three in the mot ning by now 

The truth is that Pscldonimov's circumstances were a 
great deal worse than might have been supposed, even 
allowing for the unpleasantness of his present situation. 
And now while Ivan Ilyich is still lying on the floor, with 
Pseldonimov standing over him, clutching his hair in 
desperation, we may as well interrupt the course of our 
narrative and say a few explanatory words as to Porfiry 
Petrovich Pseldonimov himself. 

Only a month before his marriage he had been literally 
perishing. He came from a gubernia where his father had 
occupied some post or other and died while on trial for 
some peccadillo When, five months before his marriage, 
Pseldonimov, who had been starving in Pctersbuig for a 
whole year, obtained a job at ten rubles a month, he felt 
revived body and soul, but very quickly was brought low 
again by circumstances. There wei e only two Pseldonimovs 
left in the whole world, he and his mother, who had left 
the gubernia at the death of her husband. Mother and son 
shared the misery of the bitter cold, and fed on the most 
dubious substances. There were days when Pseldonimov 
went to the Fontanka with a mug, there to quench his 
thirst. When he at last found employment he and his 



A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


297 


mother rented a corner for themselves. She took in 
laundry, and he saved up for four months to get himself 
a pair of boots and an overcoat. And the suffering he 
endured at his office! His superior would come to him 
with the question—when was the last time he had been at 
the bathhouse? The rumour ran that bugs had made nests 
under his coat collar. But Pseldonimov had plenty of will¬ 
power: he looked very meek and quiet; his education had 
been of the scantiest, and he was hatdly ever heard to 
express an opinion. I do not know for certain whether he 
thought, drew up plans and systems and cherished aspira¬ 
tions of any sort. Instead, an instinctive, indomitable and 
unconscious resolve to extricate himself from his position 
and get really started at last, had formed within him. He 
had an antlike tenacity—you may destroy the ants’ nest 
and they will immediately build it up again, destroy it 
again, and they will start building again, and so on ad 
infinitum. His was a persevering, thrifty sou’ You could 
see at a glance that he would make his way, build his nest, 
and perhaps even save something up. No one in the whole 
world loved him but his mother, he was the apple of het 
eye. She was a resolute, tireless, hard-working and for all 
that an extremely good-natured woman. They might have 
gone on living in their corner for another five or six years 
waiting for something to happen, if they had not encoun¬ 
tered retired Titular Councillor Mlekopitayev, an ex¬ 
treasury clerk who had once sei ved in their gubernia, and 
had lately settled down with his family in Petersburg. He 
knew Pseldonimov, whose father had once done him a 
good turn. He had a little money, not much, to be sure, 
but some. Nobody knew how much it really was, neither 
his wife, his eldest daughter, nor his relatives. He had two 
daughters, and, being a singularly crotchety old fellow, a 
drunkard and a domestic tyrant, and a sick man into the 
bargain, he took it into his head to have one of his daugh¬ 
ters marry Pseldonimov. “I know him, his father was a 
good man, and the son will be a good man, too.” When 
Mlekopitayev wanted to do a thing, he did it. He was a 
very eccentric tyrant. He spent most of his time seated in 
an armchair deprived by his disease of the use of his legs, 
which, however, Aid not prevent him from drinking. He 



298 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


drank and swore for days on end. He was a spiteful man, 
and had to have someone near him whom he could torture 
incessantly. For this purpose he kept a few distant rela¬ 
tives in his home—his sister, an ailing, grumbling woman, 
two sisters of his wife, also bad-tempered scolds, and an 
old aunt, one of whose ribs had been broken in an acci¬ 
dent. As well as these he kept another hanger-on, a lady 
of German extraction, for her gift for telling him stories 
from the Arabian Nights. His main pleasure consisted in 
tormenting all these unfortunate dependents, in cursing 
them incessantly although none of them, not even except¬ 
ing his wife, who seemed to have been born with the 
toothache, dared to utter a word in protest. He set them 
at loggerheads among themselves, invented and spread 
gossip and laughed and rejoiced to see them all up in 
arms against one another. He was exceedingly glad when 
his elder daughter, who had lived for ten years in dire 
poverty with her officer husband, came to him as a widow 
with three small, ailing children. He detested the children, 
but since they provided him with additional material for 
his daily experiments, the old fellow was quite content. 
This crowd of bad-tempered women and sick children 
huddled together, with their tormentor, in the wooden 
house on the Petersburg Side. Half-famished, since the 
old man was stingy and doled out money a few kopeks 
at a time, though he never grudged the expense of vodka, 
they never had enough sleep, for the old man suffered 
from insomnia and wanted to be entertained. In a word, 
they all dragged out a wretched existence and cursed 
their fate. Just about this time Mlekopitayev happened to 
notice Pseldonimov. He was struck by his long nose and 
meek appearance. His sickly, plain younger daughter had 
just passed her seventeenth birthday. Though she had at 
one time attended a German Schvle, she had gleaned 
little more from it than the elements of learning. There¬ 
after she grew up puny and scraggy, beneath the crutch 
of her drunken parent with his useless legs, in the hell 
of family tale-bearing, spying, and gossip. She had neither 
friends, nor brains. She had been dying to get married 
for a long time. Before strangers she w.ts meek, but at 
home, at her mother’s side, amongst the crowd of hangers- 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


299 


on, she was cross-grained and sharp as a gimlet. She loved 
to pinch her sister’s children, knocking them about and 
telling on them if they stole sugar or bread, and so an 
endless, unquenchable quarrel existed between her and 
her elder sister. The old man himself ofFered her to 
Pseldonimov. Poor as he was, Pseldonimov asked to be 
given a little time for consideration. He and his mother 
pondered the question long. But the house was given as 
dowry. It was only a wooden, one-storeyed, ramshackle 
affair to be sure, but a house is a house. Besides this, she 
would have four hundred rubles, a sum that it would 
take a long time to save up. “What do you think I am 
taking a man into the house for?” shouted the drunken 
tyrant. “In the first place, because it’s full of women, and 
I’m sick of women. I want Pseldonimov to dance to my 
piping, for I shall be his benefactor. In the second place, 
1 am taking him because you are all against it. because it 
upsets you. I’m doing it to spite you. What I say I do! 
And you, Porfiry, beat her, when she’s your wife. She has 
always had seven devils in her, from her very birth. Drive 
them all out, I’ll get you a crutch!” 

Pseldonimov said nothing, but he had made up his 
mind. He and his mother were taken into the house before 
the ceremony, washed, clothed, shod, and given money 
for the wedding. The old man probably did patronise them 
because his whole family hated them. He actually took 
a liking to Pseldonimov’s mother, putting a constraint on 
himself, and not tormenting her. Pseldonimov he ordered 
to dance the kazachok for him a week before the wed¬ 
ding. “That’ll do, I only wanted to see if you knew your 
place,” he said at the end of the dance. He allowed the 
scantiest possible sum of money for the wedding, to which 
he invited all his own relatives and acquaintances. The 
groom only invited the contributor to The Brand and 
Akim Petrovich, the guest of honour. Pseldonimov knew 
very well that his bride hated the sight of him and she 
would have liked to marry the officer instead. But he bore 
it all, this was the resolution he and his mother had taken. 
All through the day of the wedding, and the whole eve¬ 
ning the old man swore foully and drank. The family 
huddled into the back rooms, crowding there till they 



300 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


weie almost suffocated. The front rooms were set aside 
foi the ball and the supper. At last, at about eleven 
o'clock, when the old man, dead drunk, had gone to sleep, 
the bride’s mother, who had been exceptionally disagree- 
able to Pseldonimov’s mother all day, decided to let 
bygones be bygones and attend the ball and the supper. 
The appearance of Ivan Ilyich spoilt everything. Mleko- 
pitayev’s wife was embarrassed, took offence, scolded 
cveiyone for not having warned her that a real live 
General had been invited. Everyone tried to assure her 
that he had come uninvited, but she was not going to 
believe that. Champagne had to be sent for. Pseldonimov’s 
mother had only a single ruble, and he himself had not a 
kopek. Pseldonimov had to grovel before his mother-in- 
law and ask her for money first for one and then for 
another bottle of champagne. He implored her to think 
of his relations with his superiors, his caieer—and ap 
pealed to her conscience. At last she gave Pseldonimov the 
montv but made him eat such humble pic that, more than 
nine lushing into the tiny room in which the bridal bed 
had bf'm pjepaied, and, silently clutching at his hair, he 
thiew himself face down on the bed appointed for heav¬ 
enly delights, trembling with impotent rage. Ah! Ivan 
llvicli had no idea what ihe two bottles of champagne 
diunk by him that evening had cost! Imagine Pseldoni 
mov s horrm, giuf and even despair, when the whole 
thing ended as it did Oncemoic there was trouble ahead, 
and perhaps for the whole night, the squeals and tears of 
the captious biidc, the repioaches of her idiotic relatives. 
His head ached as it was, and impenetrable gloom was 
. 4 heady dimming his vision. And now here was Ivan Ilyich 
requiting aid, a doctor must be sought at three in the 
morning, oi a < arriage to take him home, and it must be 
a piivate caniage, such an important personage could not 
be sent home in his present condition in an ordinary 
dioshky. And wheic was the money for the carriage to 
come fiom? The bride’s mother, furious because the Ge¬ 
neral had not said a word to her and had not so much 
as looked her way dui ing supper, declared that she hadn’t 
another kopek. Perhaps she really hadn’t. Where was the 



A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


301 


money to come from? What was to be done? Oh, there 
was good reason to tear one’s hair! 

In the meanwhile Ivan Ilyich was carried to the little 
leather couch in the dining-room. While the tables were 
being cleared and taken apart, Pseldonimov rushed about 
trying to borrow some money, even asking the servants, 
none of whom, however, had any. He actually risked 
troubling Akim Petrovich, who had stayed behind the 
rest. But he, though a good-hearted man, was throwi\ 
into such perplexity, not to say terror, at the mention 
of money, that he could only utter the most incoherent 
nonsense. 

“Another time I’d do it with pleasure .. he muttered, 
“but now—I’m afraid I. . . . You must really excuse 


And picking up his cap he hastened out of the house. 
The only person who turned out to be of any use was the 
kind-hearted youth who had talked about the dream-book, 
and even he was not much good. He had stayed behind 
the rest, out of heartfelt sympathy for the sorrows of 
Pseldonimov. At last Pseldonimov, his mother, and the 
youth conferred together and decided, rather than send 
for a doctor, to fetch a carriage and take the patient home, 
and for the moment, till the carriage should come, to tiy 
certain home remedies on him, such as bathing his temples 
and head with cold water, putting ice on his head, and so 
on. Pseldonimov’s mother undertook to do all this. The 
youth sped off to look for a carriage. Since there were not 
even any droshky to be found on the Petersburg Side at this 
hour, he went to a cabmen’s inn on the outskirts of the 
town, and roused them. They bargained, insisting that 
even five rubles would not be enough for a carriage at 
this time of night. At last, however, one of them agreed 
to take three rubles. But when just before four o’clock 
the youth arrived at the Pseldoniinovs’ in a hired car¬ 
riage, the plans had long ago been changed. It appeared 
that Ivan Ilyich, who was still unconscious, was so ill, 
he tossed and moaned so piteously, that it was quite 
impossible, if not dangerous, to move him. “And who 
knows what might come of it?” Pseldonimov, utterly 
discouraged, asked himselLJkVha/ was toJa^done? Aapther 

Lrtapzila t/Cuma% Loose 
M. A. ( TripU ) J5.T, 
i imsagar Lake Compound 




302 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


problem arose: if the patient was to be left in their house, 
where was he to be put:* In the whole house there were 
only two beds—a huge marital couch on which Mlekopi- 
tayev slept with his spouse, and a ncwlv-purchased double 
bed of imitation walnut, intended for the newly-weds. All 
the other inhabitants slept on the floor, huddled together 
on feather mattresses which were in a deplorable state, 
they stank and were altogether indecent objects, and 
anyway there were only just enough of them to go round, 
if that. Where was the patient to be put? A feather 
mattress could no doubt have been found—for that matter 
one could have been dragged from beneath some sleeper, 
but wheie was it to be laid and on what? The best place 
was found to be the living-room, since it was farthest 
from the haunts ol the family, and had a separate entrance. 
But where was a mattress to be put? Surely not on 
chairs? Everyone knows that only schoolboys have beds 
made up for them on chairs when they come home for 
Saturday and Sunday, and this would have been very 
disrespectful to a person like Ivan Ilyich. What would 
he say tomorrow, when he waked up and found himself 
sleeping on chairs? Pseldonimov would not hear of it. 
There was only one thing left—to put him in the bridal 
bed. This bridal bed, as wc have already stated, stood in 
a tiny room off the dining-room. On it was a ntwly- 
purchased double mattiess, on which nobody had yet 
slept, chan sheets, and four pink calico pillows in ruched 
muslin casts. The eider-down was a pink satin, elabo¬ 
rately stitched. Muslin curtains were threaded through a 
gilt ring overhear!. In a word, everything was very proper, 
and the guests, almost all ol whom had found their way 
to the bedroom, had been loud in their praises. Much as 
the bride detested Pseldonimov, she had several times in 
the course of the evening tiptoed furtively in to steal 
another look at the bed. What then was her indignation, 
her fury, when she learned that this guest who had fallen 
ill with something almost like cholera, was to be placed 
in her bridal bed! The bride’s mother tried to stand up 
for her, swearing loudly and threatening to complain to 
her husband the very next day. But Pseldonimov put his 
foot down and insisted on having his own way. Ivan 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


303 


Ilyich was put in the bi idal chamber, and a mattress was 
laid upon chairs for the married couple. The bride whim¬ 
pered, was ready to pinch everyone, but dared not 
disobey. Papa had a crutch with which she was very 
familiar and she knew he would be sure to demand a 
detailed report regarding certain matters the next day. 
To console her the pink eider-down and the muslin- 
covered pillows were brought into the living-room. It was 
at this moment that the youth arrived in the carriage 
Learning that it was no longer needed he was seized with 
tciror. He would have to pay for it himself and he never 
yet had a ten-kopek piece to call his own. Pscldonimov 
declared his utter bankruptcy. Attempts were made to 
pacify the cabman, who, however, began shouting and 
banging on the shutters. How it all ended I cannot say. 
Apparently the youth took himself in the carriage as a 
hostage to 4th Rozhdestvensky Street, where he hoped to 
arouse a student spending the night with some fiiends, 
and see if he had any money. It was past four in the 
morning by the time the newly-weds were left alone, 
locked up in the room. Pseldonimov's mother watched 
by the bedside of the sufferer all night. She lay on a rug 
on the floor, covering herself with her old coat, but could 
not sleep, as she had to get up constantly—Ivan Ilyich 
had a terrible attack of diarrhea. Courageous and magna¬ 
nimous old soul that she was, she undressed him with her 
own hands, tending him as if he were her own son, carry¬ 
ing the necessary utensil to and Irom the bedioom along 
the passage all night. But the misfortunes of this night 
were not over by a long chalk yet. 


Hardly ten minutes had passed since the young couple 
had been locked up in the room, when the most heart¬ 
rending shriek was heard, a shriek not of joy, but of the 
most ominous nature. This was followed by a thud, a 
crash, and a noise as of chairs falling, and in a moment 
the dark room was invaded by a crowd of gasping, terri¬ 
fied women in all stages of deshabille. These women 
were: the bride's mother, her elder sister, leaving her sick 
children for the moment, and her three aunts, including 



304 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


the one with a broken rib. Even the cook was there, even 
the German hanger-on, the one who told fairy-tales, 
whose very own mattress, the best in the house and con¬ 
stituting her entire property, had been dragged from under 
her by force, and given to the newly-weds, came to see 
what was the matter. All these worthy and perspicacious 
women had been stealing out of the kitchen and tiptoeing 
along the passage and listening in the hall for the past 
qjuarter of an hour, devoured by irresistible curiosity. 

In the meanwhile somebody hastily lit a candle and a 
most unexpected sight was revealed to all. The chairs, 
unable to bear the double weight, and only supporting 
the mattress at the edges, had shifted, and the mattress 
had fallen between them on to the floor. The bride was 
whimpering with rage. This time she was cut to the quick. 
The stricken Pseldonimov stood there like a criminal 
caught red-handed. He did not even attempt to defend 
himself. Moans and squeals came from all sides. Pseldo- 
nimov’s mother, hearing the noise, came running up too, 
but this time the bride’s mamma scoied a tdtal victory. 
She began by showering Pseldonimov with strange and 
for the most part unjust reproaches such as: call yourself 
a husband alter that:* what’s the good of you after such 
a disgraced and so on, till at last, taking her daughter by 
the hand, she led her away from her gioom, taking upon 
herself the responsibility of answering the irate father, 
when he demanded a report next morning. They all 
poured out alter her, exclaiming and nodding their heads. 
No one was left with Pseldonimov but his mother, and 
she attempted to console him. But he drove her away 
instantly. 

He was not to be consoled. Staggering over to the couch 
he sat down and gave himself up to the most sombre 
meditations, barefooted, and wearing only the most 
necessary undergarment. The thoughts chased one another 
in confusion thiough his brain. Sometimes he cast a me¬ 
chanical glance around the room where so recently the 
dancers had made such wild merriment, and where the 
air was still laden with cigarette smoke. The filthy floor, 
wet in spots, was still litteied with bonbon papers and 
cigarette stubs. The luin of the bridal bed and the over- 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


305 


turned chairs bore witness to the vanity of the best and 
surest earthly hopes and dreams. He sat on like this for 
almost a whole hour. Nothing but the darkest thoughts 
such as: what was he now to expect at the office? came 
into his head. He realised in anguish that he would have 
to find another job at all costs, for it would be impossible 
to stay on at the old one after what had happened tonight. 
The thought of Mlekopitayev came into his head— 
Mlekopitayev, who would no doubt force him tomorrpw 
to dance the kazachok again, to test his docility. He 
thought, too, that though Mlekopitayev had given him 
fifty rubles for the wedding, all of which to the last kopek 
had been spent, not a word had been said as to handing 
over the promised four hundred rubles’ dowry, and even 
the house had not yet been formally registered. Then he 
went on to think of his wife, who had abandoned him in 
the most critical moment of his life, and of the tall officer 
kneeling on one knee in front of her. He had seen that 
all right. He thought of the seven devils dwelling in her, 
on the evidence of her own father, and of the crutch pre¬ 
pared to drive them out. He felt capable of enduring 
much, it is true, but fate was playing such tricks on him 
that he could well begin to doubt his own strength. 

Thus grieved Pseldonimov. In the meantime the candle- 
end burned quite low. Its flickering light, falling straight 
on Pseldonimov’s profile, cast an enormous shadow on 
the wall—a craning neck, a hooked nose, and two tufts 
of hair, one sticking out over his forehead, the other on 
the back of his head. At last, when the morning freshness 
began to steal into the room, he got up, shivering and 
stunned, tottered over to the mattress between the chairs, 
and, without setting anything to rights, putting out the 
candle, or so much as placing a pillow beneath his head, 
flopped on the tumbled bedclothes and slept the leaden, 
deathlike slumber probably known to men condemned to 
public execution on the morrow. 


But what could compare with the night of torture spent 
by Ivan Ilyich Pralinsky on poor Pseldonimov’s bridal 
bed! Headache, nausea, and other unpleasant sensations 


300 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


did not leave him for a moment at first. He went through 
the torments of hell. His consciousness, though it scarcely 
flickered in his brain, lit up such depths of horror, such 
gloomy and loathsome scenes, that it would have been 
better if he had remained quite unconscious. However, his 
thoughts were still confused. He did recognise Pseldoni- 
mov’s mother, he heard her kindly admonitions: “Bear it, 
dearie, bear it, you'll get used to it!” and yet though he 
recognised her he could not give himself any logical 
reason for her presence beside him. Foul spectres ap¬ 
peared before him—the most frequent was Semyon Iva¬ 
novich, but gazing more intently he observed that it was 
not Semyon Ivanovich at all, but Pseldonimov’s nose. 
The artist, the officer, the old woman with the swollen 
cheek, all Hashed swiftly by. What occupied his thoughts 
most of all was the gilt ring overhead, through which the 
curtains were threaded. He could make it out dearly by 
the dim light of the candle-end, and kept asking himself: 
“What’s that ling for, why is it here, what does it mean?” 
He asked the old woman about it several tim£s, but he 
must have said something quite different from what he 
wanted to say. and she could not understand him, try as * 
he might to explain. At last, just before daybreak, the 
attacks ceased and he slept, slept soundly and dreamlessly 
for about an hour. When he waked up it was almost in 
full consciousness, with an intolerable headache, a hor- 
lible taste in his mouth, and a tongue that felt like a bit 
of llannel. He sat up in bed, looked round, and tried to 
think. The pale light of dawn was struggling through the 
chinks in the shutters, and lay in an ever widening strip 
on the wall. It was about seven o'clock in the morning. 
But when Ivan Ilyich realised where he was and remem¬ 
bered all that had happened that night, when he remem¬ 
bered the incidents at the supper table, his frustrated 
attempt at a heroic feat, his speech; when the consequenc¬ 
es of all this, what would be said and thought, appeared 
before him with appalling vividness in a single flash, 
when he looked around and saw the wretch and hideous 
mess he had made of his subordinate’s peaceful bridal 
bed—oh, then such shame, such agony suddenly visited 
his heart that he cried out, covered his face with his 




A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


307 


hands, and threw himself back on the pillow in despair. 
A minute later he leaped out of bed, saw his clothes on 
a chair, neatly folded and cleaned, seized them and 
began putting them on, huriying and casting terrified 
glances over his shoulder. On another chair lay his coat 
and cap, his tan gloves placed in the cap. He wanted to 
steal away unnoticed, but suddenly the dooi opened and 
old Pseldonimov came in, bearing an earthenware bowl 
and a china basin. Over her shoulder hung a towel. She 
put down the basin and told him that he had got to bathe 
bis face. 

“You must wash, sir, you can’t go away unwashed.” 

At that moment Ivan Ilyich realised that if there was 
a creature in the world before whom he could feel at ease 
and fear nothing, it was this elderly woman. He washed. 
Long after, in moments of depression, he would remem¬ 
ber, among other causes for remorse, everything about 
this awakening, the earthenware bowl, the china basin 
full of cold water, in which there still floated icicles, and 
the oval cake of soap in its pink wrapping, with the 
letters indented on its surface, worth about fifteen kopeks 
and no doubt purchased for the young couple, but which 
Ivan Ilyich was fated to be the first to use . .. and the 
elderly woman with the linen towel ovei her left shoul¬ 
der. ... The cold water refreshed him, he dried himself, 
and, without saying a word, without so much as thanking 
his nurse, seized his hat and coat, held out to him by 
Pseldonimov’s mother, and ran through the passage, 
through the kitchen where the cat was mewing and the 
cook, raising herself on her mattress, looked after him 
with eager curiosity, tushed out into the yard, to the 
street, and hailed a passing droshky. It was a frosty 
morning and a cold yellowish fog covered all the houses 
and other objects. Ivan Ilyich raised his coat collar. He 
felt as if everyone were looking at him, everyone knew 
who he was, recognised him.... 

For eight days he did not leave his house or appear at 
his office. He was ill, dreadfully ill, morally rather than 
physically. During those eight days he lived through the 
horror of hell, and they must have been ci edited to his 




308 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


account in the next world. There were moments when he 
actually thought of going into a monastery. There really 
were! His imagination took to wandering in that direc¬ 
tion. He heard low, subterranean singing, saw an open 
grave, visualised life in a solitary cell in a forest or a 
cave. But returning to his senses, he immediately admitted 
to himself that all this was pure nonsense and exaggera¬ 
tion, and was ashamed of it. Then begem moral torments 
from the thought of his existence manquee. Then shame 
again rose within his heart, filling it completely, scorch¬ 
ing it, rubbing salt into his wounds. He trembled at the 
pictures that passed before him. What would they say 
of him, what would they think when he went back to the 
office, what whisperings would haunt him for a whole 
year, ten years, his whole life? The story would be hand¬ 
ed down to posterity. He had moments of panic when 
he was ready to go to Semyon Ivanovich and beg his 
pardon, his friendship. He did not even seek to justify 
himself, he castigated himself incessantly. He could find 
no excuses for his conduct, he would have been ashamed 
to look for them. 

He even thought of instantly handing in his resignation 
and devoting himself to the happiness of mankind, just 
like that, in solitude. In any case he would have to change 
all his acquaintances and that, in such a way as to erase 
all memories of himself. Then the idea came to him that 
this was nonsense too, and that everything could be put 
right by treating his subordinates with greater severity. 
At such moments he would feel hopeful and begin to 
cheer up. After eight whole days of doubt and torture, 
he felt he could no longer bear the suspense, and nn beau 
matin decided to go to the office. 

While he was still at home, in dejection, he had tried 
a thousand times to imagine how he would enter the 
office. In terror he became convinced that he would hear 
ambiguous whispered remarks as he passed, see ambiguous 
countenances, glean malevolent smiles. What was his 
astonishment when none of this happened. He was met 
respectfully, bowed to. All were grave, all busy. His heart 
filled with joy and he made his way to his private 
office. 



A MOST UNFORTUNATE INCIDENT 


309 


Once there, he immediately plunged into serious busi¬ 
ness, listened to a few reports and accounts, gave in¬ 
structions. He felt he had never reasoned or argued so 
wisely, in such a business-like manner, as on that morn¬ 
ing. He saw that he gave satisfaction, that he was appre¬ 
ciated, that he was treated with respect. The most sensitive 
vanity could not have noticed anything wrong. All went 
splendidly. 

At last Akim Petrovich himself appeared with some 
papers. At the sight of him Ivan Ilyich felt a stab at hfis 
heart, but this was only for a moment. He discussed the 
matter in hand with Akim Petrovich, held forth pom¬ 
pously, showed him what to do, and explained eveiything 
to him. He noticed however that he seemed to avoid 
letting his eyes rest long on Akim Petrovich or, rather, 
that Akim Petrovich was afraid to look at him. But now 
Akim Petrovich had finished and was beginning to gath¬ 
er up the papers. 

“There is one more lequest,” he began, trying to sound 
completelv matter of fact “Registrar Pseldonimov asks to 
be transferred to the department.... His Excellency Se¬ 
myon Ivanovich Shipulenko has promised him a place 
He requests your favourable assistance, Your Excellency ” 

“Ah, so he wants to be transferred,” said Ivan Ilyich, 
feeling an enormous load lifted from his shoulders. He 
glanced at Akim Petrovich and for a moment their eyes 
met 

“Very well ... for my part ... I will endeavour ...” 
replied Ivan Ilyich. “I am quite willing.” 

Akim Petrovich seemed anxious to get away as quickly 
as possible. But Ivan Ilyich, in a lit of generosity, decided 
to express himself finally. Once more he was visited by 
an inspiration. 

“Tell him,” he began, fixing a clear glance of profound 
significance on Akim Petrovich, “tell him I bear him no 
grudge. Y.es, I bear him no grudge. That, on the contrary, 
1 am quite ready to forget the past, to forget all, all... 

But Ivan Ilyich suddenly checked himself, observing 
with astonishment the strange behaviour of Akim Petro¬ 
vich who, from having been a rational man, suddenly 
appeared for some unknown reason to have become the 



310 


F DOSTOYEVSKY 


most appalling fool. Instead of listening respectfully, he 
blushed like an imbecile, began with almost indecent 
haste to perform a series of little bows while backing 
towards the door. He looked as if he would like to fall 
through the earth, or at least to get back to his seat as 
soon as possible. Left alone, Ivan Ilyich rose in some 
perturbation fiom his chair. He looked in the glass without 
seeing his reflection. 

“No—severity, and again severity, he whispered 
almost unconsciously, and suddenly a bright red flush 
suffused his whole face. At that moment he felt more 
deeply ashamed, more wretched, than he had felt in the 
veiy woist moments of his eight-day illness. “Couldn't 
keep it up!” he'said to himself and sank helplessly on to 
his thaif 



THE MEEK ONE 
A Fantasy 







Author’s Note 


Will my readers forgive me for offering them just a 
short novel on this occasion rather than a regular instal¬ 
ment of the “Diary”. But this short novel has really kept 
me busy for the best part of a month. In any case, I crave 
my readers’ indulgence. 

Now for the story itself. I have called it a fantastic 
story, whereas I personally consider it highly realistic. 
There is, however, a fantastic element in it, that is, in 
the very composition of the story, and this, I think, needs 
to be explained beforehand. 

The fact is that this is neither a narrative nor a collec¬ 
tion of notes. Imagine to yourself a husband whose wife 
has committed suicide only a few hours ago by jumping 
out of the window. Her body is laid out on the table. He 
is confused and has not arranged his thoughts. He is pac¬ 
ing his rooms, trying to take in what has happened, and 
“bring his thoughts to a focus”. The man, it must be said, 
is an inveterate hypochondriac, one of those who talk to 
themselves. And so he is talking to himself, going over 
what has happened and trying to take it all in. Despite 
his seeming coherence he often contradicts himself both 
in his logic and his feelings. He both justifies himself and 
accuses her, then goes into irrelevant explanations: coarse¬ 
ness of heart and mind is mingled with depth of feeling. 
By degrees he does take it all in and “focuses his thoughts”. 
A train of memories he has called up bring him at last 
irresistibly to the truth, and truth irresistibly ennobles his 
heart and mind. Towards the end the very tone of his 
narrative becomes different from its incoherent begin¬ 
ning. The truth is revealed to the poor man quite clearly 
and definitely, sufficiently for himself to see at least. 



314 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


So much for the theme. The telling of the story, of 
course, takes a few hours in breaks and snatches; it is dis¬ 
connected in form, for he either argues with himself or 
addresses some unseen listener, a judge as it were. How¬ 
ever, it is always like that in real life. If a stenographer 
could have listened to him and taken it all down, it would 
have sounded rather less smooth and finished than my 
account, but I do believe that the psychological sequence 
would have probably been the same. Now this hypotheti¬ 
cal stenographer (whose notes I have given shape to) is 
what I call “fantastic” in my story. Howevei, something 
of the sort has been allowed in literature before: Victor 
Hugo, for instance, in his masterpiece Le Dernier Jour 
d'un Condamne resorted to almost the same medium, and 
though he portiayed no stenographer he made it even less 
credible by assuming that a man sentenced to death was 
able (and had sufficient time) to make notes not only of 
his last day on eaith, but also of his last hour and, actual¬ 
ly, his last minute. Weie it not for this fantastic situa¬ 
tion, howevei, the woik itself would not havc^been written 
—the most lealistic and the most tiuthful of all his books. 



PART ONE 


WHO I WAS AND WHO SHE WAS 


• 

. .While she is still here it is not so bad: I can come 
up and look at her every minjute, but they’ll take her 
away tomorrow, and what will I do all alone then? She 
is in the front room now, on the table, they’ve put two 
card tables together, the coffin will be ready tomorrow, 
very, very white gros de Naples, oh, but I’m rambling.... 
I'm walking up and down, up and down, trying to take it 
all in I’ve been trying for six solid hours but I just can¬ 
not focus my thoughts. The thing is that I keep walking 
up and down, up and down.... This is what happened. 
I shall simply give the order of events. (Oh, order!) Gen¬ 
tlemen, I am far from being a writer, as you can see for 
yourselves, but never mind, I shall tell it the way I under¬ 
stand it. But the appalling part of it is that I do under¬ 
stand it all! 

Well, if you want to know, or rather to begin at the 
beginning, she simply came to me to pawn hei things in 
order to pay for her advei tiseinent in 7 he that she 

was a governess seeking employment, hid no objection to 
tiavelling, was willing to give private lessons, an' 1 so on 
and so foitli. I hat was the vety beginning, and naturally 
I did not single her out from among the others. she just 
came in like everyone else and *hnt was that. I uid single 
hei out latet, however. She was so thin, so sweetly fair, 
above medium height, always rather awkward with me 
and tinbatrassed as it were. (I think she was like that 
with all'strangers, and certainly I meant as little to her 
as the next man, that is, taken as a man and not a pawn¬ 
broker.) The minute she received her money she would 
turn away and leave. She never uttered a word. Other 
clients argue so, begging and haggling for more, but she 
would accept anything_I believe I’m getting con- 



F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


ksed... .OK yes, what struck me first was the things she 
brought: gold-plated silver ear-rings and a trashy little 
locket—all worthless trinkets. She knew they were worth¬ 
less, but her expression told me that to her they were 
precious—and indeed that was all her father and mother 
had left her, as I afterwards learnt. Only once did I per¬ 
mit myself to sneer at her things. That is, you see, I never 
permit myself to do it, for I am always the gentleman 
with my clients: reticent, polite and stern. “Stern, stern 
and again stem.” However, she was once presumptuous 
enough to bring the remnants (literally the remnants) of 
an oid rabbit-fur jacket, and I was tempted to say some¬ 
thing rather facetious to her. Goodness, how she had 
blushed! Her eyes were blue, big and dreamy, but the 
way they had blazed up! She did not utter a word, but 
picked up her “remnants” and walked out. That was 
when I noticed her particularly for the first time, and 
thought something of the sort about her, I mean some- 
tning of a particular sort. Oh yes. I remember another 
impression, or rather, if you like, the main impression, the 
synthesis of everything: that is, that she was awfully 
young, she iook»d about fourteen. And vet she was al¬ 
ready sixteen then three months short of sixteen. That’s 
not what I was going to say, the synthesis was not that 
at all She came again on the morrow. I found out after¬ 
wards that she had taken her rabbit jacket to Dobronra- 
\ov and Moser, but those two accept nothing but gold, 
and so thev would not even talk to her. I, on the other 
hand, mce accepted a cameo from her (very third-rate 
too), and my own action surprised me when I thought it 
over: I never took anything but gold and silver either, and 
vet, in her case, I had stooped to a cameo. That was the 
second time I thought about her, I well remember. 

On that occasion, that is after she had been to Moser, 
she brought me an amber cigar-holder, not too bad if one 
went in for that sort of thing, but once again of no value 
to us for we only deal in gold. Since this was the day 
following her revolt , I met her sternly. With me stern¬ 
ness means dryness. However, when I handed her the two 
rubles I could not desist from saying with something like 
peevishness: “I’m only doing it for you. Moser would 



THE MEEK ONE 


317 


never accept a thing like this from you.” I stressed the 
words for you particularly, and in a particular sense too. 

I was annoyed. She blushed again at this for you , but 
said nothing; she did not throw the money back at me, 
but took it—that’s poverty for you! Oh, how she had 
blushed! I had hurt her pride, I knew. When she left 1 
suddenly asked myself: was my triumph over her really 
wotth two rubles? Ha-ha-ha! I remember asking myself 
that question twice: was it worth it? was it worth it? An,d, 
laughing, 1 answered myself in the affirmative 1 had *a 
jolly good laugh then. There was no malice in it, however. 

I had a motive, my action had been intentional: 1 had 
wanted to test her, for suddenly my mind had begun to 
work in a certain direction about her. That was my third 
particular thought about her. 

.. .Well, that was how it all began. Needless to say, I 
immediately set to finding out all about her on the quiet, 
and awaited her coming with particular impatience. I had 
a feeling that she would be back soon. When she did 
come I engaged her most politely in a pleasant conver¬ 
sation. I have not been badly brought up, you know, 
and my manners are good. Hm— It was then I per¬ 
ceived that she was gentle and meek. The gentle and the 
meek have poor resistance, and though they do not shed 
their reserve at all, they simply cannot evade a conver¬ 
sation: they answer curtly but answer they do, and 
the more you ask the more they say. The important thing 
is to keep it up, if you’re interested, that’s all. She na¬ 
turally told me nothing about herself on that occasion 
It was later that I found out all about T he Voice and 
everything else. She had been using up her last resources 
on the advertisements then, wording them haughtily at 
first: “Governess seeking employment, no objection to 
travelling, state your terms by letter”, and then: “willing 
to take any employment, teacher, companion, housekeeper, 
sick nurSe and seamstress”, etc., etc., the usual story. The 
advertisement was reworded by degrees of course, and 
finally, when she was close to despair, it actually said: 
“no salary expected, board only”. But no, she found no 
employment I decided to put her to the final test then, 
and picking up that day’s Voice I pointed out to her an 



.18 


F DOSTOYEVSKY 


adve itisuue Ithiis.ud \ oung lddv with no family tie* 
• tl un}'<> p nt is I dehcn s govt iness, pi tier ably with 
ut .It »l \\id<p t, Will take 01. household duliis 

“Hieie um 4e, advertising this morning and most 
|>>'lvily uuiint i po«t bv tonight 1 That’s the way to 
adv ltise 1 

She Mushed and hei evt' hla/cd up again Tuimne 
away sin w iU.il out at onre 1 liked it veiy lnmli How 
eg. >, I \\a> al ca Jv quite Cvinhde nt and bold no one else 
vvoute aopt li< i cigai-hoideis And even hei cigar hold- 
4 'ho no out I via j>eht she came baek two days latei 
J«in vtiv pale and upset— I guessed that she had had 
so ue ti '.I k >t home, and she lealh had 1 '■hall explain 
d ieet y w> ' tl v tiou'le had been, but lust I want to 
(.<.all how 1 sud Vdy eet a firuie lor her benefit then and 
thio went n * m ner estu '*o.i 1 d.d it oi> the spui of the 
moment Iht time, is that sl*e In ought in hit am of 
nei'tc ot i tkn da' t 1 <j c.. to bunging, tatlici) 


An list, n 

i , >i 

'id ii i 

be te"i 4 h 

piooeilv npw, 1 keep 

tip 4 

1 1 V 

4 t\t 

ul \V 

t i a . ’ 

lo IV IS tl 

kit I want 

1 * H 

uli 4 

Mi < 

< 11 

he i id clt* 

'll t * 

*i < 

,4 ast lif tie 


1 


l 1 

rot ’ 1 \ 

thoughts md 1 fT.it 

V S 

i Ui< - 

In M 

111 t!> 

III* ‘ ! ^S 




V 

\ \ t i 

i n oi i« 

l’oly .ii? 

i with tM 

(,Inld in 

Id * 

i U 

HOP 


o'd-pl » . . 

Sl i V 

« io.i, and the 

ti 

* 

t» * 

in l".l V 

I < mid s 

e til. 

il Ron meant 

i ' 

.it i i 

1 t 

1 1 >1 

* \\ i ■ t 

]> V ( 

i* i 

t 1 t w tl - 

* tjr 

Ml K til »*»f 

*/ 1 1 

' ml t ht) 

Vo 

l d h 

tier le\.ve 

f Ik » 

f 


h i : 

*h Hi 

home 

l 

Oi 

0 I'+t’ 

> 

\ hh 

< \ 

>n i 

» (illU d‘e 1 

1 m r ’ 



r t 

' 

i 

11/ 1 1 f ■> 

>’ W 1* 1 






i 

JM 

1 * 111 ^ t’ 

i lit >! 

J l 4 1> 

. h ips i ii 

\ i 

T 

» 

4 1 

M * 

' ofl 






i 

^ in 

. iU ii 

) 111)' 

it »t in t. e 

< on e*.sc 

O' 

* ¥ 

T . 

ml aM# i 

Mure tho ight 

\\ <f 

the f ku 

1 

T 

>» ! I 

< i 

f mi 1 nop I v tlways 

rot 

one hurn 

if*;, ' 

VU SI 

T 

llist At 

1 bu k, n<s‘ 

I’ll 

>un] 

'v let you 

a i. 

3 

> o 

t a ’ 






do‘i 1 

* cl * 

4 !» i 

* Ihe fiv i 

I sn » 

H rc 

.cm H fnr 


sute * 



the meek one 


319 


“Don’t you want ten? Ihe icon is worth it,” I added, no¬ 
ticing hei eyes Hash again She said nothing. 1 handed hei 
the five rubles. 

“Do not despise people,” 1 said. "I’ve been in straits 
like this myself, even worse perhaps, and if you see me 
thus engaged now ... it is only because of all I had gone 
thlough....” 

1 Revenging yourself on society, are you?” she suddenly 
interrupted me with tins rather caustic remark which, 
hov ever, had much that was guileless m it. (I mean it was 
innocent of guile generally, for she certainly did not dis¬ 
tinguish me from the crowd then, and so there was almost 
no sting to her words.) 

“Aha! ’ l thought. “So that's what you’re like! There s 
evidence of character, tinged with new shades... 

“You see,” I quickly put in half-jokingly and half-mys- 
teriously, “I am part of that whole which wants to do 
e\ il but does good....” 

She quickly turned on me a look of vast cu*iosity which 
was much like a child’s. 

' Wait a minute ... whose words are they? Where i c 
it liom.* I’ve heaid it somewhere. . 

“Don *■ i atk yoer brains, it w as Mephistophelcs pi t 
anting himself to 1 aust with these woids. Have you >cad 
Faust r 

“Not . . not caretully ’ 

“In % diet words not at all Y*‘U outfit to re id it. Bui 
then I see your lip aie cuiving scorniully again Please 
'o not th-nk rm* so 1 at king in taste that l should attempt 
to cover up my rnie of pawnbroker by presenting mvself 
to vou as a Mephistophelcs. \ pawnbroker will always 
iem>>n a pawnbioket. 1 know that well enough.” 

“You aie strange, really.... I didn’t mcm anything 
hke that. . ” 

She wanted to sav: “I did not expect you to be an edu- 
ta> -1 man!” She did not say so but I knew the thoughr 
was there, she was very pleasantly surprised. 

“You see,” I said, “one can do good in any wal* of 
life. I do not mean myself of course. I, for one, do nothing 
hue evil, but then... 

“To be sure one 'in do good in any position,” she said 



320 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


with a swift and understanding glance at me. “Yes, in 
any position,” she suddenly added. Oh, how well I re¬ 
member all those moments! 1 also want to add that when 
the young, our dear young people, want to say some¬ 
thing very clever and understanding, their faces express 
all too sincerely and naively: “There, I’m saying some¬ 
thing clever and understanding to you now.” This does 
not spring from conceit as with, people like me; you can 
see that they value it all so highly, believe and esteem it 
all, and they fancy that you, too, esteem it just as much as 
they do. Ah, sincerity! It’s their truest weapon. And in 
her it was so charming! 

1 remember it all, 1 have forgotten nothing. When she 
walked out, my mind was instantly made up. That same 
day I set out to conclude my investigations and find out 
all the remaining, current secrets of her life. I had learnt 
all the earlier secrets from Lukerya, a servant of theirs at 
the time, whom I had bribed a few days earlier. Those 
secrets were so shocking that I fail to understand how 
she could bring herself to laugh and be curious about 
Mephistopheles’ words when her own predicament was 
so horrible. But that’s youth for you! It was precisely this 
I thought of her then, with pride and joy because there 
was magnanimity in this as well, as much as to say: “I 
may be on the brink of ruin, but Goethe’s great words are 
refulgent.” Youth is always attended by magnanimity, be 
there ever so little of it, or be it misdirected. I mean her, 
her alone. The main thing was that 1 was already regard¬ 
ing her as mine and had no doubts of my power. Do you 
know it's a most delicious feeling when you’re no longer 
in doubt. 

But what am I about? If I carry on like this I’ll never 
focus my thoughts. Oh hurry, hurry, it’s all beside the 
point, oh heavens! 

ii 

PROPOSAL OF MARRIAGE 

I shall explain the “secrets” I found out about her in a 
word: her father and mother had died three years 
previously, and she was left with some shiftless aunts. To 



THE MEEK ONE 


321 


call them shiftless would be putting it too mildly. One 
was a widow with a large family; six children she had, 
each smaller than the next one. The other was a spinster, 
old and bad. Both were bad. Her father had been in the 
civil service, just a clerk though, and his nobleman’s rank 
was a personal award, nothing more. In short, all this 
was playing into my hand. 1 came to them from a higher 
world, so to say: after all, I was a retired junior captain 
of a splendid regiment, a nobleman by birth, a man ofc 
independent means and so on; as for the pawnshop, her 
aunts could feel nothing but respect for it. She had been 
kept in slavery by her aunts for three years, yet she had 
passed her school exams somewhere—she had managed 
to do it, escaping from her cruel drudgery to do it—and 
that surely proved her yearning for better and nobler 
things! Look, the reason I wanted to marry her-How¬ 
ever, never mind me, that will keep_And does it mat¬ 

ter? She taught her aunt’s children, made their clothes, 
and towards the end she not only had to wash for them 
but also scrub the floors, with lungs like hers! To put it 
plainly, they actually beat her and grudged her her keep. 
They ended up by wanting to sell her. Ugh! I’ll leave out 
the sordid details. She told me all about it afterwards. 
A fat shopkeeper from next door had been watching all 
this for a whole year. He was no ordinary shopkeeper, 
for he owned two grocery shops. He had already driven 
two wives into the grave, and was now on the look-out 
for a third. “She’s quiet, brought up in poverty, and I’m 
marrying for my orphans’ sake,” he reasoned. He really 
did have children who wanted looking after. He made 
his suit, he and her aunts began to make arrangements 
(incidentally, he was fifty), and she was in a panic. That 
was when she started coming to me in order to pay for 
her advertisements in 'The Voice . Finally, she begged her 
aunts to give her time to think it over, even if only a tiny 
moment. They agreed and granted her a moment, but only 
one, they refused a second, and made her life a misery. 
“An extra mouth to feed when we’ve nothing to eat our¬ 
selves.” I knew all that already, and on that day, after 
the morning’s conversation, my mind was made up. In the 
evening the shopkeeper came to call on her, bringing a 



322 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


fiity-kopck pound of sweets from the shop; there she was 
sitting with him, while I called Lukerya out of the kitchen 
and told her to whisper in her ear that I was waiting at 
the gate and had something urgent to say to her. 1 was 
well pleased with myself. On the whole, I was awfully 
pleased all that day. 

There and then at the gate, in Lukerya’s presence, I told 
her—adding to her amazement at being called out by me 
«it all—that I should he happy and honoured if.... Next, 

1 asked her not to be surprised at my manner and my 
proposing at the gate; i told her that I was a straightfor¬ 
ward man and was well aware of the circumstances. And 
1 was straightforward, that wasn’t a lie. Oh, bother it.... 
My speech was not only decent, which is proof of my 
good breeding, but also original, and that is the main 
thing. Oh well, why think it wrong to admit it:* I want 
to judge myself and 1 do. 1 must speak fnn and <oiilra 
and i do. 1 know it’s stupid, but even afterwards l de¬ 
lighted in recalling it; l told her straight out, without any 
embarrassment, that for one thing I was not particularly 
gilted or clever, not even particularly kind perhaps, and 
something ol a cheap egoist fl remember that expression, 
it had occurred to nre on tny way there and I liked it), 
and it was quite possible that there was much that was 
unpleasant in me in other respects as well. I said all this 
with a peculiar sort of haughtiness—we all know how such 
things ate said. It goes without saying that 1 had sufficient 
good taste to loiebeai listing my good points after mak¬ 
ing a clean hi east ol my .hortconungs. ‘"but to make up 
for that 1 h tee this and that”, so to say. 1 could see that 
she was terrible aft rid still, but I did not tone down any¬ 
thing; on the contrary, seeing that she was afraid I pui- 
pose’ly made it harsher: I told her straight out that she 
would have enough to cat. hut as for lancy clothes, theati e*s 
and balls, there would be none of that, unless later perhaps 
when 1 had attained my " r oal. I was quite carried ava/ 
by this sternness of mine. 1 adde.t. as etsuailv as I »- u uld. 
that though 1 was thus occupied, .uniting a pawnshop 
that is, l was only striving foi a goal, that ‘here were cer¬ 
tain circumstances. . . . B..l 1 did nave the right to say it: 
1 really did have a goal and certain circumstances, just 



THE MEEK ONE 


323 


a moment, gentlemen, I’ve hated the pawnshop all my life 
more than anybody else could, and though it really is ab¬ 
surd to talk to oneself in veiled phrases, I was really “re¬ 
venging myself on society”, I was, I was, 1 was! And so 
her thrust that morning about my “revenging myself on 
society” was unfair. That is, you see, were I to tell her 
frankly: “Yes, I am revenging myself on society”, she 
would have laughed the way she had done that morning, 
and it would have really sounded ahsuid. Besides, I saw 
that I could play on her imagination with a vague hint 
here and a mysterious sentence there. What was more, I 
alitady feared nothing then: I knew that the fat shop¬ 
keeper was in any case more repulsive to hei than 1, and 
that I was her liberator. I did appreciate that, you know. 
Oh, man is paiticuluily good at appiuiating vile oppor 
tunities. But was it vile of me. 1 * How judge a man? Did I 
not love her even then? 

Just a minute: 1 naturally did not so much as hint at 
being her benefactor then; oh, no, on the contrary, I told 
hei it was / who was indebted and not she. I actually put 
it m words; I couldn’t help it, and it may have sounded 
siliy because 1 did notice a fleeting change of expression 
on her face. But on the whole 1 was definitely the winner. 
1 ook Imre, once I am lecalhng all that sordidness, let 
me lecall the last bit of caddishness as well: 1 was stand¬ 
ing there with this mnning through my mind: “I’m tall, 
well built, well hied, and, bragging aside, I’m not bad- 
1 ‘oking.” Such were the thoughts exciting my brain. Need¬ 
less to s ty, she said “yes”, even there at the gate. But... 
hut 1 must and: she stood at the gate thinking for a long 
time befoie she said “yes”. She was so lost in thought that 
I was about to say “Well?” but 1 could not keep the 
swaggei out of my tone and said: “Well then?” 

“Wait, I'm thinking. 

And her sweet face was so grave, I should have been 
able to read it even then! But I was vexed, thinking: “Can 
she be choosing between me and the shopkeeper?” Oh, 
I did not understand anything then. I understood noth¬ 
ing, nothing at all. I understood nothing until today. I 
remember Lukerya running after me when I had turned 
to go, stopping me and saying with a gasp: “God will 


324 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


reward you, kind sir, for taking our dear miss, but don't 
you tell her this, she’s proud.” 

Oh, she's proud, is she! 1 like proud little girls. The 
proud are especially good when ... well, when you no 
longer doubt your power over them, eh? Oh, what a vile, 
coarse man I am! Oh, the pleasure it gave me! Do you 
know, when she was standing there at the gate thinking 
hard before saying “yes” to me, which 1 found puzzling 
enough, do you know what she may have been thinking in 
“fact? “Since it’s misery here and misery there, isn’t it best 
to choose the worst at once, that is the fat shopkeeper, let 
him beat me to death when he’s drunk and the sooner 
the better.” Eh? Tell me, could she have been thinking 
that? 

But even now I don’t understand it, I understand noth¬ 
ing even now! I have just said that she may have been 
thinking she should choose the worst of the two evils, 
that is the shopkeeper. But which one of us appeared 
worse to her then, the shopkeeper or 1? A shopkeeper or 
a pawnbroker who quoted Goethe? It's quite ^ question. 
What question? Don’t you understand even that much ? 
There’s your answer lying on the table, so what question 
could there be? And then, bother me anyway. The point 
is not myself at all.... Incidentally, what do I care now 
whether the point was myself or not? That’s something 
1 absolutely cannot solve. Perhaps I should go to bed. My 
head aches so.... 


in 

1HE NOBLEST OF MORTALS, 

THOUGH I DON'T REALLY BELIEVF IT 

1 could not fall asleep. How could I with that pulse 
throbbing in my brain. I want to take it all in, all that 
sordidness. Oh, sordidness! The sordidness I rescued her 
from then. Surely she ought to have understood and ap¬ 
preciated my action? I also indulged in various pleasing 
thoughts such as the notion that she was only sixteen 
while 1 was forty-one. This disparity fascinated me; it 
was gratifying, most gratifying. 




THE MEEK ONE 


325 


I wanted our wedding to be a Vanglaise, that is just the 
two of us with two witnesses, one of whom should be Lu- 
kerya, and then straight into the train and off to Moscow 
perhaps (incidentally, I had some business to attend to 
there), to a hotel for a fortnight or so. She objected to 
this: she would not allow it, and I was compelled to pay 
courtesy calls on her aunts, the way one docs on parents 
whose daughter one seeks in marriage. I conceded the 
point to her, and the aunts received their due. I went so 
far as to give those hags a hundred rubles each, promise 
ing more to come, telling her nothing of all this of course, 
so as not to offend her with the vileness of the whole affair. 
The aunts instantly turned meek and mild. We also had 
an argument about her trousseau: she had nothing, almost 
literally so, but then she wanted nothing. I managed to 
prove to her, however, that it was not done, and 1 pro¬ 
vided the trousseau, for who else would have done it? 
Oh, bother me. I did tell her at the time, however, about 
some of my ideas to give her an inkling at least. I was 
rather hasty about it perhaps. The main thing was that 
from the very first, though she tried to curb the impulse, 
she offered her love to me impetuously, welcoming me 
eagerly when I came to call in the evening, prattling hap¬ 
pily (charming, innocent prattle!) about her childhood 
and babyhood, her parents’ home, her father and mother. 
But I instantly dashed cold water on all that rapture of 
hers. It was dictated by the idea I had, you see. I respond¬ 
ed to her transports with silence, gracious silence of 
course ... but still, she soon grasped that we were differ¬ 
ent, and that I was an enigma. And to be an enigma was 
what l was striving for mostly. My whole stupid attiiude 
was maintained for that very purpose. First and foremost 
—sternness. I kept it up until after the wedding. In short, 
even though I was satisfied then, I evolved a whole svs- 
tem. Oh, it took shape without any effort on my part. But 
then I could not have acted differently, I was compelled 
to evolve that system because of one extraordinary cir¬ 
cumstance—but really, why am I piling calumny upon 
myself? The system was correct. No, no, listen to me, 
because you must know the circumstances if you are to 
pass judgement on a person_Listen. 



326 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


I don’t know how to begin because it is all so difficult. 
It's difficult when one begins to plead one’s own case. You 
see how it was; youth despises money, for instance, and 
so 1 instantly made much of money, 1 laid stress on money. 
I did it so tellingly that she grew more and more silent. 
She opened her great eyes wide, listened, looked, and grew 
silent. You see, young people are magnanimous, that is to 
say good young people are magnanimous and impetuous, 
but they lack tolerance, and the moment anything falls 
short of wh.it they expect, they turn scornful. And I 
wanted broad-mindedness, 1 wanted to implant broad¬ 
mindedness right in her heart, in her heartfelt point of 
view, do you see? I’ll give you a vulgar example: how was 
1 to explain my pawnshop to one such as she? 1 naturally 
did not blurt it all out to her, for then it would have ap¬ 
peared that 1 was making excuses for my pawnshop, and 
so I resoitcd to proud silence, so to say, 1 practically spoke 
in silence. 1 am a past master at speaking in silence. I have 
spent a lifetime speaking in silence, I have lived through 
whole diamas in silence alone with mvself. Qh, but I too 
have known unhappiness. I have been discarded by all, 
discarded and forgotten, and no one, no one at all knows 
about it. And then for that slip of a girl to pick up that 
gossip about me from certain cads and to believe that she 
knew evciything, while everything that mattered remained 
locked in this breast alone! I kept silent, I kept pointedly 
silent with her all the time until yesterday—why did 1? 
Because of my pride. 1 wanted her to find out for her¬ 
self. without my prompting and certainly not from the 
cads’ stoiies, I wanted her to perceive the man I was by 
heiself, and understand me. Since I was bringing her into 
my home I wanted her absolute respect. I wanted her to 
stand in awe of me for my sufferings—it was my due. Oh, 

1 have always been proud. I’ve always wanted all or 
nothing. It was precisely because I rejected half-measures 
in happiness and wanted all that I was forced to take that 
attitude: “find out for yourself and appreciate my worth”. 
Because you must agree that had I gone into explanations 
of my own accord, prompting her, cringing and pleading 
for respect, it would have been the same as begging for 
alms. However, why speak of all that? 




THE MEEK ONE 


327 


It’s stupid, stupid, stupid! 1 explained to her fiankly 
and cruelly then (I stress the word cruelly), in a few 
words, that magnanimity in the young was charming but 
not worth a thing. Why wasn’t it? Because it was cheaply 
acquired, granted to them before they began to live; it 
was nothing but “life’s first impressions” so to say, but I’d 
like to see them practise it first. Cheap magnanimity is 
always easy, laying down one’s life is cheap too, because 
it’s nothing but young blood and vigour seeking an out¬ 
let, a passionate desire to do something handsome. Oh 
no. try your magnanimity in a feat that is difficult, unseen 
and unheard, with no splendour to it, attended instead 
with calumny and great sacrifice, and not a dtop of glory 
—a feat when you, radiantly pure, arc exposed as a cad 
before the world whereas there is no one equal to you ir. 
honesty on earth—I’d like to see you tiy a feat like that 
but no, you would back out of it. And I—my whole life 
has been nothing but a feat like that She argued with me 
at first, oh, so hotly, and then she began to say less, giew 
completely silent and only opened her eyes terribly wide 
listening to me, such big observant eyes. And ... and what 
was more, I suddenly caught a smile upon her face, a 
mistrustful, silent, bad smile. She wore that smile when I 
brought her into my home. It’< also true that she had no¬ 
where else to po 


IV 

PIANS NOTHING KUT PLANS 

Which of us two had staHtd ‘t hrst i> 

Neither. It all stalled oi itself at the vuv outset. I have 
ahead) told you th it I a f fecled stei in< .s uhen I 'lit 
her into my home, but I toned it down i i med’alt'y. hue 
had it explained to her before the u Ming that die " mid 
take my place in the pawnshop, acc*'pt.n' thin,^ in pawn 
and handing our the money, and she had made n. oh jit 
tion then (note this). What ii more, she actually tail lid 
the job with ?aal. Well, naturally, the room' and the fui- 
niture all remained unchanged 7 luae wext two rooms* 
one was the large front room with the pawnshop paii - 



328 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


tioned off, and the other, also large, was our room—bed- 
and living-room. The furniture was poor; even her aunts’ 
was better. My icon stand with the icon-lamp was in the 
front room where the pawnshop was; in the other I had 
my bookcase with a few books in it, my chest of which l 
kept the keys, and then the bed, tables and chairs, of 
course. I told her before the wedding that I was allowing 
a ruble a day and no more for our food, that is, hers, 
mine and Lukerya’s, whom I enticed away from the 
aunts; 1 explained that I had to save thirty thousand in 
three years, and this was the only way to do it. She raised 
no objection, but I increased the allowance by thirty ko¬ 
peks of my own accord. It was the same with the theatre. 
1 told her before the wedding that there would be no 
theatre-going, and yet I went and allowed it once a month, 
decently too, in stalls. We went three times and saw the 
Pursuit of Happiness and Singing Birds, I think it was 
(oh, bother it, bother it!). We went in silence and returned 
in silence. But why, why did we affect silence from the 
very first? There were no quarrels at first, yoif know, but 
still we were silent. In the beginning I remember, she had 
a way of glancing at me stealthily; the moment I noticed 
it I stressed our silence. It’s true that it was I who overdid 
the silence, and not she. As for her, she had one or two 
outbursts when she threw herself into my arms; but since 
the outbursts were morbid and hysterical, while I wanted 
solid happiness, respectful on her part, I responded coldly. 
And 1 was quite right, for these outbursts were inevitably 
followed by a quarrel the next day. 

That is, there were no quarrels, but silence again, and 
more and more insolence in her expression. “Revolt and 
independence” was what it implied, only she did not 
know how to go about it. Yes, her meek expression took 
on more and more insolence. Truly, I was becoming loath¬ 
some to her; I made a study of it, you know. And then 
of course there was no doubt that her outbursts carried 
her awa£. For instance, how could she suddenly start 
sneering at our poverty after the filth and misery she had 
come from, floor scrubbing and everything? You must see 
that it was not poverty, but economy, and where necessary 
there was even luxury—in linen, for instance, and clean- 



THE MEEK ONE 


J29 


lincss. I “had always imagined that cleanliness in a hus¬ 
band appealed to a wife. It was nol povertv she scoffed «>• 
however, but my alleged stinginess “So he has a goal, 
has he, he’s showing olf his strength of chaiacter.” She 
suddenly cancelled our theatre-going he rse’f And Ik 
scornful expression grew more and more pionounced 
and I grew more silent, more silent. 

After all, why make excuses for myself The * i ux ol 
the matter lay in the pawnshop. But look here 1 knew 
that a woman, a sixteen-year-old giil at that, could not 
help becoming completely subjugated to a min’s v dl 
There is no originality in women, that’s self-evident, it’s 
evident to me even now. What if she is Iving on the tul«J 
there? Truth is truth and even Mill hnnscll could do 
nothing about it. And a loving woman, oh, a loving wo¬ 
man will idolise the vices, even the crimes, of the man she 
loves. He himself wo’dd nevet ihmk of c i.ch ex< us< for 
his crimes as she will find for him It’s magna. >mous but 
not original It’s lack of originality alone that has been 
the undoing of women. What of i*, 1 repeat, what if you 
do point to that on the table over there J Why, is there 
any originality in that which is on the tuhle J Oh! Oh’ 

Listen: I was certain of her love then She did come 
flying to me and threw herself on my neck, didn’t c he ,) 
Therefore she loved me, or rather—she wanted to love 
Yes, that was it: she wanted to love, longed for someone 
to love. What is more, there was no such ci imt in evidence 
here for which she would have had to find cxiuses A 
pawnbroker, you say, and everyone says What if I am 
a pawnbroker? Obviously, theie must he reasons \vh> the 
most magnanimous of men had become a pawnbroker 
You see, gentlemen, there arc certain ideas . that is, you 
see, certain ideas which, if put into words would sound 
terribly stupid. You’d shrink with shame Why* Just so 
Because we all are rotten and cannot stand the truth, or 
I don’t know why else. I have just said “the most mag¬ 
nanimous of men”. It sounds funny, and yet it ieally was 
so. It’s the truth, you know, the most truthful truth. Yes, 
I had the right then to want to have some security and to 
open this pawnshop. “You have cast me aside, you—that 
is people—have driven me away with your scornful silence 



330 


V DOSTOYEVSKY 


When, passionately impulsive, I appealed to you, you 
reciprocated with an insult to last me a lifetime. And 
therefore I am justified in walling myself in away from 
you, saving my thirty thousand rubles and ending my days 
in the Crimea somewhere, on the south roast, in the moun - 
tains and vineyards, on my own estate bought with this 
thirty thousand, and what is more, awav from all of you, 
but without bearing you malice, carrying an unblemished 
ideal in my soul, with the woman I love close to my heart, 
and a family—God willing—spending my days in help¬ 
ing the neighbouring villagers/’ It’s all right, of coui.sc, 
saying all this about myself now, but would it not have 
been the utmost folly to have enlarged upon this out loud 
to her then? Therefore the proud silence, that's why we 
lived in silence. Could she have understood? Sixteen, 
youth's awakening—what could she have made of all my 
excuses, my sufferings? Straightforwaidness. no woildlv 
wisdom, youth's cheap convictions, pui blindness of “noble 
hearts”, but the deciding factor in this was the pawnshop, 
and there you are! (But was 1 a villain in mj^pawnshop ' 
Did she not sec the way I ran it? Did I ever drive unfaii 
bargains?) Oh, how terrible truth is in this world! This 
darling, this meek one, this heavenly one—she was a ty¬ 
rant who cruelly tormented my soul. 1 would be wrong 
ing myself if I did not say that. Do vou think I did not 

love her? Who is there to say that 1 did not love her’ 

You see, it was a wicked irony of fate and nature. We 
are the accursed, altogether there is a cuise on the life of 
men (mine particularly). 1 do understand now that I had 
been wrong somewhere. Something went wrong some¬ 
where. It had all been clear, my plan was as clear as the 
skies: “Stem and proud, a man who has no need of any¬ 
one's moral support or consolation and js suffering in si¬ 
lence.” It really was so. No, 1 wasn't shamming, I wasn’t! 
“She would sec for herself afterwards that theie was mag¬ 
nanimity in this, only she had failed to notice it, and 

then, when she did sec it. she would appreciate it ten¬ 

fold and, clasping her hands, to her breast in entreaty, 
would be reduced to dust.” So much for my plan. But 
there must have been something T had left out of account 
or had forgotten to do. There was something 1 ought to 




THE MEEK ONE 


331 


have done there and did not. But enough, enough. And 
whose forgiveness should I beg now? Once it’s over, it’s 
done with. Courage, man, think of your pride! You are 
not to blame! 

Very well, I shall speak the truth, I shall not shrink 
from facing the truth: she was to blame, she was to blame! 


THE MEEK ONE REVOLTS 

Our quarrels began with her suddenly taking it into her 
head to determine the loans in her own way, overvaluing 
the things brought in pawn, and once or twice actually 
ti eating me to an argument on the subject. I stood my 
giound. And then this captain’s widow turned up. 

An old woman, a captain’s widow, came to pawn a 
locket, her late husband's gift, the usual sort of souvenir. 
I gave her thirty rubles. She began to whimper and whine, 
begging me not to let it go—well, of course, I shouldn’t. 
Suddenly, five days later, she came back bringing a brace¬ 
let that wasn’t worth eight rubles as a substitute; I refused, 
quite naturally. My wife’s eyes must have told her some¬ 
thing because she came again when I was out and had her 
locket exchanged for the bracelet. 

On learning of it the same day, I spoke to my wife 
gently, but firmly and reasonably. She was sitting on the 
bed, staring at the floor and tapping the rug with her 
right foot (a habit of hers); an evil smile hovered on her 
lips. And then, without raising my voice at all, 1 calmly 
told her that the money was mine , that I had the right to 
my own point of view, and that I had concealed nothing 
from her as she well knew when 1 first proposed that she 
should share my home. 

All at opce she leapt up, shaking all over, and—would 
you believe it—suddenly began to stamp her feet at me. 
She was a wild beast; it was a fit; she was a wild beast in 
a fit. I was speechless with amazement; an outburst like 
that I had never expected. But I did not lose my presence 
of mind; I did not so much as stir, and once again, in the 
same calm voice, 1 told her straight out that I would not 



332 


F DOSTOYEVSKY 


allow her to take part in my business forthwith. She 
laughed in my face and walked out of the flat. 

ihe point of this is that she had no right to leave the 
flat. Not a step without me, I had made that condition 
befoic the wedding. She came back towards evening: l 
did not say a word. 

Eailv next morning she went out again, and the follow¬ 
ing dav again. 1 locked up my pawnshop and went to see 
h.’r aunts. 1 had se\ered all lstations with them imme¬ 
diately afte. the wedding, neither receiving them nor 
calling on them. I was only to learn that she had not been 
the.e. They heard me out with great curiosity and then 
•aughed straight into mv face. “Serves you right.” they 
sa ; d. But 1 \sas expecting their laughter. I lost no time in 
bribing the younger aunt, the spinster, with a hundred 
mbits, and pod her twenty-live in advance. Two davs 
later she came to me and said: “There's an officer, Yefi- 
m'.ich bv name, mixed up in this, a lieutenant in your 
old regiment. ’ I was astonished. This Yefimovich had 
done me the most harr in my regiment, and about a 
month ago he had the impudence to come into my pawn- 
sh >,t not once 1 ut twice, pretending he was a client, and 
1 lemcmbei him chatting and laughing with my wife. I 
went up to him at once and told him not to dare come 
h<u k again in view of what had passed between us; but 
nothing of that sort occurred to me then, I simply thought 
h< was bruzen-1 aced, that's all. And now her aunt in¬ 
humed u.o that she had already made a rendezvous with 
hn i, and that .ill this business was in the hands of a 
certain Yulia Samsonovna an old ft tend of the aunts, a 
\sidow. and a colonel’s widow at that. “It’s to her your 
>\i»c keeps lunnirg now,” i was told. 

1 shall make this part short It cost me all of tluee hund- 
ivd rubies, hu* it w?. arranged that two days later, when 
my wife was to have her first intimate rendezvous with 
Yefiin'-vich, I would he standing behind the door into the 
next room and listening to what they said. In the mean¬ 
time. die day before the icndczvous, we had a scene which 
though brief was of extreme significance to me. 

She came h'-me in the evening, sat clown on the bed 
and, tapping the rug with her foot, turned a mocking 



THE MEEK ONE 


333 


stare at me. Suddenly, as 1 looked at her, it struck me that 
all that last month, or rather all that last fortnight, she 
had not been herself at all; I should even say the exact 
opposite of herself: a violent cieature, aggressive, 1 should 
not exactly say shameless, yet an unbalanced creature 
eager for turmoil. A creatuie asking for turmoil. Her 
meekness, however, stood in the way. When one of her 
kind goes wild you can see, even though she has overstep 
ped all limits, that she is merely forcing herself to it, urg¬ 
ing herself on, and that she herself is fighting a losing 
battle against her chastity and shame. That is why the 
meek are sometimes liable to overstep the limits, so much 
so that one’s intelligence denies belief of what one has 
witnessed. A woman with whom depravity is a habit will, 
on the contrary, invariably tone down the outburst, mak¬ 
ing it fouler but maintaining a guise of decency which 
aspires to unchallenged supremacy over you. 

“Is it true that you were kicked out of your regiment 
because you were too much of a coward to fight a duel?” 
she suddenly asked me, her eyes flashing 

“It is. The officers’ court requested me to leave the re¬ 
giment, but actually I had already sent in my papers be¬ 
fore that.” 

“They kicked you out for a coward!” 

“Yes, their verdict said I was a coward. But 1 had re¬ 
fused to fight that duel not because I was a coward but 
because I had not wanted to obey their despotic verdict 
and challenge someone to a duel when I did not consider 
myself insulted. I assure you,” I couldn't hold back the 
words, “that defying such tyranny, and accepting ail the 
ensuing consequences, took much more courage than fight¬ 
ing any duel in the world.” 

I couldn’t hold back the words and they sounded as if 
I were trying to justify myself. This new humiliation of 
mine was just what she wanted. She laughed with malice 

“And* is it true that you tramped the streets of St. Pe¬ 
tersburg for three years after that, begging for alms and 
sleeping under billiard tables at night?” 

“I’ve taken shelter both in Sennaya Square and in the 
Vyazemsky Home. Yes, it's true: after the regiment 1 suf¬ 
fered much disgrace and degradation, but never moial 


£ DOS I'O YEXSKY 

degradation, because I myself was the first to deplore my 
actions even then. It was merely a degradation of my 
will and mind, for which my desperate position alone was 
responsible. But it's over....” 

“Oh yes, voure a personage now—a financier!" 

That was an allusion to the pawnshop. But I was quick 
to take m>self in hand. I coui 1 sec that she was long¬ 
ing for more explanations, humiliating to me, and so I 
did not give her the pleasure. A client came in most 
opportunely just then, and i left hei to attend to 
him. It must have been an hour later that she suddenly 
appeared diessed for the stieet and, coming up to me, 
said: 

“And yet >ou told me nothing of this befoie the wed¬ 
ding, did you.'*"’ 

1 made no leply, and she walked out. 

And mj, on the following da>, theie I was standing 
behind the door into the next room, listening to my late 
being decided. Theie was a revolver in rcy pocket. She 
\.u.s sitting at the table, diessed up for the lendezvous 
and Yefimovich was posing and mincing in front of her. 
What happened then.'* Why, it all happened precisely the 
wav I had imagined and supposed it would happen (and 
I am proud to admit it), although 1 was not aware at the 
time that 1 was imagining or supposing it. I don’t know 
whether I’m making myself clear. 

This is what happened. 1 stood listening for a whole 
hour; for a whole hour I was present at a duel between 
the noblest and purest of women and a society cad, lecher¬ 
ous and obtuse, with the soul of a reptile. Where, I 
thought in ,'mazement, where had that naive, meek and* 
retiring creature learned all that? The wittiest of authors 
could not have conceived for his comedy of mantlets this 
scene of taunting rcn.aiks, the most naive of laughter, and 
virtue’s holy contempt for vice. And what brilliance ot 
>ptech and repartee, what quickness of wit, what truth 
in her condemnation of him! And at the same time what 
a world of really girlish artlessness! She laughed in his 
face at his protestations of love, his gestures and his pro¬ 
posals. He had come unprepared for any resistance to his 
crude attack and now he seemed to become deflated. I may 




I'HE MEEK ONE 


335 


have thought at first that it was sheer coquetry on her 
part: “coquetry of a depraved but sharp-witted creature, 
to set a higher value on herself”. But no, the truth stood 
out, ladiant like the sun, and there was no room left for 
doubt. Only her assumed and rash hatred for me could 
have driven her, inexperienced as she was, to arrange 
this rendezvous, but when it came to the point the veil 
had instantly dropped from her eyes. She was simply- 
casting about for a way to insult me with whatever means 
she had, but the sordidness of what she had set out to do 
had repelled her. And could one as immaculate and inno¬ 
cent, one who cherished an ideal, be attracted to Yefimo¬ 
vich or any other society rotter? He only made her laugh 
at him. All that was sterling in her soul was roused, and 
indignation called forth sarcasm fiom her heait. I repeat 
that towards the end the buifoon was completely dazed and 
sat there scowling and hardly able to make reply; I was 
even afraid that he might dare insult her out of a low 
desire for vengeance 1 repeat once more: I’m proud to 
say that I heard out this scene practically unamazed. It 
was like encountering something I already knew. It was 
as if I had expressly gone there to encounter it. I went 
theie believing nothing, none of the accusations, although 
I did put a revolver in my pocket, but it is the truth. 
Could 1 have thought of her differently? Why did I love 
her then, why did I hold her so dear, why had I married 
her then? Oh yes, of course, that scene more than con¬ 
vinced me of her hatred for me. but it equally convinced 
me of her purity. I put an abrupt end to the Scene fy 
opening the door. Yefimovich jumped to his feet, I took 
her by the hand and invited her to come with me. Yefi¬ 
movich collected his wits together and suddenly gave a 
peal ot ringing laughter. 

“Oh, 1 would not encroach upon the holy ties of matii- 
mony! Take her away, take her awav! And do you know,” 
he shouted‘after me, “even though a decent man should 
not fight a duel with you, with all due respect for your 
lady I’m at your service.... That is, of course, if you 
would risk it....” 

“Did you hear that?” I held her back for a moment in 
the door. 


m 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


After that I uttered not another sound all the way 
home. 1 led hci by the hand, and she made no resistance. 
Rather the contrary; she was terribly impressed, but 
only until we leached home. Once there, she sat down on 
a chair and stared at me fixedly. She was exceedingly 
pale: though het lips instantly curved in a sneer, hci look 
was now solemn and rigidly defiant. I think she sincerely 
believed during those first few moments that I was going 
to shoot her with my revolver. But I drew it out of my 
pocket without a word and placed it on the table. She 
stared both at me and the revolver. (Note this: she was 
alicady familiar with the revolver. I had bought and load¬ 
ed it the day I opened my pawnshop. I had decided against 
keeping gieat watchdogs or a powerful footman, the way 
Moser does for instance. My cook admits the clients. I 
keep a loaded revolver handy because in our trade one 
simply must have something to defend oneself with, just 
in case When she first came into my house she was very 
curious about the revolver: I explained to h^i the way it 
worked and, moreover, once persuaded her to shoot at a 
target. Note all this.) Ignoiing her frightened look, I lay 
down on the bed, half-undressed. I felt quite spent; it was 
already close on eleven. She sat on without moving for 
about an hour, then blew out the candle and without 
undressing lay down too, on the sofa, close to the wall. It 
was the hist time that she did not come to bed with me 
—note that as well_ 


vi 

4 HORRIBLE MEMORY 

And now that hon ible memory.... 

When I woke up in the morning it must have been 
some time after seven for the room was almost light. I 
was wide awake at once, with all my senses alert. I opened 
my eyes. She w r as standing in fiont of the table, holding 
the lcvolver. She did not know that I was awake and 
watching her. And suddcntly 1 saw her coming towards 
me, levolver in hand, I quickly closed my eyes pretending 
I was fast asleep. 



THE MEEK ONE 


337 


She came to the bed and stood over me. I heard every¬ 
thing: dead silence reigned in the room, but I heard the 
silence. One nervous twitch, and I was compelled to open 
my eyes against my will. She was looking straight down 
at me, straight into my eyes, and the revolver was already 
close to my temple. Our glances met. But the look we 
exchanged lasted less than a second. I forced myself to 
close my eyes again, resolving on the instant with all the 
strength my soul possessed not to stir again or open ipy 
e>es no matter what awaited me. 

It does happen sometimes that a man, though fast 
asleep, opens his eyes suddenly, even raises his head for 
a second and looks about the room, then lays it on th* 
pillow again, without waking up, and sleeps on without 
remembering anything. Since 1 had suddenly closed my 
eyes again and remained as motionless as one fast asleep 
after meeting her glance and seeing the revolver at 
my temple, she could certainly assume that I was 
indeed asleep and had seen nothing: besides, it was more 
than incredible that 1 should have closed my eyes 
again at a moment like that, having seen what I had 
seen. 

Yes, it was incredible. Still, she may have guessed the 
tiuth—this flashed through my mind in the same fleeting 
instant. Oh, the whirl of thoughts and feelings that flashed 
across my mind in less t .n a fleeting instant, and praise 
be to the electricity of human thought! In that case (I felt) 
if she has guessed the truth and knows that I am not 
asleep, she will be crushed by my readiness to meet death 
and now, perhaps, her hand will falter. Her eailier resolve 
will be shattered, perhaps, by this new, astonishing reve¬ 
lation. They say that looking down from a great height 
one is drawn irresistibly into the abyss at one’s feet. I be¬ 
lieve that many suicides and murders are actually com¬ 
mitted simply because a revolver has already been picked 
up. It is just another abyss, a 45-degree slope which one 
cannot help sliding down, and an indomitable something 
compels one to pull the trigger. However, awaieness that 
I had seen everything, knew everything, and was silently 
awaiting death at her hand, would perhaps save her from 
slipping down the slope. 



338 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


The silence continued, and suddenly I felt the cold 
touch ol steel on my temple, close to my hair. Was l deli- 
nitcly hopeful that 1 would escape, you will ask. 1 shall 
answer you as in the presence of Clod: 1 did not enteitaio 
a slued ol hope—my chances were one in a hundred pei- 
haps. Win was 1 accepting death then.'* And now it’s my 
turn to ask you: what use was Mlc to me when a revolver 
had been pointed at me by the one 1 adored ? Besides, 1 
kt?ew with all the power of my being that the moment 
meant a light for supremacy between us, a terrifying hie 
and death duel, a duel fought by that same coward of 
yesterday who had been thrown out by his comrades for 
cowardice. I knew it and so did she, that is to say, if she 
wa v aware that 1 was not asleep. 

Perhaps there was none of this or perhaps I did not 
even have those thoughts at the time, but still it all must 
have been so, be it subconsciously, for 1 did noching but 
think ol it aftowards every hour of my life. 

You will ask me again- why did 1 not sav* her from 
committing a crime* Oh, 1 asked myself that very ques¬ 
tion thousands ol times afterwards, every time 1 recalled 
that moment with an icy sliivet tunning down iny spine. 
But then my soul was steeped in gloomy despair: 1 was 
pciishing, so how could I save anyone? How do you know 
whcthei 1 wanted to save anyone at the time or not? 
Who knows what 1 may have been feeling then? 

My senses weie astir, however: seconds passed, there 
was (had silence;’still she stood over me, and suddenly 1 
tiemhlid with hope. I quickly opened my eyes. She was 
no longer in the loom, 1 got up from the bed; I had won 
and she was vanquished foi ever! 

1 came out for breakfast. We always had our break- 
last served in the front loom, and she always poured out 
the tea herself. 1 sat down in silence and took the glass 
she handed me. 1 looked at her after five minutes or so. 
She was dieadlully pale, even palei than the night before, 
and she was looking at me. And suddenly, when she saw 
that 1 was looking at her, her pale lips quivcicd in a pale- 
smile, and her eyes asked a timid question. I thought: “So 
she is still in doubt and wondering: does he know? Did he 
see?” 1 looked away indifferently. After breakfast, I locked 




THE MEEK ONE 


339 


the shop and went to the maikct-place where I bought 
an iron bedstead and a screen. On return I had the bed 
placed in the front room and screened off. The bed was 
to be hers, but I did not say a word to her. Words were 
superfluous, for the bed told her that / had seen every¬ 
thing and knew all, and that there was no longer any 
doubt. When I went to bed, 1 left the revolver on the 
table as usual. That night she silently lay down in her 
new bed: our marriage was dissolved, she was “vanquished 
but not pardoned”. She was delirious duting the night, and 
acute fever set in towards morning. She was ill for six 
weeks. 



PART TWO 


I 

PRIDE'S DRFAM 


Lukciya has just told me that she will not stay with 
me and will leave as soon as the mistiess is buried. I have 
been playing on my kness for five minutes, whereas 
1 wanted to pi ay lor an hour, but thoughts are throng¬ 
ing my mind, all of them sick thoughts, and my mind 
is sick—so what’s the use ol praying... it’s sinful, that’s 
all. It is also strange that I do not feel sleepy; when a 
disaster, a great disaster befalls one, one always wants 
to go to sleep after the first, most violent paroxysms of 
grief aie ovei. Men sentenced to death are said to sleep 
most soundly on their last night. But that’s only right; 
it’s nature, otherwise one could not endure it. I lay down 
on the sola but 1 did not fall asleep.... 

.. .During the six weeks she was ill we nursed her day 
and night. Lukerya and I, and a trained hospital nurse 
1 had hired. I spared no expense, and 1 even enjoyed 
spending money on her. I called in Dr. Schroeder and 
paid him ten rubles a visit. When she recovered conscious¬ 
ness I tried to keep out of her sight. However, why de¬ 
scribe it:* When she was up and about again, she came into 
my room and mutely and silently sat down at a table 
apait, which 1 had also bought for her at the time. Yes, 
it s true, we said nothing to one another; that is, we did 
begin to talk later on, but it was trivial talk. My tacitur¬ 
nity was intentional, of course, but I very well saw that 
she, too, was glad she did not have to say too much. 1 
thought it quite natural of her. “She is utterly overwhelmed 
and vanquished,” I thought, “so naturally she must be 
given a chance to forget and adjust herself.” And so we 
lived in silence, but 1 spent every minute of mine in pre¬ 
paring myself for the future. 1 thought she was doing the 



THE MEEK ONE 


341 


»ame, and I enjoyed myself tremendously trying to guess 
just what she was thinking about then. 

Another thing: no one knows of course the anguish I 
went through, bemoaning her as she lay ill But I bemoaned 
her in silence and stifled the moans in my breast so 
that even Lukerya should not hear. I would not think of 
it, I could not even imagine her dying without learning 
everything. And yet. when her life was no longer in 
danger and she began to recover, I very quickly and effec¬ 
tually regained my peace of mind, 1 remember that well*. 
More than that, I decided to postpone our future for as 
long as possible, and meantime carry on with the present 
state of affairs. Yes, a very strange and peculiar thing 
happened to me then, I do not know what else to call it: 
1 had triumphed over her, and awareness of it alone 
seemed to satisfy me completely. And that is how we 
spent the whole winter. Oh yes, I was satisfied, inoie sat¬ 
isfied than I had ever been, and it went on all winter 

You see, there was one horrible circumstance in mv life 
which had until then, that is until the day of the catas¬ 
trophe with my wife, been weighing down on me, every 
day, every hour, and that was—the loss of my good name 
and my discharge from the legiment To put it briefly, 1 
had been the victim of despotic unfairness It is true that 
my comrades had disliked me because I was difficult to 
get on with or perhaps because I seemed funny, but then 
you know how it is sometimes: a thing you hold dear, 
cherish and revere, unaccountably evokes laughter fiom 
a crowd of your comrades. Oh, no one ever liked me, not 
even at school. I was disliked everywhere and always 
Even Lukerya does not like me. And though dislike for 
me lay at the root of what had happened in the regiment, 
the upshot was undoubtedly a matter of accident. I am 
mentioning this because nothing could be mote aggravat¬ 
ing and intolerable than being ruined through mere blind 
chance, through an unfortunate sum of ciicumslances 
which might well have dispersed like clouds. It is humil¬ 
iating for a creature of intelligence. This is what hap¬ 
pened. 

One night, at the theatre, I had gone into the buffet 
during the interval between acts. A certain hussar, A. by 


342 


F DOSTOYEVSKY 


name, walked in and in a very loud voice began to tell 
two other hussar friends of his, for all the other officers 
and civilians present to hear, that Captain Bezumtsev of 
our regiment had been making trouble in the corridor and 
was “apparently drunk”. The others did not pick up the 
conversation, and then it was not true anyway, because 
Captain Bezumtsev was not drunk and the trouble was 
not any trouble at all. The hussars began to talk of some¬ 
thing else and so the matter ended, but by the next morn¬ 
ing the stoiy had filtered into our regiment and all our 
officers immediately began to say that I, the only man of 
our regiment present when A. spoke so insolently of Cap¬ 
tain Be/umlsev, ought to have gone up to him and silenced 
him with a reprimand But for what earthly reason? If he 
bore Bc/umt«cv a giudge, it was their own private affair, 
and whv should I meddle? It now appeared to the offi¬ 
ce s diat it s nut a ppvjfe affair •'”* one that concerned 
the whole it. lintnf, and since I had been its only repre¬ 
sentative then* the other offi< ers and civilians present 
could have taken my attitude as proot of our icgimcnt 
tolerating officers who were not over-scrupulous about 
theii own honoui or theii icgiment’s. I could not agree 
with their leusoning I was told that I could still set matters 
liirht tven at this late date by formally challenging A. I 
refused to do so, and being annoyed. I refused haughtily. 
After that I sent in mi papers at once, and that was the 
long and the short of the story. 1 had ittained my pride 
hut I was (rushed in spirit. 1 lost my will and nv power 
of reasoning. It so happened rust then that my sister’s 
husband in Mo .cow had finished squandering the little cap¬ 
ital wc had, including mv own shaie. a tvy share. 
tiue, but it left me penniless and homeless I could Inivt 
taken on a post, but I did not: I could not see myself 
donning a railwayman’s coat after the splendour of mv 
uniform. And so—if it had to he shame, let it be shame; 
if it had to be disgrace, let it be disgrace; if if had to be 
degradation, let it. the lower the better—such was my 
choice. My iccollections of the next three years are 
gloomy, they even include the Vyazemsky Home for the 
destitute. A year and a half ago mv godmother, a rich old 
woman, died in Moscow and quite unexpectedly reniem- 




THE MEEK ONE 


343 


bered me in her will among others, bequeathing me three 
thousand rubles. I thought matters over and decided my 
fate there and then. 1 decided on the pawnshop because 
that way I would not ever have to make excuses for my 
past. Money, a home, and a new life away from my old 
memories—such was my plan. Neveitheless, my gloomy 
past and the irretrievable loss of my honour and good 
name tormented me every houi, every minute And then 
I married. Was it chance or not, I do not know, llojv- 
ever, when I brought her into my home I thought I was 
bringing in a friend, for I wanted a lriend very badly. 
I clearly saw, however, that the friend had to be prepared, 
shaped and even vanquished first. And could 1 have ex¬ 
plained anything to that prejudiced sixtecn-year-old child 
without preliminaries? For instance, if it had not been 
for the horrible catastrophe with the levolver and the 
help it so opportunely rendered, could I have proved to 
her that I was no coward and that my rigiment had un¬ 
fairly accused me of cowardice? The catastrophe had 
been most timely. My self-control at the point of the 
revolver was my revenge for all my gloomy past. And 
though no one else would ever know about it. she did, 
and that meant everything to me. for she herself meant 
everything to me, all the hope my future held for me in 
my dreams! She was the only person 1 was preparing tor 
myself, there was no one else 1 wanted at all—and now 
she knew everything: at least she knew that she had been 
unfairly hasty in joining the ranks of my enemies. This 
thought delighted me. She could no longer think me a cad, 
just strange perhaps, but even this thought did not really 
displease me after what had occurred: queerness is not 
a vice, rather the reverse, for it sometimes appeals to 
women. In short, I put off the denouement purposely: 
what had taken place was more than enough for my 
peace of mind for the moment, and provided a wealth of 
visions and material to weave into my dreams. The trouble 
with me is that I am a dreamer: I had a sufficiency of 
material, and as for her I thought she could wait. 

So the winter passed, in expectation of something. 1 en¬ 
joyed stealing glances at her as she sat at her table. She 
did needlework in the daytime, and in the evenings she 



344 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


sometimes read, taking the books out of my bookcase. My 
choice of books should have spoken well for me too. She 
hardly ever went out. I used to take her for a walk every 
day after dinner before it grew dark, and we would take 
a stroll but not as silently, however, as before. I tried to 
make it appear that we were talking pleasantly and were 
not silent, but, as I have already said before, neither of 
us wanted to be too expansive. It was intentional on my 
part, but as for her I thought she had to be “given time”. 
It’s curious, of course, that it had never once occurred to 
me until the very end of the winter that while I enjoyed 
stealing looks at her 1 had never, in all this time, caught 
her looking at me. I thought it was timidity. Besides, she 
looked so timidly meek, so weak after her illness. No, I 
thought. I’d better bide my time, and suddenly “one day 
she'll come to me herself”. 

This thought had an irresistible fascination for me. I 
will add that occasionally I could not help working myself 
up and actually bringing my spirit and mind to a point 
where I seemed to feel wronged by her. This would last 
for some time on every occasion. But never was hatred 
able to lipen and take root in my heart. I myself felt that 
it was i eally nothing but a game. And never, never could 
I think of her as a criminal, not even when I broke our 
marriage by buying her the bed and screen. And it was 
not because I judged her crime with flippancy; no, it was 
because I had the intention of forgiving her completely 
from the very hrst. even before buying the bed. In short, 
it was not like me because I am a stern judge of morals. 
She seemed to me so vanquished, so humbled and crushed 
that I pitied hei poignantly at times, albeit 1 positively 
liked the thought of her humiliation. I liked the idea of 
this inequality of ours. 

I happened to do several good deeds that winter. I took 
the opportunity to cancel two debts and give one poor 
woman a loan without taking anything in pawn. I told 
my wife nothing about it, and the thought that* she’d find 
out was not at the back of mv mind when 1 did it. But 
the woman came in to thank me, she all but knelt before 
me. And so she found out; I fancied she was ically pleased 
to learn about the woman. 




THE MEEK ONE 


345 


Spring was approaching, it was already the middle of 
April, the winter frames were taken out of the windows 
and the sun lit up our silent rooms in bright clusters of 
rays. But the veil hung over my eyes and blinded my 
reason. That fatal, terrible veil! I do not know how it 
came about, but the veil dropped suddenly, and all at 
once I saw and understood everything. Was it chance, was 
it the ultimate day, or had a sunbeam fired my dulled 
brain to thought and understanding ? No, it was neither 
thought nor understanding, it was a certain nerve which 
had all but died away, suddenly stirring and twitching 
back to life, lighting up the whole of my dulled soul and 
my devilish pride. It was like a jolt. And it did happen 
suddenly and unexpectedly. It happened befoie sunset, at 
about five in the afternoon.... 


n 

THE VEIL DROPPED SUDDENLY 

A word or two before I go on. I noticed a strange pen¬ 
siveness in her one day a month before; it was not just 
silence, but pensiveness now. That, also, I noticed sud¬ 
denly. She had been sitting with her head bent low over 
her sewing, and she did not know that 1 was watching 
her. And then, all at once, it struck me that she had grown 
so thin and frail, her face was so pale and hei lips so 
bloodless—all this, together with her pensiveness, gave 
me a frightful shock. I had heard her dry little cough be¬ 
fore, at night mostly. I got up at once and without telling 
her anything went out to call Dr. Schroeder. 

The doctor came the next day. She was very much sur¬ 
prised and kept glancing from Dr. Schroedei to me and 
back again. 

“But I’m quite well,” she said with a vague little smile. 

Schroeder did not give her a very thorough examina¬ 
tion (these medical men are sometimes conceitedlv care¬ 
less), all he said to me in the other room was that it was 
the aftereffect of her illness, and that when spi ing came 
it would not be a bad idea to go down to the sea or, if 
that could not be done, to simply move into the country. 



346 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


In short, he told me nothing except that it was weakness 
or something like that. When the doctor left, she gave me 
a frightfully serious look and said: 

“I’m quite, quite well.” 

Saying this she suddenly blushed, apparently with 
shame. It must have been shame. Oh, I understand it all 
now: it shamed her that I, who was still her husband, 
was worrying about her as if 1 were still her real hus¬ 
band. But I failed to understand it then and put her 
blush down to humility. (The veil!) 

And then, a month after that, in April, at about five in 
the afternoon of a bright, sunny day. I was sitting at my 
desk, doing my accounts. She was sewing at her own table 
in our room, and all of a sudden I heard her ... singing, 
very, very softly. The novelty of it had a staggering effect 
on me, which I cannot explain to this day. Until then I had 
hirdly ever heard her sing, except perhaps in the very 
beginning, when I first brought her into my home and 
we could still amuse ourscives by practising tjrget shots. 
She had a rather strong and ringing voice then, and though 
not very true it had a very pleasant and healthy sound. 
Her singing was so pathetic now—oh, it wasn’t a sad song 
(it was some romance or other), but there was something 
sickly and broken in her voice, as il it could not cope 
with the song, as if the song itself was sick. She sang in 
an undertone, and on a high note her voice broke off— 
such a poor little voice and it bioke off so pathetically; 
she cleared her throat and took the song up again, very, 
very softly. 

People may laugh at my agitation, but no one will ever 
understand why I was so agitated. No, I felt no pity for 
her yet; it was something entirely different. At first, at the 
very first at least, I was puzzled and terribly surprised, 
terribly and strangely, the feeling was unwholesome and 
almost vengefut. “What, singing! And in my presence! 
Can she have forgotten about me?" 

I remained where l was, quite overwhelmed, then I got 
up, took my hat and walked out, without knowing what 
I was about. That is, I did not know where I was going 
and why. In the hall, Lukcrya helped me into my over¬ 
coat. 



THE MEEK ONE 


347 


“Does she sing?” I found myself asking Lukerya. She 
did not understand, and stared at me without understand* 
ing me; however, I was really difficult to understand then. 

“Is this the first time that she is singing?” 

“No, she sings sometimes when you are out,” Lukerya 
replied. 

I remember everything. I walked downstairs and went 
out of the house and started aimlessly down the street. 
I came to the corner and stood there, staring into space. 
People walked past me and jostled me, but I was insen¬ 
sitive to it. I called a cab and told the man to take me 
to Police Bridge, I don’t know why. All at once I changed 
my mind and gave him a twenty-kopek tip. 

“That’s for your trouble,” I said, smiling at him stupid¬ 
ly, a strange rapture surging in my heart. 

I turned homeward, hurrying my step. That poor little 
broken note suddenly rang in my soul again. It took mv 
breath away. The veil was dropping; it was dropping, 
dropping. Her breaking into song in my presence meant 
that she had forgotten about me—that’s what was so clear 
and frightening. My heart knew it. But my soul was filled 
with rapture, and it was stronger than fear. 

Oh, the irony of fate! Why, I must have carried this 
rapture in my soul all winter; there could have been 
nothing else in it, but then where had I myself been all 
winter? Had I been at one with my soul? I ran up the 
stairs in my impatience, but I can’t tell whether I went 
in timidly or not. All I remember is that the floor seemed 
to sway, as if I were floating down a river. I walked into 
the room, she was sitting, sewing, with her head bent as 
before, but she no longer sang. She gave me a fleeting, 
incurious glance, but it wasn’t a glance, it was just a 
reflex, natural and meaningless, when someone comes into 
the room. 

I came straight up to her and sat close beside her, I was 
like one crazed. She looked at me quickly with some¬ 
thing like panic; I took her hand, I don’t remember what 
I said to her, or rather what 1 had meant to say, because 
I could not even speak properly then I could not master 
my breaking voice. But then I did not know what to say, 
I just gasped. 




348 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


“Let’s talk ... d’you know ... say something,” I mum¬ 
bled something as inane as this, hut oh, could I be sen¬ 
sible then? She trembled again and recoiled from me, ter¬ 
rified, staring into my face, and suddenly the expression 
in her eyes changed to stern amazement. Yes, it was amaze¬ 
ment and it was stern. She looked at me wide-eyed. Her 
stern expression, her stern amazement dealt me a crush¬ 
ing blow. “So you want love as well, do you? Love?” this 
amazement of hers seemed to ask, although she said not 
a word. But I read it all in her face, all. My whole being 
was shaken, and I fell at her feet. Yes, I fell at her feet. 
She jumped up quickly, but I gripped both her hands with 
all my strength, and held her there. 

Oh, 1 was aware of my desperation, so well aware! But 
would you believe it, the surge of rapture in my heart 
was so overpowering, that I thought I would die. I kissed 
her feet in rapture and happiness. Yes, in happiness, 
which knew no bounds or measure, and this in spite of 
my awareness of how little hope there was for me in my 
despair. I wept and I tried to say something^ but words 
failed me. Suddenly her fright and amazement gave way 
to an expression of anxietv, a dire question, and she now 
looked at me queerly, wildly even, there was something 
she was impatient to understand, and she smiled. She 
was terribly ashamed that I was kissing her feet and she 
pulled them away, but I quickly kissed the floor where 
her feet had stood. She saw it and suddenly began to 
laugh because she was ashamed (you know how one laughs 
when one is ashamed). She was becoming hysterical, 1 
saw; her hands were twitching—but I did not give it a 
thought and went on muttering to her that I loved her, 
that I would not get up Irom my knees. “Let me kiss the 
hem of your gown ... let me worship you like this all my 
life....” I don’t know, 1 don’t remember—she suddenly 
burst into sobs and began to shake; she had a dreadful 
fit of hysterics. I had frightened her. 

I carried her to her bed. When the fit passed, she sat 
up, looking terribly stricken, and, clutching my hands, 
begged me to calm down. “Come, don’t torment yourself 
so, come!” and began to cry again. I did not leave her 
side all that evening, telling her I would take her to Bou- 




THE MEEK ONE 


349 


logne, to the seaside, 1 would take her there now, at once, 
in a fortnight; I told her she had such a broken little 
voice, I had heard it that day; I would close my pawn¬ 
shop, I’d sell it to Dobronravov, everything would begin 
anew, but the main thing was Boulogne, Boulogne. She 
listened and was still frightened. She grew more and more 
frightened. But what mattered to me mostly was not this, 
but that I wanted more and more irresistibly to fall at 
her feet again, and go on kissing the floor her feet had 
touched, and worship her. “I shall ask nothing, nothing 
more of you,” I kept repeating, “do not answer me, ignore 
me completely, just let me look at you from afar, make 
me your thing, your dog-” She wept. 

“And I thought you’d leave me like that,” the words 
escaped her so involuntarily that perhaps she was not 
even aware of having said them, and yet they were the 
most momentous and fatal words, the meaning of which 
was more inexorably clear to me than anything else that 
evening and which was like a knife thrust at my heart. 
It explained everything to me, everything, but while she 
was there beside me, while I could look at her, hope carried 
me away irresistibly and I was terribly happy. Oh, I tired 
her out completely that evening, I knew it, but the thought 
that was with me all the time was that I’d make every¬ 
thing different at once. Finally, towards nightfall, she 
seemed quite spent and 1 begged her to try to fall asleep, 
which she did, immediately and soundly. 1 was afraid 
she would be delirious; she was, but vuy slightly I kept 
coming up to her almost every minute, I tiptoed to her in 
my slippers and looked at her. I wiung my hand» in 
anguish looking down on that poor, sick creature in hti 
wretched cot, that three-ruble iron bed 1 had bought tor 
her. 1 knelt beside her, but l dared not kiss h«-r feet while 
she slept (not against her will!). 1 knelt before the icons 
to pray, b.ut jumped up again. Lukerya kept an eye on 
me, coming in from the kitchen every now and again. I 
went out to her and told her to go to bed, that beginning 
tomorrow everything would be quite diffeient. 

And 1 did believe it, blindly, madly, and terribly. Oh, 
the elation that flooded my being! All I wanted was for 
tomorrow to come. I refused to admit misfortune, despite 



350 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


the symptoms. Although the veil had dropped, reason had 
not returned entirely to me then, and it did not for a 
very, very long time, not until today, it only returned to¬ 
day. But then how could it have returned earlier? She was 
alive, she was there before me and I was beside her. 
“When she awakes I’ll tell her all this, and she’ll see 
everything.” Such was my reasoning then, simple and 
clear, and therefore I was elated. The trip to Boulogne 
was uppermost in my mind. For some reason I imagined 
that Boulogne meant everything, that Boulogne held the 
key to something conclusive. “To Boulogne, to Boulogne!” 
I was madly impatient for morning to come. 


hi 

I UNDERSTAND TOO WELL 

To think that it was only a few days ago, five days, 
only five days ago—last Tuesday! No, no, i i only I had 
a little more time, if only she had waited a bit, 1 would 
have dispelled the gloom, and she had calmed down, yes, 
she had! The very next day she listened to what I said 
with already a smile on her lips, in spite of her perplex¬ 
ity. ... Her perplexity, or was it shamefacedness, was 
the main thing about her then, all those five days through. 
She was also afraid, very much afraid. I am not denying 
it, I shall make no crazy contradictions: she was afraid, 
but then how could she help being afraid? We had be¬ 
come strangers to one another such a long time ago, had 
become so unused to one another, and now suddenly all 
this.... However, I ignored her fear, for I was dazzled 
by the vision of our new life!... It is true, it is the indis¬ 
putable truth, that I made a mistake. There may have 
been more than one mistake. As early as the following 
day (it was Wednesday), the moment she woke up I im¬ 
mediately made a mistake: I suddenly made her my friend. 
I was hasty, much too hasty, but I had the need to confess, 
it was essential that I should—and it was much more than 
a confession. I concealed nothing, not even things I had 
concealed from myself all my life. I told her frankly that 
all that winter 1 had been confident of her love and had 



THE MEEK ONE 


351 


entertained no other thought. I made it t tear to her that 
the pawnshop had been nothing moie than my loss oi 
will-power and reason, my own personal idea of self- 
flagellation and self-glorification. I told her that 1 had 
really been a coward in the buffet that day because ol my 
over-sensitiveness: the situation made me shiink, tlu 
thought made me shrink that supposing l suddenly 
stepped forward would it not appear foolish:* It was not the 
duel that frightened me, but the thought of appealing 
fool'sh. It had been too late to admit it afterwards, and so 
I made eveiyone suffer, I made her sulfer for it too, and 
that was why I married her to make her suffer lor it Al¬ 
together 1 spoke as in a fever most of the time. She took 
my hands in hers of her own accord and begged me to 
stop. “You are exaggerating ... you are tormenting youi- 
sclf”, and then she began to ciy again, and again it ended 
in something like a (it. She kept imploimg iw to tJJ he* 
nothing oi this, and not to recall things. 

I took little oi no heed of her pleas: the spring, Bou¬ 
logne! Our sun, our new sun was there! 1 could talk of 
nothing else. 1 closed my pawnshop, and handed ovei the 
business to Dobronravov. Then I suddenly asked her il 
she wotdd not like us to give away all we had to the pool, 
all except the original capital of three thounsand left me 
by my godmother which wc could spend on our trip to 
Boulogne, and on return to begin life anew, working for 
our living. That’s what we decided upon, because she said 
nothing ... but merely smiled. And it must have been her 
tact prompting that smile more than anything else, so that 
l should not feel hurt. 1 did see that 1 was irksome to her, 
please don’t think that 1 was too stupid or too selfish not 
to see it. I saw everything, everything to the least trifle, 
I saw and understood it all perfectly; m> despair was 
utter and unconcealed. 

1 talked, about myself and about her. About Lukerya 
too. I told* her that I had wept.... I used to change the 
conversation too, trying to keep her from recalling cer¬ 
tain things. And she did brighten up once or twice; I re¬ 
member it, I do! Why do you say that 1 looked and saw 
nothing!* If only this had not happened, everything would 
have been resurrected. Because she did tell me—it was 



352 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


only the day before yesterday when our conversation 
touched upon literature and the books she had read that 
winter—she did speak of that scene of Gil Bias with the 
archbishop of Granada, laughing at the recollection. And 
her laughter had been so sweet and innocent, exactly like 
before when she was my fiancee (oh, fleeting moment!); 
and I was so glad! However, her telling me about the 
archbishop struck me forcibly: it meant that she had been 
untroubled and happy enough in her loneliness that winter 
to enjoy a masterpiece. It meant that she had been al¬ 
ready becoming quite easy in her mind, that she had been 
coming to believe that 1 would leave her like that. “I 
thought you’d leave me like that," was what she said to 
me that Tuesday. Oh, it was a thought worthy of a ten- 
year-old girl! And she did believe in it, she did believe 
that everything would really be like that: she at her 
table, 1 at mine, and the two of us going on like that 
till the age of sixty. And all of a sudden, there 1 was, 
coming to her, a husband, and a husband *vho wanted 
love! What a misunderstanding, what blindness on my 
part! 

Another mistake of mine was that I gazed at her en¬ 
raptured. I should have held my emotion in check, for 
rapture frightened her. But you know, I did hold my 
emotion in check, I did not kiss her feet any more. I never 
once hinted that 1 was ... well, that I was a husband. 
Oh, nothing could have been further from my thoughts, 
all I did was to worship. But 1 could not remain complete¬ 
ly mute, 1 could not help saying something! 1 suddenly 
went and told her that 1 enjoyed her conversation tre¬ 
mendously and considered her incomparably better read 
and educated than myself. She blushed a bright red and 
shyly told me 1 was exaggerating. And then, fool that 1 
am, I blurted out to her how much 1 had admired her 
when, standing behind the door that day, I had listened 
to her duel, to her innocence duelling with that hrute, how 
much I had admired her intellect, her brilliant wit, blended 
with such childlike artlessness. A shudder seemed to run 
through her, again she murmured that 1 was exaggerat¬ 
ing, but suddenly a shadow crossed her face, she buried 
her face in her hands and sobbed. Well, it was more than 



THE MEEK ONE 


353 


I could stand: I fell on my knees before her again and 
began to kiss her feet again, and once again it all ended 
in a fit of hysterics, the way it had last Tuesday. This 
happened last night, and in the morning.... 

In the morning? Oh madman, that morning was today, 
only a short while ago, so short a while! 

Listen and try to understand: when we met at breakfast 
this morning (after last night’s fit, mind you) she quite 
amazed me by her composure, do you see? And I bad 
stayed awake all night, trembling with fear because of 
what had passed between us the evening before. And there 
she was suddenly coming straight up to me, stopping in 
front of me with her hands clasped in entreaty (only a 
while ago, a while ago!) and saying to me that she was 
a criminal and knew it, that her crime had tormented 
her all winter, that it was tormenting her even then ... 
that she appreciated my magnanimity too well and that 
“I shall be a faithful wife to you, 1 shall respect you'’. 

I leapt to my feet and embraced her madly. 1 kissed her; 

I kissed her face, her lips, like a husband would kiss his 
wife after a long separation. And why did I ever go out 
then. I was only away for two hours ... to visa our pass¬ 
ports. ... Oh God'. If I had only come back five minutes 
earlier, only five minutes.... That crowd at our gate, the 
stares they gave me.... Oh God! 

Lukerya says (oh. I shall never let Lukerya go now, she 
knows everything, for she was with us all winter, she’ll 
be telling me all about it), Lukerya says that after I had 
gone out and only some twenty minutes before my return, 
she went into our room to ask her mistress something, J 
don't remember what, and saw that her icon (that icon 
of the Holy Virgin) had been taken down from the wall 
and was standing in front of her on the table, as if the 
mistress had just been praying. “Mistress, dear!’’ Lukerya 
had cried. “It’s nothing, Lukerya, go. Oh wait, Lukerya,” 
she had said, and coming up to Lukerya had kissed her. 
“Are you happy, mistress?” Lukerya had asked. “Yes, 
Lukerya.” “Master ought to have come and begged your 

forgiveness long before this_Thank the Lord, you’ve 

made it up now,...” And then she had smiled a very 
strange smile and said: “Good, Lukerya. Go now, Luke- 




.154 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


rya.” So strange had that smile been that ten minutes 
later Lukerya went bark to take another look at her. 
“There she was standing against the wall, close to the 
window, her head pressed to her arm that was propped 
against the wall, standing there and thinking, she was. She 
was so lost in thought that she never heard me come in 
and stand in the door watching her. It seemed to me that 
she was smiling, standing there, thinking and smiling. I 
toqk another look at her, turned and tiptoed away, think¬ 
ing these thoughts the while, when suddenly I heard her 
opening the window. I hurried back to warn her it was 
chilly and she might catch cold, when suddenly I saw her 
getting up on the window-sill, and there she was stand¬ 
ing at lull height in the open window with her back to 
me and the icon in her hands. My heart just sank. ‘Mis¬ 
ti ess! Mistiess!’ 1 ciicd. She heard me, made as if to 
turn to me, but she did not turn. She took a step, 
clutched the icon to her breast and—jumped out of the 
window!” 

All I remember is that when I walked into the gate the 
body was still warm. And all of them staring at me. They 
had all been shouting, but now, suddenly, they fell silent 
and made way lor me—and she, she was there on the 
ground with the icon. I remember as through a black 
haze coming up silently and looking down at her for a 
long time. All the people crowded round me, saying some¬ 
thing to me. Lukerya was there, but 1 did not see her. She 
says that she spoke to me. 1 only remember that trades¬ 
man: he kept shouting to me that “she had bled a hand¬ 
ful through the mouth, a handful, a handful!” and showed 
me the blood on the cobblestones in front of me. I believe 
I touched the blood with my linger, there was a smear on 
my linger and 1 stared at it (1 remember that), while he 
kept on shouting: “A handful, a handful!” 

“What is a handful, what?” 1 screamed at the top 
of my voice, they say, raised my arms and rushed at 
him.... 

" Oh, it’s crazy, crazy! It’s a misunderstanding! Incredi¬ 
ble! Impossible! 



mi ; mi l k oxi’ 


IV 

JUST HVL MINU1FS I.A1F 

Isn't it/ Isn't it incredibleCould anyone say that a 
thing like that was possible/ Why did that woman die, 
what lor/ 

Oh, believe me when 1 say that 1 do understand; but 
why did she have to die/ This still remains a question. She 
was frightened by my love; she had asked heiself earnest¬ 
ly should she accept it or not, but the question had bten 
mine than she could enduie, and she chose death. 1 know, 

I know, it s no use lacking niv bums- she had given too 
many promises, she was afraid she could not keep them. 
That’s clear. Theie aie ceitain considerations heie too 
humble to contemplate. 

W hy and what toi did she die * The question u mains 
I he question is hammuing, hammeiing at my biain. 1 
would have left hot like that had she wished it, had she 
wanted eveiything to be left like that. She did not beliese 
1 would, that’s what it was! No, i 10 , I am lying, it was not 
that at all. It was simply that wdth me it had to be in all 
honesty, to love me in all ways il she loved me at all, 
and not as she would have loved that shopkeeper And 
since she w r as too chaste and puie to jgiec to the suit 
of love demanded by the shopkeeper, she could not biing 
heiself to deceive me. She refused to deceive me with a 
half-love, oi a quaitei-love. disguised a*- hue love. She was 
too honest, that was it. And 1 w T as going to implant ge¬ 
nerosity into hei hcai t once, remember J \n absmd 
thought. 

I am most curious to know whether oi not she lespected 
me. 1 don’t know whether or not she despised me. 1 do nut 
think she despised me. Strange, isn't it, that it never once 
occuired to me in all ihosc winter months that she de¬ 
spised me! 1 had been quite convinced ol the opposite until 
the moment she looked at me with that stein amazement. 
Stem it was, indeed. It wris then it suddenly dawned on 
me that she despised me. I understood it, inev ocably, for 
ever and ever. Ah, what if she did despise me, despised 
me for the rest of her life if only she had remained alive! 
She was moving about and talking only a little'while ago. 




356 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


How could she jump out of the window? It’s beyond my 
understanding. And could I have suspected it even live 
minutes ago? I summoned Lukerya. I’ll never let Lukerya 
go now, not for anything in the world. 

Oh, we could have come to an understanding yet. We 
had only become terribly estranged from one another dur¬ 
ing the winter, but surely we could have grown into the 
habit again? Why shouldn’t we have been able to be¬ 
come friends and start life anew? I am magnanimous and 
so was she—there’s one link for you. Only a few more 
words, two days, no more, and she would have understood 
everything. 

The pity of it is that it was sheer accident—an ordinary, 
cruel and senseless accident. That’s the pity of it! Five 
minutes, I was just live minutes late! Had I come back 
five minutes earlier, that moment would have flashed past 
like a cloud, never to enter her head again. And it would 
have all ended in her understanding everything. But now, 
there are the empty rooms again, and I all alon^ There’s 
the pendulum swinging and clicking without the least con¬ 
cern or pity for anything. There’s no one—that’s the mi¬ 
sery of it. 

I keep pacing up and down, up and down. I know, 1 
know without your prompting; you think it funny that 
I’m putting the blame on an accident and being five min¬ 
utes late. But it is obvious. Consider this: she did not even 
leave a note to say that she was taking her own life, the 
way everybody does. Surely it would have occurred to 
her that suspicion might fall on Lukerya: “You were 
alone with her, so you went and pushed her,” so to say. 
Though guiltless, they would have certainly dragged hei 
through the courts, if not for those four people down in the 
yard who said they saw her, either from their windows 
in the wing or from the yard below, standing up on the 
window-sill with the icon in her hands and then jumping 
down. But it was also sheer chance, you know, thoke people 
being there and seeing it. No, it was nothing but a mo¬ 
ment, an unaccountable moment. Impulse and imagina¬ 
tion! What if she has been sitting there and praying? It 
does not necessarily mean a prayer before death. The 
whole moment may have lasted no more than ten min- 




THE MEEK ONE 


357 


utes: she may have formed the resolve within that very 
minute when she stood against the wall, resting her head 
on her arm and smiling. The idea had flashed across her 
mind, sending it into a whirl, and she had not been able 
to withstand it. 

It was a misunderstanding, that’s obvious, whatever 
you say. I was not beyond living with. Could it have been 
anaemia, I wonder? Perhaps it was just her anaemia, a 
sapping of vitality? That winter had worn her out, that’s 
what it was_ * 

1 came too late!!! 

How small and thin she looks in her coffin, how sharp 
her nose! Her eyelashes are like tiny arrows on her cheeks 
And the way she fell—nothing broken, nothing smashed. 
Only that one “handful of blood”. A dessert spoon, that 
is. Internal haemorrhage. A queer thought: supposing she 
did not have to be buried? Because if they take her away 
... then ... oh no, it’s almost impossible to let her be 
taken away. I do realise, of course, that they’ll have to 
take her away, I am neither mad nor raving; on the con¬ 
trary, my reason has never before been so lucid—but how 
can it be: no one in the house again; again those two 
rooms, and I alone in my pawnshop! I’m raving, raving, 
this is raving indeed! I made her suffer too much, that’s 
the reason. 

What do I care for your laws now? What use have I 
for your customs, your morals, your world, your country, 
your creed? Let your judge sit in judgement over me, let 
them take me to court, your public court, and I shall say 
that I defy everything. The judge will shout: “I order 
silence. Officer!” And I shall shout back: “What power 
have you now to make me obey? Why did bigoted igno¬ 
rance wreck what was dearest to me? What good will your 
laws do me now? I am withdrawing from >ou all!” Oh, 
I don’t care! 

She’s blind, blind! She’s dead, she cannot hear. You do 
not know that I would have built a paradise for you to 
dwell in. For I had a paradise in my heart, and I would 
have lavished it on you. Granted you would not have given 
me your love—never mind, what of it? Everything would 
have remained like that , it would have gone on being 



358 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


like that. You would have spoken to me as to a friend; 
we would have delighted in our talks and laughed to¬ 
gether, looking happily into each other’s eyes, that’s all. 
And that’s how it would have been. And even if you came 
to love another, why—never mind, never mind! You 
would have walked along with him and smiled, while I 
would have looked at you from across the street.... Oh, 
never mind anything, if only she would open hei eyes just 
once! For one single moment, just one! If she would only 
look at me the way she had done earlier today when she 
stood hefote me and swore to be a faithful wife to me! 
Oh, in that single glance she would have understood 
everything. 

Emptiness! Oh, nature! People are alone on this planet, 
that’s the trouh'e. “h Mine a living soul in this held?” 
cries the heiu of Russian legend. Though no legendary 
hcio. 1 make the same call, but no one responds. They 
say the sun gives life to the univeise. But the sun liscs and 
--look iso t it dead.* Everything is dead, the^ dead lie 
cvervwheie. Just solitary people, and all about—silence. 
I'hat's the kind of world we live in. “People, love one 
another’ Vkho said that 0 Whose commandment is it? 
The pendulum is rlicking unfeelingly, horridly, It’s two 
in the morning. Her shoes are standing beside her bed, 
as though waiting lor her... Now, seriously, they’ll take 
ho awav tomorrow, and whatever shall I do? 





, 




V 


*+rfyi' 

*W'/ ft 
«? 

/ ^ 

I 4 

4 i 
dS? 4 

4 .- 



it 

; ^V 




\ 



THE DREAM 
OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 

A Fantasy 





I am ridiculous. They call me a madman now. It would 
be a promotion for me did I not appear as ridiculous to 
them as ever. But I no longer mind—they are all dear to 
me now, even when they are laughing at me—indeed, 
something endears them to me particularly then. 1 would 
laugh with them—not at myself, that is, but because 1 love 
them—1 would laugh if I did not feel so sad watching 
them. What saddens me is that they do not know the 
Truth, and I do. Oh, how hard it is to be the only one to 
know the Truth! But they will not understand this. No, 
they will not. 

It used to hurt me very much that I seemed ridiculous. 
I did not seem it, I was. I have always been ridiculous 
and I think I’ve known it since the day I was bom. I be¬ 
lieve I realised it when I was seven, I went to school and 
then to the university, but what of it? The more I studied 
the more I came to realise that I was ridiculous. And so, 
as far as I was concerned, the ultimate meaning of science 
was to prove and explain to me, the more I probed it, that 
I was indeed ridiculous. Life taught me the same thing. 
With every year my awareness of how ridiculous I was 
in every respect grew and developed. I was laughed at by 
everyone and all the time. But none of them knew or 
guessed that of all the people in the world I knew best 
how ridiculous I was, and it was the fact that they did 
not know this that hurt me most of all, but the fault was 
entirely mine: I was always so proud that I would never 
admit this knowledge to anyone. My pride swelled in me 
with the years, and had I allowed myself to admit to 
anyone that I was ridiculous, I believe I would have 
blown my brains out that same night. Oh, the torment 



362 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


I went through in my adolescence for fear that I would 
weaken and make the admission to my friends! As I grew 
to manhood I learned more and more of this awful short¬ 
coming of mine with every year, but in spite of this 1 
took it a little more calmly for some reason. I repeat— 
for some reason, because to this day I fail to give it a 
clear definition. Perhaps it wu« because of that hopeless 
sadness that was mounting in my soul about something 
that was infinitely greater than myself: this something was 
a' mounting conviction that nothing mattered. I had be¬ 
gun to suspect this long ago, but positive conviction came 
to me all at once, one day last year. 1 suddenly knew that 
/ would not have cared if the world existed at all or if 
there was nothing anywhere. 1 began to know and feel 
with all mv being that there has been nothing since I have 
been there. At first I kept thinking that there must have 
been a great deal before, but then 1 realised that there had 
not been anything before either, and that it only seemed 
so for some reason. Gradually, 1 became convinced that 
there would never be anything at all. It was then I sud¬ 
denly ceased minding people and no longer noticed them 
at all. It was quite true, e\en in the merest trifles: for 
instance, I would walk into people as I went along the 
street. Not that I was lost in thought either, for what was 
there to think about, 1 had given up thinking altogether 
then: I did not care. Neither did I solve any problems; 
no, not a single one, and yet there was a host of them. 
But / did not (are now, and all the problems receded into 
the background. 

Arid it was much later that I learned the Truth. It was 
in November, the 3rd of November to be exact, that 1 
learned the Tiuth, and since then I remember every mo¬ 
ment of my life. It happened on a gloomy night, the 
gloomiest night that could ever be. I was walking home, 
the time being after ten, and I remember thinking that 
no hour could be gloomier. It was so even physically. It 
had been raining all day, and it was the coldest and 
gloomiest rain, even an ominous rain, I remember, ob¬ 
viously hostile to people, and suddenly after ten it stopped 
and a horrible dampness set in, which was colder and 
damper than during the rain, and steam rose from everyth- 



THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 


363 


ing, from every cobble-stone, from every alleyway if you 
peered into its deepest and darkest recesses. I suddenly 
fancied that if all the gas-lights were to go out it would 
be more cheerful, for gas-light, showing up all this, made 
one feel even sadder. 1 had hardly eaten anything that 
day, and since late afternoon I had been at an engineer’s 
I knew, with two other friends of his. I said nothing all 
evening and I believe I bored them. They were discuss¬ 
ing something exciting and actually lost their tempers 
over it. They did not care, I could see. but lost their 
tempers just like that. I went and blurted it out to them: 
“Gentlemen,” I said, “you don’t really care, you know.” 
They took no offence, they just laughed at me. That was 
because there was no sting in my remark, I simply made 
it because I did not care. They saw that I did not care and 
it made them laugh 

When, walking home, I thought of the gas-light, I 
glanced up at the sky. The sky was terribly dark, but I 
could clearly make out the ragged clouds and the fathom¬ 
less black pits between them. Suddenly I noticed a tiny 
star twinkling in one of those pits and I stopped to staie 
at it. That was because the tiny star gave me an idea: 
I would kill myself that night. I had made up my mind 
to do it fully two months before, and poor though I am 
I had bought a splendid revolver and had loaded it that 
same day. Two months had already passed, however, and 
it was still lying in my desk drawer; my feeling of not 
caring had been so strong then that I wanted to choose 
a moment when it would be a little less so to do it in, 
why—I do not know. And so every night, for two months, 
I had gone home! with the thought of killing myself. I was 
watching for the right moment. And now this star gave me 
the idea, and I made up my mind that it had to be that 
night. I do not know why the tiny star gave me the idea. 

There I stood staring at the sky when suddenly the 
little girl clutched at my arm. The street was already de¬ 
serted and there was hardly a soul about. A droshky was 
standing some way off with the driver dozing in it. The 
girl must have been about eight. All she wore in this cold 
was a poor cotton frock and a kerchief, she was drenched 
through, but I particularly noticed her sodden, broken 



364 


Fj DOSTOYEVSKY 


shoes. I remember them even now. They struck me par¬ 
ticularly. She suddenly began to tug at my elbow and 
cry. She was not weeping, but was crying out snatches of 
words which she could not articulate properly because she 
was shivering all over as if in a fever. Something had 
frightened her, and she called out desperately: “My 
mummy, my mummy!” I half-turned towards her but said 
not a word and continued on my way, while she kept 
running after me, tugging at my coat, and her voice rang 
with that peculiar sound which in badly frightened child¬ 
ren means despair. I know that sound. Though her words 
were incoherent, I understood that her mother lay dying 
somewhere, or perhaps it was some other disaster that had 
befallen them, and she had rushed out into the street to 
find someone or something to help her mother. But I did 
not go with her: on the contrary, it suddenly occurred to 
me to diivc bei away. I told her to go and look for a po¬ 
lite man But she foldetl her hands in entreaty and, sob¬ 
bing and panting, ran along at my side and*would not 
leave me alone. It was then I stamped my feet at her and 
shouted All she ciied was: “Sir, oh sir!” but, abandoning 
me abruptly, she darted across the street: another passei- 
bv had appeared there and it was to him she must have 
run fi om me. 

I climbed my five flights of stairs I live in a lodging 
house. Mv room is wretched and small, with just one 
attic window in it, a semicircular one. The furnituie con¬ 
sists of an oilcloth-covered sofa, two chairs, a table with 
my books on it, and an armchair, a very, very old one 
but a Voltaire armchair for all that. 1 sat down, lighted 
my candle, and gave myself up to thought. The room next 
door was a real madhouse. It has been going on since the 
(lay before yesterday. The man who lives there is a dis¬ 
charged captain and he was having guests, about six of 
them—castaways on the sea of life—drinking vodka and 
plaving stoss with an old deck of cards. There had been 
a fight the night before, and 1 know that two of them 
had torn at one another’s hair for quite a long time. The 
landlady wanted to put in a complaint against them, but 
she is terribly afraid of the captain The only other lodger 

is a thin little lady, an officer s wife , a newcomer to the 



THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 


365 


town with three small children, who have all been ill 
since they came here. The lady and the children live in 
deadly fear of the captain, they spend their nights shak¬ 
ing with fear and praying, and as for the youngest baby, 
it was even frightened into a fit once. The captain, I 
know for a fact, sometimes accosts people on the Nevsky 
and begs alms. He won’t be given a post anywhere, but 
strangely (this is why I am telling all this), in all the 
months he has been staying with us, he never once rouspd 
any resentment in me. 1 naturally shunned his company 
from the outset, but then he too thought me a boie the 
very first time we met, and no matter how loudly they 
shout in their room or how many they are—I never care 
I sit up all night and, honestly, I never even hear them, 
so utterly do I forget them. I cannot sleep, you know; it 
has been like that for a year now. I spend the night sitting 
in my armchair and doing nothing. 1 only read in the day¬ 
time. I just sit there, without even thinking. My thoughts 
are vague and stray, and I let them wander. My candle 
burns down every night. And so, 1 calmly settled down 
in my chair, took out my revolver and placed it on the 
table before me. I remember asking myself as I put it 
down, “Are you sure?” and answering very firmly, “I 
am sure.” That is, I would kill myself. I knew that I would 
definitely kill myself that night, but how much longer 
I would sit thus at the table before I did it 1 did not 
know. And I would have certainly killed myself if it had 
not been for that little girl. 


n 

You see how it was: though I did not care, I was still 
sensitive to pain, for instance. If someone struck me 1 
would feel the pain. Mentally it was exactly the same: 
if something very pathetic happened I would feel pity, 
just as I would have felt pity in the days before I had 
ceased caring for anything in the world. And I did feel 
pity earlier that night: surely, I should have helped a 
child in distress. Why had 1 not helped her then? Because 
of a thought that had occurred to me; when she was tug- 



36G 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


ging at my coat and crying out, a problem suddenly con¬ 
fronted me and I was unable to solve it. It was an idle 
problem but it had angered me. I got angry because, hav¬ 
ing definitely decided to commit suicide that very night, 
1 ought to have cared less than evei for anything in the 
world. Then why had 1 suddenly felt that 1 did care and 
was sorry for the little girl? J remember I was frightfully 
sorry for her, my pity was strangely poignant and absurd 
in- niy position. 1 really cannot give a better description 
of that fleeting feeling of mine, but it icmained with me 
even after I had reached my room and had seated myself 
in my chair, and it vexed me more than anything else had 
done for a long time. One argument followed another. It 
was perfectly clear to me that if 1 was a man and not yet 
.i nought, and had not yet become a nought, 1 was there¬ 
fore alive and, consequently, able to suffer, resent, and 
fee! shame lot mv actions. Yoty well. Bui if I was going 
to kill myseii in couple oi hours fiom then, why should 
I be concerned with the girl and what didM caie fot 
shame oi anything else in the world p 1 would become a 
nought, an absolute nought And could il In that mv 
ability to fee! pity for the gill and shame for my vile ac¬ 
tion was not in the least affected by the certainty that I 
would soon become <umf>h'L’Iy non-existent, and there- 
loie nothing would exist. Why, the icason I had stamped 
my feet and shouted so hiutullv at the poor child was to 
assert that “tar fiom feeling pity. 1 could even afford to 
do something inhumanly' vile now, because two hours 
hence all would fade away". l)o you believe me when 
I say that this was the reason why I had shouted? 1 am 
almost positive now that it was that. It had seemed clear 
to me that life and the world were fiom then on depend¬ 
ent on me, as it were. 1 should even say that the world 
seemed specially made for me alone: if I killed myself the 
world would be no mine, at least as fai as I was con¬ 
cerned. To say nothing of the possibility that there would 
really be nothing lor anyone aftei I was gone, and the 
moment my r consciousness dimmed the whole world, being 
a mere attribute of my consciousness, would instantly dim 
too, fade like a nut age and be no more, for it may be that 
all this world of ouis and all these people ate merely part 



I Hi: DRE \M or A RIDK.Ul Ol’S M \N 


:<G7 

of in) self, ate just n.vsclf. I lemunbei that as I sat there 
and icasoiicd, I gave an entirely different twist to all these 
new problems that wue thionging my mind, and conceived 
some' perfectly new ideas. I'oi instance, a strange notion 
like this octuned to me: supposing 1 had once lived on 
the moon 01 Mars md had there committed the foulest 
and scuiviest of deed 1 : imaginable, for which 1 had been 
made to sulfer all the scorn and dishonour conceivable in 
nothing less than a dr cam, a nightmare, and supposing 1 
latci found mysell on the earth, w'ith the crime commit¬ 
ted on that other planet alive in m/ consciousness and, 
besides, knowing there was no letuin for me, ever, 
undci any eiiiumstaiu* s—would 1 hax'c Kited or not as 
1 ga/cd at the moon from this eaith J Would 1 hav r e felt 
shame tor that deed c i not. J All thest questions weie rdle 
and superlluous since the revolver was already lying in 
front of me and 1 knew with all mv being that it was 
hound to happen, and vet the questions exerted me and 
roused lac to a ficn/y. 1 no longci seemed aide to die be¬ 
fore 1 had solved something lust in shot f , that little gill 
saved mv life because the unsolved questions (rut ofi the 
deed. Meanwhile, the noise at the captain’s began to sub¬ 
side too: they had finished their game and were now settl¬ 
ing down to sleep, grumbling, and sleepily lounding off 
their mutual abuse. It was then that 1 suddenlv fell asleep 
in tn> chair in front id the table, a thing that never hap¬ 
pened to me befoic. 1 dropped off without knowing it at 
all. Ditams, we 1 all know', arc estremedy queei things: 
one* will be appallingly vivid, with the greatest imagin¬ 
able piccision in eveiy minutely limshcd detail, while 
anedhei will take you through time mil space so sw’iftly 
that you hardly notice the flight. Dreams, I believe, aic 
diiccted by desire, not i casein, by die heart and rot the 
mind, and yet what lantastic tricks my i casern sometimes 
plays on me in eh earns! The things that happen to mv 
reason in sleep aic quite incredible. To give an instance: 
my hi other has been dead these five years. I dream of him 
sometunes: he takes an active intcicst in nn affairs, we 
are very fond e>t one anothei, yet all through my dream 
l know peifectly well that my biothei has long been dead 
and buried. Why docs it not surprise me then that though 



368 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


dead he is still there beside me, worrying about my affairs? 
Why does my reason reconcile itself to all this so will¬ 
ingly? But enough. To return to my dream. Yes, my 
dream of November the 3rd. They all tease me now that, 
after all, it was nothing but a dream. But surely it makes 
no difference whether it was a dream or not since it did 
reveal the Truth to me. Because if you have come to 
know it once and to see it, you will know it is the Truth 
acid that there is not, there cannot be any other, whether 
your are dreaming or living. Very well, it was a dream— 
let it be a dream, but the fact remains that I was going to 
snuff out the life which you all extol so, whereas my dream, 
my dream—oh, my dream revealed to me another life, a 
life revived, magnificent and potent. 

Listen then. 


in 

I said that I fell asleep without knowing it and even 
continuing with my musings on the same matters when 
no longer awake, as it were. A dream came to me that I 
picked up my revolver and pressed it to my heart—my 
heart and not my head, whereas I had definitely decided 
to shoot myself through the head, and the tight temple it 
had to be. With the revolver pressed to my heart 1 waited 
a moment or two, and suddenly my candle, the tabic and 
the wall in front of me all began to rock and sway. I 
quickly pulled the trigger. 

In dreams you sometimes fall from a gtcat height or 
you are stabbed or beaten, but you never feel the pain un¬ 
less you jerk and actually hurt yourself against the bed¬ 
post; you do feel the pain then, and it is almost certain to 
wake you up. It was the same in my dream: I felt no pain 
but with the sound of the report my whole being seemed 
to be shaken up and suddenly everything w’as extinguished 
and there was a horrible blackness all around me. I 
seemed to have gone blind and mute, I was lying on some¬ 
thing very hard, stretched out on my back, seeing nothing 
and unable to make the slightest movement. Voices shouted 



THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN M9 


and feet stamped all about me; there was the captain’s 
low rumble and the landlady’s shrill screech—and sud¬ 
denly there was a blank again, and now they were car¬ 
rying me in a coffin with the lid nailed down. I could feel 
the coffin swaying and I was reflecting upon it, when all 
of a sudden the thought struck me for the first time: I was 
dead, quite dead. I knew it without a doubt, I could 
neither see nor move, and yet I could feel and reason. But 
soon I reconciled myself to this and, as usual in dreams, 
accepted the fact without demur. 

And now they were piling earth over my grave. Every¬ 
one left, I was alone, utterly alone. I did not stir. When¬ 
ever I used to imagine what it would be like to be buried, 
1 generally associated but one sensation with the grave: 
the feeling of damp and cold. And now too 1 felt very 
cold, the tips of my toes were the worst, and that was all 
the sensation I had. 

I lay there and, strangely, expected nothing, resigning 
myself to the fact that the dead have nothing to expect. 
But it was damp. I do not know how long I lay there— 
whether it was an hour, or a day, or many days. All of a 
sudden a drop of water, which had seeped through the 
lid of the coffin, fell on my left closed eye; a minute later 
there was another drop, a minute more and there was a 
third, and so on, drops falling at regular one-minute in¬ 
tervals. Indignation mounted in my heart, and suddenly 
I felt a physical pain in it. “It’s my wound," I thought. 
“My shot, the bullet’s there...And the water kept 
dripping, a drop a minute, straight down on my closed 
eye. I suddenly invoked, not with my voice for I lay inert, 
but with the whole of my being, the Ruler of all that was 
befalling me: 

“Whoever Thou may be, but if Thou art and if there 
does exist a wiser order of things than the present, suffer 
it to be here too. But if Thou art imposing vengeance upon 
me for my unwise suicide, with ugliness and absurdity 
of the life to come, then know Thee that no tortures I 
could ever be made to suffer could compare with the con¬ 
tempt I shall always feel in silence, be it through millions 
of years of martyrdom!” 

I invoked and fell silent. Deep silence reigned for al- 



F. D0S'10YFA’SK\ 


:m) 


most a full minute, and one more drop fell, but I knew 
with infinite and profound faith, that all would be differ¬ 
ent now. And suddenly my grave was rent open. That 
is, I do not know if it was dug open, but a daik and stiangc 
being picked me up and bore me away into space 
l suddenly uncovered sight. It was deep night, and never, 
never had then- been such darkness yet! We were flying 
through spate, the earth was already far behind us. 1 asked 
the«one that bore me nothing at all, l waited, I was proud. 
1 made mvst 1 1 believe 1 was not afraid, and my breath 
caught with admiration at the thought that l was not 
.di aid. J do not lemember how long we flew nor can I 
\cntuic a guess c\ ei ything was happening the way it 
usually happens in di earns when \<»u leap over space and 
time, o\er all laws of life and reason, and only pause 
win re voui heait’s dcsiie bids you pause. I remember 1 
suddenly s iw a tiny stai in the darkness. “Is it Sirius?’’ 
I tould not hold back (lie question, although I did not 
want to ask anything at all. “No, that is thc*star you saw 
between the clouds on your way home,” replied the one 
that was healing me awa\ I knew the being was some 
what human in likeness. Strangely enough, I had no love 
(or that being, 1 rather felt a deep aversion for it. I had 
expected complete non-existence and with that thought I 
hail shot myself. And now 1 was in the hands of a being, 
not a human being of course, but a being nonetheless that 
roi/s. that existed. “It just shows that there is life herc- 
aftei. 1 thought with the peculiar flippancy of dreams, 
but the essence of my spirit remained with me intact. “If 
I must be again,” I thought, “and again live by some¬ 
one's inescapable will, I do not want to be beaten and 
humiliated!’ “\ou know that I am afraid ol you, and 
for this you despise me,” 1 suddenly said, unable to hold 
back my cringing words w'hich held an admission, and 
feeling the pin-prick of humiliation in my heqrt. Theie 
was no reply, hut all at once I knew that 1 was not being 
despised; 1 was not being laughed at nor even pitied; I 
knew that our flight through space had a purpose, mys¬ 
terious and strange, concerning me alone. Fear mounted 
in my heart. Something was being mutely but painfully 
transmitted to me by my silent companion, piercing me 




THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 


371 


through as it were. We flew through dark and unfamiliar 
space. I no longer saw the constellations my eyes were 
used to seeing. I knew that there were certain stars in the 
vastness of the sky whose light rays took thousands and 
millions of years to reach the earth. Perhaps we were 
already flying through those regions. I waited for I knew 
not what, my tormented heart gripped with a terrible 
ansruish. And suddenly I was shaken with a feeling that 
was familiar and so stirring: I saw our sun! I kney it 
could not be our sun which had begotten our earth, and 
also that we were infinitely far away from our sun, but 
my whole being told me that this was a sun exactly like 
our own, a duplicate of it, its twin. My soul tang 
with sweet and stirring ecstasy: this familiar source of 
light, the same light that had given me life, evoked 
an echo in my heart and resurrected it. and for the 
first time since my burial I sensed life, the same life as 
before. 

“But if this is the sun, if this is a sun exactly like ours, 
then where is the earth?” I cried. And my companion 
pointed to a star sparkling in the darkness like emerald. 
We were flying straight towards it. 

“Are such duplications really possible in the universe, 
is this really the law of nature? And if that star is an 
earth, can it be an earth like ours ... exactly like ours, 
wretched and poor but dear and ever beloved, inspiring 
even in its most ungrateful children a love as poignant 
as our own earth inspires?” I cried out, trembling with 
rapturous, boundless love for that dear, old earth I had 
deserted. A vision of the poor little girl 1 had hurt flashed 
past me. 

“You shall see everything,” my companion said, and I 
sensed a peculiar sorrow in his words. But now we weie 
quickly nearing the planet. It grew as we approached, 1 
could already distinguish the oceans, the outline of Eu¬ 
rope, and* suddenly a great and holy jealousy flared up in 
my heart. “How can such a duplication be and what for? 
I do love and can love only the earth I have left behind, 
the earth bespattered with my blood when in my ingra¬ 
titude I snuffed out my life with a shot through the heart. 
But I never, never ceased to love that earth, and the night 



372 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


I parted with it 1 think 1 loved it even more poignantly 
than ever before. Does this new eaith hold suffering? On 
our eaith we tan only love truly by suffering and only 
through suffering. We can love in no other way and know 
no other love, i must have suffering, if I would love. 1 
want, I long this instant to kiss that one and only earth 
1 left behind me, and weep, and I do not want, I defy 
lilt* on any other!” 

1 j*il my companion had already left me. 1 do not know 
how it came about but suddenly I found myself upon this 
other earth in the bright sunlight of a day as lovely as 
paradise. I believe l was on one of those islands which 
on our eaith comprise the Greek Archipelago, or it may 
have bceu on the mainland somewhere, on the shoie which 
the Archipelago adjoins. Everything was exactly the same 
as on our earth, but it all seemed to wear the ladiance of 
a holiday, and shone with the glory of a great and holy 
triumph at last attained. A gentle emerald-green sea soft¬ 
ly Japptd the shores and caressed them with*a luve that 
was undisguised, visible, and almost conscious. Tall and 
beautiful trees stood in flowering splendour, while their 
countless little leaves welcomed me (I’m ceitain of it) with 
their gentle and soothing rustling, and they seemed to be 
murniuiing words of love to me. The meadow was ablaze 
with bright, fragiant Dowers. Birds fluttered above in 
flocks and unafraid <>( me alighted on my shoulders and 
hands and happily beat me with their sweet, tremulous 
wings. And linally I saw and came to know the people of 
this joyous land. They came to me themselves, they sur¬ 
rounded ine and kissed me. Childten of the sun, of their 
own sun—oh how beautiful they were! I have never seen 
such beauty in man on our planet. Only in our youngest 
children could one, perhaps, detect a distant and very 
lamt reflection ot this bcautv. The eyes of these happy 
P ph* .nine with i char Lght. Their laces were aglow 
«/' wisdom end llicence matured into serenity, but 

lltcT expression w ..*• pay; their words and voices rang 
vv ; th '•iiildlike jo>. Oh. I instant!understood all, all, the 
moment l looked into thei faces! This was an earth 
undefiled by sin, inhabited by per pie who had not sinned; 
they dwelt in a Gaiden of Eden just like the one in 



THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 


373 


which our ancestors, so the legends of all mankind say, 
had once dwelt before they knew sin, with the only differ¬ 
ence that the whole of this earth was one great Garden 
of Eden. These people, laughing happily, clung to me and 
caressed me; they led me away and every one of them 
showed eagerness to comfort me. They did not question 
me about anything at all, they seemed to know all, and 
were anxious to drive the suffering from my face. 

IV 

I repeat, you see: let it be nothing but a dream. But 
the sensation of beinv loved by those innocent and beau¬ 
tiful people will remain with me for ever, and even now 
I can feel their love pouring down on me from up there. 
I have seen them with my own eves, have known them and 
been convinced; I have loved them and, afterwatds, suf¬ 
fered for them. Oh, I realised from the first that I should 
never be able to understand them at all in many things: 
for instance, it appealed inexplicable to me, a modem 
Russian progressive and wretched citizen of St Peters¬ 
burg, that, knowing so much, they did not possess our 
science. But I soon realised that their knowledge was en¬ 
riched and stimulated by other penetrations than ours, 
and that their aspirations were also quite different from 
ours. They desired nothing and were content, they did 
not strive to know life the way we strive to probe its 
depth, because their life was consummate. Thcii know¬ 
ledge was finer and more profound than our science, for 
our science attempts to explain the meaning of life. 
Science itself strives to fathom it in order to teach others 
how to live; while they knew how to )i\ e without the 
help of science, I saw it but I could not understand this 
knowledge of theirs. They showed thcii trees to me, and 
I failed to appreciate the depth of the love with which 
they gaze’d at them: it was as if they were speaking to 
beings like themselves. And do you know, I may not be 
wrong if I tell you that they did speak to them. Yes. they 
had found a common tongue and I am convinced the 
trees understood them. This was the way the> treated all 
Nature—the beasts who lived in peace with them, never 


F. DOSTOYrVSKY 


374 

attacking them and loving them, captivated by the people's 
love for them. They pointed out the stars in me and spt*kc 
to me about them, savins things 1 could not umleistand, 
but 1 am positive they had some tie with thus* heave \ 
bodies, a living tie, not spiritual alone. Oh no, these 
people did not insist that 1 should undeistand them. thc\ 
loved me anyway, but then 1 knew that thev, too, would 
never undei stand me and so hartlly spoke to them about 
our earth. I only kissed the earth they lived on and whh- 
out # woids adored them, and tluv saw it and pci milted 
themselves to be adored, unashamed of my adulation, fu: 
their own love was great They felt no pang foi i le when, 
moved to tuns, l sometime^ kissed theii feet, joylullv <er 
lain in my h<\ut ol the infinite b" < with which thev 
would rcapiocate my emotion. 1 sometimes asked inv^b 
in hcvvildci im ut: how was it that thev neve: insult* d one 
hkc me, ncvei mused one like me* U* beings of jc.dom * 
or unv * 1 a<ked myself again and a^ain, how did I i 
biaggaif and a bar. liom telling the*n of all on 

.uifiiiied knowledge of which 'btv natmalL had no »nl\ 
ling, 1/nm wishing to impiess them with it, if only be 
cause 1 lovtd them'* They wane gay and tiohrsome liU* 
childien. r l'hev w.tndeied about the ir beautiful gloves an I 
tmesis, singing their beautiful songs, eating light loud 
the fruit of theii ticcs, the lionev of theii woods, and the 
milk of the' masts devoted to them. They toiled but little 
to piocwe their fond and clothing. Thev loved and begot 
child?on, but never did l detect anv signs of that (uirl 
wnsualitv in them, which almost everyone lal^ victim to 
on our eaith, one and all. and which saws as the suU 
souice of almost all the sins of mankind on our earth. 
They welcomed the childien bom to them as new paitici- 
pants in their bliss. Theie weie no quarrels oi jealous* 
among them, and they did not even understand the mean 
ing of these words. Their childien weie the childien of all 
of them, for thev formed one family. Sickness was vciv 
lare, though thne was death: but their old people died 
peacefully: they seemed to fall asleep, blessing and smil 
ing upon the one's they were taking leave of. themselves 
uurving away the clear smiles of those sum ounding them 
in farewell. 1 saw no grief or tears then, only love mul- 



* *i i \» M i 


\ I I >1' 1 j i »T s 1 \ 


y-*r 


df s 1 a 1 c m >i i > i 1 \ that \ is s« 

< a « nui ) ] \ i i» mi i u # \\a i' it t* \ Up 1 

1 ! < h w tl i i n a u i r « ii death and lh it 

tl nkhh * » ixsc\( < 4 <*< Mil T hex hudlx 

» J t4< >d m ki i P Hi m * tlu % helwxcd m life 
< n 1 p i 1 \ih mi it w n « i miplu it it 

mis 1 n , t a ' 11 * \ h id r » thin <! ' s hut 

In hi < < p hi it is* »• i it ion w it It f, u 

Vfc| ! 5 * h ai i < » < (1 hi it mdtad fjic \ 

! f c '•si h k j c lha* win i Mu i < 11 tli I \ 

• ^ < » In i 1 t i t( e \te nt <d it ^ 

> ih U till I 1 l\l i i» Hio t|„ (l t t j(l 

' ii * \» » to i t it m t w ith the ^ mn of tl 

*11 r * 1 1\ t! \ *i 1 i P t n %n »m e ai* i 

t s t i » i i iti « i n 1 * 1 1 m i ll cuncd 
ill v t ! id\ iii \in i I<M t isk of it ir 

h it 1 t i tl oi aim hv Ik I t s diii^ m 

sc t i w old * * ilu i j v K cs 1 h ndui^ m 

I * i nsMit 1 »on rii.ii son<> spok* ot ill th it 

II < 1 's 1 i\ 1 d nttd them to I 1 tli 1 illtwed 

jpd I) d t jaw H flux I illovul \ it in t taifh sc i 
i iwu k H ( t • 1 oi d n ii| on s d>out oils. 

n l i i is i t hIui hk <i*d( n tlu\ wilt the 

n 1 » t i l 1 i ♦ <l u\ c in c limn iln he in md 4 nic I 

P < 1 Ms '\ l v n s d i c. } Hull \ tv lixt*- well 
spent i ‘i n < Pc mvhi It wa i soit <d liifatu Uion 
w ith >i ot) Mi da dnnipletc H \e\ei some 

“f*lu i H c » s u v i p l cMiltant Ihaidk mi lei 

p d c j ivt i j the wends l i< ul( ( m ui 

i l »> d t a iiiV nn \ \ u m ut*l Invmvl m\ mle\n 

* inti as j\ \ e ( \et ms 1 ' 1 'm!\ mx he * t <je\v moie 

n I nine 1 e ^ n iu t( P 1 * ft( n told them th it I hid 

liiuIimiMfi ill ^ h in 1 ip l, that dl th s happim s 
md )oi\ hid a f11;icl of anguished 1 >n iir r. me 

whdi m o i i * i jilii i u in it Mi its t uiihe u 

ihle soi c \ 1 n it ! h 1 t u li npv d ill of turn md then 

\ m the 'h ( j MS (»t u * he nt arid lh< xis ms of m\ 
nnnd th * nit n I eould not wafJi tin sun ^o down on 
mn cat Hi without teais I hat »n\ haticcl foi the people 
(Mi oui eutb i»v\ us f'ld sadnes® wh\ rould I not hate 
them without I a m s Mi« m wh\ could 1 not help fon’u- 



376 


F. DOSTOYF.VSKY 


ing them, and why was there sadness in my love for them; 
why could I not love them without hating them? They 
listened to me, and I saw that they could not comprehend 
what I was telling them, but I was not sorry I had told 
them for I knew that they appreciated to the full the great 
yearning I felt for the ones I had left behind. When they 
turned their dear, loving gaze on me, when I felt that 
with them my heart became as innocent and truthful as 
thei/s, it sufficed me, and I was not sorry I did not under¬ 
stand them. I was speechless with the fullness of life, and 
could only worship them in silence. 

Oh, everyone laughs in my face now and says that 
one could never dream of all those details I am narrat¬ 
ing now. that in my dream 1 could have seen and felt 
nothing but a mere sensation of something conceived by 
iny own heart in delirium, and as for the details I must 
have made them up on awakening. And when 1 admitted 
to them that it may really have been so—oh Lord, the wav 
they laughed in my face, the fun thev had at rfty expense! 
Yes. of course, I was overcome by the mere sensation of 
my dream, and that alone survived in my wounded, bleed¬ 
ing heart: as for the actual images and shapes, that is, 
those, 1 had really seen in my dream, they were so per¬ 
fect in their harmony, charm and beauty and were so 
true, that our feeble words naturally 1 ailed me to describe 
them on awakening, and they were bound to become 
blurred in my mind. Therefore, I may indeed ha\e been 
compelled to make up the details alterwards though uncon¬ 
sciously, distorting them of course, especially since I was 
so impatient and eager to give them some sort of expres¬ 
sion. But then how can 1 doubt that it all was like this? 
It was a thousand times better perhaps, brighter and 
happier than I am telling it. Granted it w f as a dream, but 
all of this was. it had to be. Do you know. 1 shall tell you 
a secret: it may not have been a dream at all! Because 
something happened next, something so horribly true 
that it could never come to one even in a dream. Granted 
my heart conceived that dream, but could my heart alone 
have been able to conceive that appalling reality which 
befell me next? How could I have made ; t up by myself, 
how could my heart prompt that dream? Surely my shal- 




THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS MAN 


377 


low heart and my whimsical, wretched mind could not 
have been elevated to such revelations of the truth? Oh. 
judge for yourselves: I concealed it until now, but now 
I shall disclose this truth as well. The fact is that 1 ... 
I corrupted them all! 


v 

Yes, yes, it ended in my corrupting them all! I do not 
know how it could have happened, but I remember per¬ 
fectly that it did. My dream sped across thousands of 
years and left with me only an impression of it as a whole. 
1 only know that it was I who caused their downfall. 
Like a malignant trichina, an atom of the plague afflict¬ 
ing whole kingdoms, so I spread contamination through 
all that happy earth, sinless before I came to it. They 
learned to lie and came to love lying, appreciating the 
beauty of lies. Oh, it may have begun quite innocently, 
with laughter, coquetry, playful love, or it really may 
have been the atom of lying seeping into Iheir hearts and 
appealing to them. Soon after, sensuality was born, sen¬ 
suality conceived jealousy, and jealousy conceived cruel¬ 
ty.... Oh, I don’t know, I can’t remember, but soon, very 
soon blood was shed for the first time: they were astound¬ 
ed and horrified, and began to separate and go different 
ways. They formed unions, but the unions were inimical 
to one another. Reproaches and recriminations began. They 
came to know shame and made a virtue of it. They learned 
the meaning of honour, and each union flew its own 
colours. They became cruel to their beasts who retreated 
fsom them into the forests and turned hostile. A struggle 
ensued for division, for sovereignty, for personal promi¬ 
nence, for thine and mine. They now spoke different 
tongues. They tasted of sorrow and came to love sorrow, 
they thirsted for sufferings and said that only through suf¬ 
fering could Truth be attained. And then science was in¬ 
troduced. When they grew evil, they began to talk of 
fraternity and humanity and understood these precepts. 
When they grew criminal they invented the idea of justice 
and in order to maintain it prescribed for themselves vo- 



F. DOSTOYKVSKY 


1578 


luminous codes of law, and to add security to these codes 
they erected a guillotine. They had but a vague memory 
of what they had lost, and even refused to believe that 
once they had been innocent and happy. The very thought 
that they could have once been so happy made them 
laugh, and they called it a dicam. They could not even 
envisage it in images and shapes, but strangely and mirac¬ 
ulously, though they'had lost all faith in their former 
happiness calling it a faiiy-talc, they so wanted to be¬ 
come innocent and happy again that they succumbed to 
their heartfelt wish like children and, deifying this wish, 
they put up numerous temples and began to pray to their 
own idea, or rather-their “wish”, knowing full well that 
it could never come true or be gi anted to them, but ador¬ 
ing and worshipping it in tears nonetheless. And yet, if it 
had been possible to lestore them to the innocent and 
happy jealm they had lost, or if someone could have given 
them a glimpse of it again and asked them whether they 
would like to come back to it. they would h^Ve probably 
refused. Thev told me: “Let us be deceitful, evil and un¬ 
just, but we knoo.' it. we weep over it, and torment our¬ 
selves for it, and the punishment we inflict upon ourselve* 
is even hai slier perhaps than that which will be meted 
out to us by the merciful Judge who will sit in judge¬ 
ment over us and whose name we do not know. We pos¬ 
sess science, and through it we shall seek and find the 
Tiuth once again, and this time we shall apprehend it 
cons< iously. Knowledge is supeiioi to feeling, conscious¬ 
ness of life is superior to life. Science will give us wis¬ 
dom, wisdom w'ill determine the laws, and knowledge of 
the laws of happiness is superior to happiness.” This is 
what they said to me, and after saying it each one loved 
himself above all others, nor could he have done different¬ 
ly. Kach one protected his ego so jealously, that h£ di¬ 
rected all his stiivings towards humiliating and belittling 
the ego of others: and this became his life’s work. Next 
came sluveiy, there was voluntary slavery as well: the 
weak willingly submitted to the strong only so they should 
help them to crush those even weaker than themselves. 
There were the righteous who came to these people and 
in tears spoke to them of their arrogance, of their loss of 



THE DREAM OF A RIDICULOUS N1\N 


370 


all sense of measure and liaimon\, all diame. But the 
ugliteous were mocked and stoned. Hol\ blood stained 
the thresholds of temples. Men appeared in their stead 
who began to contrive how best to unite everyone once 
again but in such a manner that each should continue lov 
ins himself above all otheis and yet should not stand in 
the otheis' way. so that all could once more live together 
in appaienlly good agreement. Great wars were fought 
because of this idea. Though engaged in warfare, the 
lighters firmly believed that science, wisdom and the in¬ 
stinct of self-preservation would eventually force man¬ 
kind to unite into a society that was concordant and sen 
sible, and in the meantime in ordei to speed matters up, 
the “w ise' tried to extei initiate the unbclicvcis in thei 1 
idea and the "unwise" as quickly as possible so they should 
not impede the idea's triumph. But the instinct of sc 1 f- 
picsei vation soon began to weaken, and men pandering 
to tneir anogancc or sensuality demanded outiight: all or 
nothing. To acquitc all they resulted to crime and if that 
failed—to suicide. Religions were next introduced with a 
cult of non-existence and self distinction for the sake of 
eternal peace in nonentity. 'The people were at last worn 
out with their senseless toil, and suffering shadowed their 
faces; and thev proclaimed that suffering was bcautv, for 
in suffering alone lav thought They extolled suffeiing in 
their songs. I walked among them, wringing my hands 
and w’ceping over them; mv love for them was even 
gieatu pci haps than befoie when their laces showed no 
suffeiing and thev weic innocent and so beautiful. I came 
to love the eaith defiled by them even more than I did 
when it was a paradise, solely because giicf had come to 
it. Alas, T have always loved sorrow and grief, but for 
iny own self, for myself alone, while over them 1 w T cpt 
in pity. I held my arms out to them in despair, accusing, 
cursing an^l despising myself. I told them that I had done 
it all, 1 alone; that it was 1 who brought them this germ 
of corruption, iniquity and deceit. I implored them to 
crucify me, 1 taught them how to make the cross. I could 
not, 1 had not the strength to kill mysell, but I wanted 
to suflei at their hands, I longed for suffeiing, longed for 
my blood to be diained drop by drop in these sufferings. 



380 


F DOSTOYEVSKY 


But they just laughed at me and iinally came to regard 
me as a saintly fool. They made excuses for me, saying 
that they had received only what they had been asking for, 
that what thev had now could not have been otherwise. 
At last they declared that 1 was becoming a danger to 
them, and that they would lock me up in the madhouse 
if I did not keep quiet. At this, sorrow gripped my heart 
so fiercely that I could not breathe, I felt that 1 was dying, 
apd then ... that was when I woke up. 


It was already day, or rathci day had not yet dawned 
but it was after five. 1 awoke in my armchair: my candle 
had burnt out, the captain’s room was locked in sleep, and 
a silence unusual for our house reigned about me. I instant¬ 
ly leapt to my feet in amazement: nothing even remotely 
like this had ever happened to me before, not any of the 
trilling details that did not really matter such as falling 
asleep in my chair, for instance. And suddenly, as I stood 
there recovering my senses, I saw my revolver lying all 
ready and loaded before me. With a quick thrust I pushed 
it away. No. give me life now, life! 1 raised my arms and 
invoked the eternal Truth, or rather wept, for all my bc- 
im>- was roused to exultation, immeasurable exultation. 
Yes, 1 wanted to live and spread the Word. My resolu¬ 
tion to preach came on the instant, to preach now and 
for ever, of course. I shall preach, I must preach—what? 
Truth. For I have seen it, seen it with my own eyes, seen 
it in all its glory. 

And so I have been spreading the Word ever since. 
What is more, the ones who laugh at me are dearer to me 
now than all the others. Why it is so I do not know nor 
can explain, but let it be so. They say that I am flounder¬ 
ing already, that is, if I am floundering so badly now how 
do I expect to go on? It’s perfectly true, I am flounder¬ 
ing and it may become even worse as I go on. There is no 
doubt that I will indeed flounder and lose my way more 
than once before I learn how best to preach, that is with 
what words and by what deeds, for it is a very difficult 
mission. It’s all as dear as day to me even now, you 
know; but, listen, who of us does not flounder? And yet 




THE DREAM 01 ; A RIDIQTOUS MAN 


381 


everyone is going towards the same, thing, at least all 
strive lor the same thing, all—from the wise man to the 
meanest wretch—only all follow different paths, it’s an 
old truth, hut here's something new-1 cannot flounder too 
badly, you know. Because 1 have seen the Tiuth, I have 
seen it and 1 know that people can he beautiful and happy 
without losing their ability to dwell on this earth. 1 can¬ 
not and will not believe that evil is man's natural state. 
And yet it's just this conviction of mine that makes tjiem 
all laugh at me. How could I help believing it, though. 
I have seen the Truth, it was not a figment of my imagi¬ 
nation or my mind, 1 have seen it, seen it, and its living 
linage has taken hold of my soul for ever. 1 have seen 
in such consummate wholeness that 1 refuse to believe that 
it cannot live among men. And so, how could 1 lose my 
way/ 1 shall stray once or twice ol course, I shall per¬ 
haps even use the woids of othcis sometimes, but not for 
long: the living image of what J have seen will remain 
with me always, it will alwavs correct me and put me 
straight. 1 am full of vigoui and strength. I shall go and 
preach, be it for a thousand years. Do you know, I first 
wanted to comeal the fact that I had conuptcd them all, 
but that would have been a mistake—a mistake already, 
you see. Truth whispered in my ear that 1 w'as lying. Truth 
sa\ed me and showed me the way. But I do not know 
how to build a paradise on earth, for 1 do not know how 
to put it in words. 1 lost the words on awakening. At least 
all the most important words, the most essential. Never 
mind; 1 shall go on my way and preach tirelessly, be¬ 
cause I have seen it with my own eyes, even though I can¬ 
not describe what 1 have seen. That is something the 
mockers fail to understand. They say: “It was just a 
dream, ravings and hallucinations.*’ Oh dear! Is that 
clever? And they arc so proud of themselves, too. A 
dream, they say. But what is a dieam? Isn’t our life a 
dream? I shall go further: let it never, never come true, 
let paradise never be (after all, I do realise that!), I shall 
anyway go and spread the Word And yet it could be 
done so simply: in a single day, in a single hour every¬ 
thing would be settled! One should love others as one 
loves oneself, that is the main thing, that is all, nothing 



382 


F. DOSTOYEVSKY 


else, absolutely nothing else is needed, and then one would 
instantly know how to go about it. It s nothing but an old 
truth, repeated and read billions of tunes, and yet it has 
not taken root. “Consciousness of life is superior to life, 
knowledge of the laws of happiness is superior to hap¬ 
piness”—this is what we must fight against. And I shall 
If only everyone wanted it, it could be all done at once. 


As for that little girl, I have found her. ... 1 shall go 
on my way! Yes, 1 shall go! 


REQUEST TO READERS 


Progress Publishers would be glad 
to have your opinion of this book, its 
translation and design. 

Please send your comments to 2*, 
Zubovsky Boulevard, Moscow, USSR. 



