
May 1988 




CREATIVITY EXPLORED ARTISTS POSE WITH THEIR 
ENTRY IN THIS YEARS CINCO DE MAYO PARADE 



3 

o 

5 



cr 

*< 

-n 

c 

3 

5' 

o 

□. 



C/J 



8 



VACANCY CONTROL BATTLE 
HEADS FOR THE BALLOT 

One hundred and two months of silence from the City’s tenant 
advocates are at an end with the commencement, in April, of two separate 
but related campaigns to achieve a limit on the amount that rents can be 
raised on apartments when one tenant moves out and another moves in (i.e. 
vacancy control). 

The San Francisco Housing and Tenants’ Council, (SFHTC) a coalition 
of approximately forty citywide organizations, has approved draft language 
of a vacancy control provision limiting such increases to fourteen percent. 
If passed, a vacant apartment renting for $500 a month could not rent for 
more than $570 upon change of tenancy, except in certain cases cases 
where the departing tenant had resided there eight years or more. 

Believing that such automatic increases are still excessive, the San 
Francisco Tenants’ Union (SFTU), supported by representatives of such 
organizations as the petitioner’s co-op Election Action, the Old St. Mary’s 
Housing Committee (OSM) and members of the North Mission Association 
voted on April 20th to circulate a ballot initiative that would permit no 
rent increases upon tenant turnover. 

Vacancy control was last tested at the polls in November 1979. It was 
defeated, but the City’s rapidly increasing rents have now exasperated not 
only tenants but businesses who find it impossible to attract or retain 
employees. A recent business exodus has not only contributed to San 
Franciscos record budget deficit, it has cost some home-owning residents 
their jobs, thus lessening their sympathies with rent-gouging landlords. 

k 1983, then-Supervisor Quentin Kopp proposed vacancy control 
legislation with a 14% increase. The measure was passed by the Board of 
Supervisors, but vetoed by Mayor Dianne Feinstein. With eight votes 
necessary to overturn the veto, the measure failed because Supervisor 
Richard Hongisto abstained from voting, claiming conflict of interest as a 
landlord. Since that time, Feinstein has been replaced by Art Agnos who 
promised in 'his book "Getting Things Done" he would sign vacancy control 
legislation. But Sup. Carol Ruth Silver has become a realtor and joined 
Hongisto in absentia... which is, in reality, a pro-landlord position... and 
Kopp and Louise Renne have been replaced by the Feinstein appointees Tom 
Hsieh and Jim Gonzalez. 

14% - SFHTCS "LITE" LEGISLATION 

It is widely believed that cither Hsieh or Gonzalez would have to be 
the sixth vote to pass a vacancy control ordinance. In 1983, Sup. Harry 
Britt, Willie Kennedy, Wendy Nelder, Nancy Walker and Doris Ward sup- 
ported Kopp’s measure. John Molinari and Bill Maher have consistently 

See page 2 



STRIKE ALLEY Photo by Fuminori Sato 




Mission Street, between 21st and 23rd Streets, is experiencing its second 
major department store strike in a year. Employees of the Department 
Store Local 1100 are walking the picket line against Top Value and 

Gransons’ on adjacent blocks because of a corporate takeover of these and 
other stores. The new owners, an out-of-state holding company called Lady 
Atlantic, demanded that retail employees making an average of $8.50 an 
hour have their wages cut to $6.00 and janitors and other personnel making 
about $11.00 be cut to $8.00. 

The members, saying "hell no", have gone out on the picket line, 
trying to cut wages to pay off the costs incurred in the takeover of what 
was originally a local firm. The epidemic of corporate mergers and 

takeovers over the last few years has made a number of millionaires, but 
has forced millions of workers into either pay cuts or unemployment. 

The workers at Local 1100 are prepared to face the prospect of the 

latter in opposition to the former. According to union official John 

Mendez, Lady Atlantic has hired scabs, broken off negotiations and has 
allegedly vowed to remain non-union "until hell freezes over". 

Last year, Local 1100 struck the Newberry’s chain, including a store 
on Mission near Top Value and Granson’s. Newberry’s finally settled, but 
the Mission store closed and is to be occupied by Thrifty Jr. 

According to Mendez, Thrifty Jr., Walgrcen’s and Merrill’s are union 
stores. Perhaps those folks who care might give them the business that 
would otherwise go to the scab estabs. 





NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 



VACANCY CONTROL continued from page 1 

supported landlords and, despite occasional assertions that their sympathies 
are with the City’s embattled renters, the abstentions of Silver and 
Hongisto are anti-renter votes. 

On March 29, the SFHTC’s convention attracted over 60 tenant 
activists to the Dorothy Day community center in the Tenderloin. There, 
after four hours of discussion, the rank and file approved (35-25) a 
legislative package modeled after a nine point program propounded by OSM 
(see North Mission News, 2/88). Included in the SFHTC package was a 
maximum 7% vacancy increase with additional one percent increments for 
each year that departing tenants resided at any location prior to 1979, 
inclusion of owner-occupied three and four unit flats and apartments (which 
cover much of the Mission and are currently not protected), a spreading 
out of rent increases due to capital improvements, a reduction in the 
number of syndicate partners able to buy larger buildings and evict tenants 
for their personal use, and other provisions. Such measures are commonly 
called "Christmas Trees"; the package of high-rise controls which were 
passed in 1986 as Proposition M is a successful precedent. 

The rank and file also voted 38-3 to support registration of all 
apartments, rather than disclosure, which is taking the landlord at his word 
that his last tenant paid $500 rent, not $200. Under registration, it is 
harder for landlords to cheat, but City money would be required for 
enforcement and, while registration would ultimately be financed by the 
landlords and tenants in the form of a small fee, the initial expenditure 
could be considered inappropriate in light of the enormous Feinslein deficit. 

Late in the meeting, the SFHTC voted to prioritize their package with 
vacancy control first, and to attempt to negotiate with the landlords and 
Mayor Agnos before taking the more confrontational steps for legislation or 
initiative action. 

During the meetings with Agnos, the landlords and the realtors, a 
counter proposal was made by the latter in the form of a self-inflicted 
apartment tax to finance subsidized housing. Although the revenues would 
be far less than the increased rents that they could collect through the 
abandonment of a vacancy control campaign, the offer impressed Agnos 
enough that he suggested that the SFHTC modify their proposal to be more 
acceptable to the landlords, the wavering supervisors and, presumably, the 
voters. 

On April 12 the SFHTC, with less than half those present at the 
March 29th meeting in attendance, substantially modified the Vacancy 
Control package, deleting all other OSM concerns and raising the landlords’ 
vacancy bonus to Kopp’s original 14% (an actual increase of 18-21% when 
the existing yearly allowable rent increases are factored in) plus the one 
percent for year for long term tenants. 

They also decided that, if the Supervisors voted down this proposal, 
they would promote a stronger vacancy control measure, reducing the 14% 
to 8%. 

In the past two weeks, the process was explained to neighborhood 
monthlies such as the North Mission News, efforts have been undertaken to 



win the support of neighborhoods, business, labor and the public and 
preparations are under way for an intensive lobbying campaign. 

NO INCREASE - THE SFTIPS "JOLT" INITIATIVE 

The S.F. Tenants’ Union, which had unsuccessfully urged the SFHTC to 
put Vacancy Control on the ballot in 1984, 1986, 1987 and June of 1988, 
withdrew from the larger organization early this year and began holding 
meetings and polling tenant activists to assess the depth of both support 
for an initiative and to what extent landlords should be rewarded for their 
tenants’ departure, whether voluntary or induced. 

Finding grass roots support for a tough measure (and bolstered by 
members of other organizations who believe the SFHTC proposal is too soft 
on landlords, they approved a measure that will clearly give voters an 
opportunity to adopt a tough and simple motion, not unlike that offered 
growth control supporters by Prop. F in 1985. And now, as then, it would 
not be surprising if some (voters or politicians) who support the SFHTC 
proposals find the SFTU plan too severe. 

As in the SFHTC meetings, issues facing the two dozen representatives 
attending centered around registration, the amount of increase, the "Christ- 
mas Tree" tenant protection jettisoned by SFHTC and whether to propose 
one or two measures. 

David Spero of the North Mission Association saw registration as "a 
bottom line issue", but it also was attacked as giving the landlords an 
excuse to make bureaucracy, not evictions and high rents, a campaign issue. 
"I would rather sec something weak out there," stated Cary Gold of the 
SFTU. "Then we can amend it." Registration was narrowly rejected. 

A proposal to circulate two initiatives, one conforming to terms 
acceptable to the SFHTC, the other containing more controversial items 
such as registration, lower percentages and possibly some of the Christmas 
Tree ornaments also failed. Proponents stated that a moderate, but more 
pro-renter initiative than the SFHTC legislation should be coupled with a 
second, overt and tough measure that would educate people even if it did 
not succeed. But Stony Gebert and Lee Goland of Election Action advised 
against alarming or confusing voters. "We should lower our sights to grasp 
what is more certainly in our grasp," Gebert said. "We don’t want," Goland 
added, "to come off looking flaky." 

"You know how people are about voting," said Gold. "Too many 
choices, forget it!" 

She then submitted a counter-proposal prepared with attorney Bob 
DeVries of the SFHTC which modified that body’s 14% figure to a sliding 
scale based on inflation rates with a minimum of 8% on tenants’ departure, 
or 12% to 21% per year. 

After the one percent increase for long term tenants was defeated by 
a single vote, Gold’s motion was defeated. A substitute motion, permitting 
no increases on vacant apartments was passed on a close vote. 

The Tenants’ Union proposal is scheduled to be ratified by the 
community on Saturday, May 7th. This meeting is open to all San Francis- 
co renters who endorse the concept that a vacancy control initiative can 
pass. -by Brian Doohan 





j O' O L ¡L K G J£ © f C ii J j i' o or d 5 & 

PROGRAM OPEN HOUSES TO MEET 
WITH FACULTY AND DISCUSS ISSUES 



New College Campus at 50 Fell Street. 



New College Valencia Center Building at 777 Valencia Street 

New College of California 

50 Fell Street 

San Francisco, CA 94102 



Graduate Psychology and Integrated H ealth Studies 
Monday, May 16th 6:30 PM 
"Cross Cultural Issues in Health" 

School of Humanities 
Wednesday, May 18 7:30 PM 
General all school open house 
with grant and scholarship information 
School of law 

Wednesday, May 18 7:30 PM 

"Issues in Environmental Law" 

Summer Activist Scholarships 

Contact: Michael McAvoy, Director 

New College Valencia Center 

777 Valencia Street 
San Francisco, CA 94110 

(415) 861-7526 



NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




AMORY PRO TECT’S CURIOUS TWISTS 

- by Victor Miller 



emm mm 







A pouriaue- 






5|£2 k - 









^m-íJteú 

'Pft/fase// 

nd/t</&aas/ 



m 



■*UfSÚwL ái fte&Ncs //¿IkSa/h*). 



A massive asbestos clean up problem and a corporate reshuffling of for 
profit investors have further complicated plans to develop the Mission Ar- 
mory as a film studio. 

The original plan to rehabilitate the old National Guard Armory at 
14th and Mission St. was set in motion nearly two years ago by then 
Assemblyman Art Agnos when the Armory was put up for bid by the State 
of California. Greg Snazelle Films who won the option to buy the property 
with a high bid of $2.7 million, agreed as a condition of purchase to enter 
into a development agreement with twelve Mission non-profit organizations 
that had come together to form the Mission Armory Foundation or MAF. 
MAF, through a 1.6 million grant of federal urban development funds was to 
have acquired title to the land on which the building sits, (in effect 
becoming Snazelles landlord,) and exercise some degree of control over 
project management. 

In December of 1987 such an agreement was signed by both MAF and 
Snazelle. After seemingly endless byzantine negotiations, the way looked 
clear for Snazelle to finally exercise his option and buy the building. The 
first roadblock occurred after an engineering report revealed the Armory 
had a very bad asbestos problem with clean up costs estimated at up to $2 
million dollars. Snazelle has now appealed to the state to lower his 
original bid by the amount of the costs of the removal of the asbestos. 
But the state has for some unexplained reasons decided to conduct its own 
study of the asbestos situation in the Armory and then undertake the clean 
up process itself. Given the usual amount of time taken for governments to 
conduct studies and the astronomically larger amount of time that it takes 
governments to act on those studies, the prospects of a film studio in the 
Mission by the end of the century are indeed gloomy, if the state is 
allowed to proceed with this scenario. At the March meeting of the 
Mission Armory Foundation, member organizations were unanimous in 
agreement that all possible political pressure should be brought on the state 
to reconsider its decision but the main topic of the meeting was the 
apparent departure of Gregg Snazelle as a major player in the Armory 
project. 

At the December, 1987 meeting of the Mission Armory Foundation, 
Snazelle had introduced J. Stanley Mattison an investment banker with the 
firm Mattison and Shidler, as the "man who can make the project work", 
i.e., Mattison could put together the rehab money Snazelle had thus far 
failed to secure. In March MAF board members received notice that Greg 
Snazelle was now a limited partner in a general partnership set up by 
Mattison to oversee the entire Armory project. Mattison followed this up 
with a written proposal to MAF that would effectively minimiz e all 
community involvement in the project and allow for a complete phase out 
of MAF participation in three years. The financial return on MAFs $1.6 
million invested in the project was significantly reduced and any question 
of a community role in project management was ruled out. The original 
agreement tortuously worked out with Snazelle over a period of 18 months 
was not even mentioned. One board member called the proposal "a return 
to the Pliocene era." Other board members were less charitable and 
unprintable in their assessment of Mr. Mattison’s attempt to eat them alive. 
Hard negotiations and frayed tempers lie ahead. 

Where does all this leave us? At sea. The state owns the Armory 
and will not let it go until the asbestos is out. When the state does sell, 
what will the price be and to whom will it sell? Snazelle holds the option 
to buy but according to the Mattison proposal, it will be an entity con- 
trolled by J. Stanley Mattison that is to be the owner. The $1.6 million 
dollars in federal funds, ear marked for MAF investment in the Armory are 
still being held by the City with the exception of a few hundred thousand 



dollars in pre-development costs for which Snazelle agreed to reimburse 
MAF (about this said reimbursement Mr. Mattision has remained tactfully 
mute.) All permits for the building, approved in Dec. of 1987 have been 
issued to the Mission Armory Foundation. Without these permits the 
Armory is just a pile of bricks. The Armory building itself sits and waits, 
like old man river it must know somethin’ but it don’t say nuthin’. 




SUSHI CAFE 

Country Station 
modestly priced 



( 415 ) 861 0972 

2140 Mission Street 
Between 17th & 18th 

BUSSINES HOURS 

Mon-Thur 10:00 am- 9:00 pm 
Fri-Sal 10:00 am- 10:00 pm 




Fine 
Mexican 
Pastries 



§MEtY 

Eduardo E. Delfincl flor fjnez, Owner 





The Best in Live Latin Music & Disco Dancing 

3140 Mission St. at Army 

(415) 648-6611 



v V" v - Y • 

Continuous Dancing until 5 






A 

' . NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




RAICES QUE ATRAVIESAN LA TIERRA 



La lucha por los derechos humanos 
solo se le pudo haber ocurrido al pueblo 



Como nota del dia 

vale la pena no perder de vista 

el sentido de pueblo 



MISSION! 24 T " ST 



Pueblo herido alia, donde naci 
y pueblo herido aqui, en donde soy 



BLACK MESCAL 



Dusty streets of Oaxaca 
black mescal blindness 
Isthmus of Tehuantepec 
desperate bus ride 
from town to town 
ghostly deserted plazas 
with indian names 
forgotten bus stations 
lights burning all night 
forlorn end of the road 
in a sad dead end town 
sick with fever 
mixing cheap mescal 
and pills 
‘San Marqueña’ on the jukebox 
red eyed indian 
spilling mescal tears 
on the table 



Cociendo las habas aqui 

encontré lo que es querido pueblo.. .otra vez 



Las raíces atraviesan la tierra. 



2 POEMS FOR 



La tierra pá lia va 

pá lia va papaya pal gato amigo herrera 

papaya con raiz 

en san pancho y en sanjo 



CINCO DE MAYO 



Raiz en los huesos, en 5 de Mayo 
raiz con huesos pá la madre tierra 
pá que se cosa la cosa... 
y le de de comer al animal jadeante 



Las raíces atraviesan la tierra ¡Como no! 



Alejandro Murguía 



A mi que me esculquen un ojo de la cara 



mission 



El ajo es viejo 
la cebolla es compañera 
y el aullido aauuuuuuuuuuuhh. 
lo que es cania fina 



Ahorita es temprano en la Mañana 
y fresca la montaña. ..Otra vez! 



Las Raíces atraviesan la tierra 



El amor es delicado 

como el terciopelo de la espiga 



King Of The Mountain 



Jorge Herrera 



gr BICYCLES BY 
PEUGEOT, NISHIKI 
AND SCHWINN 



MON. - SAT. 11 AM - 7 PM 



SUNDAY 12 - 5 



EXPERT AND FAST 
REPAIRS 



FELINOS 



VALENCIA CYCLERY 

1065 Valencia St. (btwn 21st & 22nd) 550-6601 



ULTIMATE VINTAGE CL OTHING 



***■«*" NEW LOCATION 
"thing 3164 16THST. 



CAPOEIRA 



TRADITION AJ^^ 

AFRO-BRAZILIAN 

MOVEMENT 



JOIN THE ENVIRONMENTAL BRIGADES 
TO NICARAGUA* 



Combines dance, self defense and gymnastics 
Accompanied by live music. 



jOINTHEj.WW 

l rfirrrvAia ( 



July 2 - July 30 
July 30 -- August 27 
September 3 -- October 1 

Become Part of the Solution! 
Help the Reforestation Efforts 



INDUSTRIAL WORKERS 
OF THE WORLD 

San Francisco Bay Area 



BEGINNERS WELCOME 

CHILDREN: SAT 1 JO-3, IN FLIGHT STUDIO, 333 DOLORES 



ADULTS: MON/WED 7 JO-9 



^&OUT/o¿y 
or thi 

VÍ&GE SYSTEM 



MISSION DOLORES GYM, 16TH & CHURCH 
FRI 6-7 JO, SAT 4-5 JO. IN FLIGHT STUDIO, 333 DOLORES 
FREE PARKING 

285-6689 



General Membership Branch 



r.o. ao« 404*i - san «amosco. caufo«nia 9«i«o 



For more information contact: 
Nicaragua Information Center 
2103 Woolscy St. 
Berkeley. CA 94705 
415-549-1387 



Plant a Tree for Peace. 

Be a participant or Be a sponsor 



*Co «por loftd by the Nicaragua Nawort and EPOCA 
Partial tcfcolarihipi available. 










NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




FRIENDS OF 
THE NATIVE AMERICAN 
HEALTH CTR. 



Because of the valuable services rendered to the community by the 
NATIVE AMERICA HEALTH CENTER individuals and organizations in the 
MISSION are now in the process of forming a support group to bring the 
center up to full services. This group, The Friends of the Native America 
Health Center (FNAHC) will have as its primary goals the restoration of the 
clinics 5 day schedule, and seeing that the center has sufficient funding for 
complete staffing, adequate supplies and the best equipment. 

In carrying out these goals the FNAHC will need volunteered time and 
contributions of as many people as possible. Because of the economic hard 
times the city in general is experiencing only a strong grassroots campaign 
will keep the Health Center viable. If you are willing to help out in any 
way with this important project call the North Mission Association office at 
626-2882. David Spero 



Fuminori Sato 




□ LBÍÉ 

AT H 



□ 

s COCKER. esTH & mission. 



^r- - - MTf|] 

Ü 



Ph. 824 6096 






lqy M mum 



Go KJ EE. T 

ci of F E et 






8 am - 9 pm 
9AM -3 PH 







It Yourself 



Custohn 



POSTER 
MOUNTING 
WHILE 
YOU WAIT 



orne 



FABRIC > 
-SHADOVV 

CREATIV 



OPEN: Mon-Thurs 11-7 
Friday - Sat 10-6 
Sunday 12-5 



REE ESTIMAT 



SAN FRANCIS 









NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




gallego 



Spanish - Seafood 
(’ui>>ii|e 



ISA MURA y GRUPO UTRERA 



Proudly Presents 

FLAMENCO 

SHOWTIMES 
MAY 13, 7:30 ONLY 

MAY 21, 7 and 9 pm 

Reservations Required 

Seating is limited. Please call early. 

3161 24th St. (at So. Van Ness) 821-6300 



with guitarist Benjamin Flores 



K&H 




UORS 




STILL PURVEYS TO 
THE MELTING POT 
OF THE MISSION. 




Do not ask for credit as 
a refusal often offends. 

K&H LIQUORS 

501 16th Street x Valencia 

OPEN 6am -2am 




CIVILITY AND 
SERVICE IS 
OUR MOTTO. 
(SOME TIMES) 



NO MINORS AFTER 11P.M. 





NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




M IS FOR THE MANY 



By: Nick Hornsfell 

The ozone is dissolving; oxygen-producing rain forests are being 
replaced by briefly-to-be styrofoam wrapped burgers on the hoof; there are 
college seniors who can’t read this paragraph; Washington flexes flab in 
Central America while Central America smuggles tons of cocaine into the 
U.S. (now ask yourself, who has the more effective army); the ACLU 
insures scabby, ragged, starving masses of schizophrenics their constitution- 
al right to slowly die before our eyes, living free in the streets; nothing is 
parts-and-assembly "Made in the USA" anymore; there is a growing fear 
that the only safe water is bottled water; unfortunately there is no such 
thing as bottled sex; the Republicans are crooked; the Democrats are 
incompetent; there’s yet further proof that Pentecostal preachers aren’t 
much different from the people they so loudly condemn to hell (in the 
words of Gomer Pyle "Surprise, surprise, surprise!"); we’re living on a fault 
line; the rent is due and people have the nerve to accuse me of being 
cranky! 

When was the last time YOU went to an "Up With People" concert? 
Baked anyone a cake lately? When was the last time you did your Chris- 
tian duty and yelled at a wino passed out on the sidewalk "Shape up fool 
or you’re gonna die like vermin in the gutter!"? Did you call your Mom 
this week? Well, if you haven’t done something to brighten the corner 
where you are don’t complain. 



Personally, I made Mom a cake this week with "Shape up you fool or 
you’re gonna die like vermin in the gutter!" written in pink icing on top 
(why not kill two birds with one cake). I was going to get her tickets to 
an "Up With People" concert but Mom suffers from "low gag reflex". 

All the attention on Mom is because of the great pagan festival of 
fertility, Mother s Day! When it comes to family relationships a good rule 
of thumb is to ask yourself "Would I buy this bum a beer if we weren’t 
related?" and then act accordingly, except when it comes to Mom. 

To quote Joni Mitchell (AAARRGGHHÜ He’s quoting Joni Mitchell!) 
anyone can "hurry to the darkness and the blankets to lay down an 
impression" but it’s the woman who gets to keep the most lasting impres- 
sion. In some areas it seems as though having a baby has become a rite- 
of-passage for girls; in my day "getting pinned" meant something totally 
different. 

As always, if mother is unable to handle the situation or she just 
wants to finish junior high, grandma or aunt so-and-so will become Mom 
and raise the child. Have you ever met anyone brought up by grandpa or 
uncle (don’t believe those Pacific Bell commercials!)? Besides, there’s not 
much pathos in saying "My grandfather worked 12 hours a day scrubbing 
floors and taking in washing so we could have food on the table and roof 
over our heads." It just sounds kinky. 

Sooner or later, most of us come to realize our very existence is due 
to "an accident" "a mistake" or "simple carelessness". The lucky ones figure 

it out for themselves without having some rude person tell them. This 

information is the first step in understanding the subtle difference between 
"having" a child and "raising" a child. 

We all show up as uninvited relatives, hungry, messy and demanding 
that Mom be a gracious hostess from day one. Mothers are human and it 
is not so rare for them to find it all more than they can take. Making the 

choice between abusing a child or bailing out requires a brand of courage 

the male of the species knows little about. 

At the end of a century or world war, economic expansion, economic 
collapse, scientific strides, mechanized atrocities, whole nations and peoples 
wiped out, and populations exploding in lands of famine; anyone who thinks 
Mom is June Cleaver needs their head examined; Mom is every woman doing 
a job in factories, schools, unions, offices, churches, farms, hospitals and 
government, she is homeless in the streets and at home in the board- 
room. 

How do we explain love? It isn’t cards and poetry; you don’t have to 
really like a person in order to care; absence, in fact, makes the heart 
grow fonder but you don’t necessarily have to become overly emotional; and 
face it, for better or worse the great woman-goddess Mom we have all 
known at some point in our lives, made her mistakes (possibly you being 
one of them) and has had her good times (possibly you being one of them) 
and for better or worse Mom-grandma-aunt will always be that very 
undeniable part of each of us, woman or man. 

Without ozone life may be endangered, without Mom it’s impossible; 
and so children, that is why we celebrate the great festival of fertility, 
Mother’s Day. 



SAN FRANCISCO 
AUTO REPAIR CENTER 

FOREIGN AND DOMESTIC AUTO REfWRS 

• l.'OW OPEN 7 OAVSI 

• Dependable Work- 
Honeat Pricea 

• Basic Auto Repair Classea 

• A Community-Oriented 
People'a Garage 

• Men A Women Mechanics 

• Official California Smog Station 



415/285-8588 



611 Florida St. 
(Near 18th St.) 
San Francisco 94 1 10 




FEEL PAIN? 



THINK 

ACUPUNCTURE OR 
ACUPRESSURE 
MASSAGE 



li 

For treatment of 

• Chronic & Recurring Pain 

• Sprains, Strains & Injuries 

• Tom Muscles 

For Pain of 

• Back 

• Arms & Legs 

• Stomach 

• Neck 

• Migraines 

Many others have been helped! 
Why not you? 

Free Consultation • Insurance & Medi-Cal accepted 




A\. ' * > 

Sally McMullen, Certified Acupuncturist 
550-7732 ' 



120 - 27th Sl San Francisco 

i . V>Y ■ i 



Frames & Futons 




'A' Frames 



FACTORY 
OUTLET 




Gentle Wind 

Futon Shop 



3265 17th STREET 

OPEN 9-5 30 Monday-Saturday OOd'üOüO 



MINH GRRD€N 



experienced 

Authentic Vietnamese Cuisine 



2845 Mission ot 24th St 
Son Francisco, CR 941 1 0 
Phono: (415)285-4455 




Mon-Thu: 1 1 RM - 9:50 PM 
Fri-Sat 1 1 RM - 10 PM 
Sundoys: 4:50 PM - 9:50 PM 





NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 



8 





MEMORIAL DAY 



50% OFF ALL CLOTHING 
30% OFF EVERYTHING ELSE 

2101 Mission Street EXCEPT FURNITURE 
between 17th & 18th • 861-1137 




Two truckloads of fresh merchandise 

i a,ly . over 1000 feet of quality second- 

Bright, d ean'Tpa d ou s slore " 8 hand clothin g for the enHre family! 

B L,lce a garage sale every day of the 



more 



week! 




Employment 
opportunities for 
Asians, Filipinos 
and Pacific Islanders! 



Bilingual women and men are 
encouraged to apply 

Minimum Qualifications 

■ US Citizen 

■ High school diploma or GED 

■ 21 years old minimum for appointment 
(no age maximum) 

■ Physically fit 

■ No felony convictions or illicit 
drug usage 



$2,246. 



PER MONTH 
ENTRY LEVEL 



•»NT OF cog . 
VcAutoam» y 



CALL TODAY TOLL FREE! 
1 (800) 622-WORK 

for more information attend the following workshop: 
SKYLINE COLLEGE 

3300 College Drive Location Auditorium 

San Bruno, CA 94066 May 11, 1988 

\J / 6:30 PM -9 PM 




CRIME FILE: HOT SPOTS 

In the 4 square block area surrounding the 16th St. Bart Station crime 
incident reports rose from 1594 in 1986 to 2173 in 1987, a 36% increase and 
mcident reports in the area bounded by Duboce, 15th St, Dolores and 
^encia which includes Valencia Gardens increased from 682 in 1986 to 
921 m 1987 a 35% rise. In these two districts the line is simply not being 
held by traditional law enforcement methods and community crime preven 
tion programs are beginning to organize as both residents and businesses 
perceive the situation becoming more and more intolerable. At present the 
prospect of an immediate solution to the problem is bleak, due in part to 
years of indifference from city hall and the question of how dwindling 
public resources will be allocated. 6 

The crime rise in the 16th St. Bart Plaza and surrounding area can be 
viewed, in part, as a memento of the Feinstein era. The former Mayor's 
much publicized clean up of the Tenderloin was nothing more than the 
displacement of a crime problem, from an area of high tourism to an area 
of low tourism. Unfortunately the Mission has inherited the problem at a 
tune when the threat of budget cuts and lay offs may mean a decline in 

^ rZ?,’ a ‘ MiSSi0D Stati0D - °" e tareet of P ublic has been 
the BART Police, an organization which seems totally concerned with 
turnstyle jumpers and cigarette smokers beneath the surface, but has no 

Sí presence or plan of action for the street level plazas for which the 
dak 1 has statutory responsibility. 

The Valencia Gardens Housing Projects arc like many other city 
housing projects, in the midst of Crack Wars as rival gangs fight it out for 
control of a deadly but highly lucrative market. At the same time low 
lederal funding levels for building maintenance accelerated decline in the 
physical condition of Gardens making the big bucks to be made in Huba 
ustling seem more attractive to young people who see the projects as a 
deteriorating dead end. Michael Kelley of the S.F. Housing Authority 
admits that a $5 million rehab budget is what's needed each year city wide 
but the cuirent budget is only $2 million and will run out in Í month. At 
the same time, The Housing Authority Police are being gradually phased out. 
This will create an increased burden on the Mission Station which may also 
be cut back in manpower as a result of the city’s budget deficit. Jim 
Buick, the executive director of the Mayor’s Criminal Justice Council has 
said that although there has been no decision to reduce the police budget, 
it would be "miraculous" if there were no reductions. 

When the cuts come the problem of how limited resources are divided 
up among the city’s police districts will be decided by Chief of Police 
Jordan and the Police Commission. In order to inform themselves as to 
what Mission residents see as police priorities, as well as lobby support for 
keeping the Missions district’s cut of the budget pie at least it’s current 
size. Mission Station Police Captain Michael Brush and Community Relation 
Officer Larry Ratti have begun to hold regular monthly meetings with a 
wide range of business and neighborhood organizations. Since the Mission 
Police district includes both Noe Valley and Twin Peaks these meetings 
have been broad m scope, with topics ranging from Carnaval to electrical 
emissions from the Sutro Tower. Hopefully, a unified strategy for crime 
reduction will be worked out between participating organizations and the 
pohee that will include Valencia Gardens and 16th St. 

A much more specific approach is being undertaken on May 26 when 
St. John’s Parrish and representatives of Project SAFE, (a non-profit crime 
prevention group), will meet at St. John’s Episcopal Church, (15th and 
Julian), at 7 PM to begin block by block organization of neighborhood crime 
prevention groups. These block organizations will, theoretically, serve to 
make people living in residential streets more aware of who their neighbors 
are and who their neighbors aren’t, basically a neighborhood watch or- 
ganization that will include education on personal safety and home security. 

A similar program is underway in Valencia Gardens. 

A second group with specific focus is a recently formed association of 
16th St, area businesses and non-profit organizations, including Far West 
Labs, Mission Neighborhood Health Center, Walgreens and the North Mission 
Association, has held two preliminary meetings aimed at handling the unique 
problems posed by crime at the Bart Plaza and along the 16th St. commer- 
cial strip. Suggestions to reducing crime proposed by members of this 
group have included a police kiosk at 16th and Mission, better street 
lighting on side streets and creating a strong coalition of businesses and 
institutions to turn around the sleaze and violence trend on the street. 

The results of these grass roots attempts to deal with what many 
Mission residents feel is the neighborhoods number one problem are yet to 
be seen. That these efforts are taking place at a time of a double digit 
crime rise in the target areas and a city budget crisis makes any meaning- 
ful solution both more difficult and more important. 




NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 



IÉTROPOUTAN 
MOTORS 

SPECIALIZING IN 



VOLKSWAGEN REPAIR 

ALSO JAPANESE • EUROPEAN • DOMESTIC 
COMPLETE MECHANICAL • FUEL INJECTION 



OPEN MON. ■ FRI 7 A M ■ 6:30 P.M. 

740 VALENCIA (BETWEEN 1ITH l I9TH) 

NEAR BART 



CALI FOR FREE ESTIMATES 

863-2126 



es 





LowRider Magazine is Back! 

BIG TIME COMIC BOOK PRICE WAR 



Thousands at Discount prices 



San Francisco Comic Book Co. 
3335 23RD St 
tAN FRANCISCO. CA 04110 



1415) 550-9158 
NCON-S CLOSED SUNDAY 



I 




Quan Yin 
Acupuncture 
& Herb Center 

of San Francisco 

Quan Yin is a community-oriented 
healing center offering Acupuncture, 

Herbs, Shiatsu Massage, Nutritional 
Counseling, Rosen Method Body 
Work, Hypnotherapy and Bach Flow- 
ers in a supportive environment. 

Sliding fee scale. MediCAL accepted. 

Insurance reimbursement. 

513 Valencia at 16th 861-1101 





the 

ELI/ES 



OFFICE 

SUPPORT 

SERVICES 



So Resourceful . . . 
it’s hard to believe !! 

THE ELVES have been created to 
provide fully bilingual (English-Spanish) 
support services for your office, 
business or personal needs. 



Word Processing * Desktop Publishing * Computers 



Also available: 



3370 - 24TH. ST. 



* Emergency Secretarial 

* Tape Transcriptions 

* Translations 

* Notary Public 

* Pick-up & Delivery 

SAN FRANCISCO. CA 94110 



415-824-4418 




Marc S. Janowitz 

Attorney 
Workers Rights 
Tenants Rights 
201 7 Mission Street 

Suite 300 
San Francisco 
California, 94110 

621*0499 






sübI 



50Coff 

any sub sandwich 
with this Ad 
EXP. 6/5/88 

509 Valencia Street 
(next to La Cumbre) 
255-1303 







10 



NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 

gia515©5E®S®515tS15lSM5M5M5M5lSM515^ 



L LI 



LLI 



SOUP • SANDWICHES • SALADS 
BEER • WINE • EXPRESSO 
LUNCH AND DINNER 
MON-SAT 1 1 :30 AM - 1 1 :30 PM 
SUN 3 PM -10 PM 821-0232 
SARA LEWINSTEIN 
PROPRIETRESS 

1199 VALENCIA STREET 




INTIMATE CONVERSATION 



On Sunday, April 10, three women sal at a small table on stage at the 
New Performance Gallery on 17th Street. A crowd of sixty or so look 
their seats in the late afternoon heat. They had come to hear Naomi 
Newman, Deena Metzger and Susan Griffin hold an "intimate conversation" 
on ecofeminism entitled, "Natural Imagery and the Artist." 

Naomi Newman is a singer, actress and director. She is also a 

founding Member of A Traveling Jewish Theatre, which presented her one- 
woman play, "Snake Talk: Urgent Messages form the Mother" at the Climate 
Theatre this April. 

Newman introduced Deena Metzger as her friend of several years, and 
as author of a novel on Arab Culture, three books of poetry, and Writing 
for Your Life: Imagination, Creativity and Healing. 

New met Susan Griffin in San Francisco in 1980. Once, when Newman 
remarked that Griffin’s book, Women and Nature , was "the seminal book for 
ecofeminists," Griffin had corrected, "Ovular." Griffin has also written a 
recent book of poems, Unremembered Country, and two works of prose, 
including the forthcoming, A Woman Thinks About War. 

Newman set out a rough agenda for the afternoon. Griffin would give 
a brief history of ecofeminism: all three would offer "conversations that 
apply" to ecofeminism; and then they would open the session for audience 
questions. 




youbdjmf 



31SB Mission 



El Beergarden *a 



TUESDAYS 

9-midmte 

Samba 

Pagode 



Comedy 
Night 

Wcdnaidoyi i-tOp 
Afay 4 

Marga Gomez 
Alay f f 

Monica Grant 
Renee Hicks 
Josh Kornbluth 
Afar 18 
Diane Amos 
Marilyn Pittman 
Barry Brady 
Afar 86 

Dirty Blondes 
Roubye Hart 
Ed Marcus 



SUNDAYS 
A -8 pm 



Live Music 



Thinking about 

DESKTOP PUBLISHING? 

You've been hearing a lot about Desktop Publishing these days— 

WHY? 

Desktop Publishing brings new communications options to 
business— It's a fast, low cost, flexible alternative for document 
production. There has never been a better way to communicate 
your company’s message. 



HOW? 



1 



QUALITY GRAPHICS 
SERVICES-A NEW WAY 

Zetatype 

Desktop Publishers 

Full-service graphic arts production 
Design and editorial services 
Fast turnaround 
Low rates— Cut your typesetting 
and production costs in half! 



2 



LEARN TO USE DESKTOP 
PUBLISHING YOURSELF 



The 

Zeta Group 

Desktop Publishing training 
and consulting 
IBM-PC expertise 
Systems configuration 
Individual or group training 



ISN’T IT TIME YOU FOUND OUT 
WHAT DESKTOP PUBLISHING 
CAN DO FOR YOU? 

Call us to find out. Or stop by our office at 1415 Valencia Street, 
San Francisco, CA 94110. A full initial evaluation of your 
production, training, or equipment needs is FREEI 



ZETATYPE 

DESKTOP PUBLISHERS 

( 415 ) 826-6640 



THE 

ZETA GROUP 

( 415 ) 826-1901 



The term ecofeminism, according to Griffin, was coined by a French 
feminist in 1974, in the book, Feminisme ou Mort. Griffin also cited 

Anestia King’s Ecology and Feminism, Feminism and Ecology, and Simone de 
Beauvoir’s The Second Sex as sources for contemporary ecofeminism. 

But what is_ "ecofeminism"? Griffin described it as a "new way of 
looking at the earth...as if matter and spirit were not opposed, as if man 
and woman were not split by hierarchy." She stressed that ecology is not 
something "out there." It is part of us, and we of it. Metzger offered 
that it was both a means of critique and a way for us to know ourselves 
better. For her, ecofeminism is not just a paradigm shift, but also a 
spiritual practice requiring concentration and attention. 

The "conversations that apply" were a fascinating example of how 
these women commented on each other’s work and related their own 
experiences. One instance of their passing an idea around the table 
particularly sticks in my mind. 

Newman mused on the question of what happens to us when we 
"destroy our sources’-when our society behaves compulsively and we forget 
our roots and relationships in the pursuit of addictions. She considers 
truth to be very physical. "If you start to lie to yourself, your body will 
tell you." She objected to being taught to treat one’s body "mechanistical- 
ly." 

On the subject of lies and truth, Metzger responded by saying that, 
"The authentic is satisfying. The inauthentic is never satisfying. We cut 
ourselves off from the sacred, and then we hunger for it." 

Griffin was reminded of the "habitual practice of our culture: We 

replace actual experience with the idea of experience." She emphasized the 
major concept of ecofeminism, which is the connectedness of everything. 
The "disassociation process" is enormous and prevalent in the world; 
whereas when we start connecting, we approach the truth. 




NAOMI NEWMAN 



Metzger said it was not even so much connecting as re-connecting, 
that was important. Connections are natural and vital; disassociation 
"violates us." 

One woman from the audience found a puzzling paradox between 
"boundaries and boundlessness." Connectedness presented a sort of dilemma. 
"How can one be both discrete and unified?" Metzger responded that 
discrete units and diversity are fundamental, from and ecological point of 
view. "We’re not talking about uniformity, we’re talking about interdepen- 
dency. Insist on the other, yet keep and know a sense of self." 

This "intimate conversation" process demonstrated, over the course of 
an afternoon, why these three women were sitting around the same table. 
They were brought together by shared connections - around the women’s 
movement, the peace movement, artistic creation, and healing work. The 
distinction between "discussion", which connotes more of an outline format 
and linear progression, and "conversation", which allows an interplay of 
voices, is an important one. We learn in a different way from conver- 
sation. And judging from a fruitful Sunday afternoon in April we should do 
more of it. 




NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 







The all day conference also featured Esther Cancell a a mental health 
professional and consultant on child Abuse Therapy. Feminist lawyer and 
MacKinnon spoke on the Minneapolis Anti-Pornography 
Civil Rights Law, an ordinance she co-authored with Andrea Dworkin in 
1984. Local activist Carol Leigh attended the conference and expressed 
hopes of establishing common ground in the fight for prostitutes’ civil 
rights The conference was funded in part by a grant from the Skagcs 
Foundation. W.O.A.P.P. would like to expand their membership and can be 
contacted at P.O. Box 20328, Oakland, CA 94620. 



FRUTILANDIA 

CUBAN AND PUERTO RICAN CUISINE 
3077 24th Street, near Folsom. San Francisco 644-2956 



PROSTITUTION NOT 
VICTIMLESS FEMINIST SAYS 

By: Jory Thomas 



A presentation by ex-prostitute and feminist activist Sarah Wynter was 
the high point of "Strategies For Stopping Pornography and Prostitution" a 
conference held at Laney College in Oakland in March. The conference was 
sponsored by W.O.A.P.P. (Women Organizing Against Pornography and 
Prostitution). Over 100 people attended. The 12 speakers, who came from 
as far away as New York, dealt with many types of sexual abuse against 
women and children but the main topics were pornography and prostitution. 

Members of Coyote, (a San Francisco based prostitutes rights or- 
ganization) handed out flyers to protest the theme of the conference. They 
said the conference’s condescending attitudes about prostitutes encourage 
political scape-goating. 

Sarah Wynter turned out to be the most controversial of all the 
speakers. Ms. Wynter was interrupted early in her presentation by Priscilla 
Alexander and another Coyote member who asked that her lecture format be 
changed to a discussion so that their view could be represented. Ms. 

Wynter refused and with the support of conference organizers the distur- 
bance was quelled. 

Ms. Wynter is the founder of W.H.I.S.P.E.R., (Women Hurt In Systems 
of Prostitution Engaged in Revolt), a collective of women who are or have 
been prostitutes. She is also the editor of WHISPER’S newsletter, which is 
published in N.Y.C. and available through subscription. 

According to Ms. Wynter, the average age for entry into prostitution 
is 16, and most prostitutes have previously suffered sexual abuse or 
battering. (This claim is supported by San Francisco Delancey Street 
Foundation’s surveys). Ms. Wynter observed that most prostitutes have 
pimps at some, if not all times; therefore the pattern for these women is 
one of abuse by men, which often starts in the family at childhood. Ms. 
Wynter said these women then suffer emotional and physical abuse as a 
result of being a prostitute. Yet, women who work in prostitution are 
blamed for being complicit in sexual abuses or battering done to them. 

Ms. Wynter stated that other theories of prostitution have ignored the 
fact that women are oppressed under patriarchy. Consequently the nature 
of prostitution is not voluntary because prostitutes have or perceive 
themselves as having little choice in their Uves. Wynter added that 

although some women may exist who are not tangibly trapped in prostitu- 
tion by pimps or drug addiction, they are a small minority, in no way 
representative of most prostitutes. 

Ms. Wynter contended that prostitution is not a victimless crime but 
crime against women done by men. Ms. Wynter stressed that because pros- 
titutes themselves are the victims, they should not be legally penalized for 
their collaboration in an exploitative institution. But pimps and customers 
who are profiting or exploiting women for the use of their bodies should be 
prosecuted. 

Sarah Wynter’s viewpoint is the most radically feminist in that she 
challenges the presumed male right of sexual access to any female, (and by 
any female, to all females). She maintains that paying a woman does not 
make it ethical or consensual. 

Aside from working in W.O.A.P.P, Ms. Wynter has put her experience 
to use and her theory to the test by working with the Minnesota Coalition 
for Battered Women. She insures that the existing programs for battered 
women are sensitized to the needs of prostitutes so that none of these 
women will be refused services. She is concerned that if shelters separate 
services for prostitutes from services to other women, the quality of the 
services will be unequal. 

Ms. Wynter remarked that in most areas, there are virtually no 
programs or services for women who are trying to escape prostitution. 
Facilitating this transition requires legal, logistical and employment needs 
be met. Social Services offices are only prepared to recommend therapy. 
Due to isolation and stress, many prostitutes do drugs or have drug habits. 
Yet most drug rehabilitation programs emphasize chemical dependency as the 
source of all problems. For a women caught in an abusive lifestyle, drug 
abuse may be an adaptation to her situation, hence a symptom or additional 
complication of that lifestyle. 

As a voice for women who have felt exploited by prostitution, Sarah 
Wynter had emerged as an insightful new leader, unafraid to take the con- 
troversial stand: that what is best for women is often not in men’s 

interest. 



CASA VALENCIA 

Beautifully maintained furnished rooms 
for rent in the sunny Mission. 

24 hour security. Full time manager. 
Telephone answering service. 

Laundry and day rooms. 

Close to shopping and all forms of 
public transportation. All utilities 
included, expect telephone. 

For more information call 861-2533. 

i — 



■TLeice- 

tuie- 




NORTH MISSION NEWS. May 1988 



12 







A SONG FOR PEACE 



By: Norma Del Rio 

In times when many people are following closely all the events in 
Central America. A SONG FOR PEACE IN NICARAGUA. Lichi Fuentes’s 
concert, will express the hope of Latin American people for peace in 
Nicaragua. 

Lichi Fuentes, a Latin American New Song singer, will perform at the 
Victoria Theater, 2961 16th Street, San Francisco, on Saturday, May 21st at 
7:30 pm. 

Lichi, who studied music at the University of Chile in Santiago, is one 
of the finest Latin American singers in the Bay Area. 

She has sung and played for several years with Grupo Raiz, a Latin 
American musical ensemble. Lichi traveled with them to Europe and Central 
America as weU as all over the United States. She has shared the stage 
with such prominent North American singers as Ronnie Gilbert, Pete Seeger 
and Holly Near. 

Lichi has been leading music classes and workshops at La Pena, 
sponsored by the California Arts Council. She has also sung at benefits for 
many solidarity organizations in the area. Last year, Lichi participated in 
the 3rd "Encuentro del Canto Popular" in San Francisco. 

In 1987, Lichi was honored by the Women’s Foundation as a "Woman 
of Note" for her contributions to the cultural life of the Bay Area com- 
munity. 

The May 21st concert, is a good opportunity to hear Fuentes as the 



principal singer and guitarist. She will present a repertoire of songs by 
noted composers from the New Song Movement in Latin America. She will 
be accompanied by a group of three women playing folkloric and classical 
instruments. 

Lichi Fuentes started her career in Chile in 1978, with Grupo Amanda. 
This group of women interpreted the Chilean New Song. In 1980, she 
became active in the "Canto Solidario Movement" (Solidarity Song), a 
cultural movement that emerged as a result of the national crisis after the 
military coup that overthrew Allende’s government. 

Lichi recalled that after the coup people were afraid to talk about politics 
because nobody knew who was part of the government. As the resistance 
grew, musicians started to write lyrics filled with metaphors that disguised 
the political message. 

In 1980, Lichi was visiting a sister in San Jose, California, when 
Pinochet’s government closed the universities in Chile. Since that time, she 
has been an active cultural worker in the Bay Area. 

A SON G FOR PEACE IN NICARAGUA is a benefit for Maestros Por La 
Paz, (Teachers For Peace). The profits will be used to provide scholarships 
for brigadistas who will be teaching English in Nicaragua this summer. 

Tickets are $8 in advance and $10 at the door. Advance ticket sales 
at Modern Times and Bookworks in San Francisco and at La Tienda at La 
Pena, Berkeley. Call 863-3778 for information. 



"SUNNYS1DE SCRAMBLE" - Mission District youngsters scramble for 
goodies as the broken piñata signifies the start of renovation at Thrifty 
Jr.’s new 2664 Mission Street site (April 27). 

Thrifty Jr. will feature extended hours, computerized pharmaceutical 
services and entry-level employment opportunities for neighborhood resi- 
dents. The store is scheduled to open in approximately three months. 





i SHOWCASE OF STARS J 
* at the CAFE LA BOHEME ! J 

★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ 



Fresh Salads - 

10 kinds of dessert's - ^ 

imported teas - 
15 ways to order coffee 
7 kinds of beer- 

' ^ 

Cappuccino & Sunlight 



La Boheme features exhibits of local artists & 
bulletin board -285-4122- 24th St. at Mission 



★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★★ 

Open at 7:00 a:m 



CITY COLLEGE ADVANCED LIFE DRAWING CLASS 
WATER COLORS 

MAY 15 - JUNE 12 RECEPTION MAY 17 8 PM 





THE NEW 



— DRAMATIC CHRONICLE — 

"WF WRITE WHAT WE LIKE - AND WE PRINT IT" 

Volume III SAN FRANCISCO, MAY - JUNE, 1988 Number 4 

PUBLISHE D BY THE JULIAN THEATRE OF SAN FRANCISCO 

DANCE AND MUSIC BLEND ” 
FOR BECK & CO./CLUBFOOT QUINTET 

"COMMUNITY" . 




JULIAN THEATRE HOSTS 

VARIETY OF THEATRE, 
DANCE AND MUSIC IN MAY- 
JUNE IN ITS NEW HOME IN 
SF'S MISSION 

OPENS PRODUCTION OF POWERFUL 
LATIN AMERICAN PLAYS IN JUNE 

The Julian Theatre, San Francisco's 
gutsy and respected community-based 
professional theatre company, has 
returned to the neighborhood where the 
group began, with an ambitious program 
of its own productions and some of the 
best live theatre, dance and music avail- 
able in the Bay Area. 

The Julian opened its new era as 
Resident Theatre Company in New 
College of California's 777 Valencia 
Street Center in January to very strong 
reviews for its premiere of the inter- 
generational play CONVERSATIONS OF 
MY MOTHERS, before touring the play to 
Sonoma and Marin counties. 

For its second "new home" production, 
the company will present a new version 
of its 1974-75 success, DOCUMENTS 
FROM HELL - four powerful short plays 
by Colombia's Enrique Buenaventura, in 
completely new translations by Maruja 
Cid of San Francisco. Julian artistic 
director Richard Reineccius and West 
German-born Marghitta Urias will direct 
the plays, which explore, in both comic 

- CONTINUED ON BACK PAGE 



NEW COLLEGE 
VALENCIA ST CENTER 

r *\ 



MISSION STREET 




16th St (BART) 

777 VALENCIA M 


19th 

Street 







Great Entertainment and Dining District 
see stories inside and back page 



/ 



Top: Christopher Beck & Co. dancers 
Below: The multi-talented Clubfoot Orchestra, five of 
whom will play live for COMMUNITY. 



Clubfoot and Christopher 
Beck join to create 
COMMUNITY 

Community is the title of the major May 
event at the new Julian Theatre at New 
College. Community is an exciting new 
performance collaboration between the 
Clubfoot Quintet from Clubfoot Orchestra 
and Christopher Beck & Company, the 
resident dance group at New College. 

Performances of Community are Thurs- 
days, Fridays and Saturdays at 8:30 p.m. 
May 5-7, 12- 14 and 19-21. The New 
College/Julian Theatre is at 777 Valencia 
Street (between 18th and 19th Sts.) in 
San Francisco. 

Since 1975 Christopher Beck & 
Company have been stimulating Bay 
Area audiences with their powerful 
expressionistic work. Their Theatre of 
dreams has been praised by the Balti- 
more Sun as "go-for-broke dramas told in 
movement." The choreography is by 
Christopher Beck, who has recently 
received his fourth Choreographer's 
' Fellowship from the National Endowment 
for the Arts. The San Francisco Chronicle 
said Beck has "a sense of Theatre that is 
stunning." The Examiner called his "one 
of the most provocative choreographic 
sensibilities in the Bay Area." For 
Community Christopher Beck & Company 
consists of 18 performers ranging in age 
from 4 months to 63 years. The youngest 
performer appears with her mother, who 
danced pregnant in the October perfor- 
mances of Christopher Beck & Company. 

The Clubfoot Quintet consists of five 
musicians from the Clubfoot Orchestra, 
which recently premiered its new score to 
the silent film classic The Cabinet of Dr. 
Caligari . The Caligari performances were 
a great hit at the Mill Valley Film Festival 
and at subsequent showings at the Roxie 
Cinema irt San Francisco and also in 
Berkeley and Los Angeles. San 
Francisco Focus called Clubfoot's music 
"a sweetly insane mix of jazz, rock, ethnic 
and film soundtrack." 

-CONTINUED ON PAGE 2 




The New Center of Culture in San Francisco - 

Can there be any doubt that The Inner Mission, from Dolores Street east to Potrero Hill, and from 
Army north to Duboce/13th Street, with a panhandle into the South of Market, 
is the liveliest center for the arts in San Francisco? 

The Julian Theatre will publish THE NEW DRAMATIC CHRONICLE as a bi-monthly supplement to THE 
NORTH MISSION NEWS, and for mailing and distribution to individuals and bookstores, coffee- 
houses, theatres and shops. This and future issues will include information about The Julian and 
other arts organizations and artists who share the view that 
art Is meant to change the world. 

The Julian Theatre of San Francisco - Now in Our 23rd Year 
V 



a publication of 
THE JULIAN THEATRE 

NOW PLAYING AT 
777 Valencia Street 
San Francisco CALIF 94110 



V_ 



Non-Profit Org 
U.S. Postage 

PAID 

Permit #8817 
San Francisco, Calif. 





BECK/CLUBFOOT "COMMUNITY" 

• continued from page 1 

The Clubfoot Quintet plays live for these performances, playing 
a new score composed specifically for Community by Clubfoot 
director Richard Marriott. Marriott also wrote the music for Ihfi 
Cabinet of Dr. Calioari . The musicians of the Clubfoot Quintet are 
Dave Barrett, Beth Custer, Bob Lipton, Richard Marriott and Gino 
Robair. They will be playing saxophones, brass, clarinet, shaku- 
hachi, percussion, marimba, tuba, bass and keyboards. 

Community explores some of the ways in which people connect 
and fail to connect. It points toward the need to struggle for the 
awareness, understanding and commitment to create real commu- 
nity. To frame and give context to the human dilemmas depicted, 
the piece includes images from the world of nature, both microcos- 
mic and macrocosmic. 

There are also sets and props created by East Bay visual artist 
Anne Busse to reflect the strength and fragility inherent in contem- 
porary ideas of community. Costumes have been designed and 
constructed by Karen Hampton, an innovative Oakland weaver 
and textile and fashion designer. Lighting for Community is by 
Holly Charlton. 

W ■■ — ^ 

Tickets for Christopher Beck & Co/Clubfoot Quintet 

performances of COMMUNITY are $10 general admission 
and $7 low income. Further information and reservations are 
available by phoning The Julian Theatre Box Office: 

626-8986. 

- — 



COMMUNITY: 

a new performance with 

CLUBFOOT QUINTETO, Club.oo, Orchestra 

"bizarre but unusually engrossing"--Billboard 

and 

CHRISTOPHER BECK & COMPANY 

"a sense of theater that is stunning"-SF Chronicle 

exploring the ways people connect, the ways they fail to connect, 
and the need to struggle for the awareness, understanding and 
commitment to create real community 

May 5 - 7, 12-14 & 19-21 
Thursday, Friday & Saturday 8:30 p.m. 

New College / Julian Theater 
777 Valencia St., San Francisco 

Tickets: $10 ($7, low income): available at the door one hourbelore show 
Reservations & Information: 626-8986 






LIMELIGHT 
FILM & THEATRE 
BOOKSTORE 

ROY JOHNSON 

1803 Market Street 
San Francisco. 
California 94103 

(415) 864-2265 



Rehearsing 

"COMMUNITY 1 



OPEN HOUSE FOR LEARNING AT NEW 
COLLEGE 

The Julian Theatre and Christopher Beck & Company are 
both affiliated with the Humanities Program of New College of 
California, offering classes and workshops as well as perfor- 
mances. You can design your own course of study leading to a 
fully-accredited degree in the performing arts or related fields or 
study with us for no credit. 

To learn more about the wonderful opportunities available to 
you, come to the 



NEW COLLEGE 
HUMANITIES PROGRAM 
OPEN HOUSE 
Wednes day, May 18, 7:30 pm 

REFRESHMENTS WILL BE SERVED. 

Meet with faculty and program directors. A financial aid 
advisor will be present to discuss grants, scholarships and loans. 
If you cant attend, pick up New College course descriptions at 
the 777 Valencia Center when you attend our events or write 
New College, 50 Fell Street, SF 94102. 

MAKE PLANS NOW TO ATTEND CLASSES THIS SUMMER 
AND DURING THE COMING YEAR! 



AMERICANS AND THE ARTS - from page 3 



BUT ARE THEY HAVING FUN? 

Harris, in a fiery address to those gathered at the LA forum on the arts, said 
we have a big problem in making the public think they'll enjoy themselves at the 
theatre or at a concert. ’The perception that people go to the arts out of duty or 
guilt rather than for enjoyment is rampant," he said. ’The survey shows that 
69% of Americans think that people who go to a sports event enjoy the experi- 
ence, while onty 29% think that people enjoy an arts event. This is a serious PR 
problem!" 

By every measure, the arts have penetrated the life and 
lifestyles of most Americans. By the same token, only a 
minority are aware of that fact, and that fact costs the arts 
dearly. 

- Lou Harris, from AMERICANS AND THE ARTS V 

Another section of the survey report shows that American households 
owning Video Cassette Recorders rose by 234% in the past three years - 55% 
of homes now have a VCR. But Harris and his staff are quick to point out that 
these "evil machines" are owned in far greater numbers by people who attend 
the arts than by those who don’t. They believe, in fact, that cassette recordings 
could be a saleable item for artists and organizations -- that even local produc- 
tions or exhibits, If well taped, could become an Item on the shelves of local 
video stores 





been Tortoise 






v •/■/. '/<. > /// «'-J 

"'S',,/' 










' r:f ? ^ ^ 



stJ*** 



' oovrt" 

\-5> - -«• 



LOS ANGELES 

TO PORTLAND/SEATTLE 



YOSEMITE 
3 Days $69 

GRAND CANYON 
9 Days Roundlrip 



2 Days ^59 

$249 



CROSS COUNTRY 
Extraordinary 1 1 Day Trek 



$249 



NATIONAL PARKS LOOP $QQQ 
12 Da vs Roiindfrin ^Z/Z/ 



12 Days Roundlrip 

ALASKA EXPEDITION 
17 Day Frontier Special 



$444 

(plus RT airfare)! 



415 821-0803 



AMERICANS AND THE ARTS 

What kind of people go to the arts? 

What kinds of arts do people want 
-and where do they want them? 

by Richard Reineccius 

(the author recently attended a forum on the arts in America in Los Angeles, conducted by 
American Council for the Arts, and featuring an address by national pollster Louis Harris. 
Harris’ company recently completed their fifth national survey of the public’s attitudes on 
arts and artists, AMERICANS AND THE ARTS V. The information for this article is based on 
that survey.) 

A couple months ago, an all-arts newspaper, ACCOLADES FOR THE ARTS, 
ceased publication in San Francisco. Less than a year old, the paper had been 
subsidized by a start-up grant from SF Hotel Tax receipts, with sizeable grants 
following from local foundations. It contained an extensive calendar of arts events 
for the month along with articles, and was distributed free door-to-door in the afflu- 
ent neighborhoods of Pacific Heights, Sea Cliff and St. Francis Wood, and in some 
of the City's more posh suburbs. Bundles were dropped off at theatres and galler- 
ies in other parts of town, and in some of the more obvious public places such as 
bookstores and coffeehouses. 

While we must mourn the death of any publication that attempts to "put more 
asses in seats," as theatre marketers are fond of saying, the pattern of distribution 
of the paper reflected the belief that the bulk of theatre and other arts audiences 
come from among the more affluent members of society - that only when people 
are past providing themselves and their households with basic living comforts, 
when they have ample "discretionary income," do they go out to consume culture. 

But is this true? Is the audience at a San Francisco theatre or gallery, or even at 
the opera, predominantly upper middle class and white? 

Louis Harris and Associates' 1987 AMERICANS AND THE ARTS survey shows 
that, when scientifically surveyed, the pattern of attendance at live arts is quite 
broad and multicultural. 

I've selected two income groups (representing total household income, not 
individuals) for comparison - of $15,001 to 25,000 (below middle), and $35,001 to 




INTERSECTION FOR THE ARTS presents 
JESUS BOY and BABBLER, two premiere works written and 
directed by John O'Keefe, co-founder of 
The Blake Street Hawkeyes. 

JESUS BOY exposes materialistic obsessions in a Silicon Valley think tank, 
while BABBLERcenters around the ramblings of a stroke victim. Together, 
the works share darkly humorous atmospheres of escalating violence. 

JESUS BOY and BABBLER open WEDNESDAY, MAY 4 
and run WEDNESDAYS THROUGH SATURDAYS AT 8PM 

THROUGH MAY 21 

Of O’Keefe, THE BAY GUARDIAN has said: "...a triple threat. . .a writer (who is) 
surprising, luminous, revelatory. . .an actor of great sensitivity and power. . .a director 
who can turn a bare stage into an emotional mine field." 



$50,000. The following table shows the percentage of Americans in each of 
those income groups who attended, once or more, various kinds of arts events. 
Type of Event: $15-25,000 $35-50.000 

Avant-garde music 1 6% 26% 

Classical Music 28% 37 % 

Opera-Musical Theatre 25% 36% 

Art Museums 57 % 61% 

Live Theatre 65% 78% 

So, while the table shows there indeed is a higher percentage of the higher 
income public going to the arts, it's not that much higher in most cases. There's 
a slightly smaller audience for all the arts in the under $15,000 households, and 
significant numbers in households with less than $7500 annual income (46% of 
people in households with under $15,000 income went to live theatre last year, 
compared to 65% of all households). The rate of going is lower, but the 
numbers of lower income people is so much greater - there are more of us. 

Racially, the survey had some surprises. Of the adult population, the follow- 
ing percentages attended these two types of performances: 



Avant-garde music: 
Blacks - 27% 
Whites -19% 
Hispanics - 16% 



Live Theatre: 
Whites - 66% 
Blacks - 58% 
Híspanles - 57% 



Not a really great difference in the live theatre rates of attendance, 
and a fairly high rate of avant-garde music-going among Black Ameri- 
cans. 

AMERICANS AND THE ARTS continues on page 2 




THE BACK PAGE of 

THE NEW DRAMATIC CHRONICLE 

Special Events of The Julian and others, and for the expression of opinions. The solicit thoughtful articles from those with whom we 
agree and will even consider thoughts, in the form of letters to the editor or other form - short essays, poems, drawings anythinq 
that will print. We reserve the right to edit, and to reply. y y 9 



GARAGE SALE 

This Friday the 13th 
See a new play 

(GARAGE SALE, by MICHAEL GRIEG) 

And get rid of your semi-useful goodies on the same evening 



T ¡o Julian Theatre 
staff conducted an 
exhaustive search for 
a new location before 
locating at New Col- 
lege s 777 Valencia 
Street Center. Here 
Director Richard Rei- 
neccius looks at a 
structure in Sonoma 
County, later rejec- 
ted by the Board of 
Directors . 




BUSY YEAR AT THE JULIAN’S NEW HOME - from p.1 

and dramatic modes, the lives of ordinary people in societies ruled 
by force and deprivation. 

Besides its own productions, many other performing arts and 
related events will be co-produced or presented by the Julian in the 
comfortable new space. 

In addition to the Christopher Beck & Company Spring production 
of COMMUNITY - performed with the Clubfoot Quintet (see story), 
upcoming events presented at 777 Valencia include The Left Coast 
Cabaret's monthly political cabaret evenings (next events Sundays 
May 22 and June 19 -- see story back page), and a periodic series 
we call EARLY STAGE, produced by dancer Theresa Dickinson for 
The Julian. On June 10, Artists Television Access (ATA) will present 
a media show-installation, and several other theatre and other 
performing arts events are in the works. 

To keep up with us, call us at 626-8986 to be on our mailing list, 
and keep reading THE NEW DRAMATIC CHRONICLE. 

IN THE FALL, WE BRING YOU THE TROJAN WAR 

In association with City College of SF and New College, The 
Julian Theatre will present one of the most ambitious projects of its 
23 years of work: An adaptation of the powerful Greek trio of 
dramas, THE ORESTEIA, by the great dramatist Aeschylus. 

These plays, which chronicle the events leading to the downfall of 
a great civilization due to the financial and psychological costs of 
war, have seldom been presented in America. The Julian is working 
on a surprising and modern language adaptation of the plays. 
Simultaneously, City College will be presenting Eugene O'NeilPs 
adaptation of part of the same story - MOURNING BECOMES 
ELECTRA. 

TO BE ON OUR MAILING LIST, CALL US AT 626-8986 OR MAIL 
US A CONTRIBUTION OF ANY SIZE - THE JULIAN THEATRE 777 
VALENCIA, SAN FRANCISCO 94110. 



GREAT PLACES TO EAT IN THE NORTH MISSION 

It s great to cook at home, but in The North Mission it's almost 
as inexpensive to eat out, and have great food. Some of our favor- 
ites: 



The Julian Theatre has moved — but, alas, we couldn't fit every- 
thing into our new home. We're offering the rest of it for sale, 
and we invite you to bring your throw-aways to sell as well 
To Benefit The Julian Theatre and Arts Programs of The Potrero 
Hill Neighborhood House 

WHEN: FRIDAY, MAY 13-7:30 PM 
WHERE: POTRERO HILL NEIGHBORHOOD HOUSE 
953 de Haro Street, San Francisco 

(Bring your contributions between 6pm & 8pm on Thursday, Ma< 
12 or 5pm & 7pm Friday the 13th. The resale value becomes a 
tax deductible donation to The Julian Theatre. 

BROWSE BEFORE (and during) THE PLAY - WHICH 
COMMENCES PROMPTLY AT 7:30 PM. 

BUY USED THEATRICAL PROPERTIES AND COSTUMES 
AFTER THE PLAY - ABOUT 8:30 TO 10 PM 
- DELICIOUS REFRESHMENTS WILL BE SERVED - 

ABOUT THE PLAY AND ITS ILLUSTRIOUS AUTHOR: 

Michael Grieg is author of the new novel THE AGE OF WONDER, set on San 
Francisco's Potrero Hill. In the novel, as in this new play GARAGE SALE Grieg 
exlores, with humor, poignancy, the break-up of a relationship. A couple is 
selling co-owned belongings after a six year marriage. 

A marvelous way to have fun and acquire new belongings. 
(Items not sold that evening will be sold during the following day 
at The Julian's booth at The Potrero Hill Neighborhood House 
semi-annual all-day Flea Market) 



.THE JULIAN THEATRE is a not-for-profit California corporation dedicated to 
producing plays of thought, wit, and contemporary significance. The 
1 987-88 season is funded in part by The City of San Francisco’s Hotel Tax 
Fund-Grants for the Arts Program, by The California Arts Council, a state 
agency, and by The Zellerbach Family Fund. Contributions and services 
donated to The Julian Theatre are tax-deductible. 



Members of The Freedom Song Network, The Julian Theatre 
and New College Performing Arts staff and students will 
present an evening of cabaret entertainmant on 

SUNDAY, MAY 22, 7:00 - 10:00 PM 

This time featuring 

JON FROMER, GALO PAZ, FAITH PETRIC, WELFARE 

CHEATS 
Poetry by 

CAROL TARLEN, ALFONSO TEXIDOR 
Musical Drama by 
TALESPINNERS THEATER 

-A BENEFIT FOR PLANT CLOSURES PROJECT - 



Mexican/Central & S. American: LA RONDALLA at 20th and Valencia is 
unusually decorated, has Mariachi music, and is open late. Plenty of others, 
especially on 16th Street and 24th Street, from Valencia East to Potrero. 
Japanese: ZAOH, on Mission near 1 1th, near where Van Ness and Mission cross. 
Chinese: Logna’s Kitchen, next to the Roxie Cinema on 16th St. For quick but 
good take-out. Canton on 1 4th Street just west of Church. Caribbean: The 
Welcome Mat, at 19th and Valencia. Mexican & other Latin American: New Central 
at 14th & S Van Ness, Cuba at 16th & S. Van Ness. Tepatitlan at 18th & Folsom, 
and Tortilla Fiats at 18th & Harrison. Italian: You cant beat Mama Vittoria's at 22nd 
at Valencia. OTHER: You can't beat the price ($1 .49 & up) for a full breakfast or 
lunch at Aunt Mary's Kitchen, across from the Roxie on 16th, or at The Blue Muse - 
either location: 22nd & Valencia or Gough & Hayes. Send us your favorite! 



PARKING: 

There's usually plenty of street parking near The Julian's new 
home, but there’s also a large PUBLIC PARKING LOT just East of 
Valencia Street, running from 21st Street to 22nd Street, near 
several of our favorite restaurants, too! 



Admission is by donation of five dollars, and refreshments are 
available Future Cabarets, which will be held on Sunday 
evenings monthly, will sometimes include "Open Mike" 
segments - If you have something to say or play, let us know. 



For further information on these Cabarets, or future ones, pick 
up literature at either campus of New College (Fell Street or 
777 Valencia), or call The Julian Theatre, 626-8986 or Left 
Coast Cabaret, 431-7980 to be put on our mailing list. 



Drama Books 

sinc« 1975 




134 Ninth St 
San Frandsco 
94103 



415-255-0604 






Bell’s Arts 



MAKING ART HISTORY: TWO BOOK REPORTS by Michael S. BcU 
Last month an unusual book was published by Eucalyptus Press at Mills 
College in Oakland, edited by Moira Roth, Trefethen Professor of Art 
History there. It is authored by twenty-eight women and contains 
interviews with as many leading female artists of this region. Many of 
these people live or have lived in the Mission. Included in the book are 
Yolanda Lopez, Pauline Oliveros and Las Mujeres Muralista. The book is 
called CONNECTING CONVERSATIONS, and was done under the direction of 
Kathy Walkup by a group of her students in the Book Art program at Mills 
College. 

The factors making this book important to us are numerous. It is a 
book by and about female artists. It is very significant exploration of the 
personal motives and characteristics and histories existing within some of 
this region’s best artists, known and not so well known. There are good 
photographs of the artists, and at long last an opportunity to read what 

RENE BUSINESS MACHINES 

Specializing in Sales id Service oj: 

IBM, SCM, OLYMPIAS 
ALL MAKES 
CALCULATORS 
TIME STAMPS 
FREE ESTIMATES 



2057 Mission Street 
431-6383 M-F 8:30 - 5 PM SAT 9 - 2 PM 




R 

B 

M 



NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 

.iey are doing with their energies and works in their own words. I found 
the whole project and product totally joyful and the most worthwhile art 
occurrence since Albright’s book on the art of this area was posthumously 
published. The book moves from artist to artist without homogenizing 
content beyond recognition. In terms of the selected artists it would be 
difficult to improve upon their choices, which include Jo Hanson, Eleanor 
Dickinson, and Marie Johnson-Calloway. I was personally delighted to see 
the inclusion of Sas Colby and Helene Aylon, Kathan Brown and Mary 
Lovelace O’Neal, artists whose contributions to our lives have been vast and 
whose footsteps often fall in the Mission, were also given valuable space as 
they well deserve. In every way, this book is a must for every artist and 
every seriously interested scholar/student of California art. It contains 
surprises that debunk stereotypes, and it gives sacred insights not found 
elsewhere. Now, one of the places this special book has probably already 
landed is the second "book" report you need to read and I need to write. 

The semi-edifice known as San Francisco Museum of Modern Art ought 
to have hung banners proclaiming the de Staebler exhibition instead of 
forcing everyone to turn their heads in disgust from the what’s-his-name 
banners out there. But, museums, like most big organizations have their 
hearts in the right place anyway and it is about the heart of SFMMA that 
we need to be reminded now apropos of books. 

Under the patient and skilled guidance of Genie Candau (write that 
name down), SFMMA has accumulated a huge and very refined collection of 
books, catalogues, periodicals and an artist archive of inestimable value to 
the history of American and Californian art. You might as well know from 
the start that you have to make an appointment to visit (just call 863-8800 
and ask for the Library). But, the reason I am reporting on this Library is 
because there arc documents in there of incredible importance to a 
thorough understanding of modern and contemporary art. Candau has made 
a unique and quiet effort over many years to collect in special interest 
areas. One of those areas deals with latino artists past and present. The 
catalogue library is immense, well organized and of great significance for 
anyone seeking detailed source material on just about any topic of interest 
in art-related humanities study. The library long ago ran out of room to 
do the job it wants to do, but Candau has kept everything under control in 
spite of space limitations. So if you are wondering what to do with your 
excess art book, or if you come into a collection of such publications by 
inheritance, or if you want to donate some money to a truly timeless cause 
that cuts across racial/ethnic barriers, think of Genie Candau and help us 
all. If it pertains to art, it needs to be offered to SFMMA’s library, at 
least that is how some of us see things. 

Soon SFMMA plans to move to larger and more prestigious quarters. 

One imagines that the library will be able to at least double the space it 

has now. For example, I estimate they have thirty four-drawer cabinets 
filled to overflowing with verticle files on California and U.S. artists in al- 
phabetical order! One such drawer holds approximately 150 files. That 
comes to 600 artists per cabinet and at least 18,000 individual artists in the 
archive! So much material on artists arrives each day that volunteers have 

been busy keeping up with the filing for at least the past fourteen years! 

It is not a "public" library, but if you want to 
support contemporary art in a city-based museum, then join SFMMA for no 
other reason. The museum will grow. One even hears talk of promises to 
rejoin the living art of our region when more space affords more room to 
present exhibits. That may not be worth waiting for. But, the library and 
in it the book called CONNECTING CONVERSATIONS will always be worth 
protection. It is a positive program, so let us keep it that way. 







furniture 

Books 

Clothing 




OPE?f 7 DAI'S 
/WRI 7-8 
SAMUW 10-630 



LOWEST PRICES^ IgífAission st. 

* DISCOUNT EXCEPT FOR MATTRESSES AND NEW ITEMS. 




tor.'»'*» KARAT! ftO 



The "Complete" Karate System 

The Incorporation ol old and new la the basis of 
a balanced, powerful, affective karate system. 



Professional Curatorial A Referral Services 
for California Artists A Groups 




VISUAL ART ACCESS 

140 PAGE #1 SAN FRANCISCO. CA 94102 
415 863-3784 



VALENCIA BOOKS 
RARE AND USED 

524 VALENCIA STREET 

OLDER OUT OF PRINT SCHOLARLY 

BOUGHT & SOLD 

863-6829 

OPEN EVERY DAY 
JOHN QUINN 







NORTH MISSION NEWS: 

— ' 

SUBSCRIBE NOW! Only $12.00 A Year i, 



Name. 



PLEASE PRINT > 



Addiess. 



Send Check o»r Money Order Today 
«N.M N> 3004 16th St. SFCA ^94103 



Zip. 








NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




ACE-HI 

SPANISH LANGUAGE 
HEALTH FOOD STORE 

There is an unusual and verry special store in the Mission District, 
possibly the only Spanish language health food store in San Francisco. 

This is a place that many people who live right in the Mission don’t know 
about. It is located between 24th and 25th, on Mission Street, across from 
the Mission Cultural Center. 



But this is not 
comfortable older 
in Margo’s store 
ACE-HI for the 
of found objects 
slightly different 
borhood that has a 



one of those situations that predicts the evolution of a 
neighborhood into something cute. The people who shop 
are mostly long term residents who have known about 
last ten years of its existence. The improvements consist 
that have been hanging around all along, just put to a 
use, and thereby keeping the distinct flavor of a neigh- 
predominately Latin American character. 



If your looking for a natural facial product, usually hard to find herbs from 
the American continents, vitamins, good summer sandals, or just to explore 
a store that is dedicated to holistic health alternatives, including a 
selection of Spanish language health and herb guides, then I do recommend 
that you check out ACE-HI. The hours arc 11:00 AM to 6:00 PM Monday 
through Saturday. The address and phone are: 2863 Mission - 647-6999 

SALUD! 



and filled with things involved in the care and feeding of a healthy person 
(bilingually). 



Young ’homeboys’ come in looking for "Weight Gain" powder. Latin 
American women of retirement age come in for herbs and special leas. 
Young natural looking "free people" come in to search through the wide 
variety of earth shoes. Every age and type of person hang around the 
juice bar, getting a ’vegi-dirnk’, of mixed carrot, beet, parsley, and celery 
juices. It is an amazing scene for the Mission, and has the echo of other 
neighborhoods where certain businesses have created an improved image on 
tired streets. 



When you first see the windows, it has the delightful look of a Latin 
American trading zone. Mexican Zarapes, shoulder bags from Guatemala, 
weavings from Peru, and Birkenstock sandals are mixed with Yerbas 
Mexicanas, Muscle Weight Gain, Indian Healing Clay Facial, Aloe Vera Juice, 
and a sign proclaiming "Frozen Yogurt Cones". 



Equally eclectic is the Clientel that walk expectantly through the door, 
their eyes filled with the colors of a store that proclaims itself the image 
of what a store in the Mission should look like. It is red and blue and 
Yellow and Natural wood. Many of the display cases are simple white pine 
boxes from local fruit and vegetable markets, tied together with sisal rope, 




BOOKSTORE 



Books for the Inquiring Mind 



CONTEMPORARY LITERATURE 
POLITICS & CHILDREN’S BOOKS 
LIBROS EN ESPAÑOL 

968 VALENCIA STREET 
SAN FRANCISCO, CA 941 10 
(415) 282-9246 



2172 Mission Si 
(between 1 7th & 18th St.) 
San Francisco. CA 94110 
Te! 863-3700 



% 



m 

MING S GARDEN RESTAURANT 

OPEN HOURS 11:00 am - 8:30 pm Closed Sunday 
FOOD TO TAKE OUT 

FKESH SEA FOOD DAILY - SPECIALTY 
KOREAN CHICKEN WITH WINE OR BEER 



I 






ABBY ABINANTI 

Attorney at Law 

A sole practitioner emphasizing powers of attorney; 
wills; agreements to purchase real property; agreements 
to purchase and manage businesses; contracts; small 
business advice; adoptions; relationship agreements. 
Over ten years experience in Indian Law. Civil 
litigation expertise in all above areas plus employment 
discrimination and labor experience. 

3163 Mission Street. c jn Francisco. CA 941 10 (415) 285-8010 



CITY LOCKSMITHS 



i*L It. 



2338 Clement St. 
387-8777 




San Francisco 



3388 24th St. 
641-8555 



IF 


Featuring the largest selection of 
Marxist-Leninist literature 
in Northern California 


=1 


Mon -Sat 10 AM-6 PM 
Gift Certificates 
We Special Order Books 
Libros en Español 


t/^BOOK 


518 Valencia Street 


CENTER 


San Francisco, California 
415-626-2924 


It 


RECORDS ■ POSTERS ■ POETRY ■ 
PERIODICALS ■ CALENDARS ■ 
CARDS ■ CHILDREN'S BOOKS 


J 



MAELSTROM 



san 



irán 



i s 



572 Valencia Street • 863 • 9933 
old hooks -new art 



mon-sot n - 6 sun 




„ ó 

Small Press 

Traffic 



^3599 - 24th Street, San Francisco, California 94110 
A NEIGHBORHOOD BOOK STORE 
WILLIAM BURROUGHS • CATHY ACKER • 

H.D.» JOHN CAGE • WANDA COLEMAN • 

BOB KAUFMAN » AND THOUSANDS MORF.I 



Prices Paid 

For Good Used Books 




Ivan St. John 


Hal Hughes 


íP(l¿[o±o/2(l£.l± 


<zSton£ 


BOOK RETAILERS 




3814 - 24th Street 


Mon. Sat. 11 A. -8 P 


SAN FRANCISCO. CA 94114 3894 


Sun. Noon 6 P 


1415) 647 2882 





DUMONT LIQUORS 



3090 1 6 T H ST. SAN FRANCISCO 

i-AC.». — » THU w — I I w.r*\ 



TEL 



431-0944 



empAV and 5ATUÍ.P- 



3a.h - za.wT 



3un 9a.«- & r ** 



LIQUOR WINE BEER GROCERIE COFFEE 


OW RED T50mL 
SMIRNOFF lit 
BACARDI LIT. 
B&B Lit 

BAJLfYS Lir. 
CUERVO GOLD ur 


999 

71? 

1622 

1 

IÓÜ 


ALMADEN 15 UT 
MOUTON CADET 
B V. 62 
LE Domaine 
CODORN lU 64 
J.ROGET CHAMP 


■d 99 

2I« 

222 

323 

12 ? 


WEINEKEN \2fK 
TCCATE 6 PK 
DOS EQUIS 6 PK 
Black label m 
CORONA 6 PK 
GUINNESS SPK 


799 

All 

1% 

482 


CAW SUGAR 5LB5 
nazola oil 1 Gall 
JUMBO EGGS 

pepsi Tirr. 

CAT UTTER 15 IAS 
MAWA1MA RICE $13 


293 

7*3 

99* 

1C? 

3*2 

7S2 


WHW TH‘S AD 
FRENCH ROAST 
COLOMBIA 
SUMATRA 
AMARE TI& 
RAzanvr C&ME 

moka Java 






AEE you ljook'HG f=&e. prices ? 

U/1//3T T>Q ASTGGHAV7S EAT o/V SAAC.E ? 



iva r JUA y MOCff ¿ 

SA*£>iV/C*ES F&OM DU/~10r*/Tj DSt-' 



525 

452 

5^ 





NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 



l 



AND NOW BACK TO THE PICTURE 



A walk down Valencia Street from Market to Army is always going to 
be filled with surprises. This 14 block stretch of San Francisco seems to 
have become the proving ground for first time business operators, many of 
whom fail to last out the back breaking initial twelve months, so Valencia 
St. is perpetually awash in Grand Opening and Going Out Of Business signs. 
Passing through that first year barrier this month is Back To The Picture, 
a custom framing shop and gallery at 920 Valencia. 

Back To The Picture is the result of years of hard work and savings 
by 30 year old owner-operator Servio Gomez. Born in the Chanlatanengo 
District of El Salvador, Servio, a former seminary student, immigrated to 
the Los Angeles area in 1978, to escape the escalating war in his home 
country. He found employment and training in Encino, California where he 
spent the next six years learning the art and economics of custom framing 
before moving to San Francisco in 1984. 

Servio found the job market in the Bay Area less than optimal and 
spent a few discouraging months as a busboy at a financial district eatery 
before getting a job in his field. He worked for the next 3 years in a 
number of San Francisco framing shops until he could save and borrow 
enough money to open Back To The Picture on May 25, 1987. 

Back To The Picture, besides custom framing, offers customers the 
opportunity to use the tools, materials and work space to frame their own 
pictures at considerable savings. The gallery aspect of the business which 
offers quality framed prints and original works is often plagued by too 
much success. "Sometimes we’ll have a complete exhibit with all the walls 
covered. I’ll have a sale and the next day we’ve got only two or three 
pictures left," says Servio. T hope by next year to have shows represent- 
ing the works of a number of local artists with receptions, press coverage 
and everything that makes for a quality gallery, but right now the business 
aspect of things keeps me and my two employees just moving too fast to 
put it together." 

Servio also has several things to say about the Valencia St. business 
district and its ups and downs. He pointed out that while Valencia has less 
overall foot traffic than Mission St., the feel of the street is more relaxed 
than the more congested and hectic atmosphere on Mission. 'This means 
less walk-in business but it makes it easier for me to provide customers 
with a friendly atmosphere, which besides price, is the main reason people 
come back to my place." He feels Valencia St. rents which were at one 
time fairly inexpensive have become competitive with other areas of the 
city, forcing many businesses out. 

Servio gives no small amount of credit for his success to the very 



tangible support, by virtue of customer referrals, he has received from local 
businesses, especially La Raza Graphics a few doors down the street and 
Galleria De La Raza at 24th and Bryant. He says that such referrals and, 
pay attention now, his ad in the North Mission News(!) have been the two 
most effective means of getting new customers. He adds that, The primary 
thing I’m doing myself is offering people a price at least 20% lower than 
they’d get for the same quality work anywhere else. That’s cut down on 
profits but it’s also made it possible for me to establish the business. The 
satisfaction for me doesn’t come from making alot of money but from being 
involved in something creative and being my own boss. I’d like to see Back 
To The Picture become a first rate gallery with a city wide reputation; 

that’s what I’m trying to do." 

For details of Back To The Picture’s sale which will feature a raffle 
for framed Diego Rivera prints drop by 920 Valencia or give Servio a call 
at 826-2321. Happy Anniversary, Back To The Picture. 

Bill Burn 



IÉÉÉ 

lilll 

lii^ 





SERVIO GOMEZ 




with 



bleach. 



Bleach kills the AIDS virus that gets into used needles, 
them with bleoch will help protect you from getting AIDS. It will 
not damage the needle Do not shoot or drink the bleoch. 

BLEACH 



■4 



3 



X 



X 



WATER 



2 {(ref» Ht/w 3 (J 



4 






4 



X 



SMtytirui 6 7 f 6 



8 fin*, 



Learn how. 
Call 863-AIDS 




LOS PORTALES NIGHT CLUB 

3087 16TH STREET 

CINCO DE MAYO CELEBRATION 
SUNDAY, MAY 8, 1988 

RONNIE SALAZAR 

OPEN 3 PM TILL 2 AM 
AFTER HOURS FRI AND SAT 
DANCING TILL 4 AM 
HAPPY HOUR DAILY 3 PM - 8 PM 









NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 



FIAEHOU 



3160 16th Street San Francisco 621-161 




MAY 



06 

07 

08 

09 

10 
11 
12 

13 

14 

15 

16 

17 

18 

19 

20 
21 
22 

23 

24 

25 

26 

27 

28 

29 

30 

31 



KOTOJA * * * KOTOJA * • * KOTOJA 10:00 

Dance at the ATOMIC CAFE w/ 930 

L/Music 4 PM DJ’s DOC MARTIN & BLACKSTONE 9:30 
An evening with Liz 9:30 

SONIC SURGERY w/ SHEA & ESSEN...hype-hop 9:30 
Reggae Calendar International DJ Dancing + video 9:30 
Post-Modern Mink Mix w/ DJ MINK 9:30 

BOHEMIAN LUV JONES * * * WORRY BEADSM 10:00 
Dance at the ATOMIC CAFE w/ 9;30 

L/Music 4 PM DJ’s DOC MARTIN & BLACKSTONE 9:30 
An evening with Liz 9:30 

SONIC SURGERY w / SHEA & ESSEN...hype-hop 9:30 

Reggae Calendar International DJ Dancing + video 9:30 
Post-Modern Mink Mix w/ DJ MINK 9:30 

HOUSECOAT PROJECT * BIG BIG * BONEYARD 10 00 
Dance at the ATOMIC CAFE w/ 9:30 

L/MUSIC 4 PM DJ’s DOC MARTIN & BLACKSTONE 9:30 
An evening with Liz 

SONIC SURGERY w/ SHEA & ESSEN..hype-hop 
Reggae International DJ Dancing + video 
Post-Modern Mink Mix w/ DJ MINK 
SHIVA DANCING 
Dance at the ATOMIC CAFE w/ 

L/MUSIC 4 PM DJ’s DOC MARTIN & BLACKSTONE9:30 
An evening with Liz 9:30 

SONIC SURGERY w/ SHEA & ESSEN..hype-hop 9:30 



$ 6.00 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

$5.00 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

$5.00 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

$4.00 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 

FREE 






Calendar of Events 

2-17 Poster & Papers of the Anstendig Institute. City Hall, first floor the 
Van Ness side. 

4-13 Stories of Health and Illness. Eye Gallery, 1151 Mission Street, S.F. 

Exhibition of photos of health and illness care. Call 431-6911. 

6-29 Kennedy’s Children by Robert Patrick. Climate Gallery at 252 9th 
Street at Folsom. Curtain time 8 PM. Tickets $10. Reservations 
(415) 626-9196. 

6-7; & 13-14 Jazz. Paul McCandless Trio & David Widelock Trio. New 
Performance Gallery, 3153 17th Street (btwn South Van Ness & Shot- 
well). $10 at door. (863-9834 for reservations) 8 PM. Wheelchair 
accessible. 

Dick Dines Out at the Third Wave Theatre. 3316 24th Street at 
Mission. 8 PM & 10 PM. Advance tickets 465-0792. 

The Last Empire + Women Under Siege + The War Game. Imperial 

Apocalypse. ATA, 992 Valencia at 2 1st. 8:30 PM 

9-30 Bay Area Theatresports performances. Members of Faultline, Fratelli 
Bologna, Riot Squad and many more. 8 PM. New Performance 
Gallery, 3153 17th St. $5, 824-3220 for reservation s. 

9th; 16th & 23rd "Leninism and Today’s World" Political activist Jack 
Kurzweil. 7:30 PM. The Book Center, 518 Valencia Street. 863-6968. 

10 Barbara Wilson novelist will read her newest book Miss Venezuela 
7:30. Free. Everyone welcome. Old Wives Tales, 1009 Valencia St. 

12th & 19th "Marxism for Beginners’ classes on May 12 & 19 at 7:30 PM 
The Book Center, 518 Valencia Street. $10 for entire series. Info 
863-6968 or 526-2926. 



07 



07 





THE TORE THEATER 

2780 24di ST. (HTW. BRYANT 6» POTKIIKO) S.F S 282-0316 



TUE-TUE 



MAY 



17 - 24 . 

Theatrical Premiere! 



). 









DREAMS: 

PICKING UP 

THE PIECES 

2:00, 8:00 (matinees daily) 

Dir. Victor Schonfeld Great Britain 1987 

This fas» paced, provocative portrait of modern Israel fleshes 
out the faces behind the sensational headline* Using ex- 
tensive interviews, footage of recent protests within Israel, 
extracts from theater, popular protest songs and old drama- 
tired documentaries, the film courageously confronts the 
dilemmas and painful questions faced in this region As di- 
rector Schonfeld describes his film. 'Shattered Dreams focuses 
on the destruction of Israel's dreams of building a progressive, 
egalitarian society and on the current Israeli struggles for 
social renewal After chastening events, such as the Leba 
non W ,r and the violent conflict in the occupied territories 
where do .heir feelings lead them’* 

This new film will enlighten the indifferent as well as the 
*ble viewer to the struggles and turmoil within 
contemporary Israel 

“If ,hr , rc wa * rvcr * dlK umentarv that should Ik- required 
viewing for everyone concerned with the fate of the Middle 
Last it is Shattered Dreams Puking Up the Pieces ' Judy Stone 
San Francisco Chronicle ( 1 70m) 

Admission S5 evening. $4 matinee (SI off with card). 
> * seniors 



12th- 15th; and 19th-22nd Kulintang Arts. Traditional music and dance of 
the southern Philippines. Sat. 8:30 PM, Sun. 7 PM. 552-8980 
New Performance Gallery, 3153 17th St. 

12th; 13th & 14th. Footwork presents 1988 Spring Series. The Ellen 
Bromberg Ensemble, Martin Kravitz & Terence Stark Mythos. 3221 22nd 
St. 8:30 PM 

12 Etel Adnan reads from Journey to Ml Tamalpaic 7 : 30 . Free. 



13th 



13 



13 



14 



14 



14 



14 



15 



15 



15 



16 



17 



18 



18 



18 



Everyone welcome. Old Wives Tales, 1009 Valencia. 

& 14th. Motion Arts Company features dance theatre. 8 PM. In 
Flight Studios, 333 Dolores Street. Tickets: $8. Reservation/info: 

863-4758. 

Legal Clime for Gay and Lesbian Seniors. 10-12 noon. By appoint- 
ment only. Info 626-7000. 1853 Market St. 

Motion Arts Company, classical & modern traditions. In Flight 
Studios, 333 Dolores, 16th St. 8 PM Curtain. $8 Tickets. 861-3324. 

Beuys Bio + Nekes: Ulysses. 8:30. $4. ATA, 992 Valencia. 

Song of the Golden Dragon, Chinese Cindrella story performed by Bay 
Area Youth Opera & Voices/SF Opera Ensemble. Community Music 
Center, 544 Capp St. $5. 8 PM. 

Legal Advice and Referral Clinic 10 AM - 1 PM. Public Library 
Larkin & McAllister St. 

AIDS Forum 1:30 - 3 PM. Metropolitan Community Church, 150 
Eureka. Lawyers discuss discrimination, wills and power of attorney. 

Flea Market at Neighborhood House Potrero HUI Neighborhood House 
953 De Haro St. 10 AM - 4 PM. 

Extend your San Francisco Harvest Gardening workshop 10 - 12 PM. 
Candlestick Park Community Center & Community Garden. Free to 
SLUG member. $5 non-members. 468-0110. 

Third Rail Benefit features poets. 2 PM. 766 Valencia St. $4 626- 

ARTS. 

Song of the Golden Dragon, Bay Area Youth Opera & Voices/SF Opera 
Ensemble. Community Music Center, 544 Capp St. $5. 4 PM. 

Flute and Piano Duo Recital features works by Bach, Gauber. Jolivet, 
Kuhlau, and Prokofiev. Community Music Center, 544 Capp St. 8 PM. 
Bookparty for Dwarf Bamboo nominated for a Bay Area Book Re- 
viewer’s. 7:30 PM. Modern Times Book, 968 Valencia. 

Miguel MarmoL Don’t miss this rare opportunity to meet with a 

prominent mover and shaker in the history of the Americas. Free. 
Modern Times Books, 968 Valencia. 7:361^. 

Benefit for EPOCA (Environmental Project on Central America) Music 
by Montuno Street, speaker David Brower, new video and other info. 

8 PM $3-6. Komotion, 2779 16th St at Folsom. 

A Celebration of Feminist and Lesbian Culture A slide presentation of 
the photography of Lynda Koolish. 7:30 PM Modern times Book, 968 
Valencia. 

Martin Kravitz. Dance "Odd Jobs at Unusual Hours". 8:30 PM 

Footwork Studios, 3321 22nd St. 



NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 



19th-22nd. Unbound Spirit, resident dance company of the Asian American 
Dance Collective, premiering Alonzo King. Sat. 8:30 PM. Sun 7 PM. 
New Performance Gallery, 3153 17th St. 

Sarah Schulman celebrates the publication of her new novel After 
Dolores. 7:30. Free. Everyone welcome. Old Wives Tales, 1009 
Valencia. 

Ariel Contemporary Vocal Ensemble & Composers Chamber Players. 
8:30 PM. $10 adults, $5 seniors & students. Community Music Center, 
544 Capp St. 

Phil Deal Performance Gallery presents "City of Light". 8:30 PM on 
Fri. & Sal. 401 Alabama, 17lh St. 552-2604 for reservations. $7, $5 
students and seniors. 

Walking Tour of the Mission District 1:30 PM - 3 PM. $3 general, 
$1 students & seniors. No reservations necessary. 348 Precita Ave. 

Komotion Anniversary Bash + Fundraiser. $5. 7:30 PM. Dinner + 

show follows. Komotion 2779 16th St. 

21st-22nd. Fifth Annual Himalayan Fair Himalayan food. Berkeley Live 
Oak Park. 10 AM - 5:30 PM. $2 donation. 

Found-Footage Festival $4. 8:30 Saturday. ATA, 992 Valencia at 21st. 
Renaissance Double Concerto w/ The Brass Menagerie & The Wykeham 
Singers. $5. 2 PM. Community Music Center, 544 Capp St. 

Benefit for Plant Closures Project Music, poetry, and more. Left 
Coast Cabaret, New College, 777 Valencia near 18th St. 7 PM. $5. 

Sexual History Authors John D’Emilio & Estelle B. Freedman. Free. 
7:30 PM. Modern Times Books, 968 Valencia. 

Celebrate w/ Sheila Ballantyne Reading and Bookparty. Free. 7:30 
PM. Modern Times Books, 968 Valencia. 

Poetry + Performance Series 8 PM. $3. Komotion, 2779 16th St. 

Biting the Hand That Leads Us: Humor and Social Change. 824-1174 
or 282-3078. 8 PM. ATA, 992 Valencia St. $1. 

25th-28th. Terence Stark Mythos presents PER-SE-PHO-NI. Dreamlike 
evocation of the death and rebirth of Persephone. 8:30. $8. 824- 

5044. 3221 22nd St. 

Videos and Films by Leslie Singer. 8 PM. $3. Artist’s Television 
Access (ATA), 992 Valencia St. 824-3890. 

Slide Lecture $3. $2 Friends of the Eye. Combinging the arts and 

sciences: the visual media research project. Eye Gallery, 1151 

Mission. 7:30 PM, 

Women in Post-Mao China Free. 7:30 PM. Modern Times Book, 968 
Valencia. 

Teo’s Final Spin (bullet dancing in times of war) 8 PM. Mission 
Cultural Center, 2868 Mission St. $8. Group rates available. 

Jost: Angel City + New Student Works 8:30. $4. ATA, 992 Valencia. 

Candle Magic: workshop provides introduction to theory, practice and 

ethics of operative magic. 12:30 - 4 PM. Cerridwen’s Touch, 803 
Valencia St. 647-3819. 

Women’s Gathering for Older Lesbians (60 + ) and friends. Music, 
dancing, games, pool table, etc. Refreshments. 3-6 PM. Francis of 
Assisi, 145 Guerrero St. Bring refreshments to share. Free. 626-7000 



19 



20 



20 



21 



21 



21 

22 

22 

22 

24 

25 
25 




26 



26 



26 

28 

28 

29 



29 



7 ] P£kth/6 77 

m o?eis4 m 

a 8WeC! a 

5. F Premiere! 1 week only! 

Friday, May 6 -Thurs, May 12 
at 6, 8 & 10 (5at, 5un. mats at 2 & 4) 



>7# > y /Jf II! i Zjl 



1117 látlt (at ttolancla) 





THE 

WELCOME 

MAT 

Caribbean Cuisine 
Healthfully Prepared 

807 VALENCIA ST. 

Complimentary ginger beer, sorrel 
or other house beverage with meal 
with this ad. 

647-3663 





AFTERHOURS 
DANCE PARTY 

SATURDAY AND SUNDAY 
MAY 28TH AND 29TH 



ESTA NOCM 



San Francisco’s First Gay Latino Bar 

861-5757 

SUNDAY MAY 29TH 
MEMORIAL DAY SHOW 






NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




THAT 

OLD TIME 

RELIGION 

by Fuminori Salo 





These photos taken by North Mission News staff photographer 
Fuminori Sato capture only a part of the emotional electricity that is the 
hallmark of the Assembly of Pentecostal Church of Jesus Christ Inc. located 
at 875 Valencia Street. Held together by strong tenets of Pentecostal 
Protestantism (not unlike those of Pentecostal Presidential long shot Pat 
Robertson.) The 125 member congregation has been led by Rev. Jorge Ortiz 
for the past 10 years. The church itself originally on Alabama St. was 
established in 1974. The Assembly’s most visible presence in the Mission is 
through its street preachers who are often a prominent part of the 16th St. 
and 24th St. Bart Plazas. Adult services are held Wednesdays at 6:30 pm, 
Children’s services Thursdays at 6:30 pm, Ladies Services Fridays at 6:30^ 
Young Peoples services Saturdays at 6:30 pm, Sunday School 10 am Sunday 
and Sunday Services 6 • 10 pm. Phone 282-3761. For more information. 









NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 



r 



V¡* 



\ 

I vl V 



I 

[ 



l/l/e will help you 
asser t your legal 
rlaht to live in 
'cent and safe 
housing. 

WEST BAY LAW COLLECTIVE 
2017 Mission Street, Suite 300 
San Francisco, California 94110 

621-0438 



2^4 

I 



Dolores Street Clay Studio 
333 Dolores Street 
San francisco, CA 94110 
(41 5) 43 I -6296 

Studio Classes 
for 

Adults &. Children 




Natural Spritzers 863-0620 ASTRIA 8 $13.56 

Juice 2.99/6paC COQ 10 $13.60/60 







SAN FRANCISCO ^REE EATS 

April 1, 1988 


CHART 








NAME. LOCATION. PHONE NUMBER 


SUNDAY 


MONDAY 


TUESDAY 


WEDNESDAY 


THURSDAY 


FRIDAY 


SATURDAY 


NOTES 


ALL SAINTS’ EPISCOPAL CHURCH 
1350 Waller St. (near Masonic) 


Bag lunch 
1:001:30pm 












Brunch 

10:30-11 :00am 




GLIDE MEMORIAL CHURCH 
330 Ellis St. (at Taylor) 
441-6501 


8:00-9:ooam 

12:00-I:00pm 


8:00-9:ooam 

12:00-l:00pm 

4:00-5:30pm 


8:009:00am 
12:00-1 :oopm 
4:00-5:30pm 


8:oo-9:ooam 
12:00-1 :00pm 

4:00-5:30pm 


8:oo-9:ooam 

I2:00-I:00pm 

4:005:30pm 


8:oo-9:ooam 
12:00-1 :00pm 
4:00-5:30pm 


8: 00-9: OOam 

12:00-1 :00pm 


Bag dinners to go 
provided after lunch on 
Sunday and Saturday. 


HAIGHT- ASHBURY FOOD PROGRAM 
<525 Waller St. (near Belvedere) 
566-0366 






Lunch 

12:00-1 :00pm 


Lunch 

12:00 1 :00pm 


Lunch 

l2:oo-i:oopm 


Lunch 

i2:oo-l:oopm 




VEGETARIAN alternative. 
Volunteers welcome at 
8:00am. 


MARTIN DE PORRES 

225 Potrero St. (near 16th St.) 

5520240 


Brunch 

9:0010:30am 


6 : 00 - 7 : 30 am 


6:00-7:30am 
1 2:00 3:00pm 


6:00 7:30am 
!2:00-3:00pm 


6:007:30am 

l2:00-3:oopm 


6:00-7:30am 

l2:00-3:00pm 


Lunch 

!2:00-3:oopm 


Showers available 
l ues & Thurs 9-1 lam. 


NEIGHBORHOOD BAPTIST CHURCH 
608 Hayes St. (near Laguna) 

621-8748 














Lunch every 
last Saturday 
!2:oo-2:oopm 




NEIGHBORHOOD PALS OF THE BAY AREA 
at Pleasan» Hill Missionary Baptist Church 
2535 24th St. (near Utah) 285-2032 












Dinner 

6:00-9:00pm 






ONE MIND TEMPLE 

35 1 Dlvlsadero St. (near Oak) 

62 I- 4 Q 54 


Lunch 

3 : 30 - 4 ; 30 pm 


Lunch 

2:303:30pm 












VEGETARIAN 

Always beans, brown rice, 

vegles, salad and fruit. 


OUR LADY OF GUADALUPE MINISÍRY 
Van at McAllister & Leavenworth, 
behind United Nations Plaza fountain 


Breakfast 

3:30-6:30am 


Breakfast 
3:30 -6:30am 


Breakfast 

3:30-6:30am 


Breakfast 

3:30-6:30am 


Breakfast 

3:30-6:30am 


Breakfast 

3:30-6:30am 


Breakfast 
3: 30-6 :30am 


VEGETARIAN 
Broth and sandwiches. 


PRIMERA IGLESIA BAUTISTA DEL SUR 
976 South Van Ness St. (near 21st St.) 
6471000 


Breakfast 
every first Sun. 
8:oo-9:30am 














A full breakfast. 


ST. ANTHONY’S DINING ROOM 
45 Jones St. (near Golden Gate) 
552-3838 


Lunch 

loam-l2:3opm 


Lunch 

ioam-!2:30pm 


Lunch 

ioam-i2:30pm 


Lunch 

ioam-i2:3opm 


Lunch 

ioam-!2:3opm 


Lunch 

I0am-I2:30pm 


Lunch 

ioam-i2:3opm 


Showers, laundry, haircuts 
fit other services available. 
Call 552-3838 ext. 142. 


ST. PETER & PAUL CATHOLIC CHURCH 
666 Filbert St. (off Washington Sq.) 


4:00-5:00pm 


4:oo-5:oopm 


4:oo-5:oopm 


4:00-5:00pm 


4:005:00pm 


4:oo-5:oopm 


4:oo-5:oopm 


"A simple sandwich for 
people of North Beach.” 


SAN FRANCISCO GOSPEL MISSION 
219 6th St. (near Howard) 

495-7366 


Serious Bible students can request to attend the 5:15pm sermon and then eat at 6:15pm. Others start lining up at 
5:00pm for meal tickets. The first 53 tickets are Tor the mandatory hour-long sermon at 7:00pm with an 8:00pm 
bag dinner to go. The remaining tickets are for the 8:00pm service and 9:00pm bag dinner to go. | 




STREET HOPE 

Mini-park on Howard & Langton 
(near 7th St.) 685-4673 


Dinner 

2:oo-4:oopm' 














Soup and sandwiches. 


THIRD BAPTIST CHURCH 
1399 McAllister St. (near Pierce) 
923-0259 










Lunch 

I:00-2:00pm 






Meat entree, vegetables, 
salad and dessert. 


UNITED COUNCIL OF HUMAN SERVICES 
Van on NW corner of 6th & Folsom 
822-5067 














Dinner 

3 - .oo-6:oopm 


Meat entree with 
vegetables. 


UNIVERSAL LIFE CHURCH & MISSION 
1339 Mission St. (near 10th St.) 

864-1873 


Service 10am 
& 7:30pm 


Coffee & donut 
9am-noon 


Coffee fit donut 
9am-noon 


Coffee fit donut 
9am-noon 


Coffee fit donut 
9am-noon 


Coffee fit donut 
9am-noon 
Service 7:30pm 


Sunday breakfast after mandatory i hour 
service. Sunday fit Friday dinner after 
mandatory 1$ hour service. 



l 




20 



NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




RECOl .LF.rnONS OF THE PAST 



THE O’FARRELL PLAN 



The history of Market Street became a major interest in my life when, 
in the twenties, I started selling newspapers, through the next thirty years 
I worked a number of stands in the city but the ones I liked best were on 
Market Street, from the location in front of the 98 Club, where the Hyatt 
Regency is now, to Larkin and Market at the time of the opening of the 
Fox Theater, I was in touch with many events. The stand across from the 
beginning of Grant Avenue, where Schwabacher-Frey used to be, was the 
center of action in the area, but, the one at First and Market Streets, in 
front of the Cunard Building, was on a most historical corner. In 1847 
when Jasper O’Farrell laid out the plan of streets in San Francisco, he 
started from the shoreline of Yerba Buena Cove. The intersection of 
Market, BAttery, and First Streets has a large brass plaque imbedded in the 
brick sidewalk, near the Donahue Monument, showing the extent of the 
one-time shoreline of the Cove. This is where Market Street started on its 
diagonal course to Mission Dolores Valley (Church and Market Streets now), 
where the farms and dairies were located. 

At the beginning of 1847 there were only about 400 people living here, 
by the end of that year the population had soared to some 700 souls. The 
great westward movement of Americans was now reaching the coast of 
California. An early Mormon party arrived here then, and went on to 



LOOKING FOR A JOB 

apply at 

Mission Hiring Hall 

San Francisco Residents only 
2017 Mission Street (Near 16th) 
8:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. 
Monday through Friday 
Excellent Opportunities! 
No Fee Required 
Must have previous work 

experience and be unemoloyed 

Now Recruiting foi 
Nontraditional Jobs for Women 



f Escola 
ár Nova 
* de 

Samba 



Celebrate the Spirit ot 
CARNAVAL 




DANCE 
and PERCUSSION 
classes 

n 

San Francisco 

337-8318 



figure, importantly, in the birth of this city. Quite a few people came here 
by sea; one of whom was Jasper O’Farrell. An Irishman, in the employ of 
the British government as an expert surveyor, O’Farrell had been working 
in Chile, and upon his arrival in California in 1843 he was hired by the 
Mexican government to survey some controversial land grants in the Marin 
area. For ever 20 acres of land he surveyed he was paid with one acre, 
and in this he developed a fine rancho at San Rafael, where he made his 
home. In the beginning of the take-over of California from Mexico, by 
Americans, in 1846, Stephen Kearny, the first military governor, appointed 
lieutenant Washington Al. BArtlett of the Navy, to be the first American 
alcade of the pueblo of Yerba Buena (San Francisco). An alcade acted as 
sort of mayor-judge in those days. Bartlett, like other pioneers of the 
time, was a man of great vision. He saw that this the obvious location of 
an important sea coast city, so he hired O’FarreU to improve and expand 
on an earlier rough survey that had been made in 1839 by a Swiss seaman, 
Jean Vioget. Vioget had been asked to make a plat, so he laid out a grid 

of streets on paper, bounded by what is now as Pacific and California with 

Montgomery on the shore of the cove and to the west, Dupont (Grant 
Avenue). His tools were primitive, so his results were inaccurate, causing 
problems with property lines, becoming, by 1846, very evident. O’Farrell 
stepped in, corrected Vioget, and, on paper,, laid out a large plat of streets 

on the grid pattern, disregarding the hills and creating somewhat of a stir, 

but the grid had been found to be the most workable plan. He also used it 
in platting Benicia and the town of Sonoma. The extremities he set out 
here, Leavenworth Street on the west and Bay to the north, were compara- 
tively simple to what he had to deal with on the eastern limits. Here he 
designed whole city blocks under the shallow water of the cove, which were 
subdivided into "water lots" and by order of the governor were offered for 
sale almost immediately, because, land sales were about the only source of 
income for the little city. 

On the south side of his plat he devised a new system, making the 
blocks larger and the streets much wider. An advocate of wide streets, he 
made Market 120 feet wide, deciding that this was, indeed, going to be the 
main street of the city. His vision nearly got him lynched; forewarned he 
left town for a while to let matters cool. His argument was that he 
mapped the street to follow a well-used road that ran south from Ports- 
mouth Square, along where Kearny Street ran, and then turned southwest to 
go to Mission Valley. Although almost none of the property affected was 




BREAKFAST • LUNCH • DINNER 
ESPRESSO • SOUPS • SALADS • 
GRILL SANDWICHES • CHINESE FOOD 
JUST DESSERTS • BEER & WINE 
3296 — 22ND/VALENCIA • SF 
OPEN 7 DAYS • 8 2 4-8 0 80 



MON 8 AM - 3 PM, TUES-FRI 8 AM - 10 PM 
SAT-SUN 9 AM - 10 PM 



EL AMIGO SINGLES CLUB 



A WONDERFUL 
LATIN EXPERIENCE 




We ’if Wash & Fold IT 

55t $4.50 minimum 
MISSION ST. COIN LAUNDRY 
2267 Mission 

between 18th & 19th 




Open 8am-8pm 
Sat. open 9:30 

Dry Cleaning 
Í $2 off 
with $10 
order 



FOR WOMEN 
AND MEN 

FIND THE MAN OR WOMAN OF YOUR DREAMS 
AN EXCLUSIVE SOCIAL CLUB FOR EVERYBODY 

CALL NOW 626-3841/334-8543 



>ANNZA/v/t^ 

USED BOOKS 

AND RECORDS 

BUY OR TRADE 



3686 20th Street (at Guerrero) 
San Francisco, CA 648-0957 





improved, the very width of the proposed street caused property owners to 
feel cheated. They didn’t realize that in a few short years their frontages 
would be so valuable. Of course, the gold rush hastened the inevitable. 
Selim Woodworth, son of Samuel Woodworth author of the poem "The Old 
Oaken Bucket", had just purchased, from the Alcade, the area bounded by 
what is now Second, Jessie, New Montgomery, and Market Streets for $30. 
He and his brother were having difficulty keeping squatters off the 
property and he didn’t need O’Farrell’s slicing off the north side of it. 
The next year he formed and led a group to go up to the mountains and 
get what was left of the Donner party out of there. During that time his 
brother, left alone, had to pitch a tent on the Market Street property and 
live there to protect Woodworth’s rights. 

Eventually, common sense prevailed and O’Farrell was proven to be 
right. This boulevard, with its large intersections and beautiful buildings is 
an attraction for resident and visitor alike. It is unique in the respect that 
it is the only "Main" street that didn’t just evolve, but was planned, 
surveyed, and graded to be a "Main" street, and actually became one. In 
order to appreciate O’Farrell’s achievement, one should go to the top of 
Twin Peaks and admire this wide swathe cutting through a busy downtown. 
Afterward, one can descent to Castro Street and board a #8 trolley bus and 
ride all the way down this broad artery, observing the people going about 
their various activities, as the bus passes through the different, and unique 
"Districts" of outer Market Street and downtown San Francisco. Other 
natives, like myself, agree that; you never tire of Market Street! 

Jasper O’Farrcll was born in Dublin in 1817, and died here in 1875. 
He had just finished a nightcap with a friend in a saloon on Jackson 




Nestor’s 

Universe 

Accessories/Jewelry 
New and Vintage 
Folk Art/Curios 
Furniture -including 
Southwestern 

3234 16th St (Dolores & Guerrero) 
San Francisco. CA 94103 
(415)621-7116 
Open Tubs -Sun 11-6 

PMOIOflVMERfOirH ROllEY 




BREAKFAST ALL DAY 



CHAT ' N CHEW 
2894 MISSION ST. 

(CORNER OF 25TH) 



STEAKS 

FISH 

HOME MADE HASH BROWNS 
WEDGE-CUT FRENCH FRIES 

SPECIAL REQUEST BURMESE FOOD 



M-F 6:00 AM -7:00 PM 
S-S 6:30 AM -7:00 PM 






NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




Street, near Montgomery, when he was taken with a heart attack. 1875 
was a year that saw many heart attacks, for that was the year that the 
Nevada silver mines flooded, Virginia City burned, San Francisco banks 
went broke, and the stock market sent many people to financial ruin! 
O’Farrell was one of this group. Although he owned a great deal of land 
in Sonoma and Yolo Counties, it was, for the most part, unproductive and 
of little value. Some years before, he had swapped his San Rafael acreage 
for a huge piece of land that adjoined his Sonoma property and he, then, 
made his home there. I am told some of his descendants still live around 
Sonoma. 

In 1849 William Eddy, who had followed Jasper O’Farrell as town 
surveyor, extended the official plat of the city to include all areas from 
Front Street on the east, and making Larkin Street the western boundary, 
this was important because it set in place (at least on paper) all of the 
streets and their widths for future legal purposes. It would seem that the 
final task lay in naming these streets, not only so they could be identified, 
but to bestow honor on certain individuals. O’Farrell had suggested some 
names, but the sitting alcade had the power to approve them. George 
Hyde, the alcade at the time that O’Farrell was arguing for approval of his 
Market Street plan, probably named this controversial street after the 
important street in Philadelphia, where he had graduated from law school in 
1842. It is interesting to note here that, as alcade of a fast growing 
pueblo, he found that he needed some help. The military governor granted 
him a six man town council, which we think of as the beginning of the 
Board of Supervisors. From then on, the Council, or later, the Board had 
final say on street names, the power was used to its greatest extent when, 
in 1869, the Supervisor’s Committee on Out Lands approved the limits of 
the proposed Golden Gate Park and its panhandle. The approval was signed 
by; C.H. Stanyan (Chairman), AJ. Shrader, R. Beverly Cole, Monroe 
Ashbury, and Charles Clayton, which anyone will recognize as the names of 
the five streets on each side of the Panhandle west of Masonic Ave. What 
Crust! 



Efiiicofiaí Cfiuicfi of\Si ¿c 


fin tíiE Evangzíiú 


MASSES 


SUNDAY 


11:00 AM 


MON + THURS 


12:15 PM 


TUE + WED 


6:00 PM 


FRI 


730 AM 


SAT 


9:00 AM 


(415) 861-1436 


1661 Fifteenth Street 


The Rev. Dr. )ohn H. Eastwood, lr. 


San Francisco, CA 94103 • 


Rector 



ÍMÍSSÍ0N 




CAI l 

647-6999 



Ace Hi Hea&U Fonda 

YERBAS MEXICANAS 



FRESH SQUEEZED FRUITS • VEGETABLE JUICES • FROZEN YOGURT 
We Have Bronson Edgar Case Products • Natural Cosmetics • 
Nyurai footwear • Homeopathic Products • Fine Selection 
01 Vitamins And Proteins 



I 2863 Mission (Near BART) 



San Francisco 




ALL TYPES OF 

CONTACT LENSES INCLUDING: 

• EXTENDED WEAR 
• ASTIGMATIC 
• TINTED SOFT LENSES 
• GAS PERMEABLE HARD LENSES 



DESIGNER EYEGLASSES 
NO LINE BIFOCALS 
FACETED LENSES 




DR BARRY M. SMITH 

EYE EXAMINATIONS Medi-Cal Insurance 

3* 861-6611 'S3 ¿ss, 

3199 16th at Guerrero San Francisco 






j. 







22 



NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 




PMS AND TRADITIONAL 
CHINESE MEDICINE 





By Sally McMullen, 



Certified Acupuncturist 



Premenstrual Syndrome (PMS) has gotten a lot of media coverage in 
the past few years. It’s in the spotlight because of the large number of 
women between the ages of 20-30 which it effects. 

The chief complaint of PMS sufferers is emotional instability-depres- 
sion, anger, irritability, and frustration. The emotional ups and downs can 
be mild or severe. Reasons for the reported increase in emotional in- 
stability are not hard to find: women’s changing roles and the stresses 

which accompany these changes; a hectic lifestyle with little time for a 
regular exercise program or for quiet contemplation; taxing the body with 
overly strenuous exercise programs; and an improper diet-to name just a 
few. 

Physical symptoms of PMS include fatigue, menstrual irregularity, 
cramps, abdominal bloating, headaches, breast swelling or tenderness, breast 
lumps and water retention. 

Can Traditional Chinese Medicine treat these symptoms and, in 
addition, can it get to the root of the problem? 

The basic pattern of imbalance, according to Traditional Chinese 
Medicine, that manifests itself 26 PMS is "Liver Qi (Energy) Congestion." 
By this we mean that the energy in the Liver is obstructed rather than 
flowing smoothly. The Liver is viewed as an organ for storing blood and 
regulating blood volume; the energy which passes through the Liver should 
resemble that of a water sprinkler- unblocked. Thus, energy should be 

distributed to other parts of the body in a smooth fashion, including energy 
to the endocrine system. 

When the Liver energy is blocked then specific herbs are used to 
dredge", as we say, the Liver. Anything which harms the Liver may cause 
an obstruction of the flow of energy in the rest of the body. Conversely, 
anything which obstructs another part of the body’s energy will also affect 
the Liver. 

The Liver is also viewed as a rather "rambunctious" organ-once it is 
blocked the Liver energy may rise up and attack other systems, especially 
the digestive system, causing bloating and diarrhea. 

In women the Liver QI (Energy) Congestion usually shows up in the 
lower abdomen, causing cramps, irregular menstruation, and bloating. The 
congestion may also manifest in the chest, causing breast swelling, lumps, 
chest tightness and frequent sighing. Or there may be a feeling of 
something stuck in the throat. This is called "Plum Seed Qi" because it 
feels like there is a plum seed stuck in the throat which cannot be coughed 
up. 

As indicated above, the Liver is a "temperamental" organ. We had a 
saying in our family— "Don’t get your Liver in an uproar!"— when someone 
got really angry. Likewise, in Chinese medicine, the Liver is regarded as 
being very affected by excess anger and frustration. In any case, the 
treatment is to unblock the Liver energy through acupuncture and Chinese 
herbs. 

The acupuncture points used to free the energy will depend on the 
chief problems that are manifested at the time of treatment, i.e., cramps, 



breast distention, edema, etc. Usually the treatments are given about a 
week before menstruation is due. This is the time when emotional in- 
stability and physical complaints are generally the worst. A patient will 
most often experience deep relaxation and a freeing of energy after the 
treatment. 

The most common herbal formula used for Liver Qi Congestion is 
appropriately called "Free and Easy Powder" or "Leisure Powder". There 
are seven ingredients in this prescription, and individual herbs can be added 
or subtracted to fit each woman s pattern of symptoms. (In some cases 
other formulas may be used if there are other complications.) 

Fresh herbs, brewed into a tea are used at first. After a week or so 
the patient may switch to pills or powdered herbs for the next several 
months. 

The success of Chinese medicine in treating Liver Qui Congestion is 
relatively high. Some modifications in diet, exercise and relaxation will 

definitely add to that success. 

In Chinese theory, energy stagnation over a long period of lime can 
lead to blood stagnation-which in turn can lead to the formation of 
neoplasms such as myomas, fibromas, ovarian cysts; or chronic pelvic 
inflammatory disease, endometriosis, and breast problems. Consequently, it 
is important to treat PMS and other types of Liver Qi Congestion in order 
to prevent more serious problems later in life. In fact, any imbalance 
should be treated when it is minor rather than waiting until it becomes a 
major problem. 



If you have any questions regarding PMS or related problems please call 
Sally McMullen at 550-7732. 



T & 



2 

P 

CTQ 

P 

N 

• 

D 

<T> 

C/5 



I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
■ 

European Harley Japanese 

MARS CUSTOM CYCLE 
“OUT OF THIS WORLD” 



JL Peol 

j Service/ 

"YOU ARE WELCOME AT 
MISSION DENTAL BUILDING 
FOR ALL PHASES OF DENTISTRY 
2440 MISSION ST. 285-9900 

Robert C. Cenicero* D O S. Peter V. Rengatorfl O.D. S. 

Bryan Aran! D.O. S. 

Thoma* Ridge Baker, Pertodontlal 
Ramona l. lauron. fl.O.M. 



m 

p 

C/5 

2 ?. 

a. 

a> 



TO 

o 

p 

Ci- 

po 

p 

o 

a 




Service: Most Makes • Used Bikes • Parts: 
Obsolete • Flathead and Sporty • Custom Painting: 
Racing Stripes • Pinstriping • Murals • Books: 
History and Manuals Plus Accessories 

621-8087 

621-7926 78 Shotwell 

San Francisco, CA. 94103 

(bet FOLSOM A S. VAN NESS bcl 14th A 15lh> 

OPEN: MONDAY - SATUROAY 9 am to 6 pm 

rv* .p s-rv<e a inturanre Cvimw, 

Outlaw Biker Harley Woman 



00 

£ 

z 

JJ 

73 

>> 

U 



C/5 

o 

a 

X 

<D 

Oa 

C/5 

o 

\-t 

<L) 

6 

0 

C/5 

73 

S3 

C 

a 

s 





* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 

* 



Our 51st Year 




Retlaw 
Camera Store 



"Since 1937" 



PREPAY YOUR 
PROCESSING 

SAVE $ 

GIVE US A TRY 



DARKROOM RENTAL 

• Photocopies • 

• Equipment • 

• Supplies • 

• Student Prices • 

2959 Mission Street 
San Francisco, CA. 94110 
(415) 647-8737 









NORTH MISSION NEWS, May 1988 





V 

BADD MISTAKES 

$ Í0*0&*90*0 ******f*******>'****' * t *'**'**' ** ******** 



I. Who do you think you are by squatting in the doorway of the 
stationary store on 16th St, making the Badd MISTAKE of taking a 
dump and when I called you on it, you fell right into it. Just who in 
the CENSORED so you think you are. I’m on the night and day hunt 
for all you Badd Mistakers and Mistakettes. So watch it! Laugh at 
yourself in a mirror. 




'Uade'Dw at t&e &mtcc 



Watch out Bruce Lee here comes tales of the Ninja Warrior. I have 
just bought for myself a copy of tales of Tales of the Ninja Warrior. Very 
perfect and beautiful. 

Including a story that has a character by the name of Dragon Ninja 
who reminds me of Popeye and I liked the part where he gives one of the 
Demmon Four Winds a elbow punch which would make the Bay Bombers turn 
green with envy. 5091 PTS. 

Reviews 



II. Who do you think you are, standing at the corner of 16th and South 
Van Ness? All drunked out, hassling the Chinese coolies going down 
the street to the garment factories? Ya punk. 

III. Who do you think you arc being so cheap that you don’t buy toilet 
paper so you make the Badd Mistake of flushing newspaper down the 
toilet and clogging it and then going into the kitchen and discarding 
some putrid rice down the drain and clogging it also. All in one 
morning. If there were a Baddster in there as acting landlord, you 
kabuttkus would be lasting cold cement on rainy nights. I’d say, 
"You’re kabuttcus" but you’re not worth the letter R. 

IV. Just who do you think you are by attempting to sneak away a striped 
bass one night when I was busy messing with some fishing line and my 
Doberman sensed you making a Badd Mistake and tore into you? 
Catch your own fish. MISTAKES backfire. Now don’t they? ha ha. 

V. Who do you think you are, coming home all bombed out drunk, 
knocking half the kitchen table over, puking in the fish tank, 
punching a hole through the sheetrock wall and your babe bringing 
down the man on you? Badd MISTAKE. 



Camlelot 3000 a good version of Star Wars and the movie of the same 
name. 050-99 PTS. 

2 solo Avengers at least Hawkeye and the others have their own comic 
book. Which is not bad at all. 2093 PTS. 

3 Alf a Greek Myth and part about manners very good. 10 PTS. 

Recap 



1 Tales of the Ninja Warrior. 1091 PTS. 

2 Camlelot 3000. 1995 PTS. 

3 Solo Avengers. 2091 PTS. 

4 Alf. 10 PTS. 

WINNER: Tales of Ninja Warrior 

Nothing but love and 
peace from Uncle Don 



VI. Who do you think you are after letting one of my more tamer Dobes 
lick your face when you were drunk and when I told you that he just 
got done licking his genitals, you barf up the brandy I gave you right 
in my ashtray? That’s a real Badd MISTAKE if there ever was one. 
Then when you came out of it, you wanted to take it out on my dog. 
Two Badd MISTAKES all in one, ya puke. 

VII. Who do you think you are standing at the corner of 16th & Capp 
Streets at 6:00 a.m. foggy clouded morning asking the Baddster if he 
wanted a date when all I wanted was an ale at K & H liquor? The 
Badd MISTAKE you did was when you were told by me, "How much 
money do you have," you said, "It’s you who has to have the money." 
That’s when I ordered you off the area, telling you that you’re 
working ray corner. Machismo for sale to all the neighborhood bored 
housewives and lonely widow. It was all a joke folks. 

VIII. Who do you think you are by letting your Pit Bull off the leash only 
to stand there crying because it locked onto a bus tire and went flip- 
flop down the street to it’s death? A Badd MISTAKE that nobody 
likes to see. 




BOMBAY EXPRESS 

FINE INDIAN CUISINE 



Come visit 
New Bombay Bazaar 
548 ! Valencia 
Indian Food, Spices 



532 Valencia Street 
621-7226 

Tue - Sun 

Lunch 11:30 - 3:00 
Dinner 5:30- 9:00 

Closed Monday 




For information in English or Spanish, or to order this 
brochure and others about women and AIDS, call: 

863- AIDS San Francisco AID^\ 

(800) FOR-AIDS Northern California 

864- 6606 TDD 



ill 




f 




PJIPj 








1 1 







on the sunny side of Market Street fast and free to most neighborhoods 



Two Locations to Serve You 



open 

daily 

11:00 AM TO 10:00 PM 



PHONE 431-3351 






55 ^ 



C 



tota» 



* TAQUERIA 



3071 —16th STREET 
Bet. MISSION & VALENCIA 
OPEN DAILY 
11 AM to 12 PM 

864-8840 




