PeerJ 



Too big to be noticed: cryptic invasion of 
Asian camel crickets in North American 
houses 



Submitted 28 May 2014 
Accepted 25 July 2014 
Published 2 September 2014 

Corresponding author 

Mary Jane Epps, mjepps@ncsu.edu 

Academic editor 

Dezene Huber 

Additional Information and 
Declarations can be found on 
page 1 3 

DOI 10.7717/peerj.523 

© Copyright 

2014 Eppsetal. 

Distributed under 

Creative Commons CC-BY 4.0 



OPEN ACCESS 



Mary Jane Epps 1 , Holly L. Menninger 1 , Nathan LaSala 2 and 
Robert R. Dunn 1 

1 Department of Biological Sciences, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, USA 

2 Enloe High School, Raleigh, NC, USA 



ABSTRACT 



Despite the rapid expansion of the built environment, we know little about the biol- 
ogy of species living in human-constructed habitats. Camel crickets (Rhaphidophori- 
dae) are commonly observed in North American houses and include a range of native 
taxa as well as the Asian Diestrammena asynamora (Adelung), a species occasionally 
reported from houses though considered to be established only in greenhouses. 
We launched a continental-scale citizen science campaign to better understand the 
relative distributions and frequency of native and nonnative camel crickets in human 
homes across North America. Participants contributed survey data about the pres- 
ence or absence of camel crickets in homes, as well as photographs and specimens of 
camel crickets allowing us to identify the major genera and/or species in and around 
houses. Together, these data offer insight into the geographical distribution of camel 
crickets as a presence in homes, as well as the relative frequency and distribution of 
native and nonnative camel crickets encountered in houses. In so doing, we show 
that the exotic Diestrammena asynamora not only has become a common presence in 
eastern houses, but is found in these environments far more frequently than native 
camel crickets. Supplemental pitfall trapping along transects in 10 urban yards in 
Raleigh, NC revealed that D. asynamora can be extremely abundant locally around 
some homes, with as many as 52 individuals collected from pitfalls in a single yard 
over two days of sampling. The number of D. asynamora individuals present in a trap 
was negatively correlated with the trap's distance from a house, suggesting that these 
insects may be preferentially associated with houses but also are present outside. In 
addition, we report the establishment in the northeastern United States of a second 
exotic species, putatively Diestrammena japanica Blatchley, which was previously 
undocumented in the literature. Our results offer new insight into the relative fre- 
quency and distribution of camel crickets living in human homes, and emphasize the 
importance of the built environment as habitat for two little-known invading species 
of Orthoptera. 



Subjects Ecology, Entomology 

Keywords Rhaphidophoridae, Diestrammena, Invasive species, Urban ecology, Citizen science 



How to Cite this article Epps et al. (2014), Too big to be noticed: cryptic invasion of Asian camel crickets in North American houses. 
PeerJ 2:e523; DOI 10.7717/peerj.523 



PeerJ 



INTRODUCTION 

In the United States, 90% of the human population is predicted to live in urban 
environments by 2050 (United Nations, 2012). At this time a large geographic area will 
be urban, peri-urban and suburban (Nowak & Walton, 2005), an area greater than that 
covered by many of North America's primary vegetation types (Stein, Kutner & Adams, 
2000). Although the species living in built environments are among the organisms we 
see most often, they are not necessarily well-documented. We suspect this is particularly 
true of species that are neither valued aesthetically, as are birds and butterflies, nor are 
important economic pests (such as bed bugs and roaches). Camel crickets (Orthoptera: 
Rhaphidophoridae) are among the largest of the many insects that live in modern-day 
houses, and have an especially longstanding history of contact with humans in our homes. 
These insects have long been noted in basements and cellars; with one remarkable example 
of cave art from Paleolithic France depicting the cave-dwelling camel cricket Trogophilus sp. 
(Chopard, 1928). The relationship between camel crickets and humans is clearly ancient; 
however, the biology of these insects as residents of our homes is known primarily from a 
smattering of specimen records in museums rather than from formal study. 

Camel crickets comprise a moderately diverse family of Orthoptera, represented by 
ca. 150 species (23 genera) across North America (Arnett, 2000). Of these, several species 
in the large genus Ceuthophilus Scudder (e.g., C. brevipes Scudder, C. pallescens Bruner, 
C. agassizii (Scudder), C. latens Scudder, C. maculatus (Harris), and others) have been 
reported as common or occasional inhabitants of North American homes, particularly in 
cellars and basements (Blatchley, 1920; Vickery &Kevan, 1983). Outside of these habitats, 
most species of Ceuthophilus (including those occurring in our houses) are found under 
rocks, logs, or surface debris in forested areas, although a few are known from grassland 
ecosystems (Vickery &Kevan, 1983). Other Ceuthophilus (e.g., C. carlsbadensis Caudell, 
C. longipes Caudell, C. secretus Scudder, and others) are common residents of caves, 
where the droppings and carcasses of these crickets are a major source of energy for 
other organisms. For this reason camel crickets are considered keystone species in many 
cave ecosystems (Lavoie, Helf & Poulson, 2007; Taylor, Krejca &Denight, 2005). Although 
cellars and basements share features with caves (e.g., both tend to be damp, dark, and 
low in nutrients), most camel crickets found in our houses appear to be distinct from 
species typically collected in caves (Vickery & Kevan, 1983). However, in at least one case 
(a camel cricket endemic to Tuscany, Italy, Dolichopoda schiavazzii Capra), populations of 
an otherwise cave-inhabiting species are also known from cellars and other subterranean 
environments of human origin (Allegrucci, Minasi & Sbordoni, 1997). 

In addition to a rich diversity of native camel cricket species, nonnative camel crickets 
have also become established in North America. The 'greenhouse camel cricket,' Dies- 
trammena asynamora (Adelung) is a species native either to Japan or the Sichuan region 
of China (Rehn, 1944). This species was first recorded in North America in 1898 from a 
greenhouse in Minnesota (Rehn, 1944), and subsequently has been noted in a number of 
locations across the eastern and central United States and Canada. D. asynamora has also 
been found throughout much of Europe (Rehn, 1944). Many authors have considered this 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



2/15 



PeerJ 



species to be associated primarily with greenhouses (e.g., Bue&Munro, 1939; Rehn, 1944; 
Vickery & Kevan, 1983), although a few early reports document at least an occasional 
presence in cellars (Blatchley, 1920; Rehn, 1944). However, little discussion has been 
made of this species and its status since Rehns 1944 publication. Modern reports of 
D. asynamora show that it is present in some basements, though it is uncertain whether 
the sightings of this introduced cricket represent isolated cases of localized abundance or 
a more extensive invasion. Recent anecdotal reports (www.bugguide.net) also suggest the 
establishment of a second Asian species, D. japanica Blatchley (syn. D. japonica Karny, 
D. naganoensis Mori), around New York City, NY. Because camel crickets include both 
introduced species and geographically and locally rare species, it is possible that basements 
and cellars might be important habitats for the spread of introduced camel crickets and/or 
the persistence of native camel cricket species. 

One challenge with studying the biology of species living in homes is that privacy 
concerns make these areas difficult to sample. However, citizen science may offer an 
ideal approach for studying home biodiversity; volunteers can participate in scientific 
research by self- surveying their own homes. Although obtaining accurate identifications 
of organisms from public survey data can be challenging, many of the characters that 
distinguish camel crickets at the generic and/or species level (e.g., coloration, tibial 
armature) may be visible in photographs. For this reason, photographic documentation 
is an invaluable addition to public survey data, and provides an easy way to confirm the 
presence and distribution of camel crickets in our homes. 

In this study, we use citizen-contributed data to offer new insight into the distribution 
and composition of camel crickets taking shelter in human homes. Initially, in order to 
understand how common camel crickets are in houses, we surveyed citizens across the 
United States about the presence of camel crickets living in and around their homes. 
We conducted this survey in two ways: (1) we asked visitors to our website to report 
the presence/absence of camel crickets (as well as other natural history observations in 
and around their home) via an open survey and (2) we directly administered a closed 
survey that included a question about camel crickets to volunteers wishing to participate 
in an unrelated citizen science project (about microbial diversity in the home). We then 
solicited photographs and specimens of camel crickets from citizen scientists to evaluate 
the occurrence and geographical distribution of native versus nonnative camel cricket 
species in homes. These survey results were augmented with trapping efforts to compare 
the composition of camel crickets living in houses to those present in urban yards. 

METHODS 

We used two types of citizen science surveys to characterize the geographic distribution 
and composition of camel crickets in houses across the United States. First, as part of 
a broader study about the ecology of human homes, we used an open web survey to 
poll people across the United States about the organisms they find in their homes; this 
survey included questions about the presence/absence of camel crickets in or around their 
homes and their geographic location (Appendix A). We recruited participants to the survey 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



3/15 



PeerJ 



through our website (yourwildlife.org), social media and email campaigns, and the survey 
remained open to public responses from December 201 1 through July 2013. This initial 
survey had the potential to be biased toward individuals who had camel crickets in their 
homes, as people may be more likely to report a presence than absence (Bonney et ah, 
2009). As a result, we conducted a second survey by polling a geographically stratified 
but naive population of homeowners. We directly administered a closed survey to 7,058 
households wishing to enroll in the Wild Life of Our Homes project (WLOH, a separate 
study mapping the indoor microbial biodiversity of homes; homes.yourwildlife.org) over 
the period October 2012-April 2013. Volunteers, representing all 50 states and the District 
of Columbia, were required to complete the brief survey (containing a question about the 
presence/ absence of camel crickets in the home, Appendix A) in order to receive a home 
microbe sampling kit. Thus, participation was not a function of initial interest in camel 
crickets, but in this other citizen science project, therefore reducing sampling bias. 

The results of both surveys were used to map the presence of camel crickets in 
North American homes. Maps were created using ArcGIS software (ESRI, 2006) and R 
(www.r-project.org/). Only data from the second, WLOH participant survey were used to 
estimate the prevalence of the crickets. 

In order to understand the relative distribution of native versus nonnative camel 
crickets we next solicited photographs and/or specimens of camel crickets from citizen 
volunteers who reported these insects in their homes. These volunteers included a 
subset of participants from the surveys described above, as well as additional individ- 
uals responding to an appeal for participation on the Camel Cricket Census website 
(crickets.yourwildlife.org/). Photographs and specimens were identified to genus based 
on tibial armature and other relevant characters described in Vickery & Kevan (1983). 
Where possible, photographs and specimens of the nonnative Diestrammena were further 
identified to species using characters such as the number of tibial spines, tibial spur length, 
and color pattern as described in Sugimoto & Ichikawa (2003 ), Vickery & Kevan (1 983), and 
following consultation with experts. 

Finally, to understand whether the Asian camel cricket D. asynamora is living only in 
houses or also present in yard habitats, we sampled camel crickets in a subset of urban 
yards at increasing distances from homes known to contain camel crickets. In July of 2013, 
10 participating households were recruited from central Raleigh, NC, and pitfall traps 
placed in the yard of each. Study yards were located within a 1.5 mile radius of North 
Carolina State University's central campus, and were typically a mix of sun and shade 
habitat with occasional scattered trees and primarily grass as groundcover. We constructed 
pitfall traps using plastic cups (7 cm across by 10 cm deep) and placed three traps per yard 
at distances of 1 m, 4 m, and 8 m from each house along a haphazardly placed transect. 
Traps were baited with a 1:1 dilution of molasses and water as per the methods of Hubbell 
(1936). We placed inverted plastic bowls elevated approximately 3 cm over the mouth of 
each trap to protect traps from rain and to encourage camel cricket visitation by offering 
cover. Contents of traps were collected daily and traps were left in place for two days. 
In some yards small mammals would disturb the traps, in which case we replaced the 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



4/15 



PeerJ 



molasses bait with soapy water in all traps on a transect to be less attractive to mammalian 
pests. We sorted the contents of each trap in the laboratory and identified all camel crickets 
to species with the aid of a dissecting microscope. We then used analysis of covariance 
(ANCOVA) to test for a relationship between the number of D. asynamora individuals in a 
trap and its distance from a house. Yards in which no camel crickets were recovered at any 
of the three traps were excluded from analysis. Statistical analysis was performed in JMP v. 
10.0 (SAS Institute, Cary, NC). 

RESULTS 

Individuals from 549 homes responded to our initial open survey question about the 
presence or absence of camel crickets in or around their houses, offering positive reports 
of camel crickets for 244 homes across the country. An additional 1,719 households 
responded to the unbiased (with respect to camel cricket presence) WLOH participant 
questionnaire. Over both surveys, participants from 669 houses reported having observed 
camel crickets in their homes, including 24.4% of households responding to the unbiased 
WLOH study (Fig. 1). Together, these surveys allowed us to evaluate the potential 
distribution of camel crickets associated with human houses across the United States. We 
use the word "detection" to acknowledge that reports of absence in survey data may reflect 
failures to detect camel crickets, just as presences may represent failures at identification. 
For example, a large spider might bear a vague resemblance to a camel cricket for a 
participant wary of arthropods. Participants from 39 states and the District of Columbia 
reported observing camel crickets in or around their homes (Fig. 2). The proportion of 
detections of camel crickets in homes was significantly higher in the eastern United States 
(28% of reports were positive from states east of Colorado) compared to western states (7% 
positive reports; two-tailed P < 0.0001 from Fisher's exact test). Based on the proportion 
of photographs showing insects incorrectly identified as camel crickets by citizen scientists 
who responded to our call for photographs (see below), we estimated a 4.6% error rate 
associated with affirmative reports of camel crickets from all survey data, although this 
error rate may vary geographically. From Colorado westward only five photographs were 
submitted, of which 40% (2 of 5) were identified incorrectly as Rhaphidophoridae. The 
most common taxa mistaken for camel crickets were field crickets (Gryllidae) or other 
Orthoptera. 

Citizen scientists from 163 households submitted identifiable photographs (N = 151) 
and/or specimens (N = 12) of camel crickets from their houses. Submissions spanned 23 
states and the District of Columbia, as well as one Canadian province; with an overrepre- 
sentation of submissions (37%) from North Carolina. Out of all identifiable camel cricket 
submissions, 88% of houses submitted evidence of the Asian genus Diestrammena. Only 
12% of houses reported members of the native Ceuthophilus (Table 1 and Fig. 3). In three 
cases, evidence of both native and nonnative genera were contributed from the same home. 
Of the 143 submissions recognizable as Diestrammena, 108 were of sufficient quality to 
allow identification to species. Of these, 94% of entries were D. asynamora (Fig. 4A), while 
the remainder (seven entries) were identified as putative D. japanica (Fig. 4B). Records of 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



5/15 



PeerJ 




Figure 1 Percentage of households by state reporting the presence of camel crickets around the 
home. Responses to the Wild Life of Our Home survey, showing the percentage of households from each 
state answering 'yes' to the question 'have you seen camel crickets in or around your home?'. Numerals in 
each state represent the total number of responses (yes or no) for that state. 




Figure 2 Survey responses showing presence or absence of camel crickets in homes. Map of combined 
responses to the open survey question and the Wild Life of Our Homes survey question asking citizens if 
they have observed camel crickets in their houses. Blue points represent positive reports of camel crickets 
found in homes (N — 669), whereas red points indicate households where camel crickets have not been 
knowingly observed (N — 1,598). 



D. japanica were submitted exclusively from the northeastern United States in Mas- 
sachusetts, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey (Fig. 5). 

We recovered 158 camel crickets from pitfall traps in urban yards in Raleigh, NC. 
Prior to our investigation, eight of the 10 households participating in our trapping study 
reported previously having seen camel crickets in their home. Camel crickets were found 
in seven of the yards sampled, and were absent in both of the yards for which camel 
crickets were not reported in the house. For houses initially reporting camel crickets 
as present, an average of 20 individual camel crickets were recovered per yard over the 
two-day sampling period (95% CI [5-34], range = 0-52). All recovered specimens of 
Rhaphidophoridae were identified as the Asian species D. asynamora. The number of 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



6/15 



PeerJ 



Table 1 Number of houses with camel crickets by state. Results of citizen-contributed photographic or specimen submissions showing the relative 
number of households with the Asian Diestrammena versus native Ceuthophilus samples by state or Canadian province. Two houses in North 
Carolina each contributed specimens of both genera. The subset of households submitting photographs and/or specimens of Diestrammena that 
could be determined to species are further distinguished to show the relative number and distribution of records for D. asynamora versus putative 
D. japanica. 

State or Total # Houses with # Houses with # Houses with # Houses with 
province responses Ceuthophilus D. asynamora D. japanica Diestrammena 

sp. (unidentified) 


Colorado 


2 


2 


0 




0 


0 


Delaware 


2 


0 


1 




0 


1 


District of Columbia 


1 


0 


0 




0 


1 


Georgia 


2 


0 


2 




0 


0 


Iowa 


1 


1 


0 




0 


0 


Illinois 


2 


0 


2 




0 


0 


Kansas 


2 


1 


1 




0 


0 


Kentucky 


1 


0 


0 




0 


1 


Massachusetts 


3 


1 


0 




2 


0 


Maryland 


17 


1 


10 




0 


6 


Michigan 


1 


0 


0 




0 


1 


Missouri 


9 


4 


5 




0 


0 


North Carolina 


60 


5 


41 




0 


14 


New Hampshire 


1 


1 


0 




0 


0 


New Jersey 


16 


0 


12 




2 


2 


New York 


9 


0 


7 




0 


2 


Ohio 


2 


0 


2 




0 


0 


Pennsylvania 


10 


2 


4 




2 


2 


Saskatchewan 


1 


1 


0 




0 


0 


South Carolina 


1 


0 


1 




0 


0 


Tennessee 


3 


0 


3 




0 


0 


Texas 


1 


1 


0 




0 


0 


Virginia 


15 


0 


10 




0 


5 


Wisconsin 


1 


0 


1 




0 


0 


Total records 


163 


20 


102 




6 


35 



D. asynamora individuals recovered in traps was negatively correlated with a trap's distance 
from a house (R 2 = 0.66, P — 0.004 from ANCOVA after ln-transformation of the number 
of cricket individuals and after accounting for individual yard, as would reflect variation in 
local abundances of camel crickets; Fig. 6). In fact, for every yard with successful trapping, 
more crickets were consistently recovered at traps 1 m from the house than were recovered 
from the two more distant traps combined. However, in 57% of these yards at least one 
D. asynamora individual was recovered from the trap placed farthest from the house (8 m). 

DISCUSSION 

Although camel crickets have long been a common presence in our homes, little is known 
about the identity, occupancy and geography of these animals in homes. Using data 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



■ 



7/15 



PeerJ 




Figure 3 Distribution of Ceuthophilus and Diestrammena in homes. The distribution of native 
Ceuthophilus spp. (black circles; N — 20) versus exotic Diestrammena spp. camel crickets (white points; 
N — 143) in homes, based on photographic and specimen submissions contributed by citizen scientists. 




Figure 4 Images of Diestrammena asynamora and putative D. japanica. Photographs of the two species 
of Diestrammena submitted by citizen scientists, showing (A) D. asynamora (Andrew Blanchard, Creative 
Commons Attribution License 2014) and (B) putative D. japanica (Kathryn Kinney, Creative Commons 
Attribution License 2014). 



contributed by citizen scientists, we found that camel crickets are common in houses 
across much of the continental United States (Fig. 2), and present in as many as a quarter 
of homes surveyed as part of another citizen science project. Based on our survey results, 
camel crickets appear to be geographically widespread in homes particularly across the 
eastern half of the United States, and to a lesser extent in the southwest and west coast 
(Fig. 1). Camel crickets were not reported in homes throughout much of the mountain 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



8/15 



PeerJ 




Figure 5 Distribution of Diestrammena species in American houses. The relative distribution of the 
two Diestrammena species reported from houses in the United States, as indicated by photographs and/or 
specimens from citizen scientists. Records of D. asynamora (N — 101) are indicated in grey, D. japanica 
(N — 7) in white. 



8 



Ft 2 = 0.66 




o o 

2 4 6 8 10 

Distance from house (m) 



Figure 6 The number of D. asynamora crickets in yard traps as a function of the distance from a 
house. The number of D. asynamora individuals recovered from a pitfall trap was negatively correlated 
with the distance of a trap from a house (R 2 — 0.66, P — 0.004 from ANCOVA, after accounting for 
individual yard effect). Each dot represents a single pitfall trap (N — 21, with three traps placed in each 
of seven yards). 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



9/15 



PeerJ 



west, although responses from this region were sparse relative to more populated parts of 
the country (Figs. 1 and 2). Hence, there may be large areas in the west where camel crickets 
are more common than our data indicate. However, the public can still contribute data to 
this project, such that we hope to add data for the western US in the coming months or 
years (crickets.yourwildlife.org). Camel crickets appear to be most prevalent in houses in 
the southeastern United States, with nearly 50% of households surveyed in Virginia, North 
Carolina, Missouri, Mississippi, Maryland, and Tennessee reporting the presence of camel 
crickets in their homes (Fig. 1). 

Although this survey was potentially biased geographically, it was not biased as a 
function of the presence or absence of camel crickets. If the abundance of camel crickets 
(of any species) in and around the average home where they are present is comparable 
to the abundance of these insects recovered in our pitfall traps around homes in Raleigh, 
North Carolina, there could be as many as seven hundred million camel crickets in and 
around homes across the eastern United States alone (calculated based on the number of 
housing units reported in the 201 1 US Census for midwest, northeast and south US census 
regions for which our survey responses were generally high; see Fig. 2; US Census Bureau, 
2012). If correct, this would amount to more camel crickets than humans. Although 
clearly a very rough estimate (e.g., we do not account for other factors such as regional 
geographic variation in abundance), this figure nonetheless offers a rough estimate of the 
large populations of camel crickets that may have become established in and around built 
environments. The size of these populations is all the more remarkable when we consider 
that most of these camel crickets belong to an introduced species previously not known to 
be especially common; in contrast, native species appear to be comparatively rare in these 
environments. 

Citizen scientists' submissions of photographs and specimens of camel crickets found 
in homes reveal that the Asian camel cricket D. asynamora has become a successful and 
widespread invader throughout the eastern United States (Fig. 3). Across much of this 
region this species appears to be a much more common occupant of human homes 
compared to native Ceuthophilus spp. (Table 1). For example, in North Carolina, the 
state for which we have the richest data, Diestrammena (representing D. asynamora in all 
identifiable entries) was present in 92% of houses with camel cricket samples submitted 
(Table 1). Our pitfall trapping in urban yards reveals that this species also can be extremely 
abundant, with more than 50 individuals found over two days of sampling in a single yard 
in Raleigh, North Carolina. 

Although D. asynamora is clearly widespread and abundant in the eastern United States, 
the extent of this species' range outside of the eastern United States is unclear. Rehn 
(1944) describes reports of the species in greenhouses and cellars from Maine south to 
Tennessee, and as far west as Colorado. While his reports derive from a small number of 
museum specimens combined with scattered anecdotes, they already cover a relatively 
large geographic area. Our study includes reports of the species only as far west as Kansas, 
though extending farther south into Georgia and South Carolina. Other reports suggest 
an even larger distribution, but lack of specimen data makes comparison to our results 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



10/15 



PeerJ 



difficult (Vickery & Kevan, 1983). According to most accounts, established populations 
of this species were thought to be present in greenhouses only (Blatchley, 1920; Vickery & 
Kevan, 1967; Vickery & Kevan, 1983). Hence, D. asynamora likely may have increased in 
abundance since 1944, particularly in houses; however, the species does not necessarily 
appear to have expanded its geographic distribution. 

Despite the abundance of D. asynamora in and around the home, little is known 
about the cricket's habits and life history This species is best known in the literature 
from its occurrence in greenhouses, where it has been blamed for causing occasional 
minor damage to plants {Vickery & Kevan, 1983). Although its feeding preferences are 
largely unknown, D. asynamora appears like most Rhaphidophoridae to be an omnivorous 
scavenger, and has been reported foraging on living and dead plant matter and dead 
insects. The habits and dietary preferences of our native Ceuthophilus spp. are only 
somewhat better known than those of D. asynamora. Species of Ceuthophilus (including 
taxa sometimes found in houses) have been observed scavenging opportunistically 
on a range of food sources including other insects, fungi, and fallen fruit (Taylor, 
Krejca & Denight, 2005). Examination of several cave-associated Ceuthophilus species 
(Northup, 1988) revealed a diverse diet that included mammalian carcasses, feces, other 
insects (including cannibalized Ceuthophilus individuals), and human food waste. Like 
D. asynamora, some species of Ceuthophilus appear to be occasional predators of other 
insects (Taylor, Krejca & Denight, 2005; Vickery & Kevan, 1983). Although we know little 
about the life history of D. asynamora or Ceuthophilus in houses, D. asynamora is reported 
to breed year-round in heated greenhouses. Breeding in D. asynamora is thought to occur 
only in the dark, and eggs are typically laid in the soil ( Vickery & Kevan, 1 983) . 

Although Ceuthophilus and Diestrammena both appear to be fairly generalized 
omnivores, we can infer little about the extent to which these insects' habits and life 
histories are comparable (and hence might lead to direct or indirect competition) in 
houses. Differences in the natural history of the two taxa potentially could affect the 
extent to which these crickets would be perceived by our citizen scientist contributors. 
For example, if the principal species of Ceuthophilus in houses were found to be more 
reclusive than D. asynamora, this could in part explain the larger number of D. asynamora 
reports by our contributors. However, the results of our pitfall experiment suggest that for 
at least some areas the perception of greater numbers of D. asynamora than Ceuthophilus 
associated with houses is real, especially considering that numerous individuals of various 
Ceuthophilus species (including those sometimes found in houses) have been commonly 
recovered from molasses-baited pitfall traps in other studies not near houses (Blatchley, 
1920; Hubbell, 1936; Taylor, Krejca & Denight, 2005). Although we might expect larger 
insects to be noticed more readily by citizen scientists, the principal species of Ceuthophilus 
occurring in houses are in fact slightly larger on average than D. asynamora (Blatchley, 
1920). Hence, the more numerous reports of D. asynamora relative to Ceuthophilus do 
not appear to have been biased by body size. Nonetheless, we recommend future study to 
understand the relative life histories of these species, their interactions with each other and 
other house-dwelling arthropods, and the ways in which they use our houses as habitat. 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



11/15 



PeerJ 



The appearance of a second introduced species, Diestrammena japanica, as an exotic in 
the United States has never before been recorded in the literature, although its presence 
has been reported anecdotally in some northeastern states concordant with those found 
in our study (see www.bugguide.net). Some confusion arises in the erroneous early use of 
the name D. japanica as a synonym for D. asynamora (Blatchley, 1920), a misapplication 
subsequently clarified by Rehn (1944). Aside fromD. asynamora only one other species of 
Diestrammena has been reported in the literature from the United States. This second 
species, reported by Morse (1904) as D. unicolor, is known in the United States from 
only a single specimen collected in a greenhouse in Chicago. This specimen, described 
as being uniformly piceous in color (Blatchley, 1920), is clearly distinct from our records of 
D. japanica, despite any potential nomenclatural incongruities. 

In our study, the presence of two species of Diestrammena in our samples is confirmed 
by the widely divergent number of tibial spines between D. asynamora and D. japanica 
(ca. 60 and 30 respectively; Sugimoto & Ichikawa, 2003), a character clearly visible in many 
of the photographs submitted. Although our identification of the species D. asynamora 
was confirmed on the basis of at least 170 specimens as well as by photographs, our 
records for D. japanica were based on photographs only, and we must therefore allow 
for some uncertainty as to the identity of the second species as the true D. japanica. 
Photographs of the second Diestrammena species were identified as D. japanica based on a 
combination of outwardly visible characters such as tibial spur length, tibial spine number, 
pronotal luster, and coloration (Sugimoto & Ichikawa, 2003). In addition, the distinctive 
pronotal pattern of D. japanica (Sugimoto & Ichikawa, 2003) was an exact match for our 
specimens. Although we offer clear evidence for the presence of two introduced species of 
Diestrammena in the United States, we recommend future study of museum specimens and 
examination of male genitalia (ideally in comparison with type material) to confirm the 
second species as D. japanica. 

Our collections of camel crickets from pitfall traps in urban yards revealed that 
D. asynamora is not restricted to house environments, but is also a common presence 
in adjacent yards. Whether these same individuals present in yards are also moving in 
and out of houses is unclear. The fact that these crickets were significantly more abundant 
in traps placed within a meter of the house (Fig. 6) suggests that D. asynamora may be 
closely associated with human dwellings even when found in outdoor habitats. However, 
as we did not account for potential variability in local habitats within a transect (e.g., traps 
placed lm from houses could have been more proximate to bushes compared to further 
traps), such variation may have biased our transect results. Surprisingly, no native camel 
crickets were recovered from any of these traps. Although behavioral differences (e.g., in 
activity level) between cricket species could potentially cause one species to appear more 
readily in pitfalls, pitfall traps baited with molasses have repeatedly been shown in other 
work to be highly profitable for sampling Ceuthophilus spp. (Blatchley, 1920; Hubbell, 1936; 
Taylor, Krejca & Denight, 2005). This suggests that in some localities D. asynamora may 
be the dominant camel cricket not only in houses but also in urban yards. However, it 
is yet unclear whether D. asynamora has also invaded wilder habitats with less human 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



12/15 



PeerJ 



disturbance, or if in North America the species persists exclusively in habitats associated 
with anthropogenic structures. The extent to which D. asynamora has actually displaced 
or is actively competing with native populations of Ceuthophilus (a genus that includes 
a number of rare or sensitive species) is also unknown, and further study is needed to 
determine whether this new invader poses an ecological threat, or is merely a harmless 
visitor in our houses and yards. 

ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS 

We would like to thank Lauren Nichols for mapping assistance, and David Ferguson and 
Piotr Naskrecki for initial advice on Diestrammena identification. Piotr Naskrecki, Terry 
Wheeler, and two anonymous reviewers provided helpful comments on the manuscript. 
We are also grateful to Lea Shell for help with public outreach and data management, 
and to Neil McCoy for technical and design assistance with the project website and 
associated data collection. Andrew Blanchard and Kathy Kinney kindly allowed us use 
of their photographs for Figs. 4A and 4B, respectively. We extend our warmest thanks to the 
many citizen scientists and survey participants who aided this project, without whose help 
this study would not have been possible. We also thank Bill Reynolds from the NC Museum 
of Natural Sciences for assistance with project outreach. 



ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AND DECLARATIONS 



Funding 

This work was funded by the National Science Foundation (NSF 0953390 to RRD). The 
funders had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or 
preparation of the manuscript. 

Grant Disclosures 

The following grant information was disclosed by the authors: 
NSF: 0953390. 

Competing Interests 

The authors declare there are no competing interests. 

Author Contributions 

• Mary Jane Epps conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experiments, 
analyzed the data, wrote the paper, prepared figures and/or tables. 

• Holly L. Menninger conceived and designed the experiments, performed the experi- 
ments, reviewed drafts of the paper. 

• Nathan LaSala performed the experiments. 

• Robert R. Dunn conceived and designed the experiments, contributed 
reagents/materials/analysis tools, wrote the paper, prepared figures and/or tables, 
reviewed drafts of the paper. 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



■ 13/15 



PeerJ 



Supplemental Information 

Supplemental information for this article can be found online at http://dx.doi.org/ 
10.7717/peerj.523#supplemental-information. 

REFERENCES 

Allegrucci G, Minasi MG, Sbordoni V. 1997. Patterns of gene flow and genetic structure 

in cave-dwelling crickets of the Tuscan endemic, Dolichopoda schiavazzii (Orthoptera, 

Rhaphidophoridae). Heredity 78:665-673 DOI 10.1038/hdy.l997.106. 
Arnett RH. 2000. American insects: a handbook of the insects of America north of Mexico. 

Boca Raton, FL: CRC Press, 1024. 
Blatchley WS. 1920. Orthoptera of northeastern America, with especial reference to the faunas of 

Indiana and Florida. Indianapolis, IN: The Nature Publishing Company. 
Bonney R, Cooper CB, Dickenson J, Kelling S, Phillips T, Rosenberg KV, Shirk J. 2009. Citizen 

science: a developing tool for expanding science knowledge and scientific literacy. Bioscience 

59:977-984 DOI 10.1525/bio.2009.59.11.9. 
Bue IG, Munro JA. 1939. Notes on the biology and control of the greenhouse stone cricket. Journal 

of Economic Entomology 32:468. 
Chopard L. 1928. Sur une gravure d'insecte de l'epoque magdalenienne. Comptes Rendus de la 

Societe de Biogeographie 5:64-67. 
ESRI. 2006. ArcMap. Redlands, CA: ESRI. 

HubbellTH. 1936. A monographic revision of the genus Ceuthophilus (Orthoptera, Gryllacrididae, 

Rhapidophorinae) . Gainesville, FL: University of Floridae Publications in Biology, 551. 
Lavoie KH, Helf KL, Poulson TL. 2007. The biology and ecology of North American cave crickets. 

Journal of Cave and Karst Studies 69:1 14-134. 
Morse AP. 1904. Diestrammena unicolor in North America. Psyche 11:80-80 

DOI 10.1155/1904/83842. 
Northup DE. 1988. Community structure of the arthropods of Carlsbad Cavern emphasizing 

Rhaphidophoridae of the genus Ceuthophilus. MSc Thesis, University of New Mexico. 53. 
Nowak DJ, Walton JT. 2005. Projected urban growth (2000-2050) and its estimated impact on the 

US forest resource. Journal of Forestry 103:383-389. 

Rehn JAG. 1944. The rhaphidophorid Tachycines asynamorus Adelung in America (Orthoptera, 

Gryllacrididae, Rhaphidophorinae). Entomological News 55:36-39. 
Stein BA, Kutner LS, Adams JS. 2000. Precious heritage: the status of biodiversity in the United 

States. Oxford: Oxford University Press. 
Sugimoto M, Ichikawa A. 2003. Review of Rhaphidophoridae (excluding Protrogrophilinae) 

(Orthoptera) of Japan. Tettigonia 5:1-48. 
Taylor SJ, Krejca JK, Denight ML. 2005. Foraging range and habitat use of Ceuthophilus secretus 

(Orthoptera: Rhaphidophoridae), a key trogloxene in central Texas cave communities. American 

Midland Naturalist 154:97-114 DOI 10.1674/0003-0031(2005)154[0097:FRAHUO]2.0.CO;2. 
United Nations. 2012. World urbanization prospects: the 2011 revision. Department of Economic 

and Social Affairs, Population Division. Available at http://esa.un.org/wpp/ppt/CSIS/WUP_201 1 _ 

CSJSA.pdf (accessed 12 May 2014). 
US Census Bureau. 2012. Annual estimates of housing units for United States and states: April 1 

2010 to July 1 2011. HU-EST2011-01. 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



■□14/15 



PeerJ 



Vickery VR, Kevan DK. 1967. Records of the orthopteroid insects of Ontario. Proceedings of the 

Entomological Society of Ontario 97:13-68. 
Vickery VR, Kevan DK. 1983. A monograph of the orthopteroid insects of Canada and adjacent 

regions. Ste. Ane de Bellevue, Quebec: Lyman Entomological Museum and Research Laboratory. 



Epps et al. (2014), PeerJ, DO1 1 0.771 7/peerj.523 



15/15 



